Memorabilia Mundi: OR, Choice Memoirs, OF THE HISTORY AND DESCRIPTION OF THE
WORLD.

By G. H

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by F. Smiih at the Elephant
and Castle without Temple Bar. 1670.

To the Right Honorable John Earl of Dover, Viscount Rochford, Lord Hunsdon,
etc.
MY LORD,
I Approach your Lordship with the same hardiness as they who satisfy
themselves, that the sincerity of the Giver may atone for the little value of
the gift; having learnt this presumption from History, where I find that great
Princes have looked kindly upon mean oblations, and thereby rendered the
generosity of their acceptance more illustrious, by the duty and obedience of
the Presenters.

Nor with this trick of moral story would I be thought to wind your Lordship
into the reception of a trifle, but that I carry a braver design in it; that
is, on this occasion to make a public acknowledgment of the many and great
favors (and of one especially above the rest, the overflow of your nobleness)
which you have been pleased to confer upon your unworthy servant. For (my Lord)
the sense of them hitherto, bounded within the narrow knowledge of my meanness,
has seemed to me a kind of guilty concealment, and almost tantamount to a
denial of them, till I was able to render this happy and open declaration to
the world, of an humble and obsequious gratitude for those favors done me; and
so done, that your generous affability in disspensing them may for ever condemn
the rough custom of the age, whose haughty state in doing kindnesses, does most
commonly turn their bread into stone.

And though I know, that thanks alone is no payment sterling; yet since to the
greatest Beings for the greatest and most lasting benefits we can scarce make
any better return. I hope it will not seem strange, if I present your Lordship
the memory of your own goodness to pay your self. For where the obligation
exceeds possibility of requital, the sawsiness of attempting to satisfy, is
infinitely worse than the humble acknowledgment of still owing.

My Lord, I offer to your view a piece, that dare not stand the test of your
Judgment, but would humbly shelter near your goodness, and which (when your
Lordship takes breath from your other more weighty both public and private
affairs) may serve to entertain you in the less serious part of the day; The
matter is least mine, the form and composure I may own a whole share in; so the
Bulloin of the Indies (if the allusion be not presumptuous) becomes the Kings
coin, after it has received his stamp and image. And as after viewing the
scattered pleasures of a large and fair Garden, some satisfaction is received
from the contracted scent and beauty of a posie; so if I have here at all
justified the comparison, whatever error may have past in the choice or
ordering of the flowers, I hope your Lordship will pardon to

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most grateful Servant, G. H.

TO THE Most Accomplished LADY, Mrs. DOROTHY RIVERS.
Madam
SInce for Persons of Your Quality and Merit, it is usual to suffer Afflictions
of this Nature; there is now a necessity that you undergo Your Fate, which is
so much the sadder, in that all those Excellencies which in you shine in their
Meridian, and might command Reverence from the most Savage World, serve only to
encourage my Rudeness, and with me to become accessory to your own Persecution.

But it may be ( Madam) after an humble Acknowledgment of the guilt, that
Goodness of Yours (which excepts no Sinners) may be gained to think the Crime
Venial, and that particular Condescension which has heretofore showered
Obligations upon Your most humble Servant, may stretch out Your saving Hand to
receive a Present, that would live only in and by Your favor.

It Is true ( Madam) that the Worthlesseness of the Present might very well have
dispirited the boldest attempt in this kind* had I not considered that I should
thereby better Consult for Your Glory, when the World shall take notice that my
greatest Ambition has been not to raise Trophies to my self by Writing well,
but only to pay my just and respectful Devoirs, and that by publishing Your
Names and Virtues, I might show a Pattern of all that is Excellent and Good;
which ( Madam) if I should strive to embellish with what Art of Words can add
to render any thing Illustrious, yet would all fall far below the Dignity of
the Subject, and I should be constrained at length to leave it as altogether
unaffable.

If then ( Madam) what is wanting to the true payment of Justice and Obligation
to Your Virtues, Your Goodness will allow my Zeal of owning to supply, please
to accept this trifle as the best Testimony I can at present make of it, which
when received into Your choice Closet, and sometime turned over by Your fair
Hands (when you please to give Your own quainter thoughts leave to rest) will
give me just cause to call my self the happyest man living, and for ever fix me

Madam Your most humble and most obedient Servant. G. H.

TO THE READER.
I Present you (Reader) with a novelty, which if your palate be not wholly
vitiated, may generally relish well with you. For the variety of the matter you
may call it a kind of Olio, the seasoning of which has cost me both time and
expense; and though it be not of the choicest rarities, it is done at least
according to the best of my skill. If by this slender attempt I may provoke any
better able more handsomely and regularly to couch a subject attended with so
much both profit and pleasure, I think I have done the kind and industrious
part of the world no ill office, who will (though but for this reason) let pass
without rigid and supercilious Censure the mean Essay of him, whose ardor to
serve them, has rendered him less seeing in the examination of his own ability.
Yet would I not be conceived to know my self and value my pains so little, but
that I may merit some thanks, at least from the well tempered measurers of men's
intentions: however some there will be (and those not a few) whom I could wish
(because I love my self well) might be won to my side) but I fear my single
talent of persuasion will never be able to gain them; for being ill-natured,
and therefore doing nothing themselves but mischief, they carry an intense
hatred to those that would humbly do good, nay though it be done never so
perfectly. What quarter then my poor offering (being sensible to how many
exceptions it may be liable) is like to find among them I well know, but have
heart enough not much to fear; especially hoping among the Candid Ingenious
such reception as will amply remunerate me for all the ill usage I may meet
with elsewhere.

Here is a taste then (to you kind Reader I speak it) of what in so useful a
Subject might be performed by a more judicious pen, Analects of the History and
Description of the World, not so choicely nor methodically handled as might be
expected, but yet may serve to refresh your memory after the tedious and ill
way of other mighty Volumes. It were a worthy employ for any that has parts
and leisure to go through with it (in a more acute and accurate manner, not
emitting ought memorable) to extract from those numerous Records of History all
such short Memoirs as may tend either to instruction or delight. And as he will
thereby infinitely oblige both these, whose way of Education may have less
qualified them to distinguish the Stars in sailing on the vast Ocean of Story;
and those also, whose confinement in time or coin may disenable them for such
expensive ways of knowledge: So shall he in particular find me the most
acknowledging of all his Servants, must esteem mine most happy faults, that
have been to him incentives of aspiring to the true glory of Writing better.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 4. dele utraque p. 4. l. 20. r. Ctesiphon p. 12. l. 2. r. happy;
p. 25. l. 4. dele from East Frizeland, to Westphalia, then r. Westphalia is
most famous, etc. p. 31. l. 16. for of the r. and p. 32. l. 11. r. Earl Floris,
p. 41. l. 19. r. Persians, p. 52. l. 5. r. Lines, p. 57. l. 11. r. any, p. 59.
l. 12. r. third, p. 60. l. 19. r. Shoals, p. 67. r. not maly, but maly, p. 75.
l. 13. r that, p. 78. l. 6. r. enjoined, ib. l. 21. r. and at, p. 81. l. 4. r.
rich, p. 82. l. 7. dele of, p. 83. l. 21. r. far from, p. 84. l. 3. r. Isicles,
ib. l. 17. r. Lewelyn, p. 91. l. 23 r. not wherein, but where in, in p. 93. l.
2. r. enricheth this, ib. l. 14. r. Ruyters, p. 100. l. 13. r. notwithstanding
they, p. 108. l. 12. in piramidy-wise, r. pyramid-wise, ib. l. 1. dele of, and
the comma after wonders, p. 109. l. 12. r. Shotland, ib. l. 19. r. ever
pleasing, p. 112. l. 23. r. Gods, p. 114. l. 7. r. necks were, p. 116. l. 9. r.
Agincourt, p. 118. l. 13. r. Cyrenaean, p. 120. l. 16. r. Ecstatick, p. 126. l.
2. r. of Arabia, p. 129. l. 22. r. wanderers, p. 134. l. 6. r. Herodian, ib. l.
12. r. more barbarous then the Axiacan, p. 147. l. 7. r. murderer, p. 149. l.
5. r. Savor, p. 162. l. 11. r she please.

Other Literal escapes there are, which the kind Reader may correct as he
passes.

Memorable things Noted in the DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD.
IN our Description of the World there are four parts, into which the World is
divided; Europe, Asia, Africa, America utraque.

We will begin first with Asia, for in Asia did God himself speak his
miraculous work of the Creation: There was the Church first collected, there
was the Savior of the world born, Crucified and Raised again: Indeed the
greatest part of Divine History was there written and Acted; There was the
first Monarch, and Monarchies of the World in Assyria, Persia, Babylonia,
Media. The first people of the world received their being in Mesopotamia, and
the several tongues of the World their Original in Babylonia: These are parts
of Asia, and were in the first ages blessed with God's own holy Presence, Exodus
the third; and the footing of Angels, Exodus 14. However, now it is left (for
her Infidelity) to the punishment of a Prophetical Curse that long before
passed upon her, and is delivered up into the hands of Turks, and Nations that
Blaspheme the Creator, and therefore does not flourish in that height as
heretofore.

Now add together, that this Region was at first the Paradise of the World, and
indeed still enjoys a fertile Soil and temperate Air, and that it exceeds in
compass the two other parts of the old World, to which she was the Mistress for
Arts and Sciences; Yet is it not at this day so well peopled in proportion, as
this little Europe, which came many hundred years after; for this we need
search no further cause than God's just Anger: Yet has he not exercised upon
her, only by Miraculous and Immediate Punishment from Heaven, but has suffered
(as it were) her own Creatures, over which Man at the first had the Rule) to
turn head upon their Lords, and possess their Habitation, for it is so
overrun with wild-Beasts, and cruel Serpents, that in many places they live
not without much danger.

In this; though the Nation suffer for their Monstrous Irreligion; Yet the
Earth which did not offend, reserves her place, and abounds with many excellent
commodities, not elsewhere to be had; Myrrh, Frankincense, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper, Musk, Jewels of great esteem, and Minerals of all sorts;
It breeds Elephants, Camels, and many other Beasts; Serpents, Fowl wild and
tame, and some have added such Monstrous shapes of men, as pass all belief.

In Asia were the seven Churches which St. John mentioned in the Apocalips; now
scarce is it inhabited but toward the Seaside, and that by a base and abject
people, such as are both lazy in their life, and odious Idolaters in their
Religions, for the most part Mahumetans.

Here Ephesus it self the Star of Asia, that as well for her Religion as her
miraculous Temple, This is within the compass of that one part which bears the
name of Asia propria.
set the world at gaze upon her: It was raised in the middle of the City,
Modelled out by Ctesifon, but was 220. years in building, and was ordered in
such a ground, that no Earthquake should move it; It was 425. foot long, and
220. broad, and 127. Pillars, given by so many several Kings, whereof twenty
seven were most curiously graven, all the rest of Marble polished. In this City
St. John the Evangelist is said to have gone down into his Grave alive, there
be who yet question his death.

Armenia minor, which is one of the Provinces of Asia minor, is by most thought
to be the Land of Ararat where the Ark rested, And there is great store of Oil,
and excellent Wine.

Arabia Foelix in Asia major is accounted the fruitfullest Country in the
World. In this Arabia is the City Medina, where Mahomet is Intombed in an Iron
Chest, supported only by a Roof of Adamant, without other Art to keep it from
falling to the ground.

Cyprus a place heretofore Consecrated to Venus, to whom both Men and Women
performed their Sacrifice naked, till by the prayer of Barnabas the Apostle,
the Temple was ruined.

Trojus Reports, that the Fathers of this Isle had wont to prostitute their
Daughters to Mariners for money, whereby to raise them a portion against they
could get them Husbands; but Christianity corrected those Barbarous Customs.

AFRICA.
IN most parts she has scarce plenty sufficient to maintain Inhabitants, and
where there is, we shall meet with multitudes of Ravening Beasts, or other
horrible Monsters, enough to devour both it and us: In a word, There is no
Region of the World so great an Enemy to Man's Commerce; there is such scarcity
of water, that no Creature almost could live, had not Nature provided
thereafter, that the greater part of them endures not drink in the very midst
of Summer: And if (as sometimes they be enforced by such as take them) they
suddenly perish. Thus we see how God gives a property to each place, that may
make up her defects, least it should be left as well by Beasts as Men.

Their Land is full of sandy Deserts, which lie open to the winds and storms,
and oftentimes are thrown up into Billows like Waves of the Sea, and indeed are
no less dangerous. Strabo writes, that Cambyses his Army was thus hazarded; a
foolish Nation in Africa, as they marched toward the South, to revenge
themselves upon the Winds for drying up their Rivers, were overwhelmed with
Sand, and so dyed in their Graves. It is also full of a venomous kind of
Serpent, that in some places they dare not dress their Lands unless they first
fence their legs with Boots against the sting: Other wild Creatures there are,
which range about, and possess to themselves a great portion of this Country,
and make it a Wilderness of Lions, Leopards, Elephants; and in some places
Crocodiles, Hyena's, Basilisks, and indeed Monsters without either number or
name: Africa as it is reported, is full of danger to the Inhabitants, more dye
by Beasts than by diseases.

But among all these Inconveniences, Commodities are found of good worth, and
the very evils yield at last their benefit, both to their own Country and other
parts of the world: The Elephant a docible Creature and exceeding useful for
Battle; The Camel which affords much riches to the Arabian; The Barbary Horse,
which we our selves commend; The Ram that besides his flesh gives twenty pound
of wool from his very tail; The Bull, painful and able to do the best service
in their Tillage: And so most of their worst, alive or dead yield us their
Medicinal parts, which the world could not well want.

In one of the Divisions of Africa, which is Fesse that has a City in it with
seven hundred Churches, and one of them a Mile and a half in compass. In
Morocho is a Castle of great fame, for the Globes of pure Gold that stands upon
the top of it, and weighing 130000. Barbary Ducats.

The Land of Negro is full of Gold and Silver, and other commodities, but the
Inhabitants most barbarous; they draw their Original from Chus, and have
entertained all Religions that came in their way; first their own, then the
Jews, the Mahumetans, and some of them the Christian; For the most part they
live not as if Reason guided their Actions.

Bornaum, a Country where the people have no proper Names, no Wives peculiar,
and therefore no Children which they call their own.

Aethiopia superior, it is governed by one of the mightiest Emperors in the
World, called by us Presbyter John, he has under him seventy Kings, which have
their several Laws and Customs, Among these the Province of Dobas has one,
that no man marry till he has killed twelve Christians; Their Religion is
mixed, Christians they have, but yet differ from us, for they Circumcise both
sects; their Oath is by the life of their King, whom they never see but at
Christmas, Easter and Holy-Rood; Their Commodities are Oranges, Lemmons,
Cittrons, Barley, Sugar, Honey.

Aethiopia inferior, the Government of this Region is under five Kings, whereof
Monomolopa is one, In which is reported to be three thousand Mines of Gold;
Here there lives a kind of Amazons as valiant as men, their King is served in
great pomp, and has a guard of 200. Mastives. Cafraria is another Kingdom
whose people live in the Woods without Laws like brutes. And here stands the
Cape of good Hope, about which the Sea is always rough and dangerous; It has
been especially so to the Spaniard, it is their own note, insomuch, that one
was very angry with God, that he suffered the English Heretics to pass it so
easily over, and not give his good Catholics the like speed. In the Kingdom of
Manicongo whose Inhabitants are in some parts Anthropophagi, and have shambles
of Men's flesh, as we have for Meat, they kill their own Children in the birth,
to avoid the trouble of breeding them, and preserve their Nation with stolen
Brats from their Neighboring Countries.

Egypt is another part of the African continent, the places of Note are Caire,
and Alexandria, the first was heretofore Memphis, some say Babylon, whither the
Virgin fled to escape Herod's Tyranny intended to our Savior, and blush not to
show the very Cave where she had hid her Babe. In a Desert about forty miles
distant stand the Pyramides, esteemed rightly one of the seven Wonders of the
World. Alexandria was a magnificent City, and was famous for the rarest Library
in the world; to the Inhabitants of this Country we owe the Invention of
Astrology, Physic, Writing on Paper, their Kings names were Pharaoh toward the
beginning; Now what the Turk pleases.

EVROPE.
EUrope bears the Name of the most happiest Country in the World, both for
plenty of Corn, Plants, Fruits, for Rivers and Fountains of admirable virtues;
For beauty as well of Cities, Castles, and Houses, as Men and Women of
excellent Feature* For the Study of Arts, for the science in Religion, and what
ever else God has pleased to bless his Church with from the beginning.

She wants nothing but what she may well spare, Wild-Beasts which cause Deserts
in the parts where they breed; hot spices which fit not our temper, and rather
corrupt our manners, than mend our diet, precious jewels and the like, which
have brought in a degree of vain and useless pride, not known before by our
predecessors: Yet of Gold, Silver, and other commodious metals, she has her
portion, and in brief is of a very prosperous temper, yet of so strange
variety, that it is admirable to think that there is no place in this quarter,
but is fit for any man to live in; Insomuch as every Country is Inhabited, as
is confirmed by our latter Travelers, though heretofore it has been
questioned by reason of the extreme cold toward the Pole.

In Hungaria is the Country of Soliense where the Earth sends forth such a
stench, that it poysoneth the very Birds which fly over it.

An Island in Danubius exceeding fertile, and so indeed is the whole Country;
The people are generally strong, but barbarous, their Daughters portions are
only a new attire, and their Sons equally Inherit without privilege of
Birthright; The Emperor of Germany and the Turk share it betwixt them.

Muscovia, The whole Region is subject to the Emperor of Russia: A vast
Territory and as wild a Government, for the people are very base, contentious,
ignorant, and sottishly superstitious; they bury their dead upright, with a
staff in hand, a penny in his purse, and a Letter to St. Nicholas to procure
him entrance into Heaven.

AMERICA.
AMERICA admits of all variety almost, either of plenty or want; Admirable for
the fertility of soil, then again as barren, here temperate, there scorching
hot, elsewhere as extreme cold; Some Regions watered with dainty Rivers, others
again infested with perpetual Drowth* Some Plains, some Hills, some Woods, some
Mines, and what not in some tract or other, yet nothing almost common to the
whole, but Barbarism of Manners, Idolatry in Religion, and Sottish Ignorance,
such as hardly distinguishes them from Bruits, else they would not have taken
reasonable Men to be immortal Gods, as at first they did, yet what either God
was, or Immortality, they knew no more than instinct of Nature gave them; they
had heard of some place or other (God knows where) behind some Hill, where the
blessed resided after death: And from thence they supposed the Spaniard came at
their first Arrival, but it was not long before the Tyrants cudgelled their
simplicity, and by their cruelty appeared to them rather Devils from Hell, than
Saints from Heaven.

Yet still the Inland-Countryes retain for the most part their Inbred
blindness, and worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, and they have their other
Spirits, which they call their Zemes, and Adore them in Images made of
Cotton-Wool, which oft-times by the delusion of Satan seem to move, and utter
an hideous noise, that works in these poor Idolaters a great awe, least they
should harm them.

The rest of their Customs are answerable to their Religion, beastly; they go
naked, and are very lustful people without distinction of Sex; In many places
they are Anthropophagy, and prey upon each other like Wolves, they labor not
much to sustain themselves, but are rather content to take what the Earth can
yield without Tillage.

Nova Hispania, or Mexicana propria is the largest Province; It was first
possessed by the Spaniard 1518. But it cost them much blood to entitle their
Kings Hispaniarum reges. It is an excellent Country, full of all variety almost
in every kind usual with us, and exceeds in rarities full of wonder. There is
one Tree which they dress like our Vine, and order it so, that it yields them
almost all useful necessaries. The leaves serve them instead of Paper, and of
the Vine-bark, they make Flax Mantles, Matts, Shoes, Girdle and Cordage.

Peninsula Peruviana, is the South tract of America, from North to South there
runs a continued course of high Mountains, whose tops the very Fowls of the Air
cannot reach by flight; And from thence descend many admirable Rivers, among
which Maragn^ and Argenteus are most famous, the one for his extent, and the
other for his plenty of Silver, The Country is exceeding rich, but the people
differ not much from the worst of Beasts; They devour Man's flesh, filthy worms,
and what else comes in their way.

Near to the North-west of Peru, was an admirable atchievment performed by our
valiant Countryman John Oxenham, who by the direction of Moors skilled in the
Country, went to the Land of Pearls, and took from the Spaniards an incredible
weight of Gold and Silver.

Cartagena a fruitful Country which did yield (when time was) to our still
Renowned Sr. Francis Drake, store of prize, and 240. pieces of Ordinance.

Peru a very rich Country, abounds with Gold and Silver, little esteemed
among the Inhabitants: For by report the Spaniard ordinarily shoed their Horses
with Gold. The Inhabitants are strange Idolaters, and worship a black Sheep,
Serpents, and other ugly Creatures.

Brasile. The Inhabitants are rude, live for the most part in the bodies of
Trees, the people are covered with natural hair, cruel lascivious, false and
what not; In this Region is an herb called Viva, which if you touch it, it
will shut up, as a Daisie in the Night, and will not open till the party that
injured it be out of sight.

Chile, on the North of Peru; it is there extreme cold, insomuch that many are
frozen to death, and hardened like Marble; The Rivers are fed with Snow that
falls from the tops of the high Mountains.

GREECE.
GReece, She had once the pre-eminence of Rome in glory, as the precedence in
time; For to say truth, she was the wisest of any people that were not
enlightened with the knowledge of that great Mystery; She set a pattern for
Government to all her succeeding ages, and (in brief) she was the Mistress
almost of all Sciences: Some there are which (in a strict account) will except
none but the Mathematics, but now the poor wretches suffer by the Turks, under
whom to this day they are, and are scarce permitted by that great tyrant, means
of learning to know the name for which they suffer.

And besides the base mis-usage of the mis-believing Turk, the very Natives
themselves are fallen from the noble disposition of their Predecessors into an
incredible sottishness, and those which before reckoned the rest of the Earth
barbarous in comparison to their Politic Commonwealth, are now themselves
sunk below the envy of the meanest Nation, and become the most miserable object
of pity living upon the earth; indeed, they may hardly be said to live: They
are lazy beyond belief; and ignorant almost beyond recovery; for they have now
no means to bring their Children either to learning or manners: Not an Academy
in all Greece, their carriage generally uncivil, their feasts riotous, and
their mirth debaucht; Their Wives are well favored, and so indeed they must
be, for they use them no longer as their Wives than they continue to their
liking, when they once fade, they are put to the house of drudgery: Their
language is the same as heretofore, but rudely corrupted, they have no habit
almost proper, but those which serve the Turk wear their fashion, the rest
which are under the Venetian, observe them in their Apparel, for they are
Slaves to both in their whole course.

Yet they retain still a show of the Christian Religion, which was here first
settled by Timothy to whom St. Paul wrote two Epistles, and was after in the
primitive times, professed by diverse learned and Reverend Divines of their own
Nation, which are with us received as Authentic Fathers of the Church; St.
Chrysostom, Basil, etc.

Thrace. Part of this Province was heretofore persuaded, that their Ancesters
did not at all dye, neither should they, but pass only out of this world into
another, to their supposed God Zalmoxis, once a Scholar of Pythagoras, who when
he had persuaded them into this Religion, seemed wonderfully to vanish out of
their sight, and appeared not any more, but left them fully possessed that he was
the Deity, which must after a time entertain them: And this they expected with
that great joy that as often as one dyed, instead of mourning, they set forth
Games and Feasts to congratulate his freedom from the troubles of this earthly
condition, and the Wife only, whom he loved best (for they had many) was
thought worthy to be killed by her best friends at her Husbands Grave, that she
might bear him company in the other World, the rest bewailed their neglect, and
the residue of their life was to them as a disgrace. When a Child was born,
neighbors were called to bemoan his entrance into a multitude of calamities,
and in course they reckoned up, what he was to pass before he could go to
their God Zalmoxis, for they acknowledged no other, but blasphemed and shot
Arrows against the Heavens as often as they heard it Thunder.

They will not admit, that their Government should become hereditary, neither
must their King be a Father of any Children; If the King offend, he shall not
escape their Laws even to death, ye^ no man may set a hand to his Execution,
but by a common desertion he is allowed no necessaries to live, and therefore
must needs dye.

GERMANY.
THey are a most ingenious people, famous beyond any others in Europe, unless
Belgia, for the invention of many notable and useful Engines: The Gun and
gunpowder was first brought to light by one Bertholdus Swart a Franciscan,
which has almost put by the use of any other Warlick Instrument, in those
parts of the World where the practice is perfectly understood.

The Government of this Germany is Emperial. The right descends not by
succession, the power of choice was conferred by Pope Gregory the tenth, upon
seven German Princes, three spiritual, and four temporal: These are the
Archbishop of Mentz, Chancellor of the Empire through Germany; Archbishop of
Cullen, Chancellor of the Empire through Italy; Archbishop of Triers,
Chancellor of the Empire through France. The temporal are, the King of
Bohemia, who has the casting voice, only in case of equality among the other
six, His Office is to be chief Cup Bearer at the great Solemnity: Next him the
Count Palatine of the Rhene, Arch Sewer to the Emperor; Duke of Saxony, Lord
Marshal and Marquess of Brandenburg chief Chamberlain. Each of these perform
his own Office in person, upon the day of Inauguration. The Duke of Saxony
bears the Sword, the Count Palatine places his meat on the Table, the King of
Bohemia bears his Cup, and delivers it him to drink: Marquess of Brandenburg
serves him water to wash, and the three Bishops bless his meat; He receives
three Crowns before he is fully settled into the Majesty of the Empire. The
first is of Silver, for Germany: the second of Iron, for Lumbardy; and the
third of Gold, for the Empire: The last is set on at Rome, for to this day it
pretends to the Name of the Roman Empire, and gives the title of Casar, Romani
Imperii Imperat^r.

East- Frizeland; One of the chief Towns of this Region, is West-Phalia; It is
most famous for Swine, and excellent Bacon, which is esteemed with us, one of
the greatest dainties to commend a Feast.

In Cullen, It is a received tradition among the Inhabitants, that the bodies
of the Wisemen which came from the East to worship Christ, are here Interred.

In Cleveland is a City called Aken, where the Emperor receives his Silver
Crown from Germany, and does great worship to a Clout, which they take to be
our Saviors Mantle in which he was wrapped.

BOHEMIA.
THe situation of this Kingdom is almost in the midst of Germany, there is a
Forest called by the Name of Hercinian Forest, held in the Romans time, to be
nine days journey in breadth, and in length at least forty.

The River Albi^ which has his rising in the Hercinian Wood, (if we will
believe Report) there is often found in the Sands, lumps of pure Gold, which
need no other refining, and very precious shells of great value, the water
supplies that only defect which is to be found in their Land, the earth gives
good corn, and their pastures breed as good cattle, there is Woods good store
which harbor multitudes of Wild-Beasts, among the rest there is a wild Beast
which they call Lomi* Armed by Nature with a strange defense against the Hounds
which follow her, for they say she has a kind of bladder hanging under her
jaws, which in the Hunting she fills with a scalding hot water, and casts it
upon the Dogs with that nimbleness that they are not able to avoid or pursue
her, but often times have their very hair fall off as from a dressed Pig.

There is a story passes of one Zisca a Bohemian Captain (in the difference of
the Hussites against the Pope) that when he had won so many Battles, as his
very name began to be a terror to the Foe, he was not content to be feared
alive, but bethought himself how he might speak louder when he was dead; And
therefore willed his Soldiers, that they would flea him, and make a Drum of
his skin, which he was persuaded, should ever beat victory before them, as often
as he was heard (though in a dead sound) by the enemy, whom he had so often
crushed, while he was yet living.

A wicked couzenage of Picardus, who possessed great multitudes of these silly
people, with an opinion, that he could recall them to that perfect state in
which Adam was Created; placed them in an Island for that purpose, which he
called Paradise, caused them to walk naked, and named his Sect Adamites:
Horrible sins were committed under that pretense, promiscuous Whoredom, and
Incest at their very Divine Service.

FRANCE.
IN so great a multitude, we must look to find as much variety of Customs and
Dispositions. It was the report of Caesar long since, and seconded by late
Authors, that the French for the most part are of a fiery spirit for the first
onset in any Action, but will soon Flag; They desire change of Fortunes, and
pass not greatly whether to better or worse: Their Women very Jocund, of a
voluble tongue, and as free of their speech, Complemental to strangers, and win
more by their wit than their beauty, one and the other are great enticers of men's
affections: Their Nobility have been reported to be liberal, but I suppose that
fashion is now worn out, for so it has been noted in diverse, which respect
their purse more than their honor, and let pass the Service and Deserts of
worthy persons unrewarded, as if their gracious acceptance were a sufficient
return of thanks for any Office a man can do them: They are practiced to this
garb by their Peasantry* whom they reckon but as slaves, and command as their
proper Servants, which the poor snakes take as a favor and are glad to be
employed by their betters, that by their protection they may stand free from
the injury of their equals. For the meanest of them are cruel, and affect to
oppress their adversary, either by open violence or suit in Law, though to
their own Ruin. They are very ready to take Arms, and serve in defense of King
and Country, they need no more Press than the stroke of Drum, but are as rash
in their achievements; they will not wait upon Council, but run as far on, as
upon their strength they may, and when they find that fails, they will as soon
give ground.

Aquitania. In this Province was fought the great Battle betwixt our Black
Prince and John of France; where, with eight thousand he vanquished forty
thousand, took the King Prisoner and his son Philip, 70 Earls, 50 Barons, and
1^000 Gentlemen.

Normandy; where our William the Conqueror was Duke. It was lost from his
Successors in the time of King John: Her chief Cities are Roan, and Cane,
memorable for the Siege of our English Henry the Fifth, and Verveille, Besieged
by Philip the second of France, in the time of our Richard the First. Which
when the King heard as he sat in his Palace at Westminster (it is said) he
swear he would never turn his back to France, till he had his revenge; and to
make good his Oath, brake through the Walls, and justly performed his threat
upon the Besieger.

The Low Countries.
The People are very thrifty, painful, and ingenuous in the invention of many
pretty things, which draw many other Nations to them for traffic, and they
lie as fit for it. They have the name for the first Authors of the Compass,
Clock, and Printing: They are excellent Artificers, for working of Pictures in
Glass, for laying Colors in Oil, for Tapestry and other Hangings; in brief,
for any oeconomical commodity, either for use or Ornament: And in their own
private families excel any other people.

In the Dukedom of Lutzenburg, Luick the chief City of the University;
Memorable for this one story, above any other in Christendom, That at one time
there studied nine Kings sons, twenty four Dukes sons, twenty nine Earls Sons,
etc.

Geldria. The Province stands on the East of Brabant, and North of Lumburg; It
is a very fertile soil, especially if it be well tilled, Her Pastures are
excellent, insomuch that they feed up their Cattle to an incredible bigness and
weight, a report passes of one Bull which weighed 3200 pound. It was killed at
Antwerp 1570.

Hague a Village, yet the fairest in Christendom, and seat of the States
Council. The report lies upon this Province, of Margaret Sister to the Earl of
Floris, that she brought at one birth 36^ children, all living till they were
Christened.

Spain.
A memorable story of King Rodericus* who lost both himself and Kingdom for a
Rape committed upon the Daughter of Julian a noble Gentleman, and at that time
Ambassador with the Moors in Africa. When the Father had understood of his
Daughters unworthy injury, he brought back his Revenge with him 30000 Horse,
and 180000 Foot, of Moors and Sarazens, which discomfited the King, overthrew
all the resistance which he could make, and bespread the Country with their
Forces, where they and their Posterity stood firm, till within the Memory of
some living 1630.

This change of State was before prophesied, and concealed in a large Chest
within that part of the Palace, which both the last King and his Predecessors
were forewarned not to discover: But the hope of an inestimable Treasure made
him transgress: and when he had entered, there appeared nothing but the
portractures of Armed Moors, with a presage annexed, that when that part of
the Palace should be forced open, such Enemies should ruin Spain.

The River Guadiana, which in one place glides under Ground for 15 Miles
together, and gives the Spaniard an occasion (as he will catch at any) to brag
that they have 10000 Cattle daily feeding upon one Bridge; yet give them their
own sense, the truth may be questioned: For they have not such plenty of Meat,
as they have of Sauce.

It yields indeeds abundance of Oranges, Limons, Capers, Dates, Sugar, Oil,
Honey, Liquorish, Raisons, Saffron, Rice, excellent Sacks, and other Wines, and
in some places Sheep, Goats, and swift Horses.

They are extremely proud, and the silliest of them pretend to a great portion
of Wisdom, which they would seem to express in a kind of reserved State, and
silent Gravity; when perhaps their wit will scarce serve them to speak sense:
But if once their Mouths be got too open, they esteem their breath too precious
to be spent upon any other subject, than their own glorious actions. They are
most unjust neglectors of other Nations, and impudent vain flatterers of
themselves, superstitious beyond any other people.

In the City Saint Jago, in the Island of Gallicia, was St. James the Apostle
buried, his Relics kept, Worshipped, and visited by Pilgrims.

ITALY.
MEmorable, for Rhea a Virgin which was cloystered up into the Temple of Vesta,
by her Uncle Amulius Silvius, that she might not bring forth an Heir to
endanger his Title. Notwithstanding means was found, so that she conceived at
once two Children by Mars, and was delivered among her Sisters Vestals. For
this her self (as the censure was upon such Delinquents) was buried alive, her
Boys exposed to be destroyed.

Italy is a happy Soil, pleasant and Fertile, at all times moderate Weather,
and healthful Air, full of Variety; as Rice, Silks, Velvets, Sattins,
Taffaties, Grograms, Rash, Fustians, Gold-wyer, Armor, Allom, Glasses, etc.
The Rich are very Rich, for Wealth will come with much labor in great
abundance: but the Poor are extreme poor, for they are most of them very idle.

Rome retains a 11 Miles round, and 200000 Inhabitants; a great part Friars,
and such odd idle fellows, which pretend to Religion for want of other means to
live, Cloister themselves up to a single life, only to avoid the charge of
Encumbrances of Marriage, not to separate themselves from the World or desires
of the Flesh; for among them they maintain commonly 40000 Curtezans in good
Custom, and so Rich, that they are able to pay 30000 Ducats yearly to the
Pope. The buildings in which they most glory in, are the Church of St. Peter,
the Castle of St. Angelo, the Vaticane Library, and the Popes Palace. The
truth is, their Pride is enough to attire the Whore of Babylon, as there can
hardly be any other meant than Rome, She sits upon the Beast with seven Heads,
for she was built upon seven Hills, was ruled first by seven Kings, and has
been since subject to seven several forms of Government.

HUNGARY.
HEre are many* Waters of excellent Virtue, whereof some turn Wood into Iron,
others Iron into Brass; some very Medicinal for sundry Diseases, others again
so pestiferous, that they kill the Creature which does but taste them. The like
is reported of an Hiatus in the Ground, unaccessable by any but the fowls of
the Air, and those fall suddaily dead with the stench which ascends from it.

It is hard to believe what most Geographers report of her Fertility: That she
yields Corn thrice in one year, almost without any Tillage or care of the
Husbandman. Fruit of all kinds in great abundance, and Grapes which make an
excellent, wholesome, and rich Wine; It breeds Cattle in such plenty, that this
one Country, besides store of her own Inhabitants, sends Sheep and Oxen into
Foreign Nations which lie about her, and might say they suffice to feed all
Europe with Flesh. Venison is not here any dainties, Does, Hares, Hearts, Goats,
Boars, etc. are every Man's Meat, and the Game common, as well to the Boors as
Gentry. And so for Phesant, Partridge, Black-birds, Pigeons, most Fowl, wild
and tame.

The Earth is inricht with variety of Mines, which yields her plenty of Iron,
Steel, Copper, Silver and Gold, Lead she has not, and scarce at all any Tin.

DENMARK.
THe people are valiant and Warlike, strong of body, and big boned, and of a
terrible countenane; ambitious of a glorious death, rather than a sluggish idle
life.

Such incredible plenty of Herring (near the Isle of Scunia) that (say they)
are scarce able by main strength of Oars to Row out of the Harbor. Here are
furniture for War both by Sea and Land, Armor, Masts, Cables, Steel, Saddles,
etc.

POLAND.
IT is well-nigh past belief which is reported of their Multitudes of Bees,
such as yield more Honey and Wax, then the people can find room for; they need
here neither Art, nor care of the good Huswife to order their Hives, but
naturally are their own Guardians, and provide so diligently for their own
safety within the bulks of Trees; that they easily pass over the hardest winter
without hurt.

The Polanders have a good mind to Religion, but cannot fasten upon any one to
their liking; and therefore they will try all Christians, they have been ever
since the year 965. but from that time they have scarce slipped any Error,
Schism, or Heresy, which has crept into the Church. Here are Jesuits, and
other of the Romish Sects. Here are Lutherans, and Calvinists, and Arians*
Anabaptists, and Antirinitarians, none allowed, but all tolerated: And indeed
Poland had the Seniority of Amsterdam, for that old saying; that if a Man had
lost his Religion, here he might find it. They have one ancient Custom in their
Churches, when the Gospel is Reading, the Nobility and Gentry unsheath their
Swords; and stand as it were prepared to defend it with their lives against any
which dare violate it.

In Samognia near to Livonia, a people there which is called the Peasants, who
are most of them gross Idolaters: and are oftimes met in their Woods with
horrid Visions, and are strangely cozened by the Devil, with a belief that they
can Prophecy. The silly blasphemers nourish in their House a poor Snake (like
themselves) gathered out of some Ditch, and call it their God Ziemenike. Their
greatest Commodity is of Honey, which they gather ready made to their hands in
their hollow Trees.

PERSIA.
FOr want of lawful Heirs to Cambyses their second King, their Princes
consulted to salute him; whose Horse first neighed at a set meeting upon the
Court Green before the Sun-risin. Darius Histaspes was one, and by the subtilty
of his Horse-keeper carried the Crown; for the night before in the same ground,
he had coupled a Mare with the Horse his Master should ride, which when the
lustful* Steed missed, the next Morning being full of spirit, no sooner had he
set footing upon the place, but with much eagerness he snuffed and neighed
after his Mare, and gave the quue to the other Princes to Proclaim Darius King
of the Pesiians. This was he whom the Scriptures call Ahasuerus, he was Hesters
Husband.

The ancient Persians Customs were most of them Superstitious, but they held
nothing almost in so great reverence as Water: It might not lawfully be soiled,
so much as with a foul hand; but to piss, or cast rubbish, or a dead Carkase
into their Rivers, was a kind of Sacrilege. They had many Wives, and more
Concubines; for they were exceeding desirous of increase, and great Rewards
were appointed by their King himself, for him that could most augment the
number of his Subjects in one year. They seldom entered into any Consultation of
State, till they had well armed themselves with drink; for then they thought
they should be most free to speak what they most thought. To spit or laugh
before their Prince, was a Crime well-nigh unpardonable: Some say that they
bury not their dead, but cast them forth to be devoured by wild Beasts, and
thought him most happy which was soonest torn to mammocks: the rest their
friends bewailed, as such who had lived impurely, and were therefore by this
sign declared worthy of Hell only, without any Redemption.

In Assyria, now Arzeram stands the most famous City Ninive, near the River
Tigris, containing full three score Miles in compass; they had a Custom to sell
their Virgins, which were fair and most desired, and tender the price into the
common Treasury. The homelier sort were placed in Marriage with that Money, to
those which would accept of them for gain at least, if not for Beauty.

Bermudas ISLAND.
THis Island having been formerly shunned by Travelers as most dangerous, and
seldom seen by any, except against their Wills, reputed to be rather a hold and
habitation of Devils, then any fit place for men to abide in; was discovered by
Sir John Gates, and Sir George Summers in the year 1609. they found there in
great abundance.

Fish, Fowl, Hogs, and other things for sustenance of Man: but no people, nor
any kind of Cattle; Sir John, and Sir George having with them 150 Men, abode
there nine Months: Most of these Men afterward returning for England, and
making it known to the Virginia. Company, obtained a Charter from His Majesty,
and so hold it. In Mr. Richard Moor the Governors time, he having spent three
years of his Government, for the most part Fortifying the Country, etc. A
wonderful annoyance fell out by silly Rats: These Rats coming at the first out
of a Ship, few in number, increased in the space of two years or less so
exceedingly, that they filled not only those places where they were first
Landed. But swimming from place to place, spread themselves into all parts of
the Country: Insomuch, that there was no Island, though severed by the Sea from
all other Lands, and many Miles distant from the Isles where the Rats had their
Original, but was pestred with them. They had their nests almost in every Tree,
and in all places their Burrows in the ground (like Connies) to harbor in;
They spared not the Fruits of Plants or Trees, neither the Plants themselves,
but eat them up. When we had set our Corn, they would commonly come by troops
the night following, or so soon as it began to grow, and dig it up again. If by
diligent watching any of it were preserved till it came to earing, it should
then very hardly escape them; yea, it was a very difficult matter after they had
it in their Houses, to save it from them; for they became noy some even to the
persons of Men. They used all diligence for the destroyng of them, nourishing
many Cats wild and tame for that purpose; they used Ratsbane, and many times
set fire on the Woods, so as the fire might run half a Mile or more before it
were extinct. Every Man in the Country was enjoined to set twelve traps, and
some of their own accord set near a hundred, which they visited twice or thrice
in a night; they trained up their Dogs to hunt them, wherein they grew so
expert, that a good Dog in two of three hours space, would kill forty or fifty
Rats: and other means they used to destroy them, but could not prevail, finding
them still to increase against them, and continued with them till almost to the
end of Captain Tuckers time (who was then Governor) but toward the end of his
time it pleased God (by what means it is not well known) to take them away;
Captain Tucker succeeded Mr. Moor Governor, arriving in May 1616.
insomuch that Wild Cats and many Dogs that lived on them were famished: Some
have attributed this destruction of them to the increase of Wild Cats, some to
one thing, some to another; though none could positively conclude this, or
that. It remains then, as we know God does sometimes effect his will without
subordinate and secondary causes, and sometimes against them: So we need not
doubt but that in the speedy increase and spreading of these Vermin, as also
in the preservation of so many of them by such weak means as they then enjoyed,
and especially in the sudden removal of this great annoyance there was joined
with, and besides the ordinary and manifest means, a more immediate and secret
work of God.

In the Summer Islands.
THere is the Tortoys, which they call a Turckle, which having some affinity
and resemblance with Fishes, Beasts, and Fowls; They are in the shape of their
body like a Crab-fish, and have four fins, they are as great as three or four
men can carry, the upper part of them is covered with a great shell, which they
call a Galley patch, weighing about half a hundred weight, the Flesh that
cleaves to the inside of this being Roasted against the Fire, is excellent
Meat, almost like the Marrow of Beef, but the shell it self harder then horn;
she has also a shell on her belly not so hard, but being boiled it becomes
soft, like the sinews or gristle of Beef, and good Meat. These live in the Sea,
spending the Spring time, and part of Summer about these Islands, but the
residue of the year, is not known where. They are like to Fowl in respect of
smallness, and fashion of their heads and necks, which are wrinckled like a
Turkies, but white, and not so sharp Billed. They also breed their young of
Eggs which they lay. They resemble Beasts, in that their flesh is like Veal,
but more hard and solid, and they feed always upon grass growing at the bottom
of the water; neither can they abide any longer under water then they hold
their breath, which the old ones will do long, but the young ones being chased
to and fro, cannot continue two Minutes without coming up to breathe. Shortly
after their first coming in, the Male and Female couple, which is there called
Cooting; this they continue some three days together, during which time, they
will scarce separate though a Boat come to them, nor hardly when they are
smitten. Not long after, the she Turckle comes up by night upon some sandy Bay,
and further up then the water uses to flow, she digs a hole with her Fin in
the sand some two foot deep, and there coming up several nights lays her Eggs;
some half a bushel (which are about the bigness of a Hens Egg, and round as a
Ball, and ^^ch time covers them with sand very curiously, so that a Man shall
hardly find the place. These Eggs (as it seems) are afterward hatched by the
heat of the Sun, and then by the providence of God (the means as yet unknown)
are brought out of the Earth; for they could never perceive that she returns
any more to them, and yet in likelihood they remain not long in the Earth after
they are hatched, because (as is before said) they cannot live without
breathing. Sometimes is seen the young ones no bigger then a Man's hand, which
some Fish will devour. They grow slowly, and seem to have a very long life;
they will sleep on the top of the Water, and were wont to sleep often on the Land,
till the Country was peopled; they will also live out of the Water some three
weeks, and that without Meat, but mourn and pine away, they are very witty.
Being on the Land turned upon their backs, they can no more without some help
or advantage recover themselves, by which means when they come on shore to lay
their Eggs, they are easily taken, as also they are when they are Cooting. But
otherwise they take them for the most part by night, making a great light in a
Boat, to which they will sometimes swim, and seldom shun; so that a Man
standing ready with a staff in his hand, at one end of which he has a Socket,
wherein is an Iron less then a Man's finger, apiece and sharp, with a line
fastened to it, he strikes this Iron into the upper shell of the Turckle, it
strikes so fast, that after she has a little tired her self by swimming to and
fro she is taken by it. They will live, the head being cut off four and twenty
hours, so that if you cut the flesh with a knife, or touch it, it will tremble
and shrink away. There is no meat will keep longer either fresh or salt.

Out of the Description of Great Britain, these Stories following are
Remarkable and Pleasant.
BRitain seated in the Ocean, has her praises in honorable Eulogies: That
Britain is the Seas High Admiral, and the Fortunate Island, whose Air is more
temperate then France; whose Soil brings forth all Grain in abundance, whose
Seas produce Orient Pearl, whose Fields are the seat of a Summer Queen; her
wildest parts free from wild Beasts, and her chief City worthily named Augusta:
So as we may truly say with the Psalmist, Our Lives are fallen in pleasant
places; Yea, we have a fair Inheritance.

To the Praise of this Island, are these following Verses.
England, fierce Land, Worlds Angle, fertile Art,
Rich Isle, thou needst no other Countries Mart;
Each other Country yet thy succor needs.
England, Joys Land, be free and Joyous long
Free Race, free Grace, free kind, free Mind and Tongue,
Tet hands pass tongues for free and Glorious Deeds.
KENT.
DOver with the Castle is accounted by Matthew Paris the Monk, the Lock and Key
to the whole Realm of England, fatal for the death of King Stephen, and
surrender of King John therein happening.

An accident happened in the year 1586. the fourth day of August, in this County
at Mottingham, a Town 8 miles distant from London, suddenly the ground began to
sink, and three great Elms thereon growing, were carried so deep into the
bowels of the Earth, that no part of them could any more be seen; the hole left
in compass fourscore yards about, and a line of 50 fathams plummed into it does
find no bottom.

The City of Canterbury has been honored with the Presence and Coronations of
King John, and Queen Isabel his Wife; with the Marriages of King Henry the
third, and of King Edward the first; and with the Interments of Edward the
Black Prince, King Henry the fourth, and of Queen Joan his Wife: King Stephen
and Maud his Queen was buried at Feversham.

SUSSEX.
A Battle was fought at Battle, when the hazard of England was tried in one
days fight, and Harold the King gave place to his Conqueror by losing his life
among sixty seven thousand, nine hundred seventy four English men besides;
whose blood so spilt, gave name to the place in French, Sangue Lac. And the
Soil after Rain becoming of a reddish color, caused William of Newbery to
write, that if there fell any small sweet showers in the place where so great a
slaughter of the English was made, presently sweateth forth very fresh blood
out of the Earth, as if the evidence thereof did plainly declare the voice of
blood there shed, and cried still from the Earth unto the Lord.

William the Bastard, Duke of Normandy, making his claim to the Crown of
England, by Affinity, Adoption, and Promise, arrived at a Port in Sussex called
Pensey, with 896 ships furnished for War the 28 th. of September, in the year
1066. And the 14th. of October following being Saturday, near Hastings in the
same County joined Battle with Harold King of England, who in the Field
Valiantly fighting, was there slain by the shot of an Arrow into his brains,
and with him dyed his two Brethren, and 67974 men besides. The place where they
fought, ever since does in Memory thereof bear the name of Battle, where the
Heptarchy of the Saxons was brought to their last Period. Having all their Laws
altered, their Nobles displaced, and all men disherited, all seized into the
Normans hand, who made himself Lord of all, and on the day of Christ, his
Nativity in the same year, was Crowned at Westminster King of England, which he
governed the space of 20 years, 8 Months, and 16 days.

But Places of other Note in this County is, that from Basham, Earl Harold
taking the Sea for his delight, in a small Boat was driven upon the Coast of
Normandy, where by Duke William he was retained, till he had sworn to make him
King after Edward Confessors Death: which Oath being broken, the Bastard
arrived at Pensey, and with his Sword revenged that perjury.

SURREY.
THis County is stored with many Princely Houses; yea, and five of His
Majesty's so Magnificently built, that of some she may well say, no Shire has
none such, as is Nonesuch indeed. And were not Richmond a fatal place of
Englands best Princes, it might in Esteem be ranked with the Richest: For
therein dyed the great Conqueror of France, King Edward the third, the
beautiful Anne Daughter to Charles the Fourth, Emperor, and entirely beloved
Wife to King Richard the second; the most wise Prince, King Henry the seventh,
and the Barest of her Sex, the Mirror of Princes, Queen Elizabeth, the Worlds
Love, and Subjects Joy.

In Chertsey Abbey King Henry the sixth, who was deposed and made away in the
Tower of London, was first Interred without all Funeral Pomp; but for his holy
life was imputed a Saint: and lastly translated, and Intombed at Windsor.

Hant-shire.
NEar Ringwood, from God and peoples service, to Beast and Luxury, thirty six
Parish Churches were converted and pulled down by the Conqueror, and thirty
miles of circuit inforrested for his Game of Hunting. Wherein his Sons, Richard
and Rufus, with Henry the second son to Duke Robert his first, felt by hasty
death the hand of Justice and Revenge: For in the same Forest, Richard by a
blasting of a pestilent Air, Rufus by a shot taken for a Beast, and Henry as
Absalom hanged by a bough, came to their untimely ends. At so dear a rate the
pleasure of Dogs, and harbor for Beasts were bought in the blood of these
Princes.

In the City of Winchester was Richard and Rufus Interred, their bones by
Bishop Fox were gathered and shrined in little gilt Coffers fixed upon a wall
in the Quire, where still they remain carefully preserved.

The Wars betwixt Maud the Empress, entitled Lady of England, unto whom all
the Nobility had sworn Allegiance. And King Stephen Earl of Bolloign her Cousin
German; was prosecuted with such variable Fortunes in many conflicts on both
parts, that Stephen himself was by her taken Prisoner, and retained in Irons
with other extremities used. But the success of War altering, Maud the Empress
to save her own life, adventured through the Host of her Enemy, laid in a
Coffin fained to be dead, and so was carried in a Horse-Litter from Winchester
to Lutegershall Vices, and Gloucester, and thence to Oxford, whence the year
following she escaped as dangerously by deceiving the Scout Watch in a deep
Snow, Anno 1141.

Wight Island.
IT is reported that in the year 1176. and twenty three of King Henry the
second, that in this Island it rained a shower of blood, which continued for
the space of two hours together, to the great wonder and amazement of the
people that beheld it with fear.

Devonshire.
FRom the Port of Plymouth Sir Francis Drake, that potent Man at Sea setting
forth in the year 1577. In the space of two years and ten Months did compass
the circle of the Earth by Sea.

Henry Holland, Grandchild to John Holland, half Brother to King Richard the
second, siding with Lancaster against Edward the fourth, whose Sister was his
Wife, was driven to such misery as it is reported, that he was seen all torn
and barefooted to beg his living in the Low Countries: and lastly his body was
cast upon the shore of Kent (as if he had perished by shipwreck:) so uncertain
is Fortune in her endowments, and the state of Man, notwithstanding his great
Birth.

Cornwall.
BEsides the abundance of Fish that do suffice the Inhabitants, the Pilchard is
taken, who in great Skuls swarm about the Coast: whence being transported to
France, Spain, and Italy, yield a yearly Revenue of gain unto Cornwall. There
are Rocks that are not destitute of Gold nor Silver; yea, and Diamonds shaped
and pointed Angle-wise, and smoothed by nature her self, whereof some are as
big as Walnuts, inferior to the Orient only in blackness and hardness.

Memorable matters for Antiquity and strangeness of sight, are these, at
Boskenna, is a Trophy erected, which are eighteen stones placed round in
compass, and pitched twelve foot each from others, with another far bigger in
the very center. These do show some Victory there attained either by the
Romans, or else King Athelstone. At the foot of the Rocks near unto St.
Michaels Mount, in the Memory of our Fathers were dug up Spear-heads, Axes,
and Swords of Brass wrapped in Linne, the Weapons that the Cimbrians and
ancient Britains anciently used.

There also the Wring-Cheese does show it self, which are huge Rocks heaped one
upon another, and the lowest of them the least, fashioned like a Cheese lying
pressed under the rest of those Hills, which seems very dangerous to be
passed under. But near to Pensans, and unto Mounts-bay, a far more strange Rock
stands; namely, Main-Amber, which lies mounted upon others of meaner size,
with so equal a counterpoize, that a Man may move it with the push of his
finger; but no strength remove it out of his place.

Sommerset-shire.
THis Country, besides other Commodities in some places is enriched by
Lead-mines, which yields great Plenty, the most Marchantable Commodity that is
in England, and vented into all parts of the World: Some places are beautified
with Diamonds, as St. Vincent Rock, whereof there is great plenty, and so
bright of color, as they might equalize Indian Diamonds if they had their
hardness; yet being so many, and so common, they are less sought after or
commended.

In this Country is the City of Bathe, which takes name of the hot Baths: A
place of continual concourse for Persons of all degrees, and almost of all
diseases: who by Divine Providence do very often find relief there, the Springs
thereof by reason of their Mineral and sulphurous passage, being of such
exceeding power and medicinal heat, as that they Cure and Conquer the
rebellions stubbornness of corrupt humors.

At Dunstere, where (as is reported) a great Lady obtained of her Husband so
much Pasture Ground in common by the Town side, for the good and benefit of the
Inhabitants, as she was able in a whole day to go about barefoot.

Wilt-shire.
SAlisbury the chief City, in which every street almost has a River running
through in her midst. The Cathedral a most rich Magnificent Church, wherein are
as many Windows as there are days in the year, as many cast Pillars of Marble,
as there are hours in the year: and as many Gates for entrance, as there are
months in the year.

Aurelius Ambrosus buried at Stonheng, Anno 500.
THis ancient Monument was erected by Aurelius, Surnamed Ambrosus King of the
Britiains, whose Nobility in the Reign of Vortiger (his Countries scourge) about
the year 475. by the Treachery of the Saxons, on a day of parley were there
slaughtered, and their bodies there Interred. In Memory whereof, this King Aurel
caused this Trophy to be set up, Admirable to Posterities. Both in form and
quantity; the matter thereof are stones in great bigness, containing twenty
eight foot and more in length, and ten in breadth: these are set in the ground
by two and two, and a third laid Gate-wise over-thwart fastn'd with tenons and
mortasses wrought in the same, which seem very dangerous to all that pass there
under. The form is round, and as it seems has been circulated with three
ranks of these stones: Many whereof are now fallen down, and the uttermost
whereof contains in compass three hundred foot by measure of assize. They all
are rough, and of a gray color, standing within a Trench that has been much
deeper. In this place this foresaid King Aurelius, with two more of the
British Kings his Successors have been buried with many more of their
Nobility: and in this place under little banks, to this day are found by
digging bones of Mighty men, and Armor of large and ancient fashion. Not far
hence is seen the ruins of an old Fortress, thought by some to be built there
by the Romans, when this Kingdom was possessed by their Emperors.

Bark-shire.
IN Reading, in the Collegiate Church of the Abbey, King Henry the first and
Queen (lay both veiled and Crowned) with their Daughter Maud the Empress,
called the Lady of England, were Interred, as the private History of the place
avoucheth.

But of far greater Magnificence and State is the Castle of Windsor: A most
Princely Palace and Mansion of His Majesty. In this Castle was King Edward the
third born, and here held at one and the same time Prisoners, John King of
France, and David King of Scotland. Neither was it ever graced with greater
Majesty then by the Institution of the most Honorable Order of the Garter, the
invention thereof some ascribe to be from a Garter falling from his Queen, or
rather from Joan Countess of Salisbury, a Lady of an uncomparable beauty, as
she danced before him, whereat the bystanders smiling, he gave the impress to
check all evil conceits: and in Golden Letters imbellished the Garter with this
French Posie; Honi Soit Qui Maby Pense. The Princely Chapel of Windsor is
graced with the bodies of Henry the 6 th. and Edward the 4 th. Kings of
England; the one of Lancaster, the other of York, as also King Henry the 8 th.
lies there Interred.

Finch-hampsted: For wonder inferior to none, where (as our Writers do
witness) that in the year a thousand one hundred, a Well boiled up with streams
of blood, and fifteen days together continued that Spring, whose Waters made
red all others where they came; to the great amazement of the beholders.

Middlesex.
LOndon: This City does show as the Cedars among the other trees, being the
seat of the British Kings, the Chamber of the English, the Model of the Land,
and the Mart of the World. For thither are brought the silk of Asia, the spices
from Africa, the balms from Grecia, and the riches of both the Indies, East and
West. No City standing so long in Fame, nor any for Divine and Politic
Government may with her be compared.

In King John's time a Bridge of Stone was made over Thames, upon nineteen
Arches, for length, breadth, beauty, and building, the like again cannot be
found in the World.

Essex.
IN the year 1581. an Army of Mice so over ran the Marshes in Deug^y Hundred,
near unto South-Minster in this County, that they shore the grass to the very
roots, and so tainted the same with their venomous teeth, that a great Murrain
fell upon the Cattle which grazed thereon, to the great loss of their owners.

Suffolk.
RAlph Coggeshall in the Monuments of Colchester, declares that a Fish in all
parts like a Man was taken near Orford, and for six Months was kept in the
Castle: whence after he escaped, went again to the Sea.

As strange, but most true, was a crop of Pease, that without tillage or sowing
grew in the Rocks, betwixt this Orford and Aldebrough, in the year 1555. when
by unseasonable weather a great dearth was in the Land, there in August were
gathered above one hundred Quarters, and in blossoming remained as many more,
where never grass grew, or Earth ever seen, but hard sollid Rocks three yards
deep under the roots.

Hereford-shire.
AT Langley in this Country was buried Richard the second, that unfortunate
King, who in the Cell of Friars Preachers was there first buried: but
afterward removed and enshrined at Westminster: And in another Langley, near
the East from thence was born that Pontifical Breakspear, Bishop of Rome, known
by the name of Hadrian the fourth (and famous for his Stirrupholding by
Frederick the Emperor) whose breath was lastly stopped by a fly that flew into
his mouth.

Bedford-shire.
IN the year 1399. immediately before those Civil Wars broke out between the
Princes of York and Lancaster. The River Ouse near unto Harwood stood suddenly
still, and refrained to pass any further; so that forward men passed three
miles together on foot in the very depth of her channel, and backwards the
waters swelled unto a great height, which was observed by the judicious, to
foretell some unkind division that shortly should arise.

Buckingham-shire.
A Shridge Town has been in great repute for the blood (supposed out of
Christ's sides) brought out of Germany by Henry the Eldest son of Richard King
of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, whereunto resorted great concourse of
people for Devotion, and Adoration thereof. But when the Sunshine of the Gospel
had pierced through such clouds of darkness: it was perceived apparently to be
only Honey clarified and colored with Saffron, as was openly showed at Paul's
Cross by the Bishop of Rochester, the twenty fourth of February, 1538.

Oxford shire.
MEmorable places of Note, either for Actions therein happening, or for their
own famous esteem, are the Roll-rich-stones standing near unto Enisham, in the
South of this shire, a Monument of huge stones set round in compass, in manner
of Stone-henge, of which fabulous Tradition has reported for sooth, that they
were Metamorphosed from men, but in truth were there erected upon some great
Victory obtained in the year 876.

Wood-stock is a most ancient and Magnificent Palace, built to that glory by
King Henry the first, and enlarged with a Labyrinth of many windings by King
Henry the second, to hide from his jealous Juno, his entirely beloved Concubine
Rosamond Clifford, a Damosel of surpassing beauty; where notwithstanding,
followed by a Clew of silk that fell from her lap, she was surprised and
poisoned by Queen Eleanor his Wife: and was buried at God-stow Nunnery, in the
midst of the Quire under a hearse of silk, set about with lights.

Gloucestershire.
THe Inhabitants in some parts of this shire, enjoy a private custom to this
day, that the Goods and Lands of condemned persons fall unto the Crown, but
only for a year and a day, and then return to the next Heirs, contrary to the
custom of all England besides.

Gloucester City: In this Church the unfortunate Prince, King Edward the second
under a Monument of Alablaster does lie, who being murdered at Barkly Castle,
by the cruelty of French Isabel his Wife was there Intombed. And not far from
him another Prince as unfortunate; namely, Robert Curthoise the Eldest son of
William the Conqueror, lies in a painted Wooden tomb in the midst of the
Quire, whose eyes were plucked out in Cardiff Castle, wherein he was kept
prisoner twenty six years, with all contumelious indignities, until through
extreme Anguish he ended his life.

Barkley Castle, where King Edward the second was through his Fundament run
into his bowels with a red burning spit.

Tewkesbury the fatal period of King Henry the sixth his Government, and the
wound of the Lancastrian cause; for in a Battle there fought in 1471. Prince
Edward the only Son of King Henry, had his brains dashed out in a most shameful
manner, the Queen his Mother taken prisoner, and most of the Favorites slain
and beheaded. And at Alderley a little Town standing eight miles from the
Severn, upon the hills to this day are found Cockles, Periwinckles, and Oisters
of sollid stone: which whether they have been shellfish and living Creatures,
or else the sports of Nature in her Works. Let the Natural Philosophers dispute
and Judge.

Hereford-shire
OF rare Note in this shire are said to be Bone-well, a Spring not far from
Richards Castle, wherein are continually found little fishes bones, but not a
fin seen: and being wholly cleansed thereof, will notwithstanding have again
the like, whether naturally produced, or in veins thither brought, no man
knows.

But more admirable was the Work of the Omnipotent in the year 1571. When the
Macley-Hill in the East of the shire rouzed it self out of a dead sleep, with a
roaring noise removed from the place where it stood, and for three days
together traveled from her first site, to the great amazement and fear of the
beholders: It began to journey upon the 7 th. day of February, being Saturday,
at six of the Clock at night, and by seven the next morning had gone forty
paces, carrying with it sheep in their Coats, hedge-rows, and trees, whereof
some were over-turned, and some that stood upon the Plain, are firmly growing
upon the Hill; those that were East were turned West, and those in the West
were set in the East: in which remove it overthrew Kinnaston Chapel, and
turned two Highways near a hundred yards from their usual place, paths formerly
trod. The ground thus traveling, was about twenty six Acres, which opening her
self with Rocks and all, bare the Earth before it four hundred yards space
without any stay, leaving that which was Pasturage in place of the Tillage, and
the Tillage overspread with Pasturage. Lastly, overwhelmed her lower parts,
mounted to an Hill of twelve Fathoms high, and there rested her self after
three days travel; remaining his mark, that so laid his hand upon this Rock,
whose power has poysed the Hills in his balance.

Worcestershire.
IN the midst of the Quire in St. Marys Church in Worcester City, rests the
body of King John (the great withstander of the Popes proceedings) under a
Monument of white Marble in Princely Vestures, with his Portraiture thereon
according to life.

Warwickshire.
COventry City: The Citizens having highly offended their first Lord Leofrick,
had their privileges infringed, and themselves oppressed with many heavy
Tributes, whose Wife Lady Godiva pitying their Estates, uncessantly sued for
their Peace, and that with such importunacy, as hardly could be said whether
was greater, his hatred, or her love; at last overcome with her continual
intercessions, he granted her suit upon an uncivil, and (as he thought) an
unacceptable condition (which was) that she should Ride naked through the face
of the City, and that openly at high Noonday: This notwithstanding she
thankfully accepted, and performed the Act accordingly enjoyed; for this Lady
Godiva stripping her self of all rich attire, let loose the tresses of her fair
hair, which on every side so covered her nakedness, that no part of her body
was uncivil to sight: whereby she redeemed the former freedom, and remissions
of such heavy Tributes.

At Gofford Gate in Coventry, did hang the shield-bone of a Wild-bore, far
bigger then the greatest Ox bone: with whose snout the great pit called
Swanswell was turned up, and was slain by the famous Guy.

At Leamington, far from the Sea, a Spring of Salt water boileth up, and
Newenham Regis most sovereign water against the Stone, green Wounds, Ulcers,
and Impostumes, and drank with Salt loses, but with Sugar binds the body,
and turns Wood into Stone.

Northamptonshire.
NOtwithstanding the simple and gentle sheep, of all Creatures the most
harmless: are now become so Ravenous, that they begin to devour men, waste
fields, and depopulate houses; if not whole Town-ships, as one merrily has
written.

Rutland-shire.
NEar the Lord Harringtons house Burley, stands Okham a fair Market Town,
which Lordship the said Lord Baron enjoys, with a Royalty somewhat
extraordinary, which is this: If any Noble by birth come within the precinct of
the same Lordship, he shall forfeit as an homage a shoe from the Horse whereon
he rides, unless he redeem it at a price with Money. In witness whereof, there
are many Horseshooes nailed upon the Shire-hall door, some of large size and
ancient fashion.

Leichestershire.
KIng Richard the third, ( vid.) Crouch-back Richard the Usurper, who from the
City of Leicester set forth in one day in great Pomp, and in battel-aray, to
keep the Crown sure upon his own helmet in a sore fought field, yielded both it
and his life, unto the Head and Hands of Henry of Richmond his Conqueror, and
the next day was brought back like a Hog, naked and torn, and with contempt
without tears obscurely buried in the Gray-Fryers in this City; whose
suppression has suppressed the Plot place of his Grave, and only the
Stone-Chest wherein he was laid (a drinking trough now for Horses in a common
Inn) retains the Memory of that great Monarchs Funeral: And so did a Stone in
the Church and Chapel of St. Mary's, enclose the Corpse of the proud and
pontifical Cardinal Wolsey, who had prepared for himself a far more richer
Monument.

Lutterworth: Where the famous John Wickliffe, Englands Morning Star, dispersed
the clouds of all Papistical darkness, by preaching the Gospel in that his
charge, and style of his Pen; so piercing in power, that the Man of sin ever
since has been better known to the world.

Lincolnshire.
THis Country affords great Plenty of Fowl and Fish, exceeding any other in
the Realm, wherein at some times and season of the year, has been taken in
Nets. In August at one draught, above three thousand Mallards, and other Fowls
of the like kind,

At Harlaxton was plowed up a brazen Vessel, wherein was enclosed a Golden
Helmet of an ancient fashion, set with precious stones, which was presented to
Katherine of Spain, Wife and Dowager to King Henry the eight.

At Bullingbrooke was King John poisoned by Simon a Monk of S^^nsted Abbey, and
of Queen Eleanor, wife to King Edward the first, the Mirror of Wedlock, and
Love to the Commons, who at Harby near Bullingbrooke, his Birth place, ended
her life.

Nottingham-shire.
IN this Town are many strange Vaults hewed out of the Rocks, and those under
the Castle of an esp^cial note; one for the story of Christ's passion engraven
in the Walls, and cut by the hand of David the second, King of Scots, whilst he
was therein detained prisoner. Another wherein the Lord Mortimer was surprised
in the Nonage of King Edward the third ever since bearing the name of
Mortimers Hole; these have their stairs and several rooms made artificially
even out of the Rocks, as also in that Hill are dwelling Houses with winding
stairs, windows, chimneys, and room above room, wrought all out of the same
Rock.

Darby-shire.
THings of strange note are the hot water Springs bursting forth of the ground
at Buxton, where out of the Rock within the compass of eight yards, nine
Springs arise, eight of them warm, but the ninth very cold. These run from
under a fair square building of free stone, and about threescore paces off,
receive another hot Spring from a well, near unto which another very cold
Spring bubled up, daily experience shows they are good for the stomach and
sinews, and very pleasant to bathe the body in. Not far thence is Elden hole,
the Waters that trickle from the top of that Cave (which indeed is very
spacious, but of a low and narrow entrance) do congeal into stone, and hang as
Ickles in the roof very white, and somewhat Christal-like. And seven miles
thence upon a Mounted hill, stands a Castle, under which there is a hole or
Cave in the ground of a mavelous capacity, which is commonly called the
Devils Arse in the Peak.

Shrop-shire has nothing remarkable.

The County Palatine of Chester.
CHeshire having been made a Principality by Richard the 2d. and styled himself
Prince of Chester, King Henry the 3d. gave it to his eldest Son Prince Edward,
against whom Lewlin Prince of Wales gathered a mighty Band, and with them did
the Country much harm, even unto the Cities gates. With the like Skar Fires it
had often times been afrighted, which they lastly defenced with a Wall made of
the Welsh men's heads, on the South side of Dee in Hanbridge.

Chester in the days of King Edgar, was in most flourishing Estate, wherein he
had the Homage of eight other Kings, who rowed his Barge from St. John's to his
Palace, himself holding the Helm as their Supreme.

Lancashire.
BY the civil Wars of York and Lancaster was bred and brought forth that bloody
division and fatal strife of the Noble Houses, which for many years together
molested the peace and quiet of the Land, and defiled the earth with blood:
there were thirteen fields fought, and three Kings of England, one Prince of
Wales, twelve Dukes, one Marquess, eighteen Earls, one Viscount, and three and
twenty Barons, besides Knights and Gentlemen, lost their lives in the same; yet
at last, by the happy Marriage of Henry the seventh, King of England, next heir
to the house of Lancaster, with Elizabeth Daughter and heir to Edward the
fourth of the house of York; the White and red Roses were conjoined in the
happy uniting of those two divided Families.

Yorkshire.
HAlifax once called Horton, and touching the alteration of the name, this
pretty story is related of it; namely, that a Clerk (for so they call him)
being far in Love with a Maid, and by no means either of long praises or large
promises, able to gain like affection at her hands: when he saw his hopes
frustrate, and that he was not like to have his purpose of her, turned his love
into rage, and cut of the Maids head, which being afterward hung upon an Ewe
tree, common people counted it as an hallowed Relic till it was rotten: And
afterward (such was the credulity of that time) it maintained the opinion of
reverence and Religion still, for the people resorted thither on Pilgrimage,
and persuaded themselves, that the little veins that spread out between the
bark and body of the Ewe-tree like fine threads were the very hairs of the Maids
head: Hereupon it was called by this name Haligfax, or Haly-fax, that is,
Holy-hair.

Under Knaushrouh there is a Well called Dropping-well, in which the Waters
spring not out of the veins of the earth, but distill and trickle down from the
Rocks that hang over it; it is of that virtue and efficacy, that it turns Wood
into Stone; for what Wood soever is put into it, will be shortly covered over
with a stony bark, and be turned into stone, as has been often observed.

St. Wilfrids Needle, a place very famous in times past for the narrow hole in
the close vaulted room under the ground, by which women's honesties were wont to
be tried; for such as were chaste pass through with much facility, but as many
as had played false, were miraculously held fast, and could not creep through.

The West Riding of Yorkshire.
THose Mountains near unto Richmond, on the top whereof are found certain
stones much like unto seawinkles, Cockles, and other Sea fish, which if they be
not the wonders of Nature, we may deem to be the undoubted tokens of the
general deluge, that in Noah's time over-flowed the whole face of the Earth.

Also the River Swale, among the English was reputed a very Sacred River, and
Celebrated with an universal glory; for that (the English Saxons first
embracing Christianity) in one day above ten thousand men, besides a Multitude
of Women and Children, were therein baptized unto Christ, by the hands of
Paulinus Archbishop of York.

The North and East Riding.
PLaces of eminent Note, are Whitby, where are found certain stones fashioned
like Serpents, folded, and wraped round in a Reath, even the very pastimes of
Nature, who when she is wearied (as it were) with serious works, sometimes
forgeth and shapeth things by way of sport and recreation; so that by the
credulous they are thought to have been Serpents, which a Coat or crust of
stones had now covered all over, and by the prayers of St. Hilda turned to
stones. And also there are certain fields here adjoining, where Geese flying
over fall down suddenly to the ground, to the great admiration of all men.

Ounsbery hill; besides a Spring of Medicinable waters for the eyes, is a
Prognostication unto her Neighbors, whose head being covered with a cloudy
cap, presageth some tempestuous storms or showers to follow. At Huntly Nabe,
are stones found at the roots of certain Rocks, of diverse bigness, so
artificially shaped round by nature in manner of a Globe, as if they had been
made by the Turners hand. In which (if you break them) are found stony
Serpents, enwrapped round like a reath, but most of them headless.

The Bishopric of Durham.
THings of rare note observed in this shire, are three pits of a wonderful
depth, commonly called the Hell Kettles, which are adjoining near unto
Darlington, whose waters are somewhat warm. These are thought to come of an
Earthquake, which happened in the year 1179. whereof the Chronicle of Tinmouth
makes mention, whose Record is this, On Christmas Day at Oxenhall in the
Territory of Darlington, within the Bishopric of Durham, the ground heaved up
aloft, like unto a high Tower, and so continued all that day, as it were
unmovable until the Evening, and then fell with so horrible a noise, that it
made all the Neighbor dwellers sore afraid; and the earth swallowed it up, and
made in the same place a deep pit, which is there to be seen for a testimony
unto this day.

Of no less admiration are certain stones lying within the River Weere, at
Butterbee near Durham, from whose ebb and low water in the Summer, issues a
certain Salt reddish water, which with the sun waxes white, and growing into a
thick substance, becomes a necessary salt to the use of the by-dwellers.

Westmorland nothing worth noting.

Cumberland.
THe Rivers in this Country feed a kind of Muskle that brings forth Pearl,
wherein the mouth of the Irt, as they lie gaping and sucking in dew, the
Country people gather and sell to the Lapidaries, to their own little, and the
buyers great gain. But the Mines Royal of Copper, whereof this Country yields
much, is for use the Richest of all: at Keswick and Newland, is the black lead
gotten, whose plenty makes it of no great esteem, otherwise a Commodity that
could hardly be missed.

At Burgh upon the sand, was the fatal end of our famous Monarch King Edward
the first, who there leaving his Wars unfinished against Scotland, left his
troubles, and soon missed life, to his untimely and soon lamented death.

And at Salkelds upon the River Eden, a Monument of seventy stones, each of
them ten foot high above ground, and one of them at the entrance fifteen, as a
Trophy of Victory, was erected. These are by the by-dwellers called Long Megg
and her Daughters.

Northumberland.
THe chiefest Commodity that enricheth Country, is that which we call
Sea-Coals, whereof there is such plenty and abundance dug up, as they do not
only return a great gain to the Inhabitants, but procure also much pleasure and
profit to others. No place of this Province vents forth so many of these
Sea-Coals into other Regions as New Castle does.

The Inhabitants of Morpeth set their own Town on fire in the year 1215. in the
spite they bare to King John, for that he and his Rutars over ran these
Countries.

Man Island.
THis Commodity makes this Island more happy then we are here, for the people
are there free from all necessary commencements of Suits, from long and
dilatory Pleas, and from frivolous Feeing of Lawyers. No Judge or Clerks of the
Court take there any penny for drawing Instruments, or making of Processes. All
Controversies are there determined by certain Judges, without writings or other
Charges, and them they call Deemsters, and choose forth among themselves. If any
complaint be made to the Magistrate for wrongs either done or suffered, he
presently takes up a stone, and fixes his mark upon it, and so delivers it
unto the party Plaintiff, by virtue of which he both calls his adversary to
appearance, and to produce his Witnesses. If the case fall out to be more
litigious, and of greater consequence than can easily be ended, it is then
referred to twelve men, whom they term the Keys of the Island. And this Island
is so well managed for matter of Rule and civil Discipline, that every man
there possesses his own in peace and safety. No man lives in dread or danger
of losing what he has. Men are not there inclined to robbing, or thieving, or
licentious living.

This Isle prohibits the customary manner of begging from door to door,
detesting the disorders, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical of Neighbour-Nations.
That which deserves to be committed to Memory, is, that the Women of this
Country, wheresoever they go out of their doors, gird themselves about with the
winding sheet that they purpose to be buried in, to show themselves mindful of
their Mortality; and such of them as are at any time condemned to dye, are
sowed within a sack, and flung from a Rock into the Sea.

This Island is in length 29 Miles, the widest part is scarce nine Miles, the
whole compass about, is fourscore and two Miles.

Holy Island.
THis Island from East to West is about two thousand two hundred and fifty
paces, so that the circumference cannot be great.

Farn Isle.
THe breadth of this Isle is but five Miles, and the length no more; the whole
circumference extends it self no further then to fifteen Miles.

Garnsey.
THis Isle lies in length from Plimmouth-bay South-west, to Lancross de
Anckers North-east, thirteen Miles; in breadth from St. Martins point
South-east, to the How North-west, nine miles; and is in circuit thirty six
miles.

In this Isle is neither Toad, Snake, Adder, or any other venomous Creature,
whereas Jersey has great plenty, their fields in the Summer time are so
naturally garnished with Flowers of all sorts, that a Man (being there) might
conceit himself to be in a pleasant Artificial Garden: Among the Rocks is found
a hard stone, which we term Emerill. This stone is serviceable for many
purposes, and many Trades, as Glasiers, etc. but especially for the Goldsmiths
and Lapidaries, to cut their precious stones.

Jersey.
THis Island is in length ten miles, and in breadth six miles, the whole circuit
of the Island being thirty eight miles.

Pembroke-shire, in this shire nothing remarkable.

Caermarden-shire.
IN the ruins of Carreg-Castle, which stood mounted on a high hill, under which
many Vaults and spacious Caves far into the ground are seen, wherein is thought
the people unable to fight, were therein secured in time of their Wars. Where
also is a Well, that in this place twice in four and twenty hours ebbing, and
twice flowing, resembles the unstable Motions of the main Sea.

Glamorgan-shire.
THings of strange note, that in a Rock or Cliff upon the Seaside, and Island
of Barry, lying near the South-east point of this Country, is heard out of a
little chink, the noise as it were of Smiths at their work, one while the
blowing of Bellows to increase the heat, then the strokes of the hammer, and
sound of the Anvil; sometimes the noise of the Grind-stone in grinding of Iron
Tools, then the hissing sparks of Steel-gads* as they fly from their beating,
with the puffing noise of flames in a Furnace.

More Westward from hence, upon the River Ogmore, and near unto Newton, in a
sandy plain about an hundred paces from Severn, there springs a Well, though
not of the clearest water, whereat the flowing and fullness of the Sea can
hardly any water be gotten, but at the ebb and fall of the Tide, it walloweth
up a main.

And upon the same shore more North and by West, on the top of a hill called
Minyd-Margan, is erected a Monument inscribed with a strange Character, and as
strange a conceit held thereof by the by-dwellers, whose opinions are
possessed, that if any Man read the same, he shall shortly after dye.

Monmouth.
OUr King Henry the V the great Triumpher over France, was born in Monmouth.

Brecknock-shire.
THe Welshmen relate of a Prince named Brechavius, the Father of an holy
offspring, whose twenty four Daughters were all of them Saints.

From the top of a Hill, in Welsh called Mounch-devuy, or Cadier Arthur; if any
man from the North-east Rock cast their Cloaks, Hats, and Staves,
notwithstanding will never fall, but with the Air and wind return back, and
blow up; neither will any descend from that Cliff being so cast, unless it be
stone or some Metalline substance, affirming the cause to be the Clouds, which
are seen to rack much lower than the top of that hill.

As strange a tale is told of the M^^y Llynsavathan, two Miles East from
Brec^nock, which at the breaking of her frozen Ice, makes a fearful sound like
unto Thunder. In which place as is reported, sometimes stood a fair City, which
was swallowed up in an Earthquake, and resigned her Stone-walls unto this deep
and broad water.

Radnor-shire.
NEar Knigton a Market Town, is Offaes Ditch which runs along by the Mountain,
which was a bound set to separate the Welsh from the English.

A Law was made, that it should be present death for the Welsh to pass over the
same.

Cardigan-shire.
IN Tyui, the Beaver has been found, a Creature living both by land and water,
whose stones the Physicians hold in great price. His fore-feet are like unto a
Dogs, but the hinder whole skinned as is the Goose, like Oars giving him swift
motion in swiming, his tail broad and Gristly, he uses a stern, wherewith on
the sudden he can divert his swift floating course.

Mount-Gomery-shire, nothing there remarkable.

Merioneth-shire.
HIlls there are so high, as it is affirmed by one, that shepherds upon their
tops falling at odds in the Morning, and challenging the field for fight,
before they can come together to try out the Quarrel, the day will be spent,
and the heat of their fury shut up with their sleep.

Denbigh-shire.
THis is worth observing, both for Admiration and Antiquity, that in the Parish
of Llan-sunan within this County, there is a place compass cut out of the main
Rock by man's hand, in the side of a stony hill, wherein there be four and
twenty seats to sit in, some less, some bigger, where Children and young men
coming to seek their Cattle, use to sit, and to have their sports. And at this
day they commonly call it King Arthurs Round Table.

Flint-shire.
THis Country has many shallow Rivers in it, but none of fame and note, but
Dee and Cluyde. How he it there is a Spring not far from Rudland Castle, of
great report and antiquity, which is termed Holy-well, and is commonly called
St. Winefrids Well, of whom antiquity thus reports, that Winefrid a Christian
Virgin, very fair and virtuous, was doted upon by a young lustful Prince or
Lord of the Country, who not being able to rule his headstrong affections,
having many times in vain attempted and tried her chastity, both by rich Gifts,
and large Promises, could not by any means obtain his desires, he therefore (in
a place of advantage) suddenly surprised and ravished her weak (yet resisting)
body. After the deed done, the cruel Tyrant, to stop her cries and acclamations,
slew her, and cut off her head, out of which place did suddenly arise a Spring
that continues to this day, carrying from the Fountain such a forcible stream
and current, as the like is not found in Christendom. Over the head of the
Spring there is built a Chapel of Freestone, with Pillars curiously wrought
and ingraved, in the Chancel whereof, and Glass window, the Picture of the
Virgin is drawn, together with the Memorial of her life and death. To this
Fountain Pilgrims are accustomed to repair in their zealous, but blind
devotion, and diverse others resort to Bathe in, holding firmly that the water
is of much virtue.

There be many Red stones in the bottom of this Well, and much green Moss
growing upon the sides, the superstition of the people holding that these Red
spots in the stones were drops of the Ladies blood, which all the water in the
Spring can never wash away, and that the Moss about the Wall was her hair,
which though some of it be given to every stranger that comes, yet it never
wastes. But howsoever this be carried for truth by the Tradition of time, the
Moss it self smells exceeding sweet.

Carnaervon-shire.
KIng Edward the second was born at Carnaervon, in a Tower of the Castle; he
was the first Prince of Wales of the English Line.

There are in this shire two Pools called the Mears, the one of which produces
great store of fish, but all having only one eye; and in the other there is a
moveable Island, which as soon as a man treads on, it forthwith floateth a
great way off, whereby the Welsh are said to have often escaped, and deluded
their Enemies assailing them.

Anglesea-Island.
THe length of this Island is twenty miles, in breadth seventeen miles, the
whole circumference amounting totwards seventy miles.

Out of Scotlands General Description.
THis Nations Original by some has been derived from Scota, the supposed
Daughter of the Egyptian King Pharaoh, that nourished Moses, who having married
Gaithelus, the son of Cecrops (the Founder of Athens) who first seating in
Spain, passed thence into Ireland, and lastly into Scotland, where his Wife
Scota gave name to the Nation.

In this Country is the dark Wood Caledonia, famous for the Wild White Bulls
that therein were bred, whose Manes were Lion-like, thick and curled, of nature
fierce and cruel, and so hateful to Mankind, that they abhorred whatsoever was
by them handled or breathed upon; but because the flesh was pleasant and dainty
to the mouth, the whole race of them is extinguished.

It is Admirable, the report that is given of this Country, as to the plenty of
Cattle, Fish and Fowl there abiding, fish so plentiful, that men in some places
(for delight) on Horseback hunt Salmons with Spears, and a certain Fowl, which
some call Soland-Geese, spreading so thick in the Air, that they even darken
the Suns-light; of whose flesh, feathers and Oil, the Inhabitants in some parts
make great use and gain; yea, and even of fishes brought by them, abundant
provision for Diet; as also of the sticks (brought to make their Nests)
plentiful provision for fuel.

With these of Wonders, might be spoken of the Natures of those two famous
Loughs, Lomand and Nessa, the latter whereof never freezeth in Winter, though
never so extreme, and the Waters of the other most raging in the fairest and
calmest weather, wherein also floteth an Island that removes from place to
place, as the wind forces her spongeous and unfastned body. In Buquhan upon
the banks of Ratra is a Well, whose trickling drops turn (in Piramidy wise)
into hard stone, and another near Edenbrough that floteth with Bitumen. In Dee
and Done, besides the admired plenty of Salmons, is found a Shellfish, called
the Horse-Muscle, where Pearls are engendered most precious for Physic, and
some of them so Orient, that they give no place to the choicest.

The Western Islands lying scattered in the Deucalidonia Sea, were anciently
ruled by a King of their own, whose maintenance was out of their common
Coffers, and the Regal Authority never continued in lineal succession; for (to
prevent that) their Kings were not permitted to have Wives of their own, but
might by their Laws accompany with other men's, as the like Law was in the other
parts of Scotland, that the Virginity of all new Wives, should be the
Landlords prey, till King Malcolme enacted, that half a Mark should be paid
for Redemption.

More North, lie the Isles of Shetland, where as Tzetzes fableth, the Souls of
good men are ferryed into those Elizian Fields that ever grow green, but their
fictions intended only that the virtuous Souls of the dead passed the uttermost
bounds of earthly abode, and attained to an over-pleasing repose, and ever
flourishing happiness; which whether they borrowed from the Description of
Paradise, (taken both for a fair Garden, and the Souls happy rest) is hard to
define.

Out of the Description of Ireland.
THe Manners and Customs of the Wild Irish are thus set forth by Strabo. The
Inhabitants (says he) of Ireland are more rude then the Britains, they feed
upon the flesh of men; yea, and think it a point of worth to eat their dead
Parents, wantonly they accompany with Women, making no difference of other men's
wives, their own Sisters, nor of their natural Mothers; but of these things
(says he) we have no certain witness of sufficient credit. Pomponius Mela
records, that the Irish are uncivil, ignorant of Virtues, and void of
Religion. And Solinus affirms, that after Victory they drink the blood of the
slain, and besmear their own Faces therewith, so given to War, that the mother
at the birth of a man-child, feeds the first meat into her Infants mouth upon
the point of her Husbands sword, and with heathenish imprecations, wishes that
it may dye no otherwise then in War, or by sword.

But from these ancient and barbarous manners, we will come to the conditions
of their middle time, whom Giraldus Cambrensis describes as follows. The
Irish (says he) are a strong and bold people, Martial and Prodigal in War;
nimble, stout and haughty of heart; careless of life, but greedy of glory;
courteous to strangers, constant in Love, light of belief, impatient of injury,
given to fleshly lusts, and in enmity implacable. At the baptizing of their
Infants, their manner was, not to dip their right arms into the water, that so
(as they thought) they might give a more deep and uncurable blow, never calling
them by the name of their Parents whilst they lived together, but at their
death took it upon them: Their Women nursed not their Children they bare, and
they that nursed others, did affect and love them much more than their own.

So much were they given to Fantastical conceits, that they held it very
ominous to give their Neighbors Fire upon May Day, to eat an odd Egg;
endangered the death of their Horse* And before they cast in their seed, they
sent salt into the field; to hang up the shells in the roof, was a preservative
of the Chickens from the Kite; to set up green boughs at their doors in the
month of May, increased their Kines Milk, and to spit upon Cattle, they held it
good against Witchery, whereof Ireland was full.

Superstitious Idolatry among the Wild Irish was common, yielding divine honor
unto the Moon after the change, unto whom they both bowed their knees, and made
supplications, and with a Loud Voice would thus speak unto that Planet, We pray
thee leave us in as good Estate as thou foundst us. Wolves they did make as
their God-sis, terming them Chari Christ, and so thought themselves preserved
from their hurts, the hoofs of dead Horses they accounted and held Sacred:
About childrens necks they hung the beginning of St. John's Gospel, a crooked
nail of an Horse shoe, or a piece of a wolves-skin, and both the sucking Child
and Nurse were girt with Girdles finely plated with Woman's hair; so far they
wandered into the ways of error, in making these arms the strength of their
healths.

Their Wives were many, by reason of Divorcements, and their Maids married at
twelve years of Age, whose Customs were to send to their lovers, bracelets
plated, and curiously wrought of their own hair, so far following Venus in the
knots of these allurements. The men wore Linen shirts exceedingly large,
stained with Saffron, the sleeves wide, and hanging to their knees, strait and
short Trusses plated thick in the skirts, their Breeches close to the thighs, a
short skeine hanging point down before, and a Mantle most times cast over their
heads. The women wore their hair plated in curious manner, hanging down their
backs and shoulders from under foulden wreaths of fine Linen, rolled about
their heads, rather loding the wearer then delighting the beholder; for as the
one was most seemly, so the other was unsightly, their necks was hung with
Chains and Carkaneths, their Arms wreathed with many Bracelets, and over their
side garments the Shag Rug Mantles, purfled with a deep fringe of diverse
colors, both Sexes accounting idleness their only liberty, and ease their
greatest riches.

In War^ they were forward, and fought with Battle-axes, whose bearers were
called Galloglasses, the common soldier, but lightly armed, who served with
darts and sharp skeines, their Trumpet was a Bag-pipe, and word for encounter
Pharroh, which at the first Onset with great acclamation they uttered, and he
that did not, was taken into the Air, and carried into the Vale of Kerry, where
transformed (as they did believe) he remained until he was hunted with hounds
from thence to his home.

For the dying and dead, they hired Women to mourn, who expostulated with the
sick, why he would die* and dead, at his Funeral such out-crys were made, such
clapping of hands, such howlings, and gestures, that one would think their
sorrows unrecoverable, holding the opinion of Pythagoras for their souls
departed.

Their Diet in necessity was slender, feeding upon Watercresses, Roots,
Mushrooms, Shamroh, Butter tempered with Oatmeal, Milk, Whey; yea, and raw
fish, the blood being crushed out; their use was also to let their Kine blood,
which standing a while, and coming to Jelly, with Butter they did eat as a very
good dish.

Out of the Description of the Civil Wars fought in England, Wales, and Ireland.
FRance felt the heavy hands of Edward and Henry our English Kings, when the
one of them at Poictiers took Prisoners John King of France, and Philip
Surnamed the hardy, his son; the other ( Henry the fifth at Azincourt in a
bloody battle took and slew four thousand Princes, Nobles, Knights and
Esquires, even all the flower of France, as their own writers have declared.
And at Paris the Crown of France was set upon Henry the 6 th. his Head, homage
done unto him by the French, that Kingdom made subject, and their Flower
deluces quartered with our Lions of England.

An enterprise remaining fresh in Memory, of Philip date King of Spain, against
our Dread Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, in the year 1588. attempting by his
invincible Navy as he thought, and so termed, under the Conduct of the Duke of
Medina Celi, which with great Pride and Cruelty was intended against us,
arrived on our Coasts to Englands Invasion and Subversion, had yet
nevertheless, here in the narrow Seas, the one part of his Fleet discomfited,
taken, and drowned, and the other part forced to their great shame, in poor
Estate, to make a fearful and miserable flight about the Coast of Ireland
homeward, so that of 158 great ships furnished for War, came to their own Coast
of Spain but few; and those so torn and beaten by the English Canons, that it
was thought they were unserviceable for ever, and eleven of their Ensigns or
Banners prepared for Triumph and Pride in Conquest, were contrariwise to their
dishonor showed at Paul's Cross, and in other places of this Realm.

Out of the Description of the Turkish EMPIRE.
WE will take notice of their Religion, how it is a mere Couzenage thrust upon
the filly people by the impious subtilty of one Mahomet, whose story is well
worth our knowledge, and may cause us to commiserate the desperate Estate of
those ignorant, yet perverse and bloody Antichristians.

His place of Birth is questioned, whether he were a Cirenick, an Arabian, or
Persian, it is not yet fully decided; certain enough it is he was of base
Parents, his Father (some say) a Worshipper of Devils, and his Mother a
faithless Jew, betwixt them they sent into the World a pernicious deceiver
(which none but two such Religions could have made up.) In the year 597. when
he had been for a while thus instructed by his distracted Parents, poverty and
hope to improve his Fortunes, persuaded him from his Native soil, to live for
another while among true professed Christians, where he received so much
knowledge of the Word, and light of the Gospel, as to pervert it to his
destruction, and ruin of many Millions of souls.

In his first adventurous travels abroad, he fell into the hands of theevish
Saracens, which sold him to a Jewish Merchant, and he employed him to drive his
Camels through Egypt, Syria, Palestine, and other foreign Countries, where he
still gathered farther instructions of that truth which he intended to abuse.
His wickedness first brake forth into fraud, open Theft and Rapine, and other
sins of highest rank, in which he continued and seduced others, till the death
of his Master, and after married his Aged, but rich Mistress.

He had means now to act his malicious purposes, and wealth to countenance his
exceeding Pride, which would not be satisfied with a lower Ambition, then to be
called a Prophet of God. This he began to practice, by the Counsel of one
Sergius a Monk, who being cast out for Heresy from Constantinople, betook
himself into Arabia, and joined in with Mahomet to make up this mischief
perfect: see now their Juggling. There wanted no craft betwixt them, to make
use of his worst actions to gull the simple. For when by his debaucht drinking
and gluttony, he was fallen into an Epilepsie, and in his fits lay (Bear like)
grovelling and foaming upon the Earth, as one without sense; he pretended an
Exta-like swoon, wherein his soul was wrapped from his body, in which he
converst with Gabriel an Angel from Heaven. To make this familiarity with God
the more to be believed, he had bred up a Dove to take her meat from his ear,
which he most blasphemously professed to be the Holy Ghost, who in such times
and in that shape infused the prophesies which he was to preach. Lastly, what
they in their wicked fancies had conceived, and meant to propagate, they
digested into a Volume, and called it the Alcoran.

For this too they had a trick, that it might seem to have been sent from
Heaven into the hands of Mahomet; and to this purpose he had himself fed up a
tame Bull, which by custom became so familliar, that no sooner he heard the
voice of his Master, but he would straight run, cast the head in his lap, and
use his wanton dalliance as with a Fellow. Betwixt the horns of this Bull, had
he fastened the Alcoran, and conveyed him into a by-place, near where he had
assembled the Multitude at a set time, to expect a wonderful Miracle from
Heaven that might confirm his Prophecy. The Scene thus ordered, on the sudden
he lift up his voice, and made a loud cry, which no sooner the beast heard, but
he brake his way through the Press, over-turned many of the Spectators, which
now stood at a gaze, and gently laid his horns and book in the bosom of this
false couzener, which he with much ceremony, and feigned Reverence received,
and in their presence opening the Volume, began to interpret the chief of their
Laws, which for hereafter they were to observe.

Circumcision he allowed, and with the old Law forbad Swines flesh, that he
might with more ease lead on such as were Jewish; he suffered himself to be
baptized by Sergius, that the Christian too might have in some measure his
content: Moses and our Savior he denied not to be great Prophets, but that
neither party might emulate the greater observance of other, and indeed
especially that his own might seem new, and yet take place from both, he
changed the circumsion of the Jews from the eighth day, and multiplyes baptism,
which can be conferred but once for all, upon the true believer. For the like
reason of difference with other Nations and Sects, he left both the Jews
Sabbath, and diem Christianorum Dominicum, and commands his holy ceremonies to
be celebrated on the Friday; for so it was, whent he Bull bestowed on him his
Alcaran. Before they enter the Temple, they wash all the unclean parts of their
bodies, and then to prayer, which must be performed five times in a day with
their face toward the South. They have a Months fast too once every year, but
it is observed only for the day, for they may, when the Sun is down, redeem it
with what gluttony they please; Wine is forbidden, only for a show that he
might not seem to have loved that which (he was guilty to himself) had brought
him into his Epileptical fits. Briefly, what he knew would best agree with the
brutish desires of the people, that he took order should be confirmed by his
Laws, four or five Wives to every Husband, and as many Concubines as they could
maintain. For their bliss after life, he proposed no invisible delights which
over reached their understanding, but proportioned to each of their sensual
thoughts. And promised to those which would keep his Law a Paradise of all
kinds of pleasure, which they themselves most affected, to the covetous wealth,
to the ambitious Honors, to the gluttenous Meats, to the Virgins rich attire,
and embraces of Angels, the poor souls were never so fitted; and when he had
thus for a long time discoursed over his Alcoran, he took a yoke from Sergius,
and put it upon the Bulls neck; for it was foretold by an Inscription brought
by his door, that whosoever could yoke the Bull, it should be a sign to declare
the man, as one sent from God, to govern his people.

This huddle of Miracles put the Gazers beyond all pause, so that in an instant
they cried him up King, and held his companion in Reputation of a minor
Prophet, called themselves Musulmanni; true believers, which the Turk still
affects, rather than his right name of Turk, which imports banishment, and
unpraids him the disgrace of his Original.

And now he has past the difficulty of his attempt, an easy matter to draw on
Millions of followers, such as would like that Religion best which baulkt not
their pleasures; yet at last he met with an end answerable to his beginning,
for he was poisoned by some of his own Family.

He had long before prophesied, that he should be wonderfully conveyed to
Heaven, and to make good his Fraud, had framed an Iron Chest for his Sepulcher,
which he purposed should have been held up by force of a Lodestone placed in
the top of the Temple, and by this means have appeared to the beholder to hang
in the Air without any support. But this trick (it seems) was prevented by
death, yet they expected still his ascent to Heaven, till he stank upon Earth,
so that at last they were forced to convey him into his Iron Coffin, which
remains to this day in Mecha a City of Persia, and is visited by the Turks, as
the Sepulcher of our Savior at Jerusalem by Pilgrim-Christians.

China.
THis Kingdom is in the utmost bounds Eastward of the East India, and therefore
lies farthest remote from Christendom; the Chinoyse do much exceed us for ample
Cities, and multitude of Inhabitants: It is now a vast Empire, and without
doubt, as they are infinitely populous, so they are proportionably Rich, beyond
any other Nation of the World. Their principal Commodities are Silks and
Sugars; yet besides these, they send forth Wool, Cotton, Olives, Metals,
Rhubarb, Honey, Purslain dishes, Camphire, Ginger, Pepper, etc. Musk, Salt
great store.

The men are in their several employments infinitely laborious, and ingenuous:
it is very rare to see any of them in a strange Country, nor will they easily
admit a stranger far into theirs; they are addicted much to Manual Arts, for
they have excellent practick Wits, and indeed for that go beyond any other
Nation: Much quarrel has been about the invention of Guns and Printing, which
several people have been ambitious to take to themselves, as the Masterpiece
of Man's wit; but without doubt they were both used here, long before any of
Europe pretended to the knowledge of either. In their writings, they make not
their Lines from the Right hand to the left, as the Hebrews, nor from the left
to the right as we do, but from the top to the bottom of the page, and use all
one Character through the whole Kingdom. Their special skill, which we much
admire, but cannot imitate, is in making the Purslain dishes white as very
Snow, and transparent as Glass, formed up only of Cockles found in the
Seashore, mixed with Egg shells, but lie buried in the Earth many years before
they come to perfection, and are seldom took up by the same Artificer, which
kneads them, but are left as a portion to some of his Posterity.

When they travel over the Plains, they use a kind of Coach, yet not drawn with
Horses or other Beast, but driven with the Wind under-sail as a Bark on the
Sea, which the people are as perfect to guide which way they please, as the
Mariner is to direct his course unto any Coast whither he is bound; as they
sail upon Land, as if it were Sea; so they dwell as frequent upon the Sea, as
if it were Land; for they have an incredible number of ships and Boats, which
are in many places ranked like streets upon the Waters, and filled with
Inhabitants, such as are here born, live, traffic, marry, and die. Mr. Purchase
Reports that upon one River from Nanquin to Paquin, they are thus ordered for
three hundred leagues. No mar^^l then, if their number exceed any part
proportionable of the whole Earth, since their Land is not sufficient, but is
forced to borrow room out of the Sea, for their habitation. Yet are they all
governed by one Monarch, whom they call the Lord of the World, and Son to the
Sun. In matters of State they are very Politic, in Peace wary, and in War
Valiant, crafty and excellent Engineers.

Their Laws are for the most part just, and severely executed, especially
against idle drones which set not a hand to advance their State, or maintain
themselves; they will not cherish the very blind by Alms, since without eyes a
man may be fit for some corporal employment; but to the maimed and lame, they
deny not a charitable maintenance; the Son is bound to exercise his Parents
occupation, so that no pretense almost is left for Wonderers: and briefly, as
far as humane Laws can provide, all other vain occasions, for misexpence of
time are taken off; for within the Cities no stews are allowed, or lewd persons
to withdraw them, Adultery is punished with death, but yet they have liberty to
take many Wives, one they keep at home, the rest are disposed of abroad, where
they best please. Their Marriages they chiefly solemnize at the New Moon, and
for the most part in March, which begins their year.

For their Religion, they are Gentiles, but have a confused knowledge of God,
Heaven, and the Creation: When they would decipher their great God, they
express him by the first Letter in their Alphabet, and in their Devotions; they
worship him as their chief (but not only) preserver, for they have their
prayers to the Sun, Moon, Stars, and to the Devil himself, that he would not
hurt them. Their Priests are distinguished into the black and White Friars as
we call them, for they much resemble Friars in their course of life, some are
clothed in White, their heads shorn, and their Victuals in common; others in
black, long hair, and live apart, neither are married, but both take their
liberty to live obscurely, as the debauchest swaggerers.

The chief of the Cities is Paquin, where the King has his continual
Residence, his Palace here is compassed with a Triple wall, carrys the bulk
and face of a fair Town, for indeed his retinue are no fewer then might well
people a large City, among the rest he has 16000 Eunuchs daily attending, such
as their own Parents have emascul'd in their Infancy, to make them capable of
this Court preferment. The seat Imperial was heretofore at Nanquin, where still
remains a Golden testimony of her past glory. It is a fair City thirty miles in
compass, seated nine leagues from the Sea upon a fair Navigable River, where
there Rides commonly at least 10000. of the Kings ships, besides Merchants; it
has three brick walls, the streets are six miles in length, of a
proportionable breadth, and trimly paved.

The Metropolis is Quinsay or Suntien, the largest City in the world; for it
contains 100 miles in compass, it is seated in a low and Fenny ground, is
subject to floods, and has been forced in very many places, to erect bridges
for free passage from one street to another; there are in all 12000. built of
stone, and most of them so high, that a good ship may strike under them with
full sail, each of them has its ten for a night guard. The Inhabitants of this
City live luxuriously, especially their Women, who are much more comely then
their men; yet all of them almost eat both Horse and Dogs flesh. Toward the
South part of the City, there is a great lake about 24 miles in circuit, in the
midst stand two Islands, whither the chief Nobilty repair and invite their
friends to Solemnize their Marriage, and have in each a stately Palace
erected, furnished sufficiently with all fitting Ornaments for a Wedding
jollity. In many parts of the City there are public places of Receipt; for
such as sustain any misfortune by fire, there they may lodge their Goods safe
upon a sudden casualty, till they can make better provision.

In each Province the Cities stand so thick, and are so populous, that they all
seem to be as one, one as well for their continued building almost as their
fashion of building; for they all observe the same form, and dispose their
streets alike, two broad, crossing each other in the middle in so strait a
line, that the eye may reach clean from one end to the other.

The Revenues of the whole Empire and number of Inhabitants, are not easily to
be reckoned. Yet this in brief, he has subject under him 70 Crowned Kings,
gathers up yearly 120 Millions of Crowns, stirs not into the field without
300000 foot, and 200000 horse.

Out of the Description of the Kingdom of TARTARY.
THese Tartaryans, for brutish Customs, were grown odious to the more civil
parts of the World, and as ( Herod in his fourth Book of Histories delivers)
were wont to sing their Parents to the Grave, invite their best Friends to
Feast with their Fathers flesh, and use his Scull, as a cup to drink in at
their lascivious banquets. Who more the Axiaca, who quenched their thirst with
the blood of him, whom they first slew, as it gushed warm from his wounds; who
more foolish proud than the Agathyrst, who were used to mend their beauty by a
deformed painting, and ugly staining of their bodies with motly colors.

You shall have here their Character, which is given by most that describe
them, to have ill fashioned bodies, answerable to their rude minds, fit houses
for so unclean guests.

Their Stature is different. The most part have large shoulders, a broad face,
with a crooked nose, deformed countenance, swarthy color, hollow eyes, hairy
and untrimmed beard, and head close shaved. Their speech is boisterous, and
clamorous, their noise in singing, like the yell of Wolves, and endurance of
hunger, thirst, heat, cold and watching equals them (in strength of body) to
the most able beast, for it exceeds the common power of a man. Their lust is
without Law, for they except no kindred, but their own Mothers, Daughters, and
Sisters. No species, for they mix with beasts; nor sex, for they are unsatiate
Sodomites; and yet take liberty for as many Wives which they can maintain,
which (contrary to our civil courses) they buy of their Parents, instead of
receiving Dowries. Their meat is the raw flesh of horses, without regard how
they were killed, or what diseases they dyed; sometimes they suck blood from
the living, to appease their hunger and thirst, if (in a journey) they be
distressed for want of food.

Cities they have but few, nor houses other then moveable Tents made of Beasts
skins, which they pitch up by great multitudes in the form of a Town, and those
are called hordes: when the Grass is once eaten bare, and the ground yields not
meat for their Cattle, they trudge with bag and baggage to another quarter, and
so in course they wander through the vast Deserts unsettled, and indeed
impatient to be settled, or rather imprisoned (as they take it) within any
bounded compass, having the wide world to roam in: Their chief Arms are Bow and
Arrows, which they use most on Horseback, for their most speedy flight, and
have them commonly strongly poisoned, for the more sure mischief to the foe;
their stratagems are downright fraud, and breach of truce, for they keep no
faith with an Enemy, regard not any compact made upon terms of peace, but
follow their own sense, and commit what outrages they can with least danger to
themselves.

Their Religion is answerable to their vile customs; Some are Pagans, others
Mahometans, yet will not be called Turks, but Bersemany, and their chief Priest
Said, whom they reverence more then their Maker, and admit none shall touch his
hand but their Kings; and these too with an humble gesture, their Dukes aspire
not above his knee, nor the Nobles higher then his feet, the rest are happy if
they can but reach at his garment, his Horse, his any thing; so simple are they
in their superstition. And thus have they continued either Atheists or false
Idolaters, ever since the first entrance upon this Kingdom in the year 1187.
Before they were not esteemed a Nation at all, but wild people, without Law or
reason almost, who lived in the open fields, and conversed with no other then
their own herds of Cattle.

They cease not to commit continual Murders and Rapines upon the Countries
adjoining, with an inveterate hate to such as profess the Name of Christ,
insomuch, that they have engaged themselves to pay yearly three hundred
Christians, as tribute to the great Turk, which number they draw out of
Polonia, Russia, Tituania, Walachia, and part of Muscovia.

A GENTLEMAN In his Travels TO BOHEMIA,
Has these Rare Observations following.
AFter he had left Hambrough, he was carried (as he says) day and night in
Wagons to an ancient Town called Heldeshim, it stands in Brunswick-Land, and
yet it belongs to the Bishop of Collin, where he did observe in their Kirk or
Cathedral Church, a Crown of Silver 80 foot in compass, hanged up in the body
of the Church: In the circuit of which Crown were placed 160 Wax Candles, the
which at Festival days, or at the Celebration of some high Ceremonies are
lighted.

Moreover there he saw a Silver Bell in their steeple of thirty pound weight,
and the Leads of their steeple shining and sparkling with the Sunbeams; they
did affirm to him to be Gold, the truth of which he doubted.

From thence in his Travels, he came to a Town called Halverstadt, which
belongs to a Bishop so styled, who is Duke Christian Brother to the now Duke of
Brunswick, a long Dutch mile (or almost six English) is a small Town called
Groaning belonging to the Duke: In which place he observed,

First a most stately Palace built with a beautiful Chapel, so adorned with
the Images and Forms of Angels and Cherubims, with such exquisiteness of Arts
best Industry of Carving, Graving, Guilding, Painting, Glazing, and Paving,
with such super-excellent Workman-ship of Organs, Pulpit, and Font, that for
Curiosity and admirable Rareness, all the buildings (he says) and Fabrics
that ever he beheld, must give it pre-eminence; he confesses that Henry the
sevenths Chapel at Westminster, Kings College Chapel in Cambridge, and
Christ-Church in Canterbury, are beyond it in height and Workman-ship of Stone;
for indeed this Chapel is most of Wood, Gippe, and Plaster of Paris, but it
is so gilded, as if it had been made in the Golden age, when Gold was esteemed
as Dross, so that a man had need to wear a veil over his dazeling eyes, or
else he can hardly look upon it.

In this Church there is no Service: If the painted Pulpit could preach, the
Images might (perhaps) have a Sermon now and then, for scarce at any time there
comes any body into the Chapel, but a fellow that shows the beauty of it for 2
d. or 3 d. a piece.

In the same house, in a place or Celler built of purpose, is a great Tun, or
Vessel of Wood, that was seven years in making, and was used to be filled with
Rhenish-Wine, it is said to be twice as big as the Vessel at Heidelberg, and
the hoops of it are twelve inches thick, the staves or boards of it being as
much; they go up to the top of it with a Ladder of 18 steps, he that keeps it,
says it will hold 160 Tons.

This is a Tub of Tubs, Tub of Tubs hall;
Who never had fellow yet, nor ever shall.
From hence passing through many Towns, and inaccessible mountains, he and his
company came to a Wood, which parts Bohemia from Saxony on the West, which Wood
is called by the people of those parts the Beamer Wolts, or Wolt, and is in
breadth ten English miles, but in length farther than to be described by him
truly: Thus much is affirmed, that it is a natural impregnable Wall to the
Kingdom of Bohemia, which Kingdom is all incompast round with Woods and
mountains, so that there is no passage on that side of it for an Army to enter
into it with Munition and Artillery, all the ways being uneven, and the
mountain tops all Bogs, Mosses, and Quagmires; besides, there are numbers past
numbering of Firre-trees, many standing, and such store fallen of themselves,
that any passage might easily be stopped by laying them cross the way; a most
dismal Wood it is, the trees grow so thick, and so high, that the Sun is
obscured, and the day seems night.

When they had past the Hills and Woods, and that they might look down the
Mountains, into the fruitful Land of Bohemia, never did sight more rejoice
them, the lower hills being all full of Vineyards, and the Valleys, Corn and
Pasture, not an English mile distance, but a Village every way, and twenty,
thirty, or forty ricks or stacks of Corn (which their Barns cannot hold) in
the space of every hours journey: In a word, every thing that belonged to the
use and Commodity of man was and is there, and all the delightful objects to
satisfy every sense is there abundantly, so that nature seemed to make that
Country her Storehouse or Granary, for there is nothing wanting, except men's
gratitude to God for such blessings. Then they came to Prague, which long looked
for City, could not be seen until they came within an hours travel of it;
within half a Dutch mile is a fearful place, being frequented with inhumane and
barbarous murderers, that assault travelers, but if they chance at any time to
be apprehended, they are racked and tortured to make them confess, and
afterward their Executions are very terrible: In their journey they saw above
sevenscore Gallowses and wheels, where thieves were hanged, some fresh, and
some half rotten, and the carcasses of murderers broken Limb after Limb on the
wheels.

When they were come to Prague, which was but two days after a most fearful
execution of two notorious Offenders; the manner how, with their faults, as it
was truly related to them by English Gentelmen that saw it, I shall relate it.
The one of them being taken, apprehended and racked, for ripping up a live
Woman with Child, and for taking the Infant out of her body, did sow a living
puppy into her belly, all which he confessed he did to make properties for
Witchcraft; and being further tortured, he confessed when and where he had
committed 35 murders more. The other in respect of him was but a petty
offender, for he in all his lifetime had murdered but 14. for the which
execrable facts, their deserved executions were as follows. First, they were
brought out of the Goal naked from the girdle upward, and so being bound fast
on high in a Cart, that the Spectators might see them, then the hangman having
a pan of Coals near him, with red hot pincers nip'd of the nipple of one
breast, then he took a knife and gives him a slash or cut down the back on one
side from the shoulder to the waste, and presently gave him such another slash,
three inches from the first, then on the top he cut the slashes into one, and
presently taking pincers, took hold of the cross cut, and tore him down like a
Girse below the middle, letting it hang down behind him like a belt, after
which he took his burning pincers, and plucked off the tops of his fingers of
one hand; then passing to another place of the Town, his other nipple was
plucked off, the other side of his back so cut and mangled, (which they call by
the name of rimming) his other fingers nip'd off; then passing further, all his
Toes were nip'd off with the burning pincers, after which he was enforced to
come out of the Cart, and go on foot up a steep hill to the Gallows, where he
was broken with a wheel alive, one bone after another, beginning at his legs,
and ending with his neck, and last of all quartered and laid on the Wheel, on a
high post, till Crows, Ravens, or consuming time consume him.

This was the manner of both their executions, but I speak of the greatest
murder particularly, because it is reported that all these torments never made
him once to change countenance, or to make any sign or action of grief, to call
to God for mercy, or to entreat the people to pray for him, but as if he had
been a senseless stock or stone, he did most scornfully, and as it were in
disdain abide it; whilst the other Villain did cry, rore, and make lamentation,
calling upon God often. The difference was not much in their lives, and manner
of their deaths, but the odds may be great in their dying.

In the City of Prague is said to be of Churches and Chapels 150. I was there
at four several sorts of divine exercise, viz. at good Sermons with the
Protestants, at Mass with the Papists, at a Lutherans preaching, and at the
Jews Synagogue, three of which I saw and heard for curiosity, and the other for
Edification. The Jews in Prague are in such great numbers, that they are
thought to be of Men, Women, and Children betwixt 50 or 60000. who do all live
by Brokage and Usury upon the Christians, and are very rich in Money and
Jewels, so that a man may see 10 or 12 together of them, that are accounted
worth 20 30 or 40000 l. a piece, and yet the slaves go so miserably attired,
that 15 of them are not worth the hanging for their whole ward-ropes.

The City of Hamburgh. The privileges of their grand hangman.
YOu must understand that this fellow is a Subsidy Hangman, to whom our Tyburn
Tatterdemallion, or our Wapping winde-pipe stretcher, is but a Raggamuffin, not
worth the hanging. The privileges of this Grand haulter-master are many, as he
has the emptying of all the Vaults or draughts in the City, which no doubt he
gains some favor by. Besides all Oxen, Kine, Horses, Dogs, or any such beasts,
if they dye themselves, or if they be not like to live, the hang man must knock
them on the head, and have their skins; and whatsoever Inhabitant in his
jurisdiction does any of these things aforesaid himself, is abhorred and
accounted as a Villain without Redemption: So that with hangings, headings,
breakings, pardoning, and killing of Dogs, flaying of Beasts, emptying of
Vaults, and such privy Commodities, his whole Revenue sometimes amounts to four
or five hundred pounds a year. And he is held in that regard and estimation,
that any man will converse and drink with; nay, sometimes the Lords of the Town
will feast with him, and it is accounted no impeachment to their honors, for
he is held in the rank of a Gentleman, (or a rank Gentleman) and he scorns to
be clad in the cast weeds of executed offenders; no, he goes to the Mercers,
and has his Satin, his Velvet, or what stuff he pleases measured out by the
Yard or the Ell, with his Gold and Silver Lace, his silk Stockings, laced
spangled Garters and Roses, Hat and Feather, with four or five brave Villains
attending him in Livery Cloaks, who have stipendary means from his ignominious
bounty.

Their manner of executing Thieves and Murderers upon the Wheel* I shall name
one for a president.
A Poor Carpenter dwelling in the Town, who having stolen a Goose, and plucking
it within his doors, a little Girl (his Daughter-in-law) went out of his house,
and left the door open, by which means, the owner of the Goose passing by,
espied the wretched thief very diligently picking what he before had been
stealing, to whom the owner said, Neighbor, I now perceive which way my Geese
use to go, but I will have you in Question for them, and so away he went; the
Caitiff being thus reproved, grew desperate, and his Child coming into his
house, ye young whore, quoth he, must ye leave my door open for folks to look
in upon me, and with that word he took a hatchet, and with a cursed stroke, he
clove the Child's head, for the which murder he was condemned and judged to be
broken alive upon the wheel. Upon the day of Execution, about the hour of 12 at
Noon, the people of the Town in great multitudes flocked to the place of
Execution, which is half a mile English without the Gates, the Prisoner came on
foot with a Divine with him, all the way exhorting him to repentance; and
because death should not terrify him, they had given him many Rowses, and
Carowses of Wine and Beer; for it is a custom there to make such poor wretches
drunk, whereby they be made senseless, either of Gods mercy, or their own
misery, but being prayed for by others, they themselves may die resolutely, or
(to be feared) desperately.

But the Prisoner being come to the place of death, he was by the Officers
delivered to the hangman, who entering his strangling fortification with two
grand hang-men more, and their men, to assist their Hamburghian brother in this
great and weighty work; the Prisoner mounted on a mount of Earth, built high on
purpose that the people about may see the execution a quarter of a mile round
about, four of the hang-mens men takes each of them a small halter, and by the
hands and the feet they hold the prisoner extended all abroad lying on his
back, then the Arch-hang-man, or the great Master of this mighty business, took
up a wheel much about the bigness of one of the fore, wheels of a Coach, and
first having put off his Doublet, his Hat, and being in his shirt, as if he
meant to play at Tennis, he took the wheel, and set it on the edge, and turned
it with one hand like a Top or Whirly-gig; then he took it by the Spoaks, and
lifting it up, with a mighty stroke, he beat one of the poor wretches legs in
pieces (the bones I mean) at which he rored grievously, then after a little
pause he breaks the other leg in the same manner, and consequently breaks his
arms, and then he stroke four or five main blows on his breast, and burst all
his bulk and chest in shivers; lastly, he smote his neck, and missing, burst
his chin and Jaws to mammocks, then he took the broken mangled Corpse, and
spread it on the wheel, and then fixed the post into the Earth some six foot
deep, being in height above the ground some ten or twelve foot, and there the
carcass must lie till it be consumed by all consuming time, or ravening fowls.

This was the terrible manner of the horrid Execution; and at this place are
twenty posts with those wheels or pieces of wheels, with heads of men nailed on
the top of the posts; with a great spike driven through the skull. The several
kinds of torments which they inflict upon offenders in those parts, puts me to
imagine our English hanging to be but a flea-biting.

There manner of beheading.
MOreover, if any men in those parts are to be beheaded, the fashion is, that
the prisoner kneels down, and being blinded with a Napkin, one takes hold of
the hair of the crown of the head, holding the party upright, whilst the
hangman with a backward blow with a sword, will take the head from a man's
shoulders so nimbly, and with such dexterity, that the owner of the head shall
never want the miss of it. And if it be any man's fortune to be hanged for never
so small a crime, though he be mounted whole, yet he shall come down in pieces,
for he shall hang till every joint and limb drop one from another.

Strange Torments and varieties of deaths.
THey have strange torments and varieties of deaths, according to the various
nature of the offenses that are committed; as for example, he that counterfeits
any Princes Coin, and is proved a Coiner, his judgment is to be boiled to death
in Oil; not thrown into the Vessel all at once, but with a pulley or a rope, to
be hanged under the Armpits, and let down into the Oil by degrees; first the
feet, and next the legs, and so to boil his flesh from the bones alive. For
those that set houses on fire wilfully, they are smoaked to death; as first
there is a pile or post fixed in the ground, and within an English Ell of it is
a piece of Wood nailed cross, whereupon the offender is made fast sitting, then
over the top of the post is whelmed a great tub or dry fat, which does cover or
over-whelm the prisoner as low as the middle. Then underneath the executioner
has wet straw, hay, stubble, or such kind of stuff, which is fired, but by
reason it is wet and dank, it does not burn, but smother and smoke, which smoke
ascends up into the Tub, where the prisoners head is, and not being able to
speak, he will heave up and down with his belly, and people may perceive him in
these torments to live three or four hours.

Adultery there if it be proved, is punished with death, as the loss of the
parties heads, if they be both married, or if not both, yet the married party
must die for it, and the other must endure some easier punishment, either by
the purse or carcass, which in the end proves little better then half a
hanging.

One thing more: In Hamburgh those that are not hanged for theft, are chained
two or three together, and they must in that sort six or seven years draw a
dung-cart, and cleanse the streets of the Town, and every one of those thieves
for as many years as he is condemned to that slavery, so many bells he has
hanged at an Iron above one of his shoulders, and every year a bell is taken
off, till all are gone, and then he is a freeman again, some of the thieves
had seven bells, some five, some six, some one, but such a noise they make, as
if all the Devils in hell were dancing the Morris.

A Pretty Story.
THe Hangmans place being void, there were two of the blood (for it is to be
noted that the succession of the office does lineally descend from the Father
to the Son, or to the next of the blood) which were at strife for the
possession of this high indignity. Now it happened that two men were to be
beheaded at the same Town, and at the same time, and (to avoid suit in Law for
this great Prerogative) it was concluded by the Arbitrators, that each of these
new hangmen should execute one of the prisoners, and he that with greatest
cunning and slight could take the head from the body, should have the place; to
this they all agreed, and the prisoners were brought forth, where one of the
executioners did bind a Red silk thread double about his prisoners neck, the
threads being distant one from another but the breadth of one thread, and he
promised to cut off the head with a backward blow with a sword, between the
threads. The other called his prisoner aside, and told him that if he would be
ruled by him, he should have his life saved, and besides (quoth he) I shall be
sure to have the office. The prisoner was glad of the motion, and said he would
do any thing upon these conditions, then said the hangman, when thou art on
thy knees, and have said thy prayers, and that I do lift up my Axe (for I will
use an Axe) to strike thee, I will cry Hem, at which word do thou rise and run
away (thou know none will stay thee if thou can once escape after thou art
delivered into my custody; it is the fashion of our Country) and let me alone
to shift to answer the matter. This being said or whispered, the heads-man with
the sword did cut off the prisoners head just between the threads as he had
said, which made all the people wonder at the steddiness of his hand, and most
of them judged that he was the man that was and would be fittest to make a mad
hangman of.

But as one tale is good till another be told, and as there be three degrees of
good, better and best, so this last hangman did much exceed and eclipse the
others cunning; For his prisoner being on his knees, and he lifting up his Axe
to give the fatal blow, Hem (said he according to promise) whereupon the fellow
arose and ran away, but when he had run some seven or eight paces, the hangman
threw the Axe after him, and struck his head smoothly from his shoulders: Now
for all this, who shall have the place is unknown, for they are yet in Law for
it, and I doubt not but before the matter is ended, that the Lawyers will make
them exercise their own Trade upon themselves to end the controversy. This
tale does savor somewhat Hyperbolical, but I wish the Reader to believe to
more of the matter than I saw, and there is an end.

Hamburgh a free City.
HAmburgh is a free City, not being subject to the Emperor or any other
Prince, but only governed by twenty four Burgo-masters, whereof two are the
chief, who are called Lords, and do hold that dignity from their first Election
during their lives. The buildings are all of one uniform fashion, very lofty
and stately, it is wonderful populous, and the water with boats comes through
most of the streets of the Town.

Their Churches are most gorgeously set forth, as the most of them covered with
Copper, with very lofty spires, and within sides they are adorned with
Crucifixes, Images and Pictures, which they do charily keep for Ornaments. In
St. Jacobs and in St. Katherines Churches there is in one of them a Pulpit of
Alablaster, and the other a pair of such Organs, which for worth and
Workmanship are unparalled in Christendom, as most travelers do relate.

The Women's Habit.
THe Women there are no fashion-mongers, but they keep in their degrees one
continual habit, as the richer sort do wear a Huick, which is a Robe of Cloth
or Stuff plated, and the upper part of it is gathered and sowed together in the
form of an English potlid, with a tassle on the top, and so put upon the head,
and the garment goes over her tuffe and face if she please, and so down to the
ground, so that a man may meet his own Wife, and perhaps not know her from
another Woman.

Men and Women draw Carts, their Office.
THey have no Porters to bear burdens, but they have big burlybon'd Knaves with
their Wives that do daily draw Carts any whither up and down the Town, with
Merchants Goods, or any other employments.

And it is reported that these Cart-drawers are to see the Rich men of the Town
provided of Milch Nurses for their Children, which Nurses they call by the Name
of Ams; so that if they do want a Nurse at any time, these fellows are cursed,
because they have not gotten Wenches enough with Child to supply their wants.

The Lawyer a bad Trade.
A Lawyer has but a bad Trade there, for any Cause or Controversy is tried
and determined in three days, Quirks, Quiddits, Demurs, Habeas Corpus's,
Cercioraries, Procedendoes, or any such dilatory tricks are abolished, and not
worth a button.

THE Lamentable Destruction, OF THE Ancient and Memorable City and Temple OF
JERUSALEM; Being destroyed by Vespasian, and his Son Titus.
WArs has brought dreadful Jars and Confusions, both of horror and terror
unto Domestic, Foreign, Inward and Outward Estates: In Jehovahs ire were
shafts shot at Juda, so that War, Fire, Sword, Famine, Infectious Plagues,
Depopulations and Desolations, was the final Conquest of old Jacobs Land.

These are the Theames of my mournful Muse, these are the grounds of my
Lamentation; Josephus wrote these things in ample manner, which I do here
Epitomize. That worthy Author in a large scope relates, and the Books of his
Antiquities do tell his Countries alterations, how oftentimes they rose how
often they fell, how often God favored them, and how often his frowns was upon
them, and at last in his anger he cast them headlong down.

The seventh Book of Josephus's wars, declares plainly how the Romans did by
Conquest gain the Kingdom, how death did in sundry shapes tyrannize, both in
Sword, in Fire, in Famine, and in Rapes.

Since Hebers Sons enjoyed the Country, it has been six times wasted and
destroyed; so that if you account all the Wars since the Creation that has
chanced, they are nothing to Jerusalems desolation: No story, no Memory
describes the calamity of old Isreal's Tribes to be paralleled: And indeed if
each Land in the universal did recount the bloody broyls to them, it were but a
Molehill to a Mountain; all which for sin, the Almighty in his anger heaped
upon this sinful Land.

It is now about sixteen hundred years since great Vespasian, Romes Imperial
Prince, with his stout Valiant Son, brave young Titus, did overrun Judea's
Kingdom, and with a Royal Army renowned, did beleaguer Jerusalem with Forces
and stratagems, as with Rampires, Engines, scaling Ladders and Towers, with all
the Art that either might or slight could do.

The besieged amongst themselves, in this interim, fell to Sedition, like
Bavines that lies near one to another, if one burn, and burning, each one
burns another; so did the Jews each other madly kill, insomuch as their
streets were filled with their slain Corpses.

Eleazer, Simon and John disagreeing, rent Jerusalem in pieces, each contending
who should be the chief; John scorned Eleazer, as thinking himself most worthy
to be Superior, on the other side Eleazer thought John to be his Inferior,
and Simon scorned them both, and each scorned another, and would not by any be
ruled or overborn.

The City being thus divided into three Factions, sad it is to relate how
horrid their bloody and inhumane actions were, there all impieties were
committed in sundry sorts of varieties, all sacrilegious acts were counted most
noble and meritorious facts: In evil they strived each other to surpass, and
labored most how to serve the Devil. These men had no thoughts of grace and
goodness, but daily each against the other most madly fought, and over-turned
all things by their hurly burly, so violent were they one against another, that
they burned each others storehouses, with their Victuals: And with hearts more
harder than the Adamantine Rocks, they drailed Virgins by the hair of their
heads, as also the Aged they spared not to drag about the streets, some Infants
their brains they dashed out, and some upon the points of Lances, they bore
about the streets: It is not possible to write with Pen, the devilish
outrages, and barbarous acts that was committed by them.

The advantage upon this seditious and most inhumane disorder that the Romans
took, is most incredible; yet credible it may be, because the Jews were
altogether unmindful of their own safety, they wasted and spoiled one another
without remorse, insomuch as their enemies, their cruel foes, relented and wept
in pity of them, whilst they (relentness Villains) void of pity; did their
Mother City consume and ruinate, the Channels flowed all with gore blood, the
streets were bestrowed with murdered carcasses, the Temple with unhallowed
hands defiled; there was no respect to any, to Man, Woman, or Child.

Thus this three headed multitude, or hellish crew did waste themselves, till
indeed they did at length subdue themselves: but you must note they were not
altogether neglective, some vigilance they had upon their enemy, and whilst
they were making their strength more sure within, the Romans without with their
dreadful Batteries, made not only the City to tremble, but the Walls to break,
at which the factious wisely bethought themselves, and assembled themselves
together with all their powers; and, as a wonderment it was united together
like good friends: And then like swollen Rivers bounded in with Banks, they sally
forth and fight their enemies, like as the ambitious torrent breaks his bounds,
and over-runs whole Lordships; so did these Jews out-dare and challenge any
that would withstand the fury of their insulting pride, whereupon they out of
the City came, and entered the Romans Army like a flood, and in their desperate
madness, all was overwhelmed that durst withstand them; the Walls then could
not be assaulted, the enemies fearful Engines was then by them set on fire, and
bravely fighting they bravely made their enemies to retire!

The Battle done, back go these hairbraind men, and divide again, and each
becomes the others foe, and then pell mell they go to it, and begin to
disorder, and bring all things to confusion; with fire their Corn and Victuals
they consumed, all their provision in a moment spoiled and wasted, which if
well kept, might have lasted them many years; upon which the Famine, like a
Tyrant, roams and rages, and makes all, both Old and Young, Rich and Poor to
starve and dye with fleshless Anatomies.

This was a Plague of Plagues, a Woe of Woes, death on every side did enclose
them; this being their condition, they knew not what to do, to sally forth they
durst not, for then their lives they were sure to lose, to stay within for want
of food they starved, out they could not go, for the Gates were shut and
strongly warded, their throats were cut if any staid within; so that if they
stay or go, or go or stay, every way Destruction they are sure to meet with.

But of all torments, hunger is the worst, for that will burst through the
stony Walls; therefore these people having been with War, Woe, and want on
every side beset, do now begin to consult and strive how they might get to the
Romans, for there was their hopes, that in their swords they should find more
mercy, then their still dying famisht state afforded them: And indeed when man
is oppressed, then is wit most sharpest, and then wisdom amongst evils, chooses
the least.

Now they knowing Vespasian for a noble Prince, and one that did not glory in
their Woe, they thought it best to try his clemency, and not with hunger and
famine to die, and therefore despairing of all hopes, resolved with Ropes to
slide down the Walls, which a number of them did, and fled to Titus, who
bemoaned the sadness of their condition, and relieved and took them to his
grace and favor. Thus when all hopes failed, they were by their foes
preserved, to the number of at least 40000.

The City Soldiers searched every house where they thought any Victuals were
conveyed, and if they found any, the owners were most certainly beaten for
concealing it; but if they saw a man look plump and fat, his throat they would
surely cut, for they thought him too much pampered, and too full fed; they
would therefore strike him dead to save meat and drink. The Richest and Noblest
that was born both of Men and Women, gave all they had for one poor strike of
Corn, and hid themselves and it under the ground in some close Vault, and there
they would eat it under the ground unground; if any could get flesh, they would
eat it raw: Thus the weaker were overawed, and kept under by the stronger.

No respect of persons where hunger came; natural affection was then banished;
then the Husband did his own Wife reject, the Wife she snatches the meat from
her Husband, all pity from the Mother was exiled, she from the Child tears and
takes the Victuals, the Child plays the thief with the Parents, and steals the
food, though with grief the Parents pine away.

There was neither Freeman, nor Bondman, Fathers nor Mothers, Wives,
Husbands, Masters, Servants, Brothers, Sisters, be it propinquity or strong
affinity, no Law, or reason, or rule could bear sway; and indeed obeisance must
be given where strength commands; the pining Servant will not know his Master,
the Son will not show his duty to his Father, the Commons regardless to the
Magistrate, each for one, and but for one he cared; disordered, like the cart
before the horse, force caused all respect to yield.

These Miscreants with vigilance did watch where a door was locked or latched
that they could spy, for there they supposed the people were at meat, and in
their outrage the doors they would beat open, where entering if they found them
feeding, they would tear it in haste out of their throats, half eaten and half
uneaten; these wretches would constrain the people to cast it up again, they
hauld them about the house by the ears, to force them to bring out their
Victuals, which they supposed they had; some by the Thumbs they hanged up, and
some by the Toes, some had many blows, others were pricked with Bodkins, sadly
were they tormented to reveal their meat when they had none to conceal; and in
truth all was fish that came into their net, and all was food that could be got
by fraud or force.

Grass, Hay, Barks, Leaves of trees, Cats and Dogs, Frogs, Worms, Rats, Mice,
Snails, Flies and Maggots, all stinking and contagious roots, the covering of
their Coaches, Boots and Shoes, and the dung of Fowls and Beasts, were Feasts
for these poor miserable starved wretches; things loathsome to be named in time
of plenty, is now dainties among these starved distressed Jews.

This Famine run beyond all natures bounds, (as before I have hinted) and
confounded all Motherly-affection, no compassion was there had to blood or
birth: It forced a woman to kill her only Son, she ripped and dis-joynted him,
and dis-joynted him limb from limb, she dressed, she roasted, she broiled and
boiled him, she eat him, she interred him in her womb; his life by nature
proceeded from her, and she her self most unnaturally did feed upon him, he was
her flesh, her blood, her bones, and therefore she eating him her self, her
self made food: No woe can equal her misery, no grief can match her sad
calamities, the Soldiers they smelt the meat, upon which they straightly
assembled, which when they saw, they trembled, and with staring hairs, and
ghastly looks were thereat so affrighted and amazed, that thereupon they
presently left the house: This horrid action did more with them, then any force
of man could ever do, for this sad sight over came them.

Oh then thou that do live like a fatted Brawn, and cramst thy guts as long
as thou can; thou that do eat and drink away thy time, accounting it no
crime for gluttony to be thy God, thou that must have fowl of all sorts, and
have the bowels of the Ocean searched to satisfy thy appetite, and have thy
dainties from all parts and places, near and remote, and all to satisfy thy
devouring throat, whose pampered paunch never leaves to feed and quaff. Think
on Jerusalem, perhaps it will move thee in the midst of thy Diet and riotous
courses, to a more temperate and sober demeanor.

And you brave Dames, adorned with Jems and Jewels, that must have Grewels and
Caudles, Conserves and Marchpanes, and that too in sundry shapes made, as
Castles, Towers, Horses, Apes, and Bears; think on Jerusalem in the midst of
all your glory, and then you will be more sorrowful and less dainty; poor
Jerusalem had once Beauty, Strength, Riches, spacious Buildings, Authority and
honor, yet these availed them nothing, wrong trod down right, and Justice was
quite forgotten, which was their chiefest, their greatest, their only earthly
good.

But now one little piece of bread they reckoned more upon, then ever before
they did of bags of Gold. Scraps, parings, and fragments, etc. which your full
sed Corpse did usually fling away, with them had been a ransom for a King, the
loathsome garbage which our dogs refuse, had been amongst the Jews a dish of
state.

Whilst within Famine played the Tyrant, the Romans Army strived to win the
Walls, their Pioners, and all their Engines were at work to batter and assault
the Wall: Now note, Jerusalem had three strong stone Walls, and long it was ere
the Romans could get one, but the dearth so spread, and death of the sword, as
that in the streets the living trod upon the dead, the Carcasses which the
Seditious killed, filled many great houses, so that with the stinck of bodies
putrefied there dyed a number numberless of people, for burial they afforded
none, but where they fell they let them lie stink and rot, yet very unsensible
were they of the sad condition of each other, by hundreds and thousands: then
did the soldiers throw their liveless Corpses over the Walls, upon this and
their dis-uniting, the Romans had high advantages, and could with more security
batter and scale the Walls.

When the Romans saw their dismal fall from the Walls, they told it to Titus*
which when he perceived he wept, and lifted up his hands to Heaven and called
on God to witness with him this.

These flanghters says he, were no thoughts of mine, neither was it my fault.
Indeed those wretches that escaped from out of the City, and came amongst their
foes in my Army, found both relief and pity, if any of those that fled to my
Army had by the Seditious been caught, they had without remorse struck them
dead.

But another misery I must unfold unto you, many Jews had swallowed store of
Gold, which they supposed in their need should help them, but from this
treasure did their bane proceed, the Gold was the cause that many of them
perished, amongst them all, one unhappy poor creature went privately to do the
needs of Nature, and in his dung he looked for his Gold, where being by the
straggling soldiers took, they ripped him up and searched his Maw, to find what
Gold or treasure there remained: In this sort was many a Man and Woman ripped and
slain for the gain of Gold that the soldiers gaped for. In some they found
Gold, in many none, but had they Gold or not, it was all one with them, they
were unbowelled and searched most barbarously whither they had any or no.

But my story briefly to conclude, Vespasians Soldiers had subdued the walls,
and his triumphant banner was displayed, and that in the midst of the streets,
at which the Jews were all dismayed, and upon which they desperately did retire
to the Temple, which with ungodly hands they set on fire; which noble Titus
with great care entreated them they would spare: Oh save the house (quoth he)
and I will spare you for the Temple sake, quench the fire, put out the flame!
Oh let not aftertimes report that you have burnt the worlds unmatchable glory!
For your own sakes, your wives, and your childrens, if from Vespasians hands
you expect grace, if from Vespasians hands you expect your lives; oh save your
Temple, Titus does command you to save the Temple.

The Jews heard of the mercy they might have had, but with hearts hard they
refused the offer, they refused mercy, and themselves regarded not; but in
their madness they burned, consumed and confounded to the ground King Solomon's
great Temple, that Temple which did cost thirty Millions, was in a moment lost
and consumed. The blessed Sanctum Sanctorum, the holiest place often blessed with
Johovahs sacred grace, where as the Text says, were 22000 Oxen slain, and
12000 sheep besides, dyed at the same time for an oblation. That house of God
whose glorious fame made all the World to wonder, was burnt, and ransackt, and
laid level to the ground, which when it was seen by Vespasian and young Titus,
they cried kill, kill those wretched Jews, spare not to kill, use speedy and
Marshal Law; the Roman soldiers then fell on and spared none, they slew while
they were weary of slaying, and had no respect to Age or Sex, the streets were
drowned in blood, and slaughtered-Carkases did swim in in blood, the ablest men
that were saved they carried away for slaves, John, Simon, and Eleazer, as they
deserved were brought to violent ends.

Now from that time that the Romans began their siege, until the City was won
by Sedition, by the Sword, Fire, and Famine, were deprived of their lives
eleven hundred thousand, besides one hundred thousand were taken as beasts and
sold for slaves, and from the time it was first erected, till the Romans had
taken it, it stood as appears in Histories twenty one hundred seventy and nine
years.

But before Gods vengeance was showred down upon them, what strange prodigious
Wonders did he show, as warnings how they should avoid their destruction, and
cause them to repent the wicked evils they had done.

1. The Firmament showed them a Comet like a fiery Sword.

2. Diverse nights the Temple and the Altar were environed with bright burning
lights.

3. In the midst of the Temple though una Cow did bear a Lamb.

4. No Bolts or Bars could restrain the Temple-gates, but they would fly open
of themselves.

5. In the Air assembled Armed men and Chariots, the pondrous Earth quaked,
affrighted and trembled.

6. To this sense a voice cried in the Temple, and the people cried oh let us
from hence depart!

These supernatural accidents, foretold some fearful Judgment was to come, but
toys they were accounted to the Jews, or scar-crow-bugbears to fright children
with, and not minding them, nor no way by them being affrighted, they did in
Jerusalem securely revell, they thought these signs were against their foes,
and not them.

But when war, when death, when spoil, when ruin had stormed them, appeared
the place so desolate as none could have known there had been a City.

Thus Juda, and thus Jerusalem fell, which Christ did foretell, and was now
fulfilled, that all their joys they should be bereft off, and that one stone
should not be left to stand upon another.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
Shows that in Asia did God begin his mavelous work of Creation, and there
was the first Church Collected; also the Savior of the World born and slain:
In this Asia abounds Myrrh, Frankincense, Nutmegs, Pepper, etc. and it breeds
Elephants, and many other Beasts and Serpents. page 1. 2, 3, 4. In the City
Medina in Arabia, is Mahomet Intombed in an Iron Chest supported by Art from
falling to the ground. 5 A brief Description of Africa, in one of which Cities
there is 700 Churches, and a Castle whose Globes are pure Gold, weighing 130000
Barbury Ducats in one Province; they allow not a man to Marry till he has
killed twelve Christians, where they also Circumcise Male and Female. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10 A brief description of Europe, wherein is plenty of Corn, Plants, Fruits,
Rivers, and Fountains of admirable virtue. 12, 13 A brief description of
America, in which are that Worship Sun, Moon, and Stars, and adore Images made
of Cotton-Wool, which by the delusion of Satan utters an Hideous noise, which
works on them a great awe. In Peru does Gold and Silver so abound, that it is
reported they ordinarily shooed their Horses with Gold an Brassel men live for
the most part in the Bodies of trees? In this Region is an herb called Viva,
which if touched will shut up, and not open till the party that injured it be
out of sight. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. A brief description of Greece, wherein was
first settled the Christian Religion by Timothy. 20, 21 A brief description of
Germany and Bohemia. In Cullen is received a Tradition amongst the Inhabitants,
that the bodies of the Wisemen which came from the East to Worship Christ are
Interred in Acon, they Worship a Clout, which they take to be our Saviors
Mantle, in which he was wrapped. 24, 25 A brief description of France, in one
of which Provinces called Aquitania, was fought the great Battle betwixt our
Black Prince, and John of France, where with 8000 he conquered 40000 took the
King and his son Philip prisoners 70 Earls, 50 Barrons, and 12000 Gentlemen.
29, 30 In the Dukedom Lutxenburge, Quick is this Memorable story, that at one
time their studied 9 Kings Sons, 24. Dukes Sons, 29 Earls Sons. 31 A large
description of a Tortoys, from p. 47. to p. 51 A description of Great Britain
in very Remarkable stories from p. 51. to p. 106 Amongst which is a notable
story in Essex 1581. of an Army of Mice, that so overrun the Marshes near unto
South Minster, that they shore the Grass to the very roots, and in Suffolk was
taken a fish in all parts like a man, and kept in Orford Castle for six months
after escaped, and went to Sea again. 68, 69 In the year 1571. Masley-hill in
the East of Hereford-shire removed, traveling for three days together, began
upon the 7th of February at six of the clock at night, and before 7 next
morning had gone forty paces, carrying with it sheep in the coots, hedge rows
and trees mounting to an hill of twelve fathoms high, and there rested after
three days travel. 75, 76 Under Knaves-brough in Yorkshire, there is a Well
called Dropping-Well of that virtue and efficacy, that it turns Wood into
Stones. 87 A description of Scotland and Ireland. 107 to 116 A description of
the Spanish Invasion in Eighty eight. 116, 117 A description of the Turkish
Empire, their Religion, and Manners, with the rise of Mahomet from 118 to 126 A
description of China and Tartary, from 126 to 138 Rare Observations of a
Gentleman in his travels to Bohemia. 139 to 148 The privileges of the
Grand-hangman of Hamburgh, with the manner of executing Thieves and Murderers;
the habit of their Women, and how their men draw Carts and Carriages. 148 to
165 The Lamentable Destruction of the Ancient and Memorable City of Jerusalem,
with the sore and terrible Famine, while Grass, Hay, Barks, Leaves of Trees,
Cats and Dogs, etc. with the dung of Fowls and Beasts, was dainties to the
distressed Jews. 165 To the end.
FINIS.

