Vera effigies doctissimi Viri D. JOHANNES HALES Colleg. Eton. Socii et Eccles.
Colleg. Windesoriensis Canonici.


SEVERAL TRACTS, By the ever memorable Mr. JOHN HALES Of Eaton Coll. etc. VIZ.
I. Of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. II. Paraphrase on St. Matthew's
Gospel. III. Of the Power of the Keys. IV. Of Schism and Schismatics, (Never
before printed by the Original Copy.) V. Miscellanies.


Printed in the Year, 1677.

A TRACT Concerning the SIN Against the Holy Ghost.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eton College, etc.

LONDON, Printed for John Blyth, at Mr Playfords Shop in the Temple, 1677.

A TRACT concerning the SIN against the HOLY GHOST.
MAny have Written of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and in defining or
describing of it, follow their own zealous conceits, and not the Canon of Holy
Scriptures. The more dreadful the Sin is, the more fearful we must be, in
charging it upon any special crime, or particular person. In defining a sin of
so heinous a nature, direct and evident proof from Scripture is requisite. It
is not enough to consider, (as many do) what sins are most desperate and
deadly, and therefore to conclude such sins are against the Holy Ghost. Thus
indeed the Schoolmen have done, who have made six differences of this sin, V.
in fine. without any ground or warrant from Scripture for so doing. And
Bellarmine is so liberal in bestowing on such as he calls Heretics, that his
opinion is, that a Man can scarce be a learned Protestant, without committing
the sin against the Holy Ghost. Neither are the Papists the only Men that are
mistaken about this sin: but too many Divines of the Reformed Churches, have
started aside from the Scripture, and have given us such intricate and
contradictory definitions of this sin, as tend only to the perplexing the
tender Consciences of weak Christians. To make good this Censure, I will
briefly set down so much touching this sin, as I conceive is warranted by the
Word of God, and humbly submit to the judgment of the Learned.

The Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, was an evil speaking of, or slandering
of the Miracles which our Savior did, by those, who though they were convinced
by the Miracles, to believe that such Works could not be done, but by the power
of God, yet they did maliciously say, they were wrought by the power of the
Devil.

In this Definition, these points are observable.

1. I forbear to call it the sin against the Holy Ghost, but the Blasphemy; for
though every Blasphemy be a sin in general, yet our Savior Christ, terms it
the Blasphemy. And the Evangelists do all agree, to give it the same term: and
it is now here in holy Scripture called the sin against the Holy Ghost; and yet
it appears both in St. Matthew and St. Mark, that there was just occasion
offered to our Savior to call it so; where he compares it with the sin against
the Son of Man; but he forbears to call it any thing, but the Blasphemy;
thereby, no doubt, to teach us, it consists only in cursed speaking and
Blaspheming. A serious consideration of this point, may teach us so much
moderation, as to confine our selves to that term which our Savior in the
three Evangelists has prescribed unto us. I cannot find that any Man that has
writ upon this Argument, has made any observation, or noted this phrase and
term used by the Evangelists, in pronouncing the dreadful sentence of our
Savior against the Blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, I will cite these Texts, where
it is named, Math. 12. 31. Mark 3. 28* Luke* 12* 10.

2. A second Observation is, That Blasphemy is a speaking against another, as
both St. Matthew and St. Luke expound the word, for in the Original, it is a
blasting the Fame, or blaming of another; for from the Greek word (...) both
the French Nation and our English by contraction have made the word blame.

3. To pass from the Name to the Thing it self, we may observe by the coherence
of the Texts, that Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, was spoken of by our
Savior, concerning the Scribes and Pharisees. It was (says St. Mark) because
the Pharisees said, he had an unclean spirit, and that he cast our Devils by
Beelzebub, etc. This speech of the Pharisees, whereby they slandered his
Miracles, wrought by the power of the Holy Ghost, is properly the Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost. How transcendent a crime it was, to traduce that power
by which our Savior wrought his Miracles, may appear, from the end for which
these Miracles were wrought; which was, to prove to the people that saw them,
that he was the Messiah; which is evident from the places of Scripture, wherein
he appealed to his works, 10 Joh. 37. 38. 14. Joh. 11. 11 Math. 4. 4. Joh. 29.
These and other places show, that the working of Miracles, was an act of the
most glorious manifestation of the power of God, by which at the first view,
the simplest people were led by their outward sense, to the great mystery of
inward Faith in Christ their Redeemer.

Therefore, for those men that were eyewitnesses of those Miracles which did
make them know that Christ was a Teacher come from God, to Blaspheme that
power, by which these Miracles were wrought, and to say they were done by the
help of the Devil, was the most spightful and malicious slander that could be
invented; for thereby they attempted, as much as in them lay, to destroy the
very principles of Faith, and to prevent the very first propagation of the
Gospel, to the universal mischief of all Mankind. And though these Pharisees
were no Christians, and therefore could not fall away from faith, which they
never had, yet they did know and believe that Christ was a Teacher come from
God; for so our Savior tells them, 7 Joh. 28. Ye both know me, and whence I
am. They did not believe him as a Savior, but as a great Prophet from God; (as
the Mahometans do at this very day) they trusted to be saved by their Law, and
because he taught such things as did abrogate their Law, in which they so much
gloried, they were so malicious to his Doctrine, which they did not believe,
that they spoke evil of his Miracles which they did believe; least the people
by approving his Miracles, should believe his Doctrine.

4. Observe, that its said to be Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, because, by
the Holy Ghost, the Miracles were wrought Math. 12 28. 1 Cor 12. 10.

5. The Blasphemy against the Son of Man was, when men considered Christ as a
mere man, and did disgracefully tax his conversation, by saying, behold a
glutton, a bibber of Wine, a friend to Publicans and sinners. But the Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, was, when Men beholding Christ's Miracles, did enviously
ascribe them to the Devil, which they knew and believed to be done by Gods
power.

6. The Texts formerly cited out of the three Evangelists, being all the places
wherein the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is named; we cannot find by them,
that we have any safe rule to conclude, that any but the Scribes and Pharisees,
and their confederates, committed that sin. I dare not say, that Judas, Julian
the Apostate, or Simon Magus, or those that stoned Stephen, were guilty thereof.

7. The Apostles have not in any of their Epistles once mentioned this
Blasphemy, and yet they were most careful and frequent in exhortations from all
sorts of sin: It were much therefore if they should omit or forget such a
fearful crime, without often and precise admonishing to beware of it. And
though negative proofs from Scripture, are not demonstrative, yet the general
silence of the Apostles, may at least help to infer a probability, that the
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, is not committable by any Christian, which
lived not in the time of our Savior. As for those Texts in the sixth and tenth
Chapter to the Hebrews, and in 1 John 5. 16. (which by late Divines are*
expounded of the sin against the Holy Ghost) I do not find that the Ancient
Fathers did so understand them, excepting only St. Austine, who so interprets
that one place in St. John, that all men confess him to be in an error. There
be three Texts in the Epistles, wherein although the Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost be not named, yet, most think, it is intended and meant. And Bellarmine
confuting St. Austin's opinion, who held, that final impenitency was the sin
against the Holy Ghost) affirms, that it seems the three Texts in the Epistles,
are spoken of that sin; and yet this great Cardinal forgetting what he had said
in the same Chapter contradicts himself, and shows how that those three places
are not to be interpreted of that sin. I will cite the Texts, and then his
interpretation of them, according to the exposition of St. Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Hierom, and other Fathers, as he says.

The first is Heb. 6. It is impossible, etc. The Apostle here speaks only of
Repentance, which did go before Baptism, for so Chrysostom and Ambrose, etc.
expound it; which the Apostle intimates in these words. Which were once
enlightened, that is, Baptized, for anciently, to be illuminated, signified to
be Baptized. Secondly, in these words (to renew again) for we are properly
renewed in Baptism. Thirdly, in these (crucifying the Son of God afresh) for
when we are Baptized, we are conformed to the likeness of his death, 6 Romans And
as Christ was only once crucified, so also we are only once Baptized; and he
that will be again Baptized, should again crucify to himself Ghrist. Let me
add this, that in the verses next before this Text, the Apostle speaks of the
foundation of Repentance, and the Doctrine of Baptism. And in this Text, our
new Translation follows Beza (who has varied from the Original, by putting
the conditional Si, If, instead of the Copulative Et, And, and by adding the
Causal Ut.) so that whereas Beza and our Translation is, si prolabantur ut
crucifigant, The Greek, and vulgar Latin is, (...), prolapsi sunt
crucifigentes; for the word does not signify to fall away, but to fall casually
or negligently, so (...) Galat 6. is translated fault, but not falling away.

The second Text is, Hebrews 10. 26. For if we sin willingly or wilfully, after
we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sin. Answer, I say with Chrysostom, Ambrose, and other Fathers; The sense
is, we must not expect another Christ to dye for us, or that he that dyed once,
should come again to dye for us.

The third Text, 1 John 5. 16. There is a sin unto death: I do not say ye shall
pray for it; St. Hierom says, that nothing else is here meant, but that a
Prayer for a sin unto death, is very hardly or difficultly heard; and this
seems to be the truest sense of this place: for St. John says, in the verse
immediately before, we know we have the Petitions we desire of him; therefore
least we should think this to hold true in all Petitions even for others* he
adds* if any Man see his Brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, he shall
ask, etc. he shall ask, that is, let him ask with confidence, for he shall
obtain; but if it be a sin unto death, that is, a great sin, such an one as is
not ordinarily pardoned, but punished with death: I do not say, ye shall pray
for it, that is I dare not promise that you shall easily obtain, and therefore
I do not say that you shall pray for it, that is, with that confidence of
obtaining; for often in such cases, God does nothear the Prayers of his Saints;
as God says, Jer. 7. 16. If these expositions upon the former Texts be sound,
the Definition of the sin against the Holy Ghost, cannot be grounded upon all
or any of them: for as it is not nameed, so it is not meant in any of them; but
if they seem to any to be unsound, let him bring better and more agreeable to
the literal meaning and sense, coherence and scope of the Text, and I shall
gladly learn. It seems a probable exposition of the first place, Heb. 6. that a
learned Divine, who produces this Text for proof of his definition of the sin
against the Holy Ghost, does confess against himself, that the Apostle in this
place denies a second Baptism, where he speaks of Repentance, because they
are mentioned together in the same place, and have some affinity and
correspondence. As for the second Text, Heb. 10. I must say, that if St. Paul
in this place, meant the sin against the Holy Ghost, that then this were the
only desperate Text in the whole Bible, for what Man is there that sins not
willingly; for so the word (...) properly signifies: Beza translates it ultro,
the vulgar Latin, voluntary, or willingly, not wilfully, or obstinately. It
is but a miserable shift, when St. Paul says, if we sin willingly, for Mr
Calvin to tell us, that the Text does not mean every willing sin, but only a
malicious resisting of the Truth. Could not St. Paul, as easily as Mr Calvin,
have said, If we sin maliciously, as say, if we sin willingly? My comfort is,
that if the Text be advisedly considered, there is no such thing as the sin
against the Holy Ghost, or any other desperate conclusion, to be found in the
Text; the scope of the precedent verses do evidently expound the Apostles
meaning to be this, to let the Jews know, that the case was not now with them,
as it was under the Law; for under the Law they had daily sacrifice for sin,
but now under the Gospel they had but one sacrifice, once for all; every Priest
stands daily ministering and offering often times the same sacrifice, but this
Man after he had offered one sacrifice, for ever sat down at the right hand of
God, as it is, verse 11. of that Chapter, which may serve for a comment upon
the Verse now in question. And it is worth our noting, that the Text does not
say, if we sin wilfully, there is no sacrifice for sin; this had been an hard
saying indeed; but the words are, there remains no more sacrifice for sin:
there is some comfortable difference, I hope, between these two propositions;
there is no sacrifice, and there remains no more sacrafice for sin: So that if
we do not believe in that one sacrifice, as sufficient, but look every day for
some new sacrifice for every new sin, we must expect nothing but judgment.

As to the third place, 1 Ioh. 5. 16. many would conclude, there is a sin for
which we may not pray; First, because it is irremissable, and this they think
must needs be the sin against the Holy Ghost, meant by St. John, Their best
argument is, John's not saying we should pray, is a saying we should not pray;
his silence to them is prohibition. This is bad Grammar, and worse Logic. For
we find, that St. Stephen prayed for them that stoned him, and yet told them
they resisted the Holy Ghost. And St. Peter exhorted Simon Magus to Repentance,
and yet both he and those that stoned Stephen, are commonly reputed sinners
against the Holy Ghost. St. Ambrose is of that charitable opinion, that he
thinks the sin against the Holy Ghost may be pardoned by Repentance, because
the people of the Jews, that had said of Christ, that he cast out Devils by
Beelzebub, afterward at the preaching of St. Peter, are said to be converted,
Acts 2. St. Austine in a Retract concludes, we must despair of no Man, no not
of the wickedest, as long as he lives; and we safely pray for him, of whom we
don't despair. For though it be expressly said, That the Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, yet these words may justly receive a
qualification, if we will but allow the same mitigation of these words, which
all Men confess we must needs allow to the precedent words in the same verse,
to which these have relation; where it is said generally, all Sins, and all
Blasphemies shall be forgiven, it cannot be meant of all sins always, and to
all Men, for then no sin could be damnable, but the sin against the Holy Ghost,
which is most false; and therefore the meaning must be, all sins shall be
forgiven ordinarily, and for the most part; so on the contrary, Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost shall not ordinarily, but hardly be forgiven. Even those
who are most strict to maintain the Sin against the Holy Ghost, to be
unpardonable, will yet acknowledge, that some times in Scripture, Impossibility
is used to note a difficulty, and those things are spoken indefinitely to all,
which belong but to a part only. Thus the difficulty of a rich Man's entering
into the Kingdom of Heaven, is presented to us by our Savior, under the
similitude of an impossibility.

Having dispatched these Texts of Scripture which do either name, or are
thought to concern, the sin against the Holy Ghost, it remains to examine those
common Definitions of this sin which are now current; though different in the
terms by which they define it; some call it a total or final falling away from
faith, or a wilful Apostasy, or a malicious resisting of the truth; yet when
they come to explain their meaning, the difference among them is not
considerable. I shall chiefly apply my self to Mr Calvin's definition, because
his judgment has gained the greatest reputation among the multitude; as also,
for that he himself promises such a true definition, as shall easily, by it
self overthrow all the rest. In his Institut. Lib. 3. Chap. 3. he says, they
sin against the Holy Ghost, Qui divinae veritati (cujus fulgore sic
perstringuntur ut ignorantiam causari nequeunt) tamen destinata malitia
resistunt, in hoc tantum, ut resistant. Arminius also uses Mr Calvin's words.
The Rhetorical Parenthesis, which might well have been spared in a definition,
being reduced to plain and brief terms; this definition of Calvin may be thus
Englished, They sin against the Holy Ghost, who of determined malice, resist
the known Truth of God, to the end only to resist. In this Mr Calvin does not
define what the sin is, but who they are that commit it; whereas by the Rules
of Logic, Concretes admit of no definition, but only Abstracts. But taking the
definition as it is, it consists principally upon these three terms. First,
Truth; Secondly, Known; Thirdly, Resisted; or a resisting of the known Truth.
The words being general and doubtful, we will consider them singly.

First, If by the truth Mr Calvin understands the Word of God, or the whole
Doctrine revealed in the Scriptures, then the sense of this Term will be too
large: for even the Pharisees which spoke against the Holy Ghost, did not
resist the whole Truth of God in the Scripture, for they believed in the Law of
Moses, and had confidence to be saved by the keeping of it. And in defense of
that Law, (as they thought) they did Blaspheme the Holy Ghost. Therefore
properly by the Truth of God, Mr Calvin must confine his meaning to the Truth
of the Gospel or Doctrine of Faith, for so both he himself and others expound
themselves, by terming the sin against the Holy Ghost, a falling away, or
turning away from Faith, or Apostasy.

Secondly, By this word Known, Mr Calvin must mean belief, for Faith is
properly by believing, not knowing the truth.

Thirdly, The Word, Resisting, must mean unbelieving: for if receiving of the
Truth be by belief, then Resisting of the Truth must be^^ unbelief. And indeed
Mr. Calvin explains himself in the same Chapter, saying, there is no place for
pardon where knowledge is joined with unbelief, Non esse veniae locum, etc. So
then by this definition, to resist the known Truth, is all one, as if Mr Calvin
had said in proper terms, for a Man at once to unbelieve that which he does
believe; which two things it is impossible to do together? and if they be not
together, there can be no resistance. It is true, that for some reasons, a Man
may be brought, not to believe that which he formerly believed. This cannotbe
in an instant, but successively unbelief comes in the place of belief. And this
may not be called a resisting, for that all resistance consists in a violence
between two at the least; but where two succeed one another, and are never
together, it cannot possibly be. I confess a Man may resist the Truth, when it
is a Truth, in it self only, or in the understanding of some other; but to
resist the Truth which is known, and believed by the resister himself, is a
direct contradiction; for the nature of Truth is such, that if the
understanding apprehend it for Truth, it cannot but assent unto it. No Man can
force himself to believe what he lists, or when he lists. Sometimes a Man knows
not what to believe, but finds a suspension of his Faith, or trepidation of his
understanding, not knowing which way to turn. This cannot be called a resisting
of the Truth, when the Truth is not known, but doubted of. Again, some Truths
there be, though they be assented to by the understanding for Truths, yet they
are not desired as good; for truth is one degree nearer the Soul of Man than
goodness. The Pharisees did apprehend the Miracles of our Savior as true, but
not as good; because they tended to the derogation of their Law, which they
esteemed a better Truth. And for this cause, they Blasphemed that Truth, which
in their hearts they believed for Truth. For the truth of words, or speech, is,
(as the Schools say) nothing else but the sign of truth, not truth it self; for
truth it self is seated in the understanding, and not in the speech. That Truth
which the understanding assents to, the speech may affirm to be false; there
are many things believed in deed, which are denied in word: but such a denial
is not resisting, but only making show of resisting, the Truth; for resistance
must be in the same place where Truth is; Truth being seated in the
understanding, resistance must be placed there also; the understanding can
resist no Truth, but by unbelieving of it. If Mr Calvin had intended of the
Truth only in word, he had come one step nearer to the Truth of Scripture, but
he was not so happy in the expression of his meaning: nay his terms of
Incredulity, Apostasy, falling away, etc. relate to a real, not verbal,
Apostasy, and Unbelief. It remains then to my understanding, that Mr Calvin
makes the resistance of the Truth to be a not believing of what we do believe;
which being a contradiction, he defines the Sin against the Holy Ghost, to be
such a Sin, as no Man possibly can commit. And yet in the other extreme, in
expounding his own definition, he makes it such a Sin, as no Man living but
commits; for by his Doctrine, (as I take it) any Sin may be the Sin against the
Holy Ghost. His words are these, Quorum convicta est conscientia verbum Dei
esse quod repudiant and impugnant, impugnare tamen non desistant, ill^ in
spiritum blasphemari dicuntur. What Man is there that does not daily, in some
Point or other, for sake the word of God, and ceases not to impugn it, and is
convinced thereof in his Conscience: I know Mr Calvin was far from thinking,
that St. Paul, did Sin against the Holy Ghost, and yet St. Paul it seems was
convinced in his Conscience, that it was the Word of God he fought against, and
yet ceased not to fight against it, when he says, he delighted in the Law of
God, yet another Law warring against the Law of his mind, brought him into
Captivity of the Law of Sin. What dangerous consequences weak Consciences may
draw to themselves, out of this unbridled, unlimited proposition of Mr Calvin's,
let others judge. There is a just cause I. presume to except against Mr Galvin,
and all others, who in this concur with him, to omit the term of Blasphemy in
their definitions; for this is perpetually observed by our Savior in his
speech concerning this Sin, by the Evangelists with one consent: but instead of
the word Blasphemy, he has brought in the word, resist, for a Genus of this
Sin; but by what Authority I know not; I cannot find it, or the equivalent to
it, in any of these places, which are thought to touch this Sin I find only
falling away mentioned, Heb. 6. which phrase is used by Mr Calvin, for
resisting; whereas falling away, and resisting, are no more alike, than
fighting and running away, which are little less than contraries. The last point
I shall touch in Mr Calvin's definition, is, where he says, the Sinners against
the Holy Ghost resist, to the end only that they may resist; and yet withal he
tells, they resist out of a determinate malice. If they resist out of malice,
then the end for which they resist, is for the satisfaction of their malice.
The Pharisees here condemned by our Savior, had an other end than bare
resisting. The defense of the Law of Moses, was the end for which they
Blasphemed, and not any pleasure they could have in the bare and simple act of
resistance. We find three old opinions, concerning the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, but they were long since exploded; I will but only name them. Origin
thought, all Sins committed after Baptism, were Sins against the Holy Ghost:
his reason was only a witless conceit of his own, That God the Father was in
all things, the Son only in all reasonable Creatures, the Holy Ghost in all
regenerate Men. Therefore when Men Sin against the Divine Person, which is in
them, if they be Heathen, they Sin against God the Father, or Son; if they be
Christians, they Sin against God the Holy Ghost; but this opinion is false. The
Novatian Heretics agreed with Origin in opinion, for they denied remission of
Sins to any that fell, thinking all falls of Christians to be Sins against the
Holy Ghost; but this opinion is false; else all Sins were unpardonable to
Christians. Yet we find St. Paul, to remit the Sins of the incestuous
Corinthian.

Our Savior also charge the Pharisees with this, who were no Christians. St.
Austin thought final impenitency to be the Sin against the Holy Ghost; but
final impenitency is no Blasphemy, but only a general circumstance, that may
accompany any Sin: besides, our Savior intends, that this Sin may be found in
this life. And the Pharisees were alive when they were accused of it Pet.
Lumbard, and Tho. Aquinas, thought Sins of Malice, to be Sins against the Holy
Ghost, and Sins of infirmity against the Father, and Sins of ignorance against
the Son. This opinion is false, because the Sin against the Holy Ghost, must be
a Sin of some certain Blasphemy, but malice is no certain Sin, but a General,
and it is not always a Blasphemy.

The six differences the Schoolmen make of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, are
these;

1. Envying of our Brothers Graces; 2. Impugning of the Known Truth; 3.
Desperation; 4. Obstinacy; 5. Presumption; 6. Final Impenitency.

In this determination of the point of Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and
the inquiry made into Mr Calvin's and others new definition; I hope I have
delivered nothing contrary to the Articles of the Church of England.

FINIS.
A TRACT Concerning the SACRAMENT OF THE Lords Supper.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge, etc.

Printed, 1677.

A Tract on the Sacrament of the LORDS SUPPER.
Kind SIR,
IN perusal of your Letters* together with the Schedule enclosed, no
Circumstance did so much move me as this, that so ordinary Points as are
discust there, and that in a bare and ordinary manner, should amuse either your
self or any man else, that pretends to ordinary Knowledge in Controversies in
Christian Religion. For the Points therein discust are no other than the
subject of every common Pamphlet, and sufficiently known (that I may so say) in
every Barbers Shop. Yet because you require my Opinion of matters there in
question, I willingly afford it you, though I fear I shall more amuse you with
telling you the Truth, than the Disputants there did, by abusing you with
Error. For the plain and necessary (though perhaps unwelcome) Truth is, that in
the greater part of the Dispute, both parties much mistook themselves, and that
fell out which is in the common Proverb, sc. Whilst the one milks the Ram, the
other holds under the Sieve. That you may see this Truth with your Eyes, I
divide your whole Dispute into two Heads; the one concerning the Eucharist, the
other concerning the Churches mistaking it self about Fundamentals.

For the first, It consists of two parts; of a Proposition, and of a Reply:
The Proposition expresses (at least he that made it intended it so to do,
though he mistakes) the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, concerning the
presence of Christ in the Eucharist. The Reply does the like for the Church of
Rome in the same Argument. Now that you may see how indifferently I walk, I
will open the mistakes of both parties, that so the truth of the thing it self
(being unclouded of Errors) may the more clearly shine forth.

The first mistake common to both is, That they ground themselves much upon the
words of Consecration, as they are called, and suppose, That upon the
pronouncing of those words, something befalls that action, which otherwise
would not; and that without those words the action were lame. Sir, I must
confess my ignorance unto you. I find no ground for the necessity of this
doing. Our Savior instituting that Holy Ceremony, commands us to do what he
did, leaves us no Precept of saying any words; neither will it be made appear,
that either the blessed Apostles, or Primitive Christians had any such Custom:
Nay the contrary will be made probably to appear out of some of the antientest
Writings of the Churches Ceremonials. Our Savior indeed used the Words, but it
was to express what his meaning was; had he barely acted the thing, without
expressing himself by some such Form of Words, we could never have known what
it was he did. But what necessity is there now of so doing? for when the
Congregation is met together, to the breaking of Bread and Prayer, and see
Bread and Wine upon the Communion Table, is there any man can doubt of the
meaning of it, although the Canon be not read? It was the farther solemnizing,
and beautifying that holy action which brought the Canon in; and not an opinion
of adding any thing to the substance of the action. For that the words were
used by our Savior to work any thing upon the Bread and Wine, can never out of
Scripture or Reason be deduced; and beyond these two, I have no ground for my
Religion, neither in Substance nor in Ceremony. The main Foundation that
upholds the necessity of this form of action now in use, is Church-Custom and
Church-Error.

Now for that Topique place of Church-Custom, it is generally too much abused:
For whereas naturally the necessity of the thing ought to give warrant to the
practice of the Church; I know not by what device matters are turned about, and
the customary practice of the Church is alleged to prove the necessity of the
thing; as if things had received their Original from the Church Authority, and
not as the truth is, from an higher Hand. As for the Churches Error, on which I
told you this Form of action is founded, it consists in the uncautelous taking
up an unsound ungrounded conclusion of the Fathers for a religious Maxim. St.
Ambrose, I trow, was he that said it, and posterity has too generally
applauded it, Accedat verbum ad elementum, and fiat Sacramentum. By which they
would persuade us, against all experience, that to make up a Sacrament, there
must be something said and something done; whereas indeed to the perfection of
a Sacrament, or holy Mystery (for both these are one) it is sufficient that one
thing be done whereby another is signified, though nothing be said at all. When
Tarquinius was walking in his Garden, a Messenger came and asked him, what he
would have done unto the Town of Gabij, then newly taken? He answered nothing*
But with his Wand struck off the tops of the highest Popies; and the Messenger
understanding his meaning, cut off the Heads of the chief of the City. Had this
been done in Sacris, it had been forthwith truly a Sacrament, or holy Mystery.
Cum in omnibus Scientiis voces significent res, hoc habet proprium Theologia,
quod ipsaeres significatae per voces, etiam significent aliquid, says Aquinas;
and upon the second signification are all Spiritual and mystical senses
founded: So that in Sacris, a Mystery or Sacrament is then acted, when one
thing is done and another is signified, as it is in the Holy Communion, though
nothing be said at all. The ancient Sacrifices of the Jews, whether weekly,
monthly, or yearly, their Passover, their sitting in Boothes, etc. These were
all Sacraments, yet we find not any sacred forms of words, used by the Priests
or People in the execution of them.

To sum up that which we have to say in this Point, the calling upon the words
of consecration in the Eucharist, is too weakly founded to be made
argumentative, for the action is perfect, whether those words be used or
forborne: And in truth to speak my opinion, I see no great harm could ensue,
were they quite omitted. Certainly thus much good would follow, that some part
(though not a little one) of the superstition that adheres to that action, by
reason of an ungrounded conceit of the necessity and force of the words in it,
would forthwith pill off and fall away: I would not have you understand me so,
as if I would prescribe for, or desire the disuse of the words; only two things
I would commend to you, First, That the use of the Canon is a thing
indifferent. And, Secondly, That in this knack of making Sacraments, Christians
have taken a greater liberty than they can well justify: First, In forging
Sacraments, more than God (for ought does or can appear) did ever intend: And
Secondly, In adding to the Sacraments instituted of God many formalities, and
ceremonial circumstances upon no warrant but their own; which circumstances by
long use, begat in the minds of men a conceit, that they were essential parts
of that to which indeed they were but appendant; and that only by the device of
some who practiced a power in the Church morethan was convenient.

Thus much for the first common mistake.

The Second is worse than it; You see that both parts agreed in the
acknowledgment of the real presence of the Body of Christ in the Eucharist,
though they differ in the manner of his Presence, and application of himself to
the receiver; though the Protestant Disputant seems to have gone a little
beyond his Leader: Had he expressed himself in the point of Bread and Wine, what
became of it, whether it remained in its proper nature yea or no, I could the
better have fathomed him: Now these words of his, that the Bread and Wine after
consecration are truly* and really the Body of Christ, howsoever they are
suppled and allayed with that clause, not after a carnal, but after a spiritual
manner, yet still remain too crude and raw, and betray the Speaker for a
Lutheran at least, if not for a favourer of the Church of Rome; for as for that
Phrase, of a spiritual manner, which seems to give season and moderation to his
conclusion, it can yield him but small relief: For first, To say the flesh of
Christ is in the Bread, but not after a carnal manner, is but the same
nonsense, which the Divines of Rome put upon us on the like occasion, when
telling us, that the Blood of Christ is really sacrificed, and shed in the
Sacrament, they add by way of Gloss, that it is done incruente, unbloodily* by
the like Analogy they may tell us, if they please, that the body of Christ is
there incorporated unbodily, Flesh not carnally may pass the Press jointly the
next Edition of the Book of Bulls. Again, in another respect, That clause, of a
spiritual manner does your Protestant Disputer but little service, if any at
all; for the Catholic Disputant contriving with himself how to seat the Body
of God in the Eucharist, as may be most for his ease, tells us, that he is
there as Spirits and glorified Bodies (which St. Paul calls spiritual) are in
the places they possess; so then, the one tells you the Body of Christ is there
really, but spiritually; the other, that he is there really, but as a Spirit in
a place; and what now, I pray you, is the difference between them? By the way,
in the passage you may see what account to make of your Catholic Disputer.
Aristotle, and with him common sense, tells us thus much, That he that compares
two Bodies together, must know them both; Does this Gentleman know any thing
concerning the site and locality of Spirits, and Bodies glorified? if he does,
let him do us the courtesy as to show us, at what price he purchased that
degree of knowledge, that so we may try our Credit, and see if we can buy it at
the same rate; Tertius e Coelo cecidit Cato? Is he like a second Paul, lately
descended out of the third Heavens, and there has made us the discovery? for
by what other means he could attain to that knowledge, my dullness cannot
suggest. But if he does not know (as indeed he neither does nor can, for there
is no means left to make discovery that way) then with what congruity can be
tell us that the Body of Christ is in the Bread, as Spirits, and glorified
Bodies are in their places, if he know not what manner of location and site,
Spirits and glorified Bodies have? I shall not need to prompt your discretion
thus far, as that you ought not to make dainties of such fruitless and
desperate Disputers; who, as the Apostle notes, thrust themselves into things
they have not seen, and upon a false show of knowledge, abuse easy Hearers,
and of things they know not, adventure to speak they know not what.

To return then, and consider a little more of this second mistake common to
both your Disputants, I will deal as favorably as I can with your Protestant
Disputer; for though I think he mistakes himself (for I know no Protestant that
teaches, that the common Bread, after the word spoken is really made the Body
of Christ) yet he might well take occasion thus to err out of some Protestant
Writings: For generally the Reformed Divines do falsely report that Holy Action,
whether you regard the Essence or Use thereof.

For first, if in regard of the Essence, some Protestants, and that of chief
note, stick not to say, That the words of Consecration are not a mere Trope,
and from hence it must needs follow, that in some sense they must needs be
taken literally, which is enough to plead authority for the Gentleman's Error.
But that which they preach concerning a real presence and participation of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament; they expound not by a supposal that the Bread
becomes Gods Body, but that together with the Sacramental Elements, there is
conveyed into the Soul of the worthy Receiver, the very Body and Blood of
God, but after a secret, ineffable, and wonderful manner. From hence, as I
take it, have proceeded these crude speeches of the Learned of the Reformed
parts, some dead, some living, wherein they take upon them to assure the
Divines of Rome, that we acknowledge a Real Presence as well as they; but for
the manner how, con, or trans, or sub, or in, (...), we play the Scepticks, and
determine not. This conceit, besides the falsehood of it, is a mere novelty,
neither is it to be found in the Books of any of the Ancients, till Martin
Bucer rose. He out of an unseasonable bashfulness, and fear to seem to recede
too far from the Church of Rome, taught to the purpose now related, concerning
the Doctrine of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament; and from him it descended
into the Writings of Calvin and Beza, whose Authority have well-near spread it
over the face of the Reformed Churches. This is an Error which, as I said,
touches the Essence of that holy Action; but there are many now which touch the
end and use of it, which are practiced by the Reformed parts; for out of an
extravagant fancy they have of it, they abuse it to many ends, of which we may
think the first Instituter (save that he was God, and knew all things) never
thought of: For we make it an Arbitrator of Civil businesses; and employ it in
ending Controversies; and for Confirmation of what we say or do, we commonly
promise to take the Sacrament upon it; we teach, that it confirms our Faith in
Christ, whereas indeed the receiving of it is a sign of Faith confirmed, and
men come to it to testify that they do believe, not to procure that they may
believe: For if a Man doubt of the truth of Christianity, think you that his
scruples would be removed upon the receiving of the Sacrament? I would it were
so; we should not have so many doubting Christians, who yet receive the
Sacrament often enough: We teach it to be Viaticum morientium, whereby we abuse
many distressed Consciences, and sick Bodies, who seek for comfort there, and
finding it not, conclude from thence (I speak what I know) some defect in their
Faith. The participation of this Sacrament to sick and weak persons, what
unseemly events has it occasioned, the vomiting up of the Elements anon, upon
the receipt of them, the resurging the Wine into the Cup, before the Minister
could remove his hand to the interruption of the action? Now all these Mistakes
and Errors have risen upon some ungrounded and fond practices, crept long since
(God knows how) into the Church, and as yet not sufficiently purged out. I will
be bold to inform you what it is, which is (...), the main fundamental fallacy,
whence all these abuses have sprung. There has been a fancy of long
subsistence in the Churches, that in the Communion there is something given
besides Bread and Wine, of which the Numerality given, men have not yet agreed;
Some say it is the Body of God into which the Bread is transubstantiated; Some
say it is the same Body with which the Bread is consubstantiated; Some, that
the Bread remaining what it was, there passes with it to the Soul the real Body
of God, in a secret unknown manner; Some, that a further degree of Faith is
supplied us; Others, that some degree of Gods grace, whatever it be, is
exhibited which otherwise would be wanting: All which variety of conceits must
needs fall out, as having no other ground, but conjecture weakly founded. To
settle you therefore in your Judgment, both of the thing it self, and of the
true use of it, I will commend to your consideration these few Propositions.

First, In the Communion, there is nothing given but Bread, and Wine.

Secondly, The Bread and Wine are signs indeed, but not of any thing there
exhibited, but of somewhat given long fince, even of Christ given for us upon
the Cross sixteen hundred years ago, and more.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is eaten at the Communion Table in no sense neither
Spiritually, by virtue of any thing done there, nor really, neither
Metaphorically, nor Literally. Indeed that which is eaten (I mean the Bread) is
called Christ by a Metaphor; but it is eaten truly and properly.

Fourthly, The Spiritual eating of Christ is common to all places, as well as
the Lord's Table.

Last of all, The Uses and Ends of the Lord's Supper can be no more than such
as are mentioned in the Scriptures, and they are but two.

First, The commemoration of the Death and Passion of the Son of God, specified
by himself at the Institution of the Ceremony.

Secondly, To testify our Union with Christ, and Communion one with another;
which end St. Paul has taught us.

In these few Conclusions the whole Doctrine and Use of the Lord's Supper is
fully set down; and whosoever leads you beyond this, does but abuse you. Quicquid
ultra quaeritur, non intelligitur. The proof of these Propositions would
require more than the Limits of a Letter will admit of; and I see my self
already to have exceeded these Bounds. I will therefore pass away to consider
the second part of your Letter.

In this second Part, I would you had pleased to have done as in the first you
did, That is, not only set down the Proposition of the Catholic, but some
Answer of the Protestant, by which we might have discovered his Judgment; I
might perchance have used the same Liberty as I have done before, namely
discovered the misstakes of both parties; for I suspect that as there they did,
so here they would have given me cause enough. Now I content my self barely to
speak to the Question. The Question is, Whether the Church may Err in
Fundamentals? By the Church I will not trifle as your Catholic does, and mean
only the Protestant Party, as he professes he does only the Roman Faction. But
I shall understand all Factions in Christianity, All that entitle themselves to
Christ, wheresoever dispersed all the World over.

First, I Answer, That every Christian may err that will: for if men might not
err wilfully, then there could be no Heresy; Heresy being nothing else but
wilful Error: For if we account mistakes befalling us through humane Frailties
to be Heresies, then it will follow, That every man since the Apostles time was
an Heretic; for never yet was there any Christian, the Apostles only excepted,
which did not in something concerning the Christian Faith mistake himself,
either by addition or omission, or misinterpretation of something. An evident
sign of this Truth you may see in this by the Providence of God: the Writings
of many learned Christians from the Spring of Christianity, have been left unto
posterity, and amongst all those, scarcely any is to be found who is not
confessed on all hands to have mistaken some things, and those mistakes for the
most part stand upon Record by some who purposely observed them. Neither let
this (I beseech you) beget in you a conceit as if I meant to disgrace those
whose Labors have been and are of infinite benefit in the Church. For if
Aristotle, and Aphrodiseus, and Galen, and the rest of those Excellent men whom
God had endued with extraordinary portions of natural Knowledge, have with all
thankful and ingenious men throughout all Generations retained their Credit
entire, notwithstanding it is acknowledged that they have all of them in many
things, swerved from the Truth; Then, why should not Christians express the
same ingenuity to those who have labored before us in the Exposition of the
Christian Faith, and highly esteem them for their Works sake, their many
infirmities notwithstanding? You will say, that for private persons it is
confessed they may and daily do err; But can Christians err by whole Shoals, by
Armies meeting for defense of the Truth in Synods* and Councils, especially
General, which are countenanced by the great Fable of all the World, the Bishop
of Rome?

I answer, To say that Councils may not err, though private persons may, at
first sight is a merry speech; as if a man should say, That every single
Soldier indeed may run away, but a whole Army cannot, especially having
Hannibal for their Captain; and since it is confessed, that all single persons
not only may, but do err, it will prove a very hard matter, to gather out of
these a multitude, of whom being gathered together, we may be secured they
cannot err. I must for mine own part confess, that Councils, and Synods not
only may and have erred, but considering the means how they are managed, it
were a great marvel if they did not err: For what men are they of whom those
great Meetings do consist? are they the best, the most learned, the most
virtuous, the most likely to walk uprightly? No, the greatest, the most
ambitious, and many times men, neither of Judgment, nor Learning; such are they
of whom these Bodies do consist: and are these men in common equity likely to
determine for Truth? Qui ut in vita, sic in causis, spes quoque improbas alunt,
as Quintilian speaks. Again, when such persons are thus met, their way to
proceed to conclusion, is not by weight of Reason, but by multitude of Votes
and Suffrages; as if it were a maxim in nature, that the greater part must
needs be the better; whereas our common experience shows, That, Nunquam ita
been agitur cum rebus humanis ut plures sint meliores. It was never heard in
any profession, that Conclusion of Truth went by plurality of Voices, the
Christian profession only excepted; and I have often mused how it comes to
pass, that the way which in all other Sciences is not able to warrant the
poorest Conclusion, should be thought sufficient to give authority to
Conclusions in Divinity, the Supreme Empress of Sciences. But I see what it is
that is usually pleaded, and with your leave I will a little consider of it.

It is given out, that Christian meetings have such an assistance of God, and
his blessed Spirit, that let their persons be what they will they may assure
themselves against all possibility of mistaking; and this is that they say,
which to this way of ending Controversies, which in all other Sciences is so
contemptible, gives a determining to Theological Disputes of so great
Authority. And this music of the Spirit is so pleasing, that it has taken the
Reformed Party too; For with them likewise all things at length end in the
Spirit; but with this difference, that those of Rome confine the Spirit to the
Bishops and Counsels of Rome, but the Protestant enlarges this working of the
Spirit, and makes it the Director of private meditations. I should doubtless do
great injury to the goodness of God, if I should deny the sufficient assistance
of God to the whose world, to preserve them both from sin in their Actions, and
damnable errors in their opinions; much more should I do it, if I denied it to
the Church of God; but this assistance of God may very well be, and yet men may
fall into sin and errors. St. Paul preaching to the Gentiles, tells them that
God was with them in so palpable a manner, that even by groping they might have
found him, yet both he and we know what the Gentiles did. Christ has promised
his perpetual assistance to his Church; but has he left any Prophecy, that
the Church should perpetually adhere to him? if any man think he has, it is
his part to inform us, where this Prophesy is to be found. That matters may go
well with men, two things must concur, the assistance of God to men, and the
adherence of men to God; if either of these be deficient, there will be little
good done. Now the first of these is never deficient, but the second is very
often; so that the Promise of Christ's perpetual presence made unto the Church,
infers not at all any presumption of Infallibility. As for that term of Spirit
which is so much taken up, to open the danger that lurks under it, we must a
little distinguish upon the Word. This term [ Spirit of God,] either signifies
the third Person in the blessed Trinity, or else the wonderful power of
Miracles, of Tongues, of Healing, etc, which was given to the Apostles, and
other of the Primitive Christians, at the first preaching of the Gospel, but
both these meanings are strangers to our purpose; The Spirit of God, as it
concerns the Question here in hand, signifies either something within us, or
something without us; Without us, it signifies the written Word, recorded in
the Books of the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, which are metonymically
called the Spirit, because the Holy Ghost spoke those things by their mouths
when they lived, and now speaks unto us by their pens when they are dead. If
you please to receive it, this alone is left as Christ's Vicar in his absence,
to give us directions both in our actions and opinions; he that tells you of
another Spirit in the Church to direct you in your way, may as well tell you a
tale of a Puck, or a walking Spirit in the Churchyard. But that this Spirit
speaking without us may be beneficial to us, oportet aliquid intus esse, there
must be something within us, which also we call the Spirit; and this is
twofold; For either it signifies a secret Illapse, or supernatural Influence of
God upon the hearts of men, by which he is supposed inwardly, to incline,
inform, and direct men in their ways, and wills, and to preserve them from sin
and mistake; or else it signifies that in us, which is opposed against the
flesh, and which denominates us spiritual men, and by which we are said to walk
according to the Spirit; that which St. Paul means, when he tells us, The Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, (Romans 7.) so that
we may not do what we list. Now of these two, the former it is, which the
Church seems to appeal unto in de ermining Controversies by way of Counsel: But
to this I have little to say. First, Because I know not whether there be any
such thing yea, or no. Secondly Because experience shows, that the pretense of
the Spirit in this sense is very dangerous, as being next at hand to give
countenance to imposture and abuse: which is a thing sufficiently seen, and
acknowledged both by the Papist and Protestant Party; as it appears by this,
that though both pretend unto it, yet both upbraid each other with the pretense
of it. But the Spirit in the second sense, is that I contend for; and this is
nothing but the Reason illuminated by Revelation out of the written Word. For
when the Mind and Spirit humbly conform and submit to the written Will of God,
then you are properly said to have the Spirit of God, and to walk according to
the Spirit, not according to the Flesh. This alone is that Spirit which
preserves us from straying from the Truth; For he indeed that has the Spirit,
errs not at all, or if he do, it is with as little hazard and danger as may be;
which is the highest point of Infallibility, which either private Persons or
Churches can arrive unto. Yet would I not have you to conceive that I deny that
at this day the Holy Ghost communicates himself to any in this secret and
supernatural manner, as in foregoing times He had been wont to do; indeed my
own many uncleanness are sufficient reasons to hinder that good Spirit to
participate himself unto me, after that manner. The Holy Ghost was pleased to
come down like a Dove; Veniunt ad candida tecta Columbae. Accipiet nullas
sordida Turris Aves. Now it is no reason to conclude the Holy Ghost imparts
himself in this manner to none, because he has not done that favor unto me.
But thus much I will say, that the benefit of that sacred Influence is confined
to those happy Souls in whom it is, and cannot extend it self to the Church in
public; And if any Catholic except against you for saying so, warrant your
self and me out of Aquinas, whose words are these, Innititur fidei natura
revelationi Apostolis and Prophetis factae, qui Canonicos Libros scripserunt,
non autem Revelationi, siqua fuit, aliis Doctoribus factae. It being granted
then, that Churches can err, it remains then in the second place, to consider
how far they may err; I answer for Churches as I did before for private
Persons, Churches may err in Fundamentals if they list, for they may be
heretical, for Churches may be wicked, they may be Idolaters, and why then not
heretical? Is Heresy a more dangerous thing than Idolatry? For whereas it is
pleaded, that Churches cannot fall into Heresy, because of that promise of our
Savior, That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church, is but
out of mistake of the meaning of that place; and indeed I have often mused how
so plain a place could so long and so generally be misconstrued: To secure you
therefore, that you be not abused with these words hereafter, (for they are
often quoted to prove the Churches Infallibility) I shall endeavor to give you
the natural meaning of them, for (...), the Gates of Hell, is an Hebraisme; for
in the Hebrew Expression, the Gates of a thing signifies the thing it self, as
the gates of Sion, Sion it self, and by the same proportion the gates of Hell
signifies Hell it self: Now (...) which we English Hell, as in no place of
Scripture it signifies Heresy, so very frequently in Scripture it signifies
Death, or rather the state of the dead, and indifferently applied to good and
bad; Let us then take the Word in that meaning, for what greater means can we
have to warrant the signification of a Scripture word, than the general meaning
of it in Scripture? So that when our Savior spoke these words, he made no
promise to the Church of persevering in the Truth, but to those that did
persevere in the Truth he made a promise of victory against death and hell; And
what he there says, sounds to no other purpose, but this, that those who shall
continue his, although they die yet death shall not have the Dominion over them;
but the time shall come, that the bands of Death shall be broken; and as Christ
is risen, so shall they that are his rise again to Immortality: For any help
therefore that this Text affords, Churches may err in Fundamentals. But to
speak the Truth, I much wonder, not only how any Churches, but how any private
man, that is careful to know and follow the Truth, can err in Fundamentals: For
since it is most certain, that the Scripture contains at least the Fundamental
Parts of Christian Faith, how is it possible* that any Man, that is careful to
study and believe the Scripture, should be ignorant of any necessary part of
his Faith? Now whether the Church of Rome err in Fundamentals, yea or no? To
answer this, I must crave leave to use this Distinction; To err in
Fundamentals, is either to be ignorant of, or deny something to be fundamental
that is, or to entertain something for Fundamental, which is not. In the first
sense, the Church of Rome, entertaining the Scriptures as she does, cannot
possibly be ignorant of any principal part of Christian Faith; all her error
is, in entertaining in her self, and obtruding upon others, a multitude of
things for Fundamentals, which no way concern our Faith at all: Now how
dangerous it is thus to do, except I know whether she did this willingly or
wittingly, yea or no, is not easy to define: If willingly she does it; it is
certainly high and damnable presumption, if ignorantly, I know not what mercies
God has in store for them that sin not out of malicious wickedness, Now
concerning the merriment newly started; I mean the requiring of a Catalogue of
Fundamentals, I need to answer no more, but what Abraham tells the rich man in
Hell, Habent Mosen and Prophetas, They have Moses, and the Prophets, the
Apostles, and the Evangelists, let them seek them there; for if they find them
not there, in vain shall they seek them in all the World besides. But yet to
come a little nearer to the Particulars; If the Church of Rome would needs know
what is Fundamental, in our conceit, and what not, the Answer, as far as my
self in Person am concerned in the Business, shall be no other than this; Let
her observe what Points they are, wherein we agree with her, and let her think,
if she please, that we account of them as Fundamentals, especially if they be
in the Scriptures; and on the other hand, let her mark in what Points we refuse
Communion with her, and let her assure her self, we esteem those as no
Fundamentals. If she desire a List and Catalogue made of all those, she is at
leisure enough, for ought I know, to do it her self.

Last of all, Concerning the imputation of Rebellion and Schism against
Church Authority, with which your Catholic Disputant meant to affright you;
all that is but merely Powder without Shot, and can never hurt you; For since
it has been sufficiently evidenced unto us, that the Church of Rome has
adulterated the Truth of God, by mixing with it sundry Inventions of her own;
it was the Conscience of our duty to God, that made us to separate: For where
the Truth of God does once suffer, there Union is Conspiracy, Authority is but
Tyranny, and Churches are but Routs; And suppose we, that we mistook, and made
our Separation upon Error, the Church of Rome being right in all her Ways,
though we think otherwise, yet could not this much prejudice us; For, it is
Schism upon wilfulness that brings danger with it, Schism upon mistake, and
Schism upon just occasion, has in it self little hurt, if any at all.

SIR,
I Return you more than I thought, or you expected; yet less than the Argument
required: If you shall favor me so much as to carefully read what I have
carefully written, you shall find (at least in those Points you occasioned me
to touch upon) sufficient ground to plant your self strongly against all
Discourse of the Romish Corner-creepers, which they use for the Seducing of
unstable Souls. Be it much or little that I have done, I require no other
reward than the continuance of your good Affection to,

Your SERVANT, whom you know.


A PARAPHRASE ON S. Matthew's Gospel.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge, etc.

Printed, 1677.

A PARAPHRASE on St. Matthews Gospel. CHAP. XII.
Scholar. SIR,

I Thank you for the pains you have taken in facilitating to my Understanding
the scope and purpose of the XI. of St. Matthew: If I might not be too
troublesome to you, I would also desire you to take the like pains with me in
the Twelfth.


Master. I shall, with all my heart; provided that you will make your
Objections, as they rise within you; for peradventure, I may think you
understand that which you do not, and not understand that which you do, and so
lose my Labor.


Scholar. I shall obey you readily, and therefore to begin with the beginning
of the Chapter; I pray, Sir, how is it said, 1. that, At that time, Jesus went
through the Corn, with his Disciples? when in the very next Chapter before, it
is said, That he sent all his Disciples away from him.


Master. By these Words, at that time, is not meant the very next immediate
Instant of time, to that, when he spoke the last words going before; but such a
convenient portion of time, wherein the twelve Disciples might have gone about
those parts, whereunto they were sent, and returned back again: So St. Matthew,
having spoken newly of Christ's dwelling in Nazareth, when he was a Child of
about two years old, immediately subjoyns, In those days came John the Baptist,
as if John had come within some few days after his coming into Nazareth, when
we know there passed eight and twenty years between.


Scholar. I believe it as you say, and therefore shall pass to that which does
more trouble me, and that is, What that was, which the Disciples did, which was
not lawful on the Sabbath day.


Master. How come you to be troubled at that? Is it not said in plain Terms,
they plucked the Ears of Corn, and did eat them. Why should not you think that
this was their fault?


Scholar. I shall tell you why: To my thinking, there are three things said, 1.
That they went through the Corn. 2. That they plucked the Ears. 3. That they
eat them. Now whether all these or one of these was their Fault, I cannot tell;
and I shall tell you the Reason of my doubt.

First, It is true that their very Walking might have been their fault, because
it was not lawful on the Sabbath, to walk above the space of two thousand
Cubits, and we know not how far Christ and the Disciples might have come that
day; But yet methinks, if that had been it, they should have reproved Christ as
well as his Disciples, because it is very likely they walked the one as much and
as far as the other.

Secondly, It is true, that their plucking the Ears of Corn might have been
their fault, but yet methinks it should not, in regard the Law is so clear, in
the 23. Deuteronomy. 25. When thou come into the standing Corn of thy Neighbor,
then thou may pluck the Ears with thine hand, but thou shall not move a
Sickle unto thy Neighbors standing Corn. And, truly why that, which is so
plainly lawful at another time, should be unlawful on the Sabbath (being it is
so far from being any kind of labor or servile work) I cannot imagine.

3. It Is true, that they did eat them, and I cannot see what fault there is in
that, unless you can show me.


Mast. And peradventure I shall show you more in that than you thought on. It
is true that the general consent of Expositors runs on their plucking the Ears
upon the Sabbath Day, as being the thing condemned by the Pharisees for an
unlawful thing: But I think they would be much troubled to prove it. The custom
and manner of the Jews, (especially since the times of the Macchabees) being to
allow Acts of greater labor and pain than the plucking of an Ear, namely,
waging War against their Enemies, the Traveling of Carryers and Merchants,
with such others, even on the Sabbath Day. I should rather incline to think,
that their Fault was Eating; especially if that be true, which the very Heathen
Poets tax and scoff them so with, namely, their Sabbath-Fasts. For if all
things be well considered, I believe there will more be said for this, than for
the other Crime. And if a man will go no further than that Answer which our
Savior makes for them, he he shall find ground enough to be of this opinion.
For, if the pretended fault had been working or laboring, our Savior Christ
might have easily laid his Answer upon Joshua, or upon many others, who did
greater work than this upon the Sabbath. But laying it as he does upon David,
and upon his Eating that which was forbidden: He seems to Answer one unlawful
Eating with another, when Necessity was a sufficient dispensation for both. I
do not oblige you to believe this as a positive Truth, but only tell you that
as much may be said for the one as the other; but if you would be sure to know
what their fault was, you had best put them both together and you will not miss.


Scholar. I thank you for this Light, I wish you could give me as good in my
next Objection.


Master. I shall do my best, what is that I pray?


Scholar. Our Savior says, in the third Verse of this Chap. that David did
eat of the Shewbread, and they that were with him; and the Holy Ghost says, 1 Samuel 21. 1 where this History is recorded, That there was no man with him, for
it is said there, that Ahimelech the Priest was afraid at the meeting of David,
and said unto him, Why art Thou alone, and why is no man with Thee? How shall I
reconcile this Contradiction to my Thinking?


Master. The truth is, The Words of our Savior in St. Matthew, are too plain
and evident, than to admit of any other Construction, but that there were some
other men with David; and if they could admit of it, yet St. Mark would put all
out of doubt, for he says expressly, that, David did eat the Shewbread, and
gave it to them that were with him, Mark. 2. 26. And therefore, when the Priest
says, that there was no man with him in Samuel, it is best to understand that
of no man in sight, because, peradventure, David might have caused them to
withdraw for the present, till he had got relief from the Priest, both for
himself and them. And this, I conceive the best* Satisfaction unto that doubt.


Scholar. I think it not improbable; but before I leave this story of David, I
pray, tell me how it comes to pass, that our Savior says, David entered into
the House of God, in v. 4. of this Chap. when as yet the House of God was not
built, ( i. e.) when as yet there was no Temple.


Master. It was well Objected, and the Answer to be given is this: That our
Savior calls that place where the Tabernacle then was, The House of God, which
afterward became the proper appellation of the Temple.


Scholar. It is very likely: Now if you please, let us pass from this Answer
concerning David, to that concerning the Priests, in the 5th. V. where Christ
says, That the Priests on the Sabbath Day, profane the Sabbath, and are
blameless: What does he mean by that?


Master. In those words, our Savior uses another Argument, in behalf of his
Disciples; which they call an Argument from the less to the greater, to justify
their Plucking and their Eating on the Sabbath Day. Amongst the Jews, the Law
of the Sabbath was ever so to be interpreted, as that it hindered not the Works
of the Temple; and therefore it was a kind of Rule in the Jewish Law, that in
the Temple there was no Sabbath. From this submission of the Law of the Sabbath
to the works of the Temple; Our Savior argues to that, which is greater than
it, The works of a Prophet, who was above a Priest: His Answer is in brief
this; The Priests, by their works in the Temple upon the Sabbath, were not
thought to profane the Sabbath; and therefore, there is less reason that my
Disciples, who are Prophets, should be thought to profane it, in doing of that
which is a less work than theirs; And that this is the Scope of his Reply, will
appear by that which follows, when he says, That in this place, there is One
greater than the Temple, in the 6th Verse; For, the truth is, every Prophet was
greater than the Temple, that is, he was obliged in no case to the Laws and
Customs of the Temple; but might sacrifice out of it, when he pleased, as
appears in the practice of Eliah. And whereas it may be Objected, That the
Priestly Function, on the Sabbath, could not be performed without the Labor of
Offering, but the Prophetical Function of the Disciples might be performed on
the Sabbath, without plucking ears and eating: The answer is, that both our
Savior and his Disciples were so intent upon their Prophetical Employment,
that, as elsewhere, they forgot to take Bread, So here, they either forgot, or
had no time for the provision of victuals before the Sabbath, whereon to feed
on the Sabbath.


Scholar. I apprehend your meaning, and desire you to make the force of Christ's
third Argument as evident unto me, which follows in the seventh Verse, where he
says, But if ye had known what this means; I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.


Master. His meaning is no more but this, That when two Laws seem to clash so
against one another, that both cannot be kept; the better is to be observed,
and the worse omitted; The Law which wills us to do good to all men, and to
further them in the means of their Salvation, which to a Christian is a Law
Moral, never to be omitted; is better than the Law which wills us not to work
or eat upon the Sabbath, which is only a Law Ritual: Christ could not intend
to teach, and the Disciples intend to prepare and fit the minds of the people
to be taught, and withal intend the preparing of such things, as were
requisite to the strict observation of the Sabbath; And therefore in Equity,
the Law of the Sabbath ought to give place to the Law of Instructing the World
in the ways of Happiness, and not to have justled with it.


Schol. I conceive this Argument, but yet methinks, there follows somewhat like
a Reason, which I do not yet conceive, in the next verse; For the Son of Man is
Lord even of the Sabbath; Pray show me what the meaning is of that.


Master. They that by the [ Son of Man] here, understand Christ, or the
Messiah, do mistake; for in that acceptance of the Words, the Reason does not
hold: for if Christ had meant only, that he as the Messiah, was Lord of the
Sabbath, and so could abrogate it at his pleasure, then what needed all the
three other Arguments, that went before? By the [ Son of Man] therefore is to
be understood every common ordinary man, as appears most evidently by that of
St. Mark 2. 27. The Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath.
Besides, at this time, Christ neither had preached, nor would have others to
preach, that He was the Messiah; and a good while after this, as you may see in
Matthew. 16. 20. He charged, that they should tell it no man, etc. The sense
therefore of the words, is this: That which is ordained for another thing,
ought to give place to that thing, for which it is ordained: But the Sabbath
was ordained for Man, every Man; therefore it ought to give place unto Him;
namely, when a thing so nearly concerning Man, as his Salvation, steppeth in
between. For, to be [ Lord of the Sabbath] is, to dispose and order the Sabbath
unto his own use, and to have a Right so to order, and dispose it.


Scholar. I thank you for the pains: and because I have put you to so much
already, I shall trouble you with nothing concerning the next Story of the man
which had the withered hand, because, I think I do well enough understand it;
only, let me desire you to give me your opinion, why, when our Savior Christ
had healed him, and diverse other men, of their diseases: It is added in the
16th verse of this Chapter, And he charged them; that they should not make him
known?


Master. Truly, that which was the cause of his secess, or his withdrawing
himself from them, in the Verse before may very well be conceived the cause
also of this enjoined silence; namely, that He might be fafer from all
violence, and force. But, they which say, that He did it out of charity to
those Pharisees who did seek his life, say not amiss: as Origin reports of
Aristotle, that he withdrew himself from Athens, not for his own sake; but for
the Athenians sake, lest he should give them an occasion of committing another
murder, after the murder of Socrates. Hitherto, as yet, this Zeal and
endeavors of the Pharisees to maintain the Traditions of their Elders, and the
Religion of their Fathers, might seem somewhat excusable; and therefore, Christ
adding Miracle to Miracle, did wait for their repentance and amendment: in the
mean time, preventing them by escapes, and concealing of himself, from doing
him any violence or mischief, till such time, as that, resisting the Light and
Testimony of their own Conscience (as some of them did, very shortly after, as
we shall see anon) they had more deservedly drawn upon themselves, the guilt of
that innocent blood, which afterward fell upon their heads: So, that when
Christ, charged them that they should not make Him known; He meant, only that
they should not discover where He was, that so with the more silence, and less
opposition, He might do the business of his Father: and this sense is agreeable
to that which follows out of the Prophet Isaiah, in the 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21
Verses.


Schol. I take it to be so indeed: but in these words out of Isaiah, there is
somewhat which does much trouble me how to understand; and that is, the latter
part of the 20. verse; where it is said, Till he send forth Judgment unto
Victory: Pray, what do you take to be the meaning of those words?


Mast. I shall run through the whole words of the Prophet, and by that you will
better understand that part. These words of the Prophet Isaiah are produced by
St. Matthew. for a confirmation of that Meekness, Humility, Quietness and
Silence, with which the great business of our Salvation was to be dispatched:
For, by these words [ I will put my Spirit on Him] is understood the Spirit of
Meekness, Gentleness and Humility, which was emblem'd in the Dove, when it came
upon him; and by those words [ and he shall show Judgment unto the Gentiles] is
understood the preaching of the Christian Law; and therefore, if you mark it in
the 42 of Isaiah, and the 4th verse, it is added, as an explication of the word
[ Judgment] going before; And the Isles shall wait for his Law. When He comes
to preach this Law, or, to show forth this Judgment, says the Prophet, He
shall not strive, nor cry; that is, He shall discover no sign of anger, or
discomposure in his mind; neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets,
says the Prophet; that is, He shall cause no Tumult or popular Hubbub; He
shall not expose the vices of Men to the knowledge and censure of the World, of
whom He has but the least Hope that they will amend. A bruised Reed shall he
not break, says the Prophet; that is, the mind which is afflicted, He shall
not afflict more: and the smoking flax shall he not quench; that is, where he
does but see a little smoke, He will look for some fire; He will so comply with
the weaknesses and infirmities of all Mankind, that he will not be out of hope
to cherish them up into Virtues. And all this he will do, says the Prophet,
Till he send out Judgment unto Victory; of which words, whatsoever the sense or
meaning be, this is plain, that they contain the success or event of that
Meekness, Gentleness, and Quietness, which went before. Now, taking it for
granted, that there is nothing left out in these words, as St. Jerome does
suspect, I can imagine but two senses that can be put upon them: and those two
senses arise out of the two several acceptations of the word [ Judgment.] For,
First, If by [ Judgment] in this place, be meant the same, which was meant by [
Judgment] in the 18th verse, going before; then the sense of the words is this;
He shall preach the Christian Law, with all Meekness and Mildness, maugre all
opposition and malice of those that do oppugn it, till that Law have prevailed,
or gotten the victory; that is, till the greatest part of all the World embrace
it: and this sense is no improper sense, if we look no further. But then,
Secondly, If by [ Judgment] be meant, the disceptation, or discussion of a
Cause (in which sense it is often taken in the Scriptures) then the meaning of
the words is this; He shall use so much Meekness and Gentleness, in working
upon the minds of all Men in the World, that, let any Man sit in Judgment upon
that which he has done, and he shall carry the Cause, or bear away the
Victory. To this purpose says the Psalmist of God, that, He is clear when he
is judged, Psalm. 51. 6. And in this sense God says of himself, O ye men of
Judah, judge ye, I pray you, between my Vmeyard and Me, Isa. 5. 3. And in this
Judgment Christ got the Victory, when with all Patience and Long-sufferance,
with all Gentleness and Meekness, He endured the perverse and crooked
dispositions of the People of the Jews, and spared no Time or Labor to reform
them, if they would have hearkened unto him.


Sch. Sir, I confess there is much reason in what you say, but methinks it
seems a little strained sense, to be put upon those words, as you read them,
Till he shall send forth Judgment; for according to your sense, we should read
them thus, at least, Till he shall carry away the Judgment with Victory, or, to
Victory.


Mast. You have judged very right, and so indeed should we read them; For the
word (...), which we render [ shall send forth] is of the same signification
with (...), which does signify [ to carry away.] But you must bear with more
faults in the Translation of your Testament than this, and I hope you will bear
with me, if I tell you plainly of them when I meet with them.


Sch. I beseech you do, for though I have a very great opinion of those Men who
did translate the Testament; yet I would be loath to be a loser by my reverence.
But if you please, I will proceed in framing my Objections.


Mast. You shall not need, for I foresee whither you are driving, even toward
the great Scruple that affrights the World, the Sin against the Holy Ghost, of
which there is mention in this Chapter, upon the occasion of Christ's healing of
the blind and dumb man, possessed of the Devil, in the 22 Verse of this Chapter.


Sch. I was indeed, and therefore if you please, let us come unto that Story.


Mast. With all my heart; And first, I must let you know, that so soon as the
Pharisees saw that great Miracle which Christ had done; they said, that he
casts out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils, in the 24th verse of
this Chapter; and truly this was no unusual practice amongst the Sorcerers and
Magicians, as is evident by many of the ancient Poets: when they could not
prevail any other way, to use the help of the great and chiefest Devil (whose
name they would threaten him to publish, if he did not help them) to expel, or
cast out other less Devils that possessed Men; In Iamblichus there is mention
of that Form, in which they threatened him; and Porphiry says, that his name was
Serapis. But, our Savior sufficiently refuteth that calumny, several ways.
First, By a common and known Axiom amongst themselves, Every Kingdom divided,
etc. and the meaning thereof is this; That the Devils are wise, there is no
question: but they that are wise, will rather seek to establish Themselves and
their own Power, which is done by Concord and Agreement, than to distract and
dislocate it, which is done by Faction and Division; therefore it is not likely
that the Devils will so differ and disagree, as the one to expel the other, as
they would persuade the World. Secondly, By Retortion, in these words, If I by
Beelzebub do cast out Devils, by whom do your children cast them out? verse. 27.
And the force of Christ's Argument is this: In a like Cause, Equity will that
men give a like judgment; when your Disciples do cast out Devils, do not you
think that they cast them out by a divine Power? Therefore so should you even
think of me, if you thought aright: But I should take this to be an Ironie
rather.


Sch. I consess I did partly conceive the Scope of these two Arguments before,
but that which follows, I do not understand, But if I cast out Devils by the
Spirit of God, then is the Kingdom of God come unto you: Pray make me
understand it, that is, First, What is meant by the [ Kingdom of God?]
Secondly, What is the meaning of this Consequence, If I by the Spirit of God
cast out Devils, then is the Kingdom of God come unto you, For I see not how it
follows.


Mast. By the Kingdom of God is meant the Time of the Messiah's being in the
World, as in Dan. 4. 29. and Dan. 7. 14. And the Consequence there inferred, is
this, That as God, by sundry Works and Miracles, gave his people of Israel a
Sign of their instant Deliverance out of Egypt; So the great Miracles of
Christ, were ordained by him, to be a Sign unto the World of a greater
Deliverance, which was now working for them; and therefore where they saw the
one, they should expect the other.


Sch. I believe you have guessed right; But what say you to the Verse which
follows, Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his
Goods, etc. It looks like another Argument, which Christ uses in his own
defense against this Calumny of the Pharisees, but I confess, I do not yet
apprehend it.


Mast. It is not unlikely, but anon you will. This is indeed a third Argument
of Christ's, and it touches to the quick; for whereas his other two served
only to convince certain men, this comes to the very thing it self, and quite
overthrows it: There have been, says Christ, who have cast out Devils through
Beelzebub: it may be so, but this has been without any harm or loss, from the
one unto the other; it has not come to spoiling of Goods, to extirpate out of
the minds of men any of their sins, but rather to increase them: this has been
nothing but a mere collusion and cheat: But when I cast out Devils, you may see
I spoil them to the purpose, I rob them of their power; for, I plant in the
minds of men such Doctrine, as will admit of no vice and wickedness to be near
it, (wherein the Power of the Devil does consist) and therefore you may well
imagine, that I am in good earnest; for, I bind him and spoil him; which no one
Devil ever yet did unto another, or ever will.


Schol. I shall desire to put you to no more trouble in this Verse: If you
please, let us pass unto the next.


Mast. As I take it, that is this; He that is not with me, is against me; and
he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad.


Schol. Truly, as the words stand alone, I should not trouble you at all with
them, for to my thinking, they are easy enough; but, as they follow upon what
went before, I see not what our Savior Christ might intend by them.


Mast. Having declared himself to be so far from casting out Devils in the name
of Beelzebub, that He labored to bind even Beelzebub himself, and to spoil him
of all his power, which he exercised in the hearts of wicked men; He carries
the consideration of this Enmity between the Devil and Himself to such a
height, as that He will not admit of any Neutrality, in any other Man;
professing, that whosoever is not the Devil's enemy, is his; according to that
Axiom of the Wars, Medii habentur pro Hostibus: All indifferent men are
Enemies. And if all this be not enough to show how far He was from operating by
the help of Satan, surely, nothing can be. And therefore having said this,
conceiving he had said as much as Man could say, He adds: Wherefore I say unto
you, (verse. 31.) that is, seeing it is evident by these Reasons and Arguments,
that all the Signs and Miracles which I do, I do by the Power of God, and not
by the help of the Devil: Consider what a wretched punishment you draw upon
your selves, that thus do slander and belly me. This Connection St. Mark does
teach us plainly, Chapter 3. 30. where he says: Because they said, He has an
unclean Spirit. And yet it is to be considered, that our Savior Christ
proceeds not merely upon the strength of his own Arguments; but as knowing
their Thoughts, as St. Matthew tells us, in the 2^ th verse of this Chapter,
that is, He saw in unto them, and He knew that They verily believed, that the
Miracle which he wrought, was wrought by the Power of God; but yet he saw, that
they would rather invent any Lie, or asperse him with any slander (though they
knew it well enough to be a Lie and slander) then to suffer the People to
forsake their Chair, and to follow Christ.


Schol. I thank you, Sir, for this pains which you have taken, to prepare me
for the understanding of my great Doubt, which now methinks, I begin to have a
little glimpse of, but desire you to give me better Light.


Mast. I shall: But first, I would gladly know what you conceive of those
words, in the 31. verse. All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto
men; because, by understanding of what sin shall be forgiven, you will the more
easily understand me, when I tell you, what manner of sin shall not.


Schol. Why Sir, I understand any manner of sin whatsoever: and I understand
the sin of the Holy Ghost, to be the only sin which shall never be forgiven.


Mast. I did fear as much, and therefore I did ask you; But you must know that
you are much mistaken, both in the one and in the other opinion; For First, It
is to be considered, that Christ speaks not of all sin, but of that sin, which
is Blasphemy or Calumny, (for there are many other sins which will never be
forgiven, as well as the sin against the Holy Ghost,) And therefore in the next
Verse he says, Whosoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, that is,
whosoever slandereth or calumniateth any other man, it shall be forgiven him;
And in those words he expounds what he means by Sin and Blasphemy. Secondly,
It is to be considered, that when he says, All manner of Sin and Blasphemy
shall be forgiven, there is an Hebraism in those words, which is often met
withal in Scripture; as in the 5 Chap. of St. Matthew, Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, but my Words shall not pass away; that is, Heaven and Earth shall
sooner pass away, than my words shall pass away; (and so St. Luke reads them)
not that Heaven and Earth shall ever pass away, but that, if it were possible,
they should sooner pass away than his Word shall. The meaning therefore of the
words is only this, All manner of Calumnies and Slanders, are heavy sins, and
shall hardly be forgiven to those that do commit them; but they will be more
easily forgiven, than that Calumny, which he knows to be a Calumny, who does
commit it: and this Christ calls Blaspheming of the Holy Ghost; which was the
Case of these Pharisees, who calumniated the Miracle which our Savior wrought,
as proceeding from the Devil, which their own Conscience told them, issued from
the Holy Spirit of God.


Sch. I confess, Sir, this is very plain and easy; and I pray, proceed to the
33. verse. Either make the Tree good, and his Fruit good, etc. says Christ:
The dependence of those words, is this: You say, I work by the Devil, says
Christ: But you do not see any other work of mine, besides this Miracle, which
looks like a work of the Devil: You see, I go about doing good; I exhort People
to Repentance, I show them the way to Heaven: These are no works which the
Devils use to do: Therefore, either say, that I do all this in the name of
Beelzebub too; or else, acknowledge that I do my Miracles by the Power of God:
for, Men judge of the Quality of the Mind, by the common Actions, or Habits of
their Life, as they do of Trees, by the Fruits which they produce, be they good
or evil. And that this is true, says Christ, you may judge by your own selves:
For, How can ye, being evil, speak good things? says He, ver. 34. That is, you
can never do it. A dissembled and forced Mind will quickly show it self, some
way or other, and will return unto its wonted habit; and therefore, as you may
judge by your selves, that because you speak and do nothing but that which is
evil, therefore* you your selves are evil: So you should judge of Me, that
because you see, I say and do nothing but that which is Good, therefore I am
good; and therefore that Spirit which works in Me is good.


Schol. I apprehend all this; and therefore shall save you the labor of
expounding that which follows, for I see, it all tends to the same end and
scope; only, methinks I am much straightened in my mind, about the 36th verse,
which forbids all idle words: for, if we must give account of every one such,
God be merciful unto me, and to many thousand more; Pray, make me to understand
the full latitude of this Commination of Christ.


Mast. Whatsoever is meant by this idle Word here, you may be sure it has
reference to that Word which the Pharisees had spoke of Christ, when they said,
He cast out Devils in the name of Beelzebub, for Christ has not done with this
Calumny of theirs yet; but continues his discourse upon it, till the 38. Verse
of this Chapter; Now considering this [ Idle Word] in that reference, it is
most reasonable to expound it, not of every Word which a man speaks, of which
there is no profit, or which is good for naught, (for if that Exposition should
be true, which God forbid, yet it were not pertinent,) but of such a Word,
wherein there is no Truth; For by Idle, and Vain, in holy Scripture, is often
understood that which is false: And so to take the Name of God in Vain, in the
Commandments, is to swear falsely: So that the Scope of Christ in those Words
is this, Do you think that you shall escape for this horrid Calumny which you
have cast upon me, knowing it to be a Calumny in your own hearts? I tell you
nay; for no man shall escape in the day of Judgment, for calumniating another
man falsely, though he do not know that that Calumny is false; and therefore
much less shall you. By which we may learn, if not to avoid all idle Words,
(which to the nature and education of man is almost quite impossible,) yet to
beware of calumniating persons, not only when we know that Calumny is false,
(which doubtless is a very grievous sin) but when we are not evidently
ascertained that the thing is true. And therefore it is the special Office of a
good Christian, to refrain his Tongue altogether in that Point, for it is a
rare thing for a man to give himself the liberty, to repeat that of another
which is false, and not to wish it true.


Sch. I thank you for this Satisfaction, and by Gods help shall endeavor to
frame my Life and Conversation accordingly; for I perceive it is a Sin, which
the World takes little notice of; though indeed it be the destruction of
Charity, without which no man is a Christian: For so they avoid doing of that
which is notoriously Evil, they care not what they say of any man. Now if you
please, we will proceed to that which follows, I pray, what do the Scribes and
Pharisees mean to desire a Sign from Christ, in the 31th Verse of this Chapter,
who had seen so many before; for, methinks it seems a very impertinent Request.


Mast. Some Interpreters are of opinion that these Scribes and Pharisees were
not the same, who saw those late Miracles which our Savior did; and they
ground their opinion upon Luke 11. 16. where it is said, That others tempted
him, seeking a Sign from Heaven; But, upon examination, that opinion will not
hold. The better answer is, that they did not desire a bare sign, or a Miracle,
of which they had seen enough already; but they desired a Sign from Heaven (as
St. Luke speaks) that is, that God by some strange Prodigy there, should
declare him to be a Prophet sent from him, if so be he were so indeed: For, as
for those Miracles which he did on Earth, they were not satisfied with them, as
apprehending them pendulous between two several Powers; for as they they might
come from God, so they might come from the Devil; but, in Heaven they thought
the Devil had no Power.


Schol. I like your reason well; but, I pray, what does Christ mean by that
answer which he gives to their request in the 39, 40, 41, and 42 verses for I
do not understand it perfectly?


Mast. The meaning of His Answer is this; You would have a Sign from Heaven,
and then you will believe me: God, that will omit no occasion to leave you
unexcusable, has given you Signs enough, here upon Earth; but he is not bound
to satisfy your humors, and give them where and when you would have them, he
knows these which you have seen are sufficient to persuade Belief, if that your
Avarice, and Profit, and Places which you hold in the present Jewish State, did
not make you seek all Occasions and Cloaks for your Incredulity: And therefore,
if those Signs which I have done on Earth, will not serve you; you shall have
none from Heaven, but if you will, you shall have one from under the Earth,
even the Sign of the Prophet Jonas, and that Sign not a Sign to convert you,
who after so many Signs and Miracles will not be converted; but a Sign of my
Innocence, and your Malice, which will persecute me even unto the death, for
all that Good which I have done amongst you.


Sch. By this which you have said, I do not only perceive the Scope and Purport
of Christ's Answer, which he gives them; but the Drift of Verse 41 and 42 also,
wherein he complains, That they who had had so many Signs done amongst them,
never would believe; whereas those of Nineveh, and the Queen of the South,
without any Sign or Miracle* wrought, either by Jonas, or Solomon, believed all
that was told them. But, I pray, how comes the next Discourse in, concerning
the unclean Spirit going out of a man, in the 43 Verse? And what is the Scope
and Purport of that Discourse?


Mast. It is not improbable, That our Savior Christ, being much afflicted with
the evil and incredulous hearts of the people of the Jews, takes a kind of
Survey of that whole Nation, even from the time wherein they were first led
away captive into Babylon, to the time when they were utterly destroyed by
Titus. Before their Captivity, they were full of all manner of Wickedness, as
appears by the Prophets; Under their Captivity, they were a little reclaimed,
and upon that Amendment, were brought back again: But then after their Return,
in the times not long before our Saviors coming, they fell into such Vices, as
were abominable, even in the Heathens themselves, as is manifest in Story; and
to shut up all, added thereunto the Contempt of their own Messiah, sent amongst
them with so much power, and yet with so much meekness, as man never came:
Whereupon being justly forsaken of God, whom they had thus forsook, they became
the most wretched and vicious people in the World, as Josephus does describe
them to be, about their latter times; And this Contemplation of their miserable
Condition, our Savior seems to insinuate, even unto themselves, in this kind
of Parable of the unclean Spirit going out of a man, and returning back again.
Of which, If that which I have said be not the Occasion, (as I do not avow, but
only offer it unto you) yet certainly this is the sense, That those men, who
have once left and forsaken the vicious courses of their carnal life, if they
ever relapse, and fall back again into them; all their latter sins are far more
sinful than their former; Almighty God justly revenging the Contempt of that
Grace, which he has offered to them, by giving them up to all manner of
wickedness and uncleanness.


Sch. I think you have guessed right, and to the purpose; But there are some
terms, and phrases in this Parable or Story, or whatsoever you will call it,
which I do not understand as, First I pray what do you think Christ means by
walking through dry places, and seeking rest, and finding none.


Mast. Dry and sandy Grounds are no fit places of Habitation, and such kind of
places are all those places where the Devil does abide when he is out of man,
who is only capable of Vice and Sin, wherein the Devil takes pleasure: And the
meaning of Christ is this, That as a man that travels, is wearied with heavy,
sandy, and dry way, more than with green, soft, and pleasant Fields; so the
Devil is not half so well satisfied, when he enters into any other Creature, as
when he enters into Man.


Schol. It may be so indeed but then, why takes he seven Spirits, more wicked
than himself? why is the number of Seven here pitched on, more than any other?


Mast. The Number of Seven is the Number of Perfection, or the signification of
that which, in its own kind, is grown to full maturity, whether it be good or
evil. So St. John calls the Holy Spirit of God the Seven Spirits, Rev. 1. 4.
So the Barren is said to have born Seven, 1 Samuel 2. 5. that is, to have been as
fruitful as any other Woman is, or can be. And therefore when the unclean
Spirit is said to take Seven other Spirits with him, the meaning only is, that
that man becomes perfectly wicked, when that Spirit once returns again, whom
before he had cast out.


Sch. I approve your Exposition of the Word, and think it likely. But I pray
can you guess what business the Virgin, and the Brethren of Christ might have
with him, because the Scripture says They stayed without, to speak with him,
in the 47 Verse of this Chapter; peradventure you may think me curious, and
therefore if Expositors have made no Conjecture thereupon, I will not urge you.


Mast. Truly they have, and I shall not conceal it from you: They do imagine,
that his Mother and his Kindred, having had some Inckling of the Pharisees
conspiring against him, to do him mischief, desired to speak with him in
private, and to contrive some way, to withdraw him out of danger: This will
seem the more probable, if we consider that which St. Mark says, Chap. 3. 21.
That his Friends would fain have laid hold on him, saying, that he was beside
himself; which in all likelihood, they said to make the Pharisees the less
active in contriving any mischief to him, as conceiving him a fitter Subject
for their pity, than their hate; But it seems Christ would not hearken unto
them, nay would not know them, as appears by the three last Verses of this
Chapter, which are so plain and easy, that I dare not suspect your sense, and
apprehension of them.


FINIS.
A TRACT Concerning the Power of the KEYS AND Auricular Confession.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge, etc.

Printed, 1677.

A Tract concerning the Power of the KEYS, and AURICULAR CONFESSION.
IN opening the Point concerning the Doctrine of the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, I will follow those Lines, that Tract, which your self has been
pleased to set me. Yet first, ere I com^ to your particulars, I will discover,
as far as generality will give me leave, what it is which we intend, when we
use this phrase of Speech. At the first appearance, it is plain, the form of
words is not Proper, but Metaphorical. Now some Truth there is in that which
you learnt in the Books of your Minority, from your Aristotle, (...); and
indeed could we but once agree what it is which that Metaphor does intimate,
the greatest part of the Dispute were at an end. The natural way to discover
this, is to see what the Use of Keys, properly taken, is; and after that, what
means they are, which in our endeavors to attain to the Kingdom of Heaven,
have something proportionable to the Use of Keys: and thi^ being once
discovered, there can remain no Question What are the Keys.

Now nothing is more known, than that the only Use of Keys is to Open and Shut,
to admit us Unto, or exclude us from the possession of what we seek. Now since
the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a House, from which all the Sons of Adam,
by Nature are excluded; whatsoever then it is that gives us way, that removes
all Obstacle^ which hinder us from entrance of that House, that certainly must
be understood by the Name of Keys. Now all these means, or whatsoever else it
is which does further us toward the possessing our selves of Eternal Life,
they were all laid down in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, committed by
him fully and first of all to the dispensation of the blessed Apostles, to be
reported by them, or their means, all the World over. So that I think I may
safely lay thus much for the first Ground of the Question betwixt your self and
me, Claves Regni Coelorum sunt Doctrina Evangelii.

Now since Keys are nothing without some hand to manage them, we must in the
second place discover into whose hands they are committed. And for this
purpose, first of all, It must not be denied that principally and properly, (I
might well enough add only, if I listed, but that I spare you) the Hand of God
it is, that manages and applies these Keys; For of God and Christ it is
written, He has the Keys, he opens, and no man shuts; he shuts, and no man
opens. Yet since it has pleased God to use the Ministry of Men, to the saving
of Men, and bringing them into the Kingdom of Heaven; In a secondary sense the
Keys of that Kingdom are said to be put into the hands of Men. In as much as it
has pleased the Wisdom of God, not to use these Keys, at least as far as
concerns the beneficial and opening part, some act of Man not first premised;
for since that Faith in Jesus Christ is the Sum of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and Faith comes not but by hearing, and hearing comes not but by preaching,
and preaching is the act of Men alone, (for God employs not Angels in that
behalf,) It appears that this Preaching, or manifestation of the Doctrine of
the Gospel not performed, the Keys must needs be unprofitable. By the
manifestation of the Gospel of God, I mean not only the labor of the lip, in
expounding, praying, reproving, or the like, but the administration of
Sacraments, the acting (if any thing beyond this is to be acted) whatsoever the
manifestation of the Gospel requires. So that I think I may set down for a
second Ground toward the settling of the Point in question, thus much, That the
managing or application of the Keys, so far forth as men are entrusted with
them, is, The Manifestation of the Doctrine of the Gospel. Thus far have we
opened in general the Substance of the Keys, and the Use of them. I come now to
your Queries.

First, You ask of the quality of the Apostles receiving this Power, whether
they had it as Judges Authoritative, or as Messengers, Declaratative, only to
propound, or denounce? You manifest your self for the former, and Reasons you
bring, such as they be. Your Reasons I shall consider in their place, but I
must first tell you that you ask amiss, for your question is concerning the
whole Power of the Keys, but you answer only of a part, that is, of Sacramental
Absolution only, as if all the Power of the Keys resided there. So that here
you use the Fallacy plurium Interrogationum; And I might well grant you, that
indeed that part were Judicative, but yet contend that all the rest were only
Declarative. To reduce you therefore, I must do with you, as Physicians in some
cases deal with their Patients; ere I can come to purge the humor you are sick
of, I must a little prepare you. The power of the Keys is expressed by the
Learned in three yokes, or pairs of Words.

1. To remit, and to retain. 2. To loose, and to bind. 3. To open, and to shut.
On the one side, to remit, to loose, to open, which is the one half of the
power, agree in one, and signify the same thing; so do the other three, to
retain, to bind, to shut, which contain the other half. To your Question then,
whether the power of the Keys be declarative only, I answer first: For this
latter part or half, it is merely declarative, neither can it be otherwise;
which that you may see with your eyes, I must request you to observe, That all
shutting of the Kingdom of Heaven, is either common to all, or casual,
befalling only some. The common Exclusion is that state of Nature, wherein we
all are involved, as we spring from the first Adam; The second Exclusion is
that which befalls Christians relapsing into sin. The first shutting was at the
fall, and was then Prefigured unto us, by the barring up of the way unto the
Tree of Life. What active, what judiciary part can any Minister of the Gospel
have here? all that the Apostles could do here, was but to open to men this
their misery, a thing, before the death of our Savior, either very sparingly,
or not at all revealed. Of this therefore you must needs quit your hands, and
so you must of the other, I mean exclusion upon casuality and relapse. For when
a man converted to Christianity, falls eftsoons into some mortal sin, does
the Gate of Heaven stand open to him, till he fall upon some cursed Priest, that
used his Key to shut it?

There are in the World a kind of deceitful Locks with sliding Bolts, I have
seen my self and others much deceived by them, when the doors have fallen at
our heels, and locked us out when we intended no such thing. Sir, Heaven door
has a sliding Lock, upon occasion of mortal sin, it will shut without any use
of a Key.

Perchance I do not well, (...), yet the sober meaning of what I have spoken
merrily, is but this, that either you must make the Ministry of the Gospel only
Declarative, or else it will follow that every impenitent Relapser, that has
the good fortune to escape the Priests being privy to his Sin, is like to find
Heaven open at the last. So then it is apparent, that notwithstanding your
heaping up of Interrogatories, and your pressing of Ligaveritis and vos, and
telling me what I never knew, that Solvere and Ligare be Actives; yet in this
part of our Power, all your Activity is lost, and there remains nothing for you
but to report upon good evidence, what you find done by your betters to your
hand.

Half your Jurisdiction then is fallen: and if I had no other Medium but this:
I might with good probability conclude against you for the other part. For if
the one half made in the same Form, in the like phrase and garb of speech, yet
enforces no more but Declaration and Denouncing: then why should you think the
other half, (which in all likelihood is homogeneal to the former) to be more?
Nay, there is far more natural Equity that you should be here only Declarative
than in the other. Politicians tell us, That it is Wisdom for Princes, who
desire to gain the love of their Subjects, to administer themselves all Favors
and Graces, but to leave action of Justice and Harshness to be performed by
others.

Sir, No Prince can be so ambitious of the Love of his Subjects as God is of
the Love of Mankind: why then should I think him so ill a Politician, as to
make himself the Administrator of the Rough, Unpleasing, Love-killing Offices,
of Binding, Shutting, Retaining; and then pass over to the Priest, the
dispensation of the Fair, Well-spoken, Ingratiating Offices of Remitting,
Loosing, and Opening? But I will leave this kind of Topic and Dialectical
arguing, because you are a pretender to convincing Reasons; I will directly
enter even upon that part of your power of Opening, and Remitting, being the
other part of your Territory, and by main strength, take all activity from you
there too. Give me leave to ask you one Question, you may very well favor me
so far, for you have asked me very many.

The Conversion of a Sinner, is it an act of the Keys, yea or no?

By your Principles it is not; for you make the power of the Keys to be
judiciary, and therefore the Conversion of an Infidel pertains not to them: The
Church of Rome will help you with a Medium to make this Argument good. Do we
not judge those that are within? for those that are without, God shall judge,
says Paul: Whence she infers, That a converted Infidel, not yet admitted to
the Church, is a Stranger to the Judiciary Power of the Keys; but being once
admitted into the Church, he is now become the Churches Subject, and so fit
matter for the Priest to work on upon his next Relapse. What think you of this
Reason? Do you take it to be good? Take heed; or else it will give you a deadly
stripe. For the Conversion of an Infidel, out of question is a most proper act
of the Keys. For, since the opening of the Kingdom of Heaven is confessed to
belong unto the Keys; and Heaven, which was shut against the Infidel in time of
his Infidelity, upon his Conversion is acknowledged to be opened unto him;
certainly whoever converted him, used the Keys; or else he must pretend to have
either a Picklock, or the Herb Lunaria, which, they say, makes Locks fall off
from Doors, and the Fetters from Horses heels. If then the Conversion of a
Sinner be an act of the Keys, and by the Argument of the Church of Rome it be
not judiciary, it follows then, that all Acts of the Keys are not Judiciary;
and if not Judiciary, then Declarative only? For betwixt these two I know no
mean.

But because to dispute against a man out of his own Principles, which
perchance are false (for this we know often falls out, that by the power of
Syllogisms, men may and do draw True Conclusions from False Premises) because,
I say, thus to do, in the judgment of Aristotle, leaves a man (...); and I am
willing not only to persuade you, but to better you: I will draw the little
which remains to be said in this Point, from other Places.

First, In all the Apostles practice in Converting Jews and Gentiles, find you
any thing like unto the act of any Judiciary Power? They neither did nor could
use any such thing. That they did not, appears by Philip, who having Catechized
the Eunuch, and finding him desirous of Baptism, immediately upon profession of
his Faith, admitted him into the Church. That they neither did nor could,
appears by Peter and the rest of the Apostles in the Acts, who could never in
the space of an afternoon, being none but themselves, have converted three
thousand souls, had they taken any such way, as you seem to misfancy. Again,
imagine with your self all circumstances you can, which are of force to make a
power judiciary, apply them all to the practice of the Apostles, in the
Conversion of Infidels, and if you find any one of them agree to that action,
let me be challenged upon it, and be thought to have abused you with a Fallacy.

To conclude then, since your Ligaveritis, which is the one half of your
pretended Jurisdiction, pretends to nothing above Declarative: And since your
Solveritis, in so great an act as is the Conversion of Infidels, lays claim to
no more, what act of the power of the Keys is it, wherein we may conceive hope
of finding any thing active or judiciary? I see what you will say, There yet
remains a part, you think, wherein you have hope to speed, and that is the
reconciling of relapsing Christians: As you fancy that in every sinning
Christian, there is a duty binding him to repair, and lay his sin open to the
Minister of the Gospel, and in him a power to consider of the sins of such as
repair unto him, to weigh particulars, to consider circumstances, and
occasions, and according to true Judgment, either upon penance imposed to
absolve sin, (which you call remitting of the sin) or to withold him for a
time, from participation of holy duties with Catholic Christians, which you
call retaining of sins, supposing that God does the like in Heaven, as it is
written, What you bind in Earth, is bound in Heaven, and what you loose in
Earth, is loosed in Heaven. Now the Rock on which you labor to found so
extravagant a Conceit, is no other than the Words which I have quoted out of
Scripture; you press earnestly the Ligaveritis and vos, all which can yield you
small relief; for if they help you not at all in those weighty parts of the
Power of the Keys, which but now were laid before you; by what Analogy can you
expect they should afford you any assistance here? As is Ligare, so is Solvere;
as is the Conversion of an Infidel, so is the reconciling of a relapsing
Christian, for any thing you can make appear; Either all is Declarative, which
is very possible, and in many cases necessary, or all Judicative, which in some
cases is impossible, and in none necessary; so that to fit the Scripture to
your Fancy, you are constrained to distract and rend it without any Warrant at
all. But you have found out in the Text a stronger Argument against the
declarative Power, I contend for: You epsy an Insufflavit, a great, a solemn,
and unwonted Ceremony, undoubtedly concluding some greater matter than a poor
power declarative: What? did our serious Master thus spend his breath to no
purpose, and like a Hocus Pocus with so much show act us a solemn nothing? I
pray whose words are these? I should have thought them to have been Porphiries,
or Julians, (but that I know your hand) for you subscribed not your name to
your letters: (...): They are the Words of your Pindarus, upon an occasion not
much unlike unto this

Sir, you have no Skill to judge, or set a price upon so divine an act; He lost
not his breath, when he spent his Insufflavit; he opened their wits, that they
might understand the Scripture; he revealed to them the Mysteries of Jesus
Christ, dying and rising again for the Worlds salvation, the greatest news that
ever was reported in the World, and till then concealed; He commanded them to
be the first bringers of this good News, and that they might the more
undauntedly perform their Charge, he endowed them with Infallibility, with
infinite Constancy and Fortitude, with Power of working such Wonders as none
could do unless God were with them. Appello Conscientiam tuam: Were those
things such nothings, that they deserve to be thus jeered? But that befalls you
which befalls the Stares that dwell in the Steeple, who fear not the Bells,
because they hear them every day. These wonderful Benefits of God have every
day sounded in your ears, and the frequency of them has taught you to forget
your Reverence to them. Yet all this Insufflavit, this Ceremony, was for no
other end but to further a Declarative Power; Their undaunted Fortitude, their
power of Miracling, their Infallibility did but add countenance and strength to
their Declarative Power, by by which they went up and down the World, to
manifest the good tidings of Salvation. So that even these which served thus to
set off the Gospel, were nothing else but means of the better manifestation of
it, therefore may they very well pass, if not amongst the Keys, yet amongst the
necessary Wards. Whereas your Fancy of an active or judicative Power in the
Priest, concurring with God in reconciling relapsing Christians, is neither one
nor other, but is indeed like unto the work of some deceitful Smith, who the
better to countenance and grace his work, adds to his Key superfluous and idle
Wards, which in the opening of the Lock, are of no use at all.

To your second Query, Whether the Keys were confined to the Apostles only? The
Answer is in no case hard to give, it may perchance in some case be dangerous;
for there is a Generation of men in the World (the Clergy they call them) who
impropriate the Keys unto themselves, and would be very angry to understand,
that others from themselves should claim a right unto them. To your Question
then, no doubt but originally none received the Keys from the mouth of our
Savior, but the Apostles only; none did nor ever could manage them with that
authority and splendour as the Apostles did, who were above all most amply
furnished with all things fitting so great a work. For whereas you seem to
intimate, that the preaching Mission was communicated to others, as the seventy
two Disciples, as well as the Apostles; you do but mistake your self, if you
conceive that the Keys of the Gospel were any way committed to them; for
concerning the Mysteries of Jesus Christ, and him crucified for the sins of the
World (wherein indeed the opening of the Kingdom of Heaven did consist) they
received it not, they knew it not. To be the prime Reporters of this, was an
honor imparted only to the Apostles: Yet were they not so imparted, as that
they should be confined to them. Every one that heard and received the Light of
the saving Doctrine from them, so far forth as he had understanding in the
ways of Life, had now the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to his
power, both for his own and others use. Every one, of what state or condition
soever, that has any occasion offered him, to serve another in the ways of
Life, Clergy, or Lay, male or female, whatever he be, has these Keys, not
only for himself, but for the benefit of others. For if natural Goodness teach
every man, Lumen de Lumine, Erranti comiter monstrare viam, etc. Then how much
more does Christian Goodness require of every one, to his ability to be a Light
to those who sit in darkness, and direct their steps, who most dangerously
mistake their way? To save a soul, every man is a Priest. To whom I pray you,
is that said in Leviticus, Thou shall not see thy Brother sin, but thou shall
reprove, and save thy Brother? And if the Law binds a Man, when he saw his
enemies Cattle to stray, to put them into their way; How much more does it
oblige him to do the like for the Man himself? See you not how the whole World
conspires with me in the same opinion? Does not every Father teach his Son,
every Master his Servant, every Man his Friend. How many of the Laity in this
age, and from time to time, in all ages have by writing for the public good,
propagated the Gospel of Christ, as if some secret instinct of nature had put
into men's minds thus to do. I shame to dwell so long upon so plain a Theme, yet
because I feel your pulse, and perceive what it is that troubles you, I must
say something to an Objection, which I know you make. You conceive that
forthwith upon this which I have said, must needs follow some great Confusion
of estates, and degrees, the Laity will straitway get up into our Pulpits, we
shall lose our credit, and the adoration which the simple sort do yield us is
in danger to be lost.

Sir, Fear you not, the sufficient and able of the Clergy, will reap no
discountenance, but honor by this: For he that knows how to do well himself,
will most willingly approve what is well done by another. It is extreme poverty
of mind to ground your Reputation upon another man's Ignorance, and to secure
your self, you do well, because you perceive perchance, that none can judge how
ill you do. Be not angry then to see others join with you in part of your
Charge. I would all the Lords People did Preach, and that every Man did think
himself bound to discharge a part of the Common Good: and make account that the
Care of other men's Souls concerned him as well as of his own. When the Apostles
took order to ordain some, upon whom the public burden of Preaching the Gospel
should lie, it was not their purpose to impropriate the thing to those persons
alone; but knowing that what was left to the care of all, was commonly worst
looked unto, in wise and most Christian Care, they designed some, whose duty it
should be to wait upon the Gospel alone, the better to preserve the Profession
to the Worlds end: It has been the wisdom of those, who have taken care of the
propagation of Arts, and Sciences, not only to appoint means, that multitudes
should study and make profession privately, but that some should be constituted
public Professors to teach e Cathedra, that so all might know to whom to
repair, in the doubts incident to their faculties, and this has been thought a
sovereign way to preserve Sciences. Sir, we are the public Professors of
Christianity, we speak e Cathedra, which none can do, but such as are ordained.
Let the private profession and practice of Christianity improve it self never
so much, yet the honor of the public Professor, so he deserve his place, can
never impair. It greives me to stand so long upon so plain, so unwelcom a
Lesson, I will ease my self and you, and reflect upon your third Query.

In the third place, you require to know, what necessity, or what convenience
there is of Confession: You mean, I think, that confession, which is as
foolishly as commonly called Sacramental, for it has nothing of a Sacrament in
it. Did I know your mind a little more in particular, what form of confession
you speak of, whether as it is used in the Church of Rome, or in some refined
Guise, as it seems some would, who have of late called for it in the Church of
England, I should speak peradventure more appositely to what you desire. But
since you have proposed Confession only in a generality, my answer shall be in
like manner. And

First of all, Confession of sins is a thing, not only convenient, but
unavoidably necessary to Salvation, without which none shall ever see God. And
thus far I suppose, all Christians do agree. The main Difference is in the
manner of practicing it, the Question being, What Parties are to be interessed
in it? Natural Equity informs us, that unto every Party, justly offended,
Satisfaction some way or other is due.

The first party wronged in every offense, is God, against whose Honor, and
express Command every sin is committed. To him therefore in the first place,
Satisfaction is due, by submission and acknowledgment, since there remains no
other way of composition with God. But there are some sins committed against
God, some committed against God and Men. In the former it is sufficient if we
pacify God alone; in the latter, our Neighbor, against whom we have trespast,
must receive Satisfaction for the wrong done him, at least, if it be in the
power of the Trespasser. Your Primer of Sarum will tell you, That not to make
restitution, if you be able, and not to pardon, unavoidably exclude from the
Kingdom of Heaven. Now might the Doctrine of Confession and acknowledgment in
case of Offense given, have been permitted to run fair and clear, as it
descends from God, and good reason, the first Fountains of it. There needed no
more to be said in this argument, than I have already told you. But I know not
what intempestive foolish Ambition has troubled the stream, and it has past
now for a long time (till the Reformation altered it) for a general Doctrine in
the Church, That in all kind of sins, whether against God or our Neighbor,
there can be no reconciliation betwixt the parties offending, and offended, but
by interposition of a Priest, a thing utterly besides all reason and common
sense, that you should open your private imperfections to one whom they concern
not, (for it is granted, that all Parties concerned in an Offense, must have
reason at the hands of the Offender) and who can no ways help you; For He that
is conscientious of his sin, (and without trouble of Conscience I think none
would ever repair to his Confessor) knows very well, that there is no sin so
great, but upon submission, God both can and will pardon it; and none so small,
but pardon for it must be sought, or else he has been ill catechized. And more
than this what can any Priest tell him: Plin. Not. Hist. l. 28. c. 10.
Your Pliny, somewhere tells you, That he that is stricken by a Scorpion, if he
go immediately, and whisper it into the ear of an Ass, shall find himself
immediately eased: That Sin is a Scorpion, and bites deadly, I have always
believed, but that to cure the bite of it, it was a Sovereign Remedy to whisper
it into the Ear of an [ ] a Priest, I do as well believe as I do that of Pliny.
The Patrons of this Fancy, for defect of reason and common congruity, are fain
to betake themselves to Scripture; and the mischief is, there is there no
direct Text for it, and therefore they are constrained to help themselves with
a mere conjectural consequence; For since it is taken for certain, that there
is a Power to Remit and to Retain sins, how shall they who have this Power
given them, know how fit it is to Remit or to Retain a sin, except they know
the sin, and know it they cannot, but by Confession. For answer to this,

First, We have found and proved, That the Words of Scripture must receive such
a sense, as from whence no such Consequence can be inferred.

Secondly, We have endeavored to prove, That the Dispensation or Application
of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, (being nothing else, but the duty of
saving of Souls) is a Duty, which pro Occasion oblata, lies upon every
Christian: Which if it be true, (as in good faith I think it,) and the Clergy
perceive it, I think they would never go about to urge that Text, although we
should yield it them in their own meaning. For they must needs see, that it
follows, that you may as well make your Muletter, (if you have one) your
Confessor, as your Parish Priest. Tell me in good earnest, if you can, out of
what good intent can this desire to know another man's sin, which concerns you
not, proceed? Is it to teach him that it is a sin? he knew that, or else he had
never repaired to you, to confess it: Is it to tell him, that he is to repent,
to restore, to pray, to give alms, etc. All this he knew, or else he has had
his breeding under an evil Clergy. Yea, but how shall the Physician cure the
Disease, if he know it not? Suppose all Diseases had one Remedy, (as all
spiritual Diseases have) and what matters it if the Patient be sick, to know
whether it be an Ague, or the Meazels, or the Pleurisy, since one Potion cures
them all? Yea, but if he know not the particulars, how shall he judge of the
Quantity of the Doses? for the same Disease upon sundry circumstances, may
require Majus or Minus in the Physic. This is the poorest scruple of a
thousand; for in the Regiment of Patients spiritually sick, there can be but
one mistake, that is, if you give too little: Be sure you give enough, and
teach your Patients to think no sin to be little, (which in men spiritually
sick is Error saluberrimus) and you can never err: For natural Physic is only
Physic; but spiritual Physic is both Physic and Diet, and may be
indifferently administered both to the sick and the sound Repentance perchance
only excepted, of which upon occasion, assure your self you can hardly take too
much. What reason now can you give me, why you should desire to dive into any
man's Breast, and scire Secreta Domus? except it be that which follows in the
next Verse, inde teneri, as I must confess, I suspect it is. The truth is, some
mistaken Customs of the ancient Church, the craft and power of the Clergy, the
simplicity and ignorance of the Laity, these begat the Tragelaphus, of which we
now speak. It may be you take the practice of the ancient Church, and the Point
of Excommunication, to make somewhat for you: When those Cards shall come to be
played (though that of Church custom is not greatly material, which way soever
it looks) I believe you will not find the Game you look for. Indeed I was once
minded to have considered something of that: But I think you look for a Letter,
not for a Book, and I perceive my self already to have gone beyond the compass
of a Letter. Another parley therefore, if you please, shall put an end to those
and other scruples, if any do arise. And for the present give, I pray you, a
little respite unto

From my Study, this 8 Day of March. 1637. Yours, J. H.

A TRACT Concerning SCHISM AND SCHISMATICS. WHEREIN Is briefly discovered the
Original Causes of all Schism.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge, etc.

Never before Printed by the Original Copy.

Printed, 1677.

A TRACT Concerning SCHISM.
Heresy and Schism as they are in common use, are two Theological (...) or
scar-crows, which they, who uphold a party in Religion, use to fright away
such, as making inquiry into it, are ready to relinquish and oppose it, if it
appear either erroneous or suspicious. For as Plutarch reports of a Painter,
who having unskilfully painted a Cock, chased away all Cocks and Hens, that so
the imperfection of his Art might not appear by comparison with Nature; so men
willing for ends to admit of no fancy but their own, endeavor to hinder an
inquiry into it by way of comparison of somewhat with it, peradventure truer,
that so the deformity of their own might not appear. But howsoever in the
common manage, Heresy and Schism are but ridiculous Terms, yet the things in
themselves are of very considerable moment, the one offending against Truth,
the other against Charity, and therefore both deadly, where they are not by
imputation, but in deed.

It is then a matter of no small importance, truly to descry the nature of
them, that so they may fear, who are guilty of them, and they on the contrary
strengthen themselves, who through the iniquity of men and times, are
injuriously charged with them.

Schism (for of Heresy we shall not now treat, except it be by accident, and
that by occasion of a general mistake, spread throughout all the writings of
the Ancients, in which their names are familiarly confounded) Schism, I say,
upon the very sound of the word, imports Division; Division is not, but where
Communion is, or ought to be. Now Communion is the strength and ground of all
Society, whether Sacred or Civil; Whosoever therefore they be, that offend
against this common Society and Friendliness of men, and cause separation and
breach among them: If it be in civil occasions, are guilty of Sedition or
Rebellion; if it be by occasion of Ecclesiastical difference they are guilty of
Schism: So that Schism is an Ecclesiastical Sedition, as Sedition is a Lay
Schism. Yet the great benefit of Communion notwithstanding, in regard of diverse
distempers men are subject to, Dissension and Disunion are often necessary; For
when either false or uncertain Conclusions are obtruded for Truth, and Acts
either unlawful, or ministering just scruple, are required of us to be
performed; in these cases, Consent were Conspiracy, and open Contestation is
not Faction or Schism, but due Christian Animosity.

For the further opening therefore of the nature of Schism, something must be
added by way of difference to distinguish it from necessary Separation, and
that is, that the causes upon which Division is attempted, proceed not from
Passion, or Distemper, or from Ambition, or Avarice, or such other Ends, as
humane folly is apt to pursue; but from well weighed and necessary Reasons, and
that, when all other means having been tried, nothing will serve to save us
from guilt of Conscience, but open Separation. So that Schism, if we would
define it, is nothing else but an unnecessary Separation of Christians from
that part of the visible Church, of which they were once Members. Now as in
Mutinies and Civil Dissentions, there are two Attendants in ordinary belonging
unto them; one the choice of one Elector or Guide in place of the General, or
ordinary Governor, to rule and guide; the other the appointing of some public
place or Rendezvous, where public Meetings must be celebrated: So in Church
Dissentions and quarrels, two Appurtenances there are, which serve to make a
Schism complete;

First, The choice of a Bishop in opposition to the former, (a thing very
frequent amongst the Ancients, and which many times was both the cause and
effect of Schism.)

Secondly, The erecting of a new Church and Oratory, for the dividing Party to
meet in publicly. For till this be done, the Schism is but yet in the Womb.

In that late famous Controversy in Holland, De Predestinatione, and Auxiliis,
as long as the disagreeing Parties went no further than Disputes and
Pen-combats, the Schism was all that while unhatched; but as soon as one party
swept an old Cloister and by a pretty Art suddenly made it a Church, by putting
a new Pulpit in it, for the separating Party there to meet; now, what before
was a Controversy, became a formal Schism. To know no more than this, if you
take it to be true, had been enough to direct how you are to judge, and what to
think of Schism and Schismatics; yet because in the Ancients, (by whom many
Men are more affrighted than hurt) much is said, and many fearful Dooms are
pronounced in this case; will we descend a little to consider of Schisms, as it
were by way of Story, and that partly further to open that which we have said
in general, by instancing in particulars; and partly to disabuse those who
reverencing Antiquity more than needs, have suffered themselves to be scared
with imputation of Schism, above due measure; for what the Ancients spoke by
way of censure of Schism in general, is most true; for they saw (and it is no
great matter to see so much) that unadvisedly, and upon fancy to break the knot
of Union betwixt man and man (especially amongst Christians, upon whom above
all other kind of men, the tie of Love and Communion does most especially rest)
was a crime hardly pardonable, and that nothing Absolves a man from the guilt
of it, but true and unpretended Conscience; yet when they came to pronounce of
Schisms in particular (whether it were because of their own interests, or that
they saw not the Truth, or for what other cause God only does know) their
Judgments many times (to speak most gently) are justly to be suspected; Which
that you may see, we will range all Schism into two ranks.

For there is a Schism, in which only one party is the Schismatic; for where
cause of Schism is necessary, there not he that separates, but he that
occasions the separation is the Schismatic.

Secondly, There is a Schism, which both parts are the Schismatics: For where
the occasion of separation is unnecessary, neither side can be excused from the
guilt of Schism.

But you will ask, who shall be the Judge what is necessary? Indeed that is a
Question, which has been often made, but I think scarcely ever truly answered;
not because it is a point of great depth or difficulty truly to assoil it, but
because the true solution carries fire in the tail of it. For it brings with
it a piece of Doctrine which is seldom pleasing to Superiors. To you for the
present this shall suffice. If so be you be Animo defoecato, if you have
cleared your self from froath and grownds, if neither sloth, nor fears, nor
ambition, nor any tempting Spirits of that nature abuse you, (for these and
such as these, are the true Impediments* why both that, and other Questions of
the like danger are not truly answered) if all this be, and yet you see not how
to frame your resolution, and settle your self for that doubt; I will say no
more of you than was said of Papias, St. John's own Scholar, you are (...),
your abilities are not so good as I presumed.

But to go on with what I intended, and from which that interloping Question
diverted me; that you may the better judge of the nature of Schisms by their
occasions; you shall find that all Schisms have crept into the Church by one of
these three ways; either upon matter of Fact, or matter of Opinion, or point of
Ambition. For the first; I call that matter of Fact, when something is required
to be done by us, which either we know, or strongly suspect to be unlawful; So
the first notable Schism, of which we read in the Church, contained in it
matter of Fact; For it being upon Error taken for necessary, that an Easter
must be kept; and upon worse than Error, if I may so speak, (for it was no less
than a point of Judaism, forced upon the Church,) upon worse than Error, I say,
thought further necessary, that the ground for the time of our keeping that
Feast, must be the rule left by Moses to the Jews; there arose a stout
Question, Whether we were to celebrate with the Jews, on the fourteenth Moon,
or the Sunday following? This matter, though most unnecessary, most vain, yet
caused as great a Combustion, as ever was in the Church; the West separating
and refusing Communion with the East, for many years together. In this
fantastical Hurry, I cannot see but all the world were Schismatics: neither
can any thing excuse them from that imputation* excepting only this, that we
charitably suppose that all Parties out of Conscience did what they did. A
thing which befell them through the ignorance of their Guides, (for I will not
say their malice) and that through the just judgment of God, because through
sloth and blind obedience Men examined not the things which they were taught,
but like Beasts of Burden patiently couched down, and indifferently underwent
whatsoever their Superiors laid upon them. By the way; by this you may plainly
see the danger of our appeal unto Antiquity, for resolution in controverted
points of Faith, and how small relief we are to expect from thence. For if the
discretion of the chiefest Guides and Directors of the Church, did in a Point
so trivial, so inconsiderable, so mainly fail them, as not to see the Truth in
a Subject, wherein it is the greatest Marvel how they could avoid the sight of
it; can we without imputation of extreme grosness and folly, think so poor
spirited persons, competent Judges of the Questions now on soot betwixt the
Churches? Pardon me; I know not what Temptation drew that Note from me.

The next Schism, which had in it matter of Fact, is that of the Donatist: who
was persuaded (at least so he pretended) that it was unlawful to converse or
communicate in holy Duties with Men stained with any notorious Sin. (For
howsoever Austin and others do specify only the Thurificati and Traditores, and
Libellatici, and the like, as if he separated only from those, whom he found to
be such; yet by necessary proportion, he mustrefer to all notorious Sinners)
Upon this he taught, that in all places where good and bad were mixed together,
there could be no Church, by reason of Pollution, evaporating as it were from
Sinners, which blasted righteous Persons who conversed with them, and made all
unclean. On this ground separating himself from all whom he list to suspect, he
gave out that the Church was no where to be found but in him and his
Associates, as being the only Men among whom wicked Persons found no shelter;
and by consequence, the only clean and unpolluted Company, and therefore the
only Church. Against this Saint Augustine laid down this Conclusion, Unitatem
Ecclesiae per totum Orbem dispersae propter nonnullorum peccata non esse
deserendam; which is indeed the whole sum of that Fathers Disputation against
the Donatist. Now in one part of this Controversy betwixt St. Augustine and
the Donatist, there is one thing is very remarkable. The Truth was there where
it was by mere chance, and might have been on either side* any Reasons brought
by either party notwithstanding. For though it were de facto false, that pars
Donati, shut up in Africa, was the only Orthodox Party, yet it might have been
true, notwithstanding any thing Saint Austine brings to confute it; and on the
contrary, though it were de facto true, that the part of Christians dispersed
over the Earth were Orthodox; yet it might have been false notwithstanding any
thing Saint Austine brings to confirm it. For where, or amongst whom, or
amongst how many the Church shall be, or is, is a thing indifferent; it may be
in any Number more or less, it may be in any Place Country, or Nation; it may
be in All, and (for ought I know) it may be in none, without any prejudice to
the definition of the Church, or the Truth of the Gospel. North or South, many
or few, dispersed in many places, or confined to one; None of these either
prove or disprove a Church.

Now this Schism, and likewise the former, to a wise Man that well understands
the matter in Controversy; may afford perchance matter of pity, to see Men so
strangly distracted upon fancy; but of doubt or trouble what to do, it can
yield none. For though in this Schism the Donatist be the Schismatic, and in
the former both parties be equally engaged in the Schism; yet you may safely
upon your occasions communicate with either, so be you flatter neither in their
Schism: For why might it not be lawful to go to Church with the Donatist, or to
celebrate Easter with the Quartodeciman, if occasion so require? since neither
Nature, nor Religion, nor Reason does suggest any thing to the contrary: For in
all public Meetings pretending Holiness, so there be nothing done, but what
true Devotion and Piety brook, why may not I be present in them, and use
Communication with them? Nay what if those to whose care the execution of the
public Service is committed, do something either unseemly or suspicious, or
peradventure unlawful? what if the Garments they wear be censured as, nay
indeed be superstitious? what if the Gesture of adoration be used at the Altar,
as now we have learned to speak? What if the Homilist or Preacher deliver any
Doctrine, of the truth of which we are not well persuaded, (a thing which very
often falls out) yet for all this we may not separate, except we be constrained
personally to bear a part in them our selves. The Priests under Eli had so ill
demeaned themselves about the daily Sacrifice, that the Scriptures tell us,
they made it to stink, yet the People refused not to come to the Tabernacle,
nor to bring their Sacrifice to the Priest. For in these Schisms, which concern
Fact, nothing can be a just cause of refusal of Communion, but only to require
the execution of some unlawful or suspected act; For not only in Reason, but in
Religion too, that Maxim admits of no release, Cautissimi cujusque Praeceptum
quod dubitas, ne feceris. Long it was ere the Church fell upon Schism upon this
occasion, though of late it has had very many; For until the second Council of
Nice, (in which conciliable Superstition and Ignorance did conspire) I say,
until that Rout did set up Imageworship, there was not any remarkable Schism,
upon just occasion of Fact; All the rest of Schisms of that kind were but
Wantonness, this was truly serious. In this the Schismatical party was the
Synod it self, and such as conspired with it. For concerning the use of Images
in Sacris, First, it is acknowledged by all, That it is not a thing necessary;
Secondly, It is by most suspected; Thirdly, It is by many held utterly
unlawful. Can then the enjoining of the practice of such a thing be ought else
but abuse? Or can the refusal of Communion here, be thought any other thing
than duty? Here, or upon the like occasion, to separate, may peradventure bring
personal trouble and danger, (against which it concerns every honest man to
have Pectus been praeparatum) further harm it cannot do. So that in these
cases, you cannot be to seek what to think, or what you have to do.

Come we then to consider a little of the second sort of Schism, arising upon
occasion of variety of opinion. It has been the common disease of Christians
from the beginning, not to content themselves with that measure of Faith, which
God and Scriptures have expressly afforded us; but out of a vain desire to know
more than is revealed, they have attempted to discuss things, of which we can
have no light, neither from Reason nor Revelation; neither have they rested
here, but upon pretense of Church Authority, which is none, or Tradition, which
for the most part is but figment; they have peremptorily concluded, and
confidently imposed upon others, a necessity of entertaining Conclusions of
that nature; and to strengthen themselves, have broken out into Divisions and
Factions, opposing man to man, Synod to Synod, till the peace of the Church
vanished, without all possibility of recall. Hence arose those ancient and many
separations amongst Christians, occasioned by Arrianism, Eutychianism,
Nestorianism, Photinianism, Sabellianism, and many more both ancient and in our
time; all which indeed are but names of Schism; howsoever in the common
Language of the Fathers, they were called Heresies. For Heresy is an act of
the Will, not of Reason; and is indeed a Lie, not a mistake: Else how could
that known speech of Austine go for true, Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo.
Indeed Manichaeism, Valentinianism, Marcionism, Mahometanism, are truly and
properly Heresies; For we know that the Authors of them received them not, but
minted them themselves, and so knew that which they taught to be a Lie. But can
any man avouch that Arrius and Nestorius, and others that taught erroneously
concerning the Trinity, or the Person of our Savior, did maliciously invent
what they taught, and not rather fall upon it by error and mistake? Till that
be done, and that upon good Evidence, we will think no worse of all Parties
than needs we must, and take these Rents in the Church to be at the worst but
Schisms upon matter of Opinion. In which case what we are to do, is not a point
of any great depth of understanding to discover, so be Distemper and Partiality
do not intervene. I do not yet see, that Opinionum Varietas, and Opinantium
Unitas, are (...), or that Men of different opinions in Christian Religion, may
not hold communion in Sacris, and both go to one Church. Why may I not go, if
occasion require, to an Arrian Church, so there be no Arrianism expressed in
their Liturgy? And were Liturgies and public Forms of Service so framed, as
that they admitted not of particular and private fancies, but contained only
such things, as in which all Christians do agree, Schisms on Opinion were
utterly vanished. For consider of all the Liturgies that are or ever have been,
and remove from them whatsoever is scandalous to any Party, and leave nothing
but what all agree on, and the event shall be, that the public Service and
Honor of God shall no ways suffer: Whereas to load our public Forms with the
private Fancies upon which we differ, is the most sovereign way to perpetuate
Schism unto the Worlds end. Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading of
Scriptures, Exposition of Scripture, Administration of Sacraments in the
plainest and simplest manner, were matter enough to furnish out a sufficient
Liturgy, though nothing either of private Opinion, or of Church Pomp, of
Garments, of prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of matter concerning
the Dead, of many superfluities, which creep into the Churches under the name
of Order and Decency, did interpose it self. For to charge Churches and
Liturgies with things unnecessary, was the first beginning of all Superstition,
and when scruples of Conscience began to be made or pretended, then Schisms
began to break in. If the spiritual Guides and Fathers of the Church would be a
little sparing of incumbring Churches with superfluities, and not overrigid
either in reviving obsolete Customs, or imposing new, there were far less
danger of Schism or Superstition; and all the inconvenience were likely to
ensue, would be but this, they should in so doing, yield a little to the
imbecillities of Inferiors, a thing which St. Paul would never have refused to
do. Mean while, wheresoever false or suspected Opinions are made a piece of the
Church Liturgy, he that separates is not the Schismatic; For it is alike
unlawful to make profession of known or suspected falsehoods, as to put in
practice unlawful or suspect actions

The third thing I noted for matter of Schism was Ambition, I mean Episcopal
Ambition, showing it self especially in two heads; one concerning Plurality of
Bishops in the same See, another the Superiority of Bishops in diverse Sees.
Aristotle tells us, that Necessity causes but small faults, but Avarice and
Ambition were the Mothers of great Crimes; Episcopal Ambition has made this
true: For no Occasion has produced more frequent, more continuing, more
sanguinary Schisms, than this has done. The Sees of Alexandria, of
Constantinople, of Antioch, and above all of Rome, do abundantly show thus
much, and our Ecclesiastical Stories witness no less, of which the greatest
part consists in the factionating and tumultuating of great and potent Bishops.
Socrates Apologizing for himself, that professing to write an Ecclesiastical
Story, he did ofttimes interlace the actions of secular Princes and other civil
businesses, tells us that he did thus to refresh his Reader, who otherwise were
in danger to be cloyd by reading so much of the Acts of unquiet and unruly
Bishops, (...), in which as a man might say, they made Butter and Cheese one of
another; For (...), (that I may show you a cast out of my old Office, and open
you a Mystery in Grammar) properly signifies to make Butter and Cheese: Now
because these are not made without much agitation of the Milk, hence (...), by
a borrowed and translated signification, signifies to do things with much
agitation and tumult.

But that I may a little consider of the two heads, which I but now specified;
The first I mentioned was the Plurality of Bishops in one Sea. For the general
practice of the Church from the beginning, at least since the original of
Episcopacy, as now it is, was never to admit at once more than one Bishop in
one Sea; And so far in this point have they been careful to preserve unity,
that they would not suffer a Bishop in his Sea to have two Cathedral Churches;
which thing lately brought us a Book out of France, De Monogamia Episcoporum,
written by occasion of the Bishop of Langres, who, I know not upon what fancy,
could not be content with one Cathedral Church in his Diocese, but would needs
have two, which to the Author of that work seems to be a kind of spiritual
Polygamy. It fell out amongst the Ancients very often; sometimes upon occasion
of difference in Opinion, sometimes because of difference amongst those who
were interessed in the choice of Bishops, that two Bishops and sometimes more
were set up, and all Parties striving to maintain their own Bishop, made
themselves several Churches, several Congregations, each refusing to
participate with others, and many times proceeding to mutual Excommunication.
This is that which Cyprian calls Erigere Altar contra Altar: to this does he
impute the Original of all Church disorders; and if you read him, you would
think he thought no other Church-Tumult to be a Schism but this. This perchance
might plead some excuse; For though in regard of Religion it self, it matters
not whether there be one or more Bishops in the same Diocese, and sometimes two
are known to have sat at once (for Epiphanius reckoning up the Bishops of Rome,
makes Peter and Paul the first: and St. Austin acknowledges, that for a time
he sat fellow Bishop with his Predecessor, though he excuses it, that he did
so by being ignorant that the contrary had been decreed by the Council of
Nice,) yet it being a thing very convenient for the Peace of the Church to have
it so; neither does it any way savor of vice or misdemeanor; their Punishment
sleeps not, who unnecessarily and wantonly go about to infringe it.

But that other Head of Episcopal Ambition, concerning Supremacy of Bishops in
diverse Sees, one claiming Superiority over another, as it has been from time
to time, a great Trespasser against the Churches Peace, so it is now the final
Ruin of it. The East and the West, through the fury of the two prime Bishops,
being irremediably separated without all hope of Reconcilement. And besides all
this mischief, it is founded in a vice contrary to all Christian humility,
without which no man shall see his Savior; For they do but abuse themselves
and others, that would persuade us, that Bishops, by Christ's Institution, have
any Superiority over other men, further than of Reverence; or that any Bishop
is Superior to another, further than positive order agreed upon amongst
Christians, has prescribed. For we have believed him that has told us, That
in Jesus Christ there is neither high nor low; and that in giving honor, every
man should be ready to prefer another before himself; which sayings cut off all
claim most certainly to Superiority, by title of Christianity; except men can
think that these things were spoken only to poor and private Men. Nature and
Religion agree in this, that neither of them has a hand in this Heraldry of
secundum sub and supra; all this comes from Composition and Agreement of men
among themselves. Wherefore this abuse of Christianity, to make it Lacquey to
Ambition, is a vice for which I have no extraordinary name of Ignominy, and an
ordinary I will not give it, lest you should take so transcendent a vice to be
but trivial.

Now concerning Schism arising upon these Heads, you cannot be for behavior
much to seek; for you may safely communicate with all Parties as Occasion shall
call you, and the Schismatics here are all those who are heads of the Faction,
together with all those who foment it: for private and indifferent Persons,
they may be Spectators of these contentions as securely in regard of any peril
of Conscience (for of danger in Purse or Person, I keep no account) as at a
Cock fight. Where Serpents fight, who cares who has the better? the best Wish
is, that both may perish in the fight.

Now for Conventicles, of the nature of which you desire to be informed, thus
much in general. It evidently appears, that all Meetings upon unnecessary
Occasions of Separation are to be so styled, so that in this sense, a
Conventicle is nothing else but a Congregation of Schismatics; Yet Time has
taken leave sometimes to fix this Name upon good and honest Meetings, and that
perchance not altogether without good reason; For with public Religious
Meetings thus it fares: First, it has been at all times confessed necessary,
that God requires not only inward and private Devotion, when Men either in
their hearts and Closets, or within their private walls, pray, praise, confess
and acknowledge; but he further requires all those things to be done in
Public, by troops and shoals of Men, and from hence have proceeded public
Temples, Altars, Forms of Service, appointed Times, and the like, which are
required for open Assemblies; yet whilst men were truly pious, all Meetings of
men for mutual help of Piety and Devotion, wheresoever and by whomsoever
celebrated, were permitted without exception.

But when it was espied that ill affected persons abused private Meetings,
whether Religious or Civil, to evil ends, Religiousness to gross impiety, (as
appears in the Ethnic Fleusinia, and Bacchanalia; and Christian Meetings under
the Pagan Princes, when for fear they durst not come together in open view,
were charged with foul imputations, as by the report of Christians themselves
plainly appears; and Civil Meetings many times under pretense of friendly and
neighbourly Visits, sheltered treasonable Attempts against Princes and
Common-weals:) Hence both Church and State joined, and jointly gave order for
Forms, Times, Places of Public Concourse, whether for Religious or Civil Ends;
and all other Meetings whatsoever, besides those of which both Time and Place
were limited, they censured for Routs and Riots, and unlawful Assemblies in the
State, and in the Church for Conventicles.

So that it is not lawful, no not for Prayer, for Hearing, for Conference, for
any other Religious Office whatsoever, for people to assemble otherwise, than
by Public Order is allowed. Neither may we complain of this in Times of
Incorruption, for why should men desire to do that suspiciously in private,
which warrantably may be performed in public? But in Times of manifest
Corruptions and Persecutions, wherein Religious Assembling is dangerous,
private Meetings, howsoever besides public Order, are not only lawful, but
they are of Necessity and Duty; else how shall we excuse the Meetings of
Christians for public Service, in time of danger and persecutions, and of our
selves in Queen Mary's days? and how will those of the Roman Church amongst us,
put off the imputation of Conventicling, who are known amongst us privately to
assemble for Religious Exercise against all established order, both in State
and Church? For indeed all pious Assemblies in times of persecution and
corruptions howsoever practiced, are indeed, or rather alone the lawful
Congregations; and public Assemblies, though according to form of Law, are
indeed nothing else but Riots and Conventicles, if they be stained with
Corruption, and Superstition.

FINIS.
Miscellanies WRITTEN By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge,
etc.

Printed, 1677.

Miscellanies.
How to know the Church.
MArks and Notes to know the Church there are none, except we will make True
Profession, which is the Form and Essence of the Church to be a Mark. And as
there are none, so is it not necessary there should be. For to what purpose
should they serve? That I might go seek and find out some Company to mark. This
is no way necessary. For glorious Things are in the Scriptures spoken of the
Church: not that I should run up and down the World to find the persons of the
Professors; but that I should make my self of it. This I do by taking upon me
the Profession of Christianity, and submitting my self to the Rules of Belief,
and Practice, delivered in the Gospel, though besides my self, I knew no other
Professor in the World. If this were not the Authors end in proposal of the
Title, it is but a mere Vanity.

To the Description of the Church.
The Church, as it imports a visible Company in Earth, is nothing else but the
Company of Professors of Christianity, wheresoever dispersed in the Earth. To
define it thus by Monarchy, under one visible Head, is of novelty crept up,
since men began to change the spiritual Kingdom of Christ to secular Pride and
Tyranny, and a thing never heard of, either in the Scriptures, or in the
Writings of the Ancients. Government, whether by one or many, or howsoever, if
it be one of the Churches contingent Attributes, it is all; certainly it is no
necessary Property, much less comes it into the Definition and Essence of it. I
mean outward Government; for as for inward Government, by which Christ reigns
in the Hearts of his Elect, and vindicates them from spiritual Enemies, I have
no occasion to speak, neither see I any reference to it in all your Authors
Animadversions.

How Christ is the Head of the Church.
From the Worlds beginning, till the last hour of it, the Church is essentially
one and the same, howsoever perchance in Garment, and outward Ceremony, it
admits of Difference. And as it was from the beginning of the World, so was it
Christian; there being no other difference betwixt the Fathers before Christ
and us, but this, As we believe in Christ that is Come, so they believed in
Christ that was to Come. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for
ever. Reference unto Christ is the very Essence of the Church, and there
neither is, nor ever was any Church but Christ's; and therefore the Church
amongst the Jews was properly and truly Christian, quoad rem, as we are. Now as
this Church at all times is Christ's Body, so is Christ the Head of it. For it
is as impossible for the Church, as for the Body to be without its Head; it is
not therefore as your Author dreams. Christ came not to found a New Church, or
to profess a Visible Headship of it. That Relation to this Church, which we
express when we call him the Head of it, is one and the same, from the
Beginning to all Eternity, neither receives it any alteration in this respect,
because the Person in whom this Relation is founded, is sometimes Visible,
sometimes not. It Is true indeed, the Head of the Church sometimes became
Visible, but this is but contingent and by Concomitancy. For Christ the second
Person in the Trinity, becoming Man to Redeem this Church, and manifest the way
of Truth unto it; It so fell out that the Head of the Church became Visible. Of
this Visibility he left no Successor, no Doctrine, no Use, as being a thing
merely accidental: I ask, Had the Church before Christ any Visible Head? if it
had, then was not Christ the first, as here our Teacher tells us; If it had
none, why then should the Church more require a Visible Head, than it did from
the Beginning. To speak the Truth at once. All these Questions concerning the
Notes, the Visibility, the Government of the Church, if we look upon the
Substance and Nature of the Church, they are merely Idle and Impertinent: If
upon the End, why Learned Men do handle them, it is nothing else but Faction.

Of Peter's Ministerial Headship of the Church.
In your Authors Paragraphs concerning the visible Increase, or Succession of
the Church, there is no Difference betwixt us. As for the Proofs of Peter's
Ministerial Headship, this first concerning his being the Rock of the Church,
that cannot prove it; For Peter was the Rock then; when our Savior spoke, but
then could he not be the visible Head, for Christ himself then was living, and
by our Teachers Doctrine, supplied that room himself. Peter therefore,
howsoever, or in what sense soever he were the Rock, yet could he not be the
visible Head, except we will grant the Church to have had two visible Heads at
once.

Secondly, The Keys of Heaven committed to Peter, and Command to feed his
Sheep, import no more, than that common Duty, laid upon all the Disciples, To
teach all Nations; for this Duty in several respects, is expressed by several
Metaphors. Teaching, as it signifies the opening of the way to life, so is it
called by the name of Keys; but as it signifies the Strengthening of the Soul of
Man by the Word, which is the Souls spiritual Food, so is it called Feeding.
Thus much is seen by the Defenders of the Church of Rome, and therefore they
fly for refuge to a Circumstance: It is observed, that our Savior delivered
this Doctrine to Peter alone (as indeed sometimes he did) in this it is
supposed that some great Mystery rests: For why should our Savior thus single
out Peter, and commend a common Duty to him, if there were not something
extraordinary in it, which concerned Him above the rest? This they interpret a
Preeminence that Peter had in his Business of Teaching, which they say is a
Primacy and Headship; enforcing thus much, that all the rest were to depend
from Him, and from Him receive what they were to preach. For Answer, Grant me
there were some great Mystery in it, yet whence is it proved, that this is that
Mystery? For if our Savior did not manifest it, then might there be a thousand
Causes, which Man's Conjecture may easily miss: It is great boldness, out of
Causes concealed, to pick so great Consequences, and to found Matters of so
great weight upon mere Conjectures.

Thirdly, The Prayer for Confirmation of Peter's Faith, whence it came, the
Course of the Story set down in the Text does show, It was our Saviors
Prevision of Peter's danger to relapse, which danger he had certainly run into,
had not our Savior extraordinarily prayed for confirmation of his Faith. And
the Precept of confirming his Brethren, is but that charitable Office, which is
exacted at every Christians hand, that when himself had escaped so great a
Wrack, to be careful in warning and reclaiming others, whom common frailty
drives into the like Distress.

These Circumstances, that Peter is first named amongst the Disciples, that he
made the first Sermon, and the like, are too weak Grounds to build the
Sovereignty over the World upon; and that he spoke Ananias and Sapphira dead,
argues spiritual Power, but not temporal. But that Peter called the first
Council in the Acts, is a Circumstance beyond the Text; for concerning the
calling of the Council there is no word, all that is said is but this, that the
Disciples and Elders met, no Syllable of Peter's calling them together.

That Peter was 25 Years Bishop of Rome, is not to be proved out of Antiquity,
before St. Hierom, who shuffled it into Eusebius Chronicle, there being no such
thing extant in his Story. Yea that he was Bishop at all (as now the name of
Bishop is taken) may be very questionable: For the Ancients that reckon up the
Bishops of Rome until their times, as Eusebius, and before him Tertullian, and
before them both Iraeneus, never account Peter as Bishop of that See: And
Epiphanius tells us, that Peter and Paul were both Bishops of Rome at once; by
which it is plain he took the Title of Bishop in another sense than now it is
used: For now, and so for a long time upward, two Bishops can no more possess
one See, than two Hedge-Sparrows dwell in one Bush. St. Peter's time was a
little too early for Bishops to rise.

Answer to the Bishop of Romes Practice of Supremacy.
To the first, That so many of the Bishops of Rome were Martyrs, what makes
that to the purpose? Is Martyrdom an Argument of the Supremacy?

To the second, That Victor endeavored to excommunicate the Asiatick Bishops,
is true; but withal it is as true, that he was withstood for his Labor: For
the Bishops of Asia themselves did sharply reprove him, (...), the Words of
Eusebius; and Irenaeus wrote against him for it.

To the third, That the first four Councils were called by the Popes, is an
open Falsehood, for in the two first, the Bishops of Rome are not so much as
mentioned, save only as persons cited. In the two last they are mentioned only
as Petitioners to the Emperor. There are extant the Stories of Eusebius,
Socrates, Ruffinus, Theodoret, Sozomenus, the Acts of the Councils themselves,
at least some of them, the Writings and Epistles of Leo Bishop of Rome. In all
these there is not one word of the Pope farther than a Supplicant, and the
whole calling of the Bishops together is attributed to the Emperor. Take for
Example but the last of them. Leo, Bishop of Rome, was desirous that some
things done in a meeting of Divines at Ephesus, should be disannulled; for this
he becomes a Suitor to Theodosius the junior, to have a General Council, but
could never procure it of him. After his death he continues his suit to
Marcianus, Successor to Theodosius, who granted his request; But whereas Leo
had requested the Council might be held in Italy, the Emperor would not hear
him; nay which is more, the Pope upon good reason, had besought the Emperor to
put off the day designed for the holding of the Council, but the Emperor would
not hear him. So that Leo could do nothing, neither for the calling the
Council, nor for the Place, nor for the Time. And all this appears by Leo's own
Epistles. If the Popes could do so little well near 500 years after Christ, how
little could they do before, when their horns were not yet so long.

The Plea of the Protestants concerning the Corruption of the Church of Rome,
which by them is confessed sometimes to have been pure, is no more prejudicial
to Christ's Promise to his Church, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against her, than the known corruption of the Churches in Asia in St. John's
time, or of other Churches after.

The Close of all is a Demonstration. A Word unfortunately used by your Author,
to bewray his Logic: For indeed a Reason drawn from so poor and empty a sign,
falls many bows wide of demonstrative Proof. First, it is false that all the
rest of Patriarchal Sees are extinct. The Sea of Constantinople yet stands, and
shows her Succession of Bishops from St. Andrew till this day, as well as the
Church of Rome can from St. Peter: The Sea of Alexandria yet subsists, and the
Bishop of that place calls him, (...), Judge of the World, (as my self have
seen in some of his Letters) a Title to which he has as good Right, as the
Bishop of Rome has to be the Worlds Sovereign. If any reply they are poor, in
misery, in persecution and affliction: this can make no difference, since with
Christ there is neither rich nor poor, but a new Creature. And again, their
case now is as good as was the Bishops of Rome, under the Ethnic Emperors; for
their Lot then was no other than those Bishops is now. But grant that it had
lasted longest, what then? some of them must needs have consisted longer than
the other, except we would suppose that they should have fallen all together.
Peradventure the reason of her so long lasting is no other, but that which the
Cyclops gives Ulysses in Homer, (...), Ulysses should be eaten last of all.
However it be, this Vaunt seems but like that of the wicked Servant in the
Gospel, tardat Dominus venire, and we doubt not but a day of the Lord shall
overtake him who now eats and drinks, and revels with the World, and beats his
fellow Servants.

FINIS.

