The Irish-Evidence Convicted by their Own OATHS: OR, THEIR SWEARING AND
Counter-Swearing Plainly Demonstrated In Several of Their Own AFFIDAVITS,
Herewith faithfully Published.

AS ALSO, A Full and Impartial ACCOUNT OF THEIR Past and Present Practices.

LONDON: Printed for William Inghal the Elder. 1682.

The Irish-Evidence CONVICTED By their own OATHS.
I Doubt not but the whole Nation is by this time sufficiently Alarmed with the
noise of the Irish Witnesses, and their Notorious Adventures, their Swearing,
Counter-swearing, Quarrels amongst themselves, Suborning, and being Suborned,
Endeavors to drop the Popish Plot, and Sham another upon Protestants, etc. are
become the Common themes of every Table-talk, and the Subject matter of
Playhouse Drolls.

But the Methods how, the persons by whom, and the Ends for which they were
turned Renegado's, and brought to debauch their Consciences to such an
unparalled degree, are things perhaps not so Generally known, or taken notice
of.

Nor shall I (though I have more Reason than most Private Persons to Inspect
those Affairs) undertake fully to satisfy in all those Particulars, only shall
here present the public with a few Remarques and true Copies of some of their
own Depositions, which will afford us not a little Light therein; for he must
be extremely dull, that by those four Grapes cannot Judge of the whole Vintage.

1. It appears by Coleman's Letters, and all the Evidence of the Popish Plot,
that the same was a General Conspiracy to Subvert and Root out the Protestant
Religion, not only in England, but likewise in the rest of his Majesty's
Dominions, and indeed throughout the World. Whence it cannot in Reason be
imagined, they would neglect to carry on the same in Ireland; a Kingdom where
the overbalance of Papists, the open undisturbed Residence of Popish Bishops
and Priests, the natural Antipathy and Malice in the Natives toward the
English (as well on the account of Religion, as for enjoying several of their
Lands) and many other Reasons, afforded such apt fuel for that Combustion. On
the other side, it is most probable, that the French, as well to embroil our
Affairs, and promote Popery, as more especially in hopes of gaining, at long
Run, the Possession and Government of so Important a Kingdom into their own
Hands, might be forward enough in offering them Assistance, as they did to the
Rebels of Messina in Sicily, when lately they Revolted from their Sovereign the
King of Spain.

2. The Plot in England being Discovered, and the Prosecution vigorously
carried on against the Traitors, and some of them Executed, it is no wonder, if
Conscious Guilt, and Fear, (a very powerful motive with an Irish man, and which
has abundance more Influence on them than true Remorse of Conscience, or
Kindness to the English) might prevail with some of the Conspirators to
Discover what they knew; and indeed their Informations were so Coherent, and
Backed with such pregnant Circumstances, that both His Majesty and the
Parliament declared themselves satisfied, There was such a Bloody and
Traitorous design on foot in that Kingdom, and accordingly Plunket the Titular
Primate, on the Testimony of some of these Evidence, and his own Papers, was
Condemned and Executed.

3. But the Popish Party taking Boldness from the Dissolutions of Parliaments,
whereby the Prosecution against them, was not so vigorously carried on, or at
least retarded, and perceiving the Poverty of these Witnesses, who had a very
little to subsist on, but the mere Charity of well disposed Protestants,
resolved to try if they could take them off, and prevail with them by Bribes
and Hopes to decline their former Evidence, and lay the Plot at the Protestants
doors.

This they foresaw would be a two-edged Strategem; for if they succeeded, and
could get these Witnesses to be believed as to the Protestant Plot, then they
should Infallibly destroy many of their Enemies and most zealous Prosecutors,
as the Earl of Shaftsbury, etc. or if the Sham were Discovered, and the
Witnesses Trapp'd in their Stories, yet however it would spoil their Credit,
and render their Testimony so suspected as to be Invalid against any of the
Popish Traitors, and so either way not fail of doing their Party a most
Effectual Service.

Nor had they reason to despair of prevailing with these fellows, for though
some of them (not all) did now call themselves Protestants, yet even those
pretended Converts remained Papists in their Hearts, or at least were still
Irish men, that is, implacable Enemies to the English. And as fear of a Rope
first brought them to Discover, so now these fears beginning to lessen, and new
fears arise, that they should suffer for Discovery; Therefore, the only way
whereby they could hope for reconciliation to their Countrymen, and Pardon and
Absolution from their Church, was to be Instrumental in Sacrificing the Lives
of as many Protestants as they could to her Interest, as a Peace Offering. Add
hereunto their wretched Poverty, which not only rendered them desperate, but
that very small Relief which they had received from Protestonts, gave them
greater opportunities to color such a Sham-Plot, and swear against their
Charitable Innocent Benefactors.

4. In order therefore to this, they first tamper with and prevail upon David
Fitzgerald, and make use of him as a Decoy to wheedle in the rest, concerning
which Worshipful Tool, it will be necessary to give a brief Account. His
Pedigree is very suitable to his Employment and Practiecs, his Father a pitiful
Villain, considerable only for having had the honor to have been Indicted and
Out-lawed, as being one of the Cutthroats of the Protestants in the late
Rebellion in that Kingdom, and who now goes a begging with his Wife from Door
to Door: This young Hero, their Son, was Originally a Footboy, first to one
Captain Butler, and afterward to one Colonel Piggot, and though he has had
the impudence to say before the King and Council, that he was a man of a
considerable Estate, it is most Notorious, that in Lands, Goods or otherwise, he
was never worth twenty Pounds in his Life, whilst he continued in Ireland; and
what he has done as to Discovery of any thing of the Popish Plot, he was
provoked thereunto rather by desire of Revenge, than any Sentiments of Loyalty:
for his Landlord Sir Thomas Southwel having distrain'd a few Cattle he had for
his Rent, (which were not at all worth 10 l.) And having no way to recover them
back again (being all that he and his Family had to subsist on) but by breaking
of the Pound and stealing them out, and Sir Thomas Prosecuting him for the
same, he then in Revenge Charges Sir Thomas for Concealing the Popish Plot,
pretended to be Discovered by him, to the said Sir Thomas sometime before,
which whether true or false, I determine not; it is certain few people believed
it, the whole Country knowing him to be a fellow of so vile a Life and
Conversation, that they would give no credit to any thing he should either say
or swear, though they were otherwise well satisfied of the designs of the
Papists.

But he hearing that the Irish Plot was discovered in England by Mr.
Hethrington to the King and Council, comes over for England, and gave
Information before the King and Council and both Houses of Parliament, against
several Persons that were concerned in the Popish Plot in Ireland; but his
wants being very great, insomuch, that had not his Landlord given him Credit
for Meat, Drink and Lodging, he must either have starved, or followed the old
Trade that he formerly practiced in Ireland, and being a fellow naturally
proud, ambitious, false, treacherous, and disposed as well by his Constitution
as former Conversation for any kind of Villainy; the Papists or some of their
disguised Factors and Abettors, fell in with him, and managed him so, as he not
only began to Retract his Evidence against Sir John Fitzgerald, Colonel Lacy,
and others. And also used all the means he could, by Threats, Discouragements
and Temptations, to get the rest of the Witnesses against them and others to
Retract also; which ill Practices being found out by Mr. Hetherington, he
immediately made a Complaint, and Exhibited the following Articles against him
to the House of Commons at Westminster.

Articles of High Misdemenour preferred against David Fitzgerald, to the House
of Commons, and there proved fully by Mr. William Hetherington, and afterward
before the King and Council; but not there brought io hearing.
1. THe said Fitzgerald at the first coming of the Witnesses out of Ireland to
prove the Hellish Popish Plot, did seem to be very glad of their coming, to
justify their Evidence, and in particular, that of Eustace Comins, saying that
he was an honest man, and was wrongfully clapped up in prison by the means of Sir
William Davis, for discovering of the Plot, which he the said Fitzgerald swore
he could say more to, than any of them all, and that he could charge the
greatest men or man in Ireland therewith, or in words to that effect: but after
he saw Comins's Narrative Printed, and found that several of his Friends, as he
pretended, were charged there, then he began to rail and reflect upon him, and
threaten to be the death of him; and afterward took accasion to abuse and
revile the rest of the Witnesses.

2. That amongst other matters that he pretended he could prove touching the
Plot, he said he could prove the day and time that the Duke of York was to be
Proclaimed King in Ireland, and that he would tell the King of it, and that he
did acquaint the Earl of Burlington coming out from the Committee of the Lords,
that he could and would hang those he had accused, and bring great ones to
prove the matters he had charged them with.

3. That notwithstanding, the said Fitzgerald has since endeavored by many
ways and means to bring this Informant and the said Witnesses into His
Majesty's disfavour, and to cast reproaches upon them, the better to Invalidate
their Evidence; alleging untruly, That they had received three thousand pounds
from the City of London, or some of the Citizens thereof, or some others whom
he would mention if he could.

4. That the said Fitzgerald has sometimes by threats, other times by feasts,
treats, moneys, promises, and other ways of persuasion, labored to take off
the said Witnesses from giving their Evidence on His Majesty's behalf,
particularly in the Case of Sir John Davis, and when all that would not prevail
upon them, told them that His Majesty was displeased with this Informant's
Proceedings, and would be so with them, if they followed his directions; and by
these devices so affrighted them, that he got them to sign to a Petition to His
Majesty (which he drew for the purpose) Intimating, That they were informed,
His Majesty did not look upon them as coming to do him Service; and that if it
were so, they should readily desist appearance further: though their intentions
were really to serve His Majesty.

5. That the said Fitzgerald, when he knew the said Witnesses were to be
called into either Houses of Parliament, or some Committee relating to them, to
give in their Evidence, has endeavored to hide them, or some of them, that
they could not be found; and when they have been found, he has laid violent
hands on them, or some of them, and would not permit them to go, until they
forced themselves away from him; and then he threatened them, and those that
called them, and with an Oath, said he would break Shaftsbury's Knot; and the
better to prevail with the Witnesses, acknowledged he had received for his
Service, 100 l. of his Grace the Duke of Ormond, 500 l. from the King, and a
Commission to be a Captain; and that His Majesty had given him two Blank
Pattents for Baronets, the one for his Father-in-Law, and the other to be at
his own disposing, and a Grant of the Lands of Rakeale, and all the Commons of
Knockgreny in the County of Limerick.

6. That the said Fitzgerald had not only villified and threatened the said
Comins, but had also informed several of the Members of the House of Commons,
that the said Comins was a very Rogue, and that he could produce many Records
against him, and that he was not fit to be credited: and also terrified and
threatened to kill him the said Comins, so that he was forced for some time to
keep himself in Obscurity That the said Fitzgerald has not only villified and
abused him this Informant, and the Evidence which he was concerned for, but
also Mr. Thomas Sampson, who came over upon his own accord to serve His Majesty
in that matter: and who by his Testimony therein has given great satisfaction
to both Houses of Parliament.

7. That the said Fitzgerald being examined by a Committee of the House of
Commons against Sir John Fitzgerald, refused to give his Evidence, being his
Relation, unless the Committee would promise to Intercede to His Majesty for
his the said Sir John's Pardon; and before a Committee of the Lords, in his
Evidence, he charged Colonel John Fitz-Pattrick and Sir Edward Scot to be
Confederates in the Plot, but at the Lords Bar would not, though asked, and
left their names out in his Narrative, published in Print, of his own knowledge
in that matter, his mind being since altered, upon what considerations may well
be judged; he also said before the said Commit, that he fared the worse
because they knew that the King had a kindness for him.

8. That the said Fitzgerald asked the Witnesses, or some of them, whether
they retained the Romish Religion still? who replied they did, for which he the
said Fitzgerald commended them for so doing, for that the Protestants would
only make use of them for their own purpose and advantage, and afterward would
hang them.

9. That the said Fitzgerald also told the said Witnesses, or some of them,
that the King was satisfied that the late Lord Stafford was innocent, denying
the Fact at his death, or words to that Effect: and that His Majesty was
resolved not to try any more of the Lords in the Tower; and after the
Parliament was Prorogued, he told the said Witnesses, or some of them, that he
would remove their Nests.

10. That the said Fitzgerald had kept continual correspondency and
familiarity with the four Witnesses which were brought over by a Messenger from
Ireland: and a Person of Quality perceiving it, told him that he had not
observed the Orders the Committee gave him; which was, That he should not come
near any of the Evidence, nor Converse with them. The said Fitzgerald replied,
that he was Commanded by the King to come there, and also gave the said Person
of Quality very scurrilous abusive language.

11. The said Fitzgerald also abused the said four Witnesses, or some of them,
and asked them if they came to hang poor Plunket.

12. That the said Fitzgerald said he was abused, because he would not accuse
the Duke of Ormond and the Chancellor of Ireland, which he knew to be as honest
men as any in the three Kingdoms.

THe Examination of these Articles being referred to a Committee, Mr.
Hetherington produced all the Evidence that Fitzgerald had been tampering
with, and gave full satisfaction to the Committee of his villainous Practices,
of which indeed his own Insolent Behaviors before the said Committee, might
alone have been a very pregnant proof. And the Chairman of that Committee was
making his Report to the House, when the Black Rod came to Prorogue them; soon
after which, a Dissolution followed, otherwise it is probable this Plot-shammer
would have been severely dealt with according to Law. But escaping Justice then
so luckily, has encouraged him and his Accomplices, to proceed since more
boldly in their endeavors to sham the Popish Plot, and Suborn Witnesses
against the Earl of Shaftsbury, Mr. Hetherington, etc.

The first course he took to shock the Integrity of the other Witnesses, was to
fright them with impudent lies and scandalous Aspersions upon the Person and
Honor of His Sacred Majesty, assuring them with Horrid Oaths, That His Majesty
did not send for them, nor regard whether they were all hanged or drowned, That
His Majesty did not believe there was any Popish Plot at all, nor care for
prosecuting it, That they should never get any allowance if they would not be
ruled by him, etc. Such brazen-faced slanders on the best of Monarchs, who on
all occasions has so vigorously shown himself a true Defender of the Protestant
Faith, that no good Subject can repeat them without Horror, and Wonder that the
Villian that broached them, has so long escaped the Pillory, or rather the
Gallows.

In the next place he braves it out with fine clothes, and Insults over the
other Witnesses poverty, and shows them whole handfulls of temptation, bright
charming Gold: Insinuating that they should have the like encouragment if they
would but embark with him in the same design. Some of them indeed had so much
conscience and sparks of honesty remaining, or at least such regard to their
future repute and safety, as for some time to struggle with these Temptations,
and then freely upon Oath discovered the proffered Subornations and wheadling
devices; yet afterward (as may reasonably be judged by the sequel) over-swayed
with the suggestions of the Devil and his Instruments, so as to value neither
Truth nor Conscience, nor even their former Oaths, pinched with necessities and
Brow-beaten with the frowns of Grandees, and abandoned (almost) by all the
World, they began to hearken to the voice of this Man-catching Siren, and
forget the Popish Plot, and set up the Irish Ha-loo-loo against Protestants;
and being once engaged, and having slung their Consciencies overboard, nothing
remains that they will Boggle at, or which their grand Plot-shamming Masters
and daily Feeders please to put them upon.

This may seem a bold charge, and would appear very unjust, had we only
suspicions and probable proofs, or violent presumptions, to justify it, but we
have it under several of their own hands, nay more upon their Oaths, which for
the Readers satisfaction, we shall here faithfully recite. The following
Depositions being by several of them (ere they were so totally debauched)
voluntarily sworn before the respective Magistrates therein mentioned.

London ss.
The Information of Maurice Fitzgerald, Gent. taken this Eighteenth Day of
March, 1680. upon Oath before me, Sir John Frederick, Knight and Alderman, one
of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the City of London.
THis Informant being duly sworn says, That whereas it is reported in and
about the City of London and Westminster, and other places, That he has
retracted from the Evidence and Information that he gave upon Oath before John
Odell, Nicholas Mouncton and George Aylesmer, three of His Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the County of Limerick, in the Kingdom of Ireland, against
several Persons in the said Information mentioned, being concerned in the
Horrid Popish Plot, contrived against His Majesty and His Protestant Subjects
there, it is altogether false and untrue. And further declares, That
whatsoever he has related in the said Information, is altogether true, and
will upon no account whatsoever retract from the same, but will justify the
same Information whenever he this Informant shall be thereunto required. And
further says, That whereas there was a Petition lately presented in the name
of this Informant and others (as he has heard) to the King and Council, by
David Fitzgerald, That he this Informant had disowned any Information that he
had given against Sir John Fitzgerald and Colonel Pierce Lacy, He this
Informant does declare, That he knew nothing of the said Petition till after it
was presented, and was not any ways concerned in the same.

Maurice Fitzgerald
Jur. Coram me,

John Frederick.


Vera Copia.

E. B.



Which Information given by the said Maurice Fitzgerald in Ireland, follows in
these words.

Com. Limerick.
The Information of Maurice Fitzgerald, Gent. taken before us, John Odell,
Nicholas Muncton and George Aylsmer, three of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, for the County of Limerick.
THe Informant being duly sworn on the Holy Evangelist says, That on or about
Winter, 1676. after Captain Thomas Mac-Inerina returned out of Flanders and
France, whether he had been employed as Agent from the Irish Gentry, there was
a very great meeting, at Colonel Pierce Lacy's House at Curroe, where met
besides the said Colonel, the Lord of Brittas, Molowney the Popish Titular
Bishop of Killalow, Brenan the Popish Bishop of Waterford, Duley the Popish
Bishop of Limerick, two Jesuits whose names this Informant knows not, Sir John
Fitzgerald, John Power, Son to David Power late of Killbolan, John Hurley,
Eustace White, John Bourke of Cahormohill, William Bourke his Brother, Captain
John Purdon, Captain Thomas Mac-Inerina, Captain Richard Stephenson, David
Fitzgerald, and he this Informant, and several others, whose names this
Informant knows not, where and at which time the said Captain Mac-Inerina gave
an account of his Agency, and what Force the French King had promised to send
over into this Kingdom of Ireland, which to the best of this Informants
remembrance, was to be about 20000 men, and Artillery, Arms and Ammunition for
20000 men more, which were to be raised in Munster, and they then and there
consulted how the 20000 men should be raised, and resolved it should be by
their Clergy, and made a Computation, and appointed how many each Priest should
raise in his Parish; and likewise appointed the Officers that should Command,
and says that the Lord of Brittas, Colonel Pierce Lacy, Sir John Fitzgerald,
John Macnamarra of Cortlaigh, John Power, Captain Sulivan of Beerehaven, one
Carty, and several others were to be Colonels: That John Bourke of Cahirmokill
was to be Lieutenant Colonel, and that Captain Thomas Mac-Inerina was to be
Lieutenant Colonel, or Major to Captain Sulivans Regiment, and that Captain
John Purdon, Captain Richard Stephenson, Mr. John Hurley and Mr. Eustace White,
were to be Field-Officers; and that he has heard, That Mr. John Anktill was to
be Lieutenant Colonel, and that Mr. William Bourke, Mr. Theobald Dowdall, Mr.
Oliver Stephenson, Mr. David Fitzgerald, now in London, This Informant, and
several others, were then appointed Captains, and that John Bourke of Ardagh,
and several others, were appointed Lieutenants, and that John Dury and Tady
Quin, were to be Captains, and that Nicholas Bourke and many others of
Limerick, were then pitched on for the surprise of Limerick, whose names at
present he remembers not, and says, That on notice from Captain Sulivan of
Beerehaven of the Frenches landing, there was a Massacre of all the English
resolved in one Night, and persons particularly assigned to the Massacre or
Murder of every Family, and says, That the Popish Servants in each Family
were to betray and open the doors, or some other way let in those Irish, and so
murder the English in their beds, and after if they could not surprise, they
were imediately to besiege Limerick: and says, That by reason of the Emperors,
the King of Spain, and other the Confederates joining and assisting the Dutch,
the French King was hindered from sending out those Forces and Arms he promised,
and so all things were at a stand till about Michaelmas, 1679. That all the
aforenamed persons, and John Macnamarra of Cratellaigh, John Anktill of
Farochy, Captain Levallin and several others, met at Mr. William Bourke's House
at Lisnekilly, and continued there two or three days together, and that the
said Captain Levallin brought and produced a Commission for the raising of
those 20000 men, and uniting them with what Forces should be sent out of
France, and raised in other parts of this Kingdom; and says, That he has
heard, that the Earl of Tyrone was to be a General Officer, and Colonel
Fitz-Patrick and Sir Wiliam Talbot, were to have some great Commands, and
says, That all then present at Lisnekilly, bound themselves by strict Oaths,
and by an Instrument under their Hands and Seals, to be true and faithful and
stand by each other, and says, That the Plot is still, and that they have
daily hopes of the French Kings invading, and that he has heard there was some
Powder lately landed in the County of Clare, side of the River of Shanon, and
that he will labor to discover it, and says, That he has some papers which
he will peruse, and hopes by them other things may occur to his memory, which
he will be ready to add to this his Information; and says, That he has been
told, That David Fitzgerald discovered the said Plot both to Sir Thomas
Southwell and John Piggot, Esquire And this Informant says; That in case this
Information should be known, he and his Family are in danger of being murdered.

London, ss.
The Information of Maurice Fitz-Gerrald Gent. taken the one and twentieth day
of March 1680. upon Oath before me Sir John Frederick Knight and Alderman, one
of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of London.
THis Informant says that David Fitz-Gerrald was a Grand Plotter, and also to
be a Captain to assist the French King, as he has formerly sworn and declared;
and that there was a difference between one Colonel Lacy and the Lord Brittis,
which of them should have the said David to be their Captain in their said
Regiments. And further the said Maurice Deposes, that the said David did use
all his endeavors to stifle some of his Majesty's Evidence, as himself, one
Edmond Morphew John Moyer, Hugh Duffey, George Coddan, Paul Garmley, and
Mortaph Downing, from declaring the truth concerning the horrid Popish-Plot in
Ireland. And further says, that the said David-Fitz-Gerrald, did desire him
this Informant and the rest of his Majesty's Evidence, to go back for Ireland,
that the said David might be Captain over all the said Evidence, and have all
the benefit to himself. Also the said Informant says that the said David
Fitz-Gerrald, did send one Thomas Fitz-Gerrald, to one John Fitz-Gerrald to
persuade him the said John Fitz-Gerrald to retract his Evidence. And the said
John being come to the said David Fitz-Gerrald, this Informant was ordered by
the said David to withdraw into a private Chamber, that he might not hear their
Contrivance and Discourse. As also, the said John was to be one of the three
Eitz-Gerralds that were to join with the said David against his Majesty's
Evidence. Furthermore, the said David did order me to write in my Information,
that one William Hetherington and the rest of his Majesty's Evidence, were but
all Rogues and Thieves, and Goale-breakers, and Turbalent persons; and that
their Evidence ought not to be taken, either by King or Parliament; And the
said David Fitzgerald did likewise tell this Informant, that his Majesty told
him the said David Fitz-Gerrald, that he would not give, or Order any money for
his said Evidence that are in the City, unless the said persons would go back
from their Evidence, and join with the said David Fitz-Gerrald, meaning one
Moyer, Morphey, and Duffey, that were to have thirty pounds a piece to join
with the said David, against the rest of his Majesty's Evidence. Further, being
demanded whether David Fitz-Gerrald had been at any time in Company with the
Earl of Aron, and Sir John Davis, since the last Sessions of Parliament, says
several times at their respective Lodgings, and likewise, that the said David
had been several times with Sir John Fitz-Gerrald in the Gatehouse, likewise,
this Informant says, that he has seen David Fitz-Gerrald, in Company with
Robert Poor, a person charged for Treason, at the said David's Lodging, where
the said David Fitz-Gerrald gave the said Robert Poor Instructions to draw up
the Articles against Mr. Hetherington.

Maurice Fitz-Gerrald.
Jurat Vicessimo primo die Martij 1680. Coram me.

John Frederick.



The informatton of Owen Callaghan and Murtagh Downing taken upon Oath before
the Right Honorable Sir Patient Ward Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London,
the 4th. of May, 1681.
THe said Informants being duly sworn and examined upon the holy Evangelist,
deposes and says: That David Fitzgerald has used all the means he could
possible for to get these Informants to retract from their Evidence these
Informants had formerly given in against several persons who were concerned in
the late Horrid Popish Plot in Ireland. The said David Fitzgerald meeting with
these Informants in the City of Westminster near Charing Cross demanded of them
these Informants what their business was here in England, whereupon they these
Informants told the said David Fitzgerald that they came over to be Witnesses
for the King, to whom the said David Fitzgerald replying, and said to these
Informants, that the King did not send for them nor for the rest of the
Evidence and that the King had rather that they were all hanged or drowned,
than that they should stay here to any such purpose. And these Informants
further say, that the said David Fitzgerald told them these Informants, that
those that would join with him the said Fitzgerald against Mr. William
Hetherington, and the rest of his Majesty's Evidence should have money enough,
and named Ten Pounds a piece and also their pass for Ireland. And these
Informants further declare that in the company of one Morris Fitzgerald who is
also one of the Kings Evidence, and the said Mortagh Downing one of these
Informants being at the sign of the Kings Head in Long-Acre near London, the
said David Eitz-Gerald declared that the said Evidence had better to go home
for Ireland: and dig their Potatoe Gardens than to stay here and expect any
money from his Majesty for their service. And that the said David Fitzgerald
also declared to these Informants that his Majesty did not care for putting
this Popish Plot forward at all, and the said David Fitzgerald further said,
that his Majesty did not believe there was any such Popish Plot intended in
Ireland. And these Informants further declare, that the said David Fitzgerald
declared and said to these Informants that his Majesty did not care for any man
that should speak any thing against his Grace the Duke of Ormond, neither would
his Majesty believe that the said Duke had any hand in the said Irish Plot. And
these informants further declare that the said David Fitzgerald, wherein he
could meet with these informants, and the said Morris Fitzgerald in discourse
would tell the foresaid Morris Fitzgerald and these informants, that his
Majesty would not give them any money for maintenance, nor money to bear their
charge for Ireland, except they would all join with him the said David
Fitzgerald against the said Mr. William Hetherington, and the rest of his
Majesty's Evidences: merely to force them to retract from the discharge of
their Consciences in giving in their just Evidences to serve his Majesty, as in
true zeal and loyalty to their King and Country they ought to do as becomes
true Subjects: And these Informants further declare, that the said David
Fitzgerald declared to several Friars (whose names do follow) when first they
came to him the sald David Fitzgerald, that they should have no money from his
Majesty unless that he the said David Fitzgerald did further and forward them
the old Friars which he would do upon condition that the said Friars would
assuredly join with him the said David Fitzgerald against the said Mr.
Hetherington and the rest of his Majesty's Evidence, etc. The which they the
said Friars have since acaccordingly done and agreed to the said Fitz-Gerralds
desire, as namely Friar John Moyer, Edmond Murphey a secular Priest, Friar Hugh
Duffey and others by the said Fitz-Gerralds procurement. And these Informants
further say, That the said Fitz-Gerrald ordered all the said parties to have
all things in readiness, in order thereunto in Writing: These Informants also
say, that the said Moyer, Murphey Duffy and others, gave him the said
Fitz-Gerrald a Contract in Writing under their hands, to effect the said
purpose solintended by them, which was to side with him the said Fitz-Gerrald,
against the said Mr. Hetherington. And these Informants further say, that the
said David Fitz-Gerrald has likewise engaged himself to the said Friars, that
all the Names of those persons in Ireland, who are concerned in the said horrid
Plot, that he the said Fitz-Gerrald would undertake to have money enough from
his Majesty for them, upon the condition that they would ioyn with him the said
Fitz-Gerrald against the said Mr. Hetherington, and the rest, to sham their
Evidence in speaking the Truth as aforesaid in the discharge of their
Consciences. And further the said David Fitz-Gerrald told them, these
Informants, that he would make his Majesty not to give any of the Evidence that
was in this City of London any money at all, and that as soon as the Parliament
sat at Oxford, that those Evidences then lying in the City of London, would be
all hanged for lying there; merely on a pretense to get these Informants as
they verily believe, to join with him the said Fitz-Gerrald, as the before
named Moyer, Murphey, Duffey, and one George Murphy had done; the which said
persons, the said Fitz-Gerrald had drawn to side with himself, by Treats
Threats and Money as aforesaid. And these Informants further say, That the said
David Fitz-Gerrald declared to them, these Informants, that his Majesty had
told him the said Fitz-Gerrald, that within one week after the Parliament were
met and sat at Oxford, they would be dissolved. And that then every one of the
Evidence might go home about their business: and these Informants further say,
that one Doctor Thomas Fitz-Gerrald, who was sent by the said David
Fitz-Gerrald as these Informants verily believes, on purpose to Trap or ensnare
us these Informants in our Evidence, and thereby to know our intentions, and
for no other end then to get us to retract our Evidence as aforesaid: he the
said Doctor Thomas Fitz-Gerrald uttering himself in these words (viz.) that he
the said Doctor Fitz-Gerrald would Pistol or kill the said David Fitz-Gerrald,
(always provided) That they, these Informants, would join with him the said
Doctor Fitz-Gerrald against the said David Fitz-Gerrald. And these Informants
further say, That the said Doctor made it his Business to come several Nights
to the Informant Mortough Downings Lodging to effect his said purpose, thinking
thereby to entrap these Informants in their Evidence, as aforesaid, if by any
means he could.

The Information of Bernard Dennis, taken upon Oath before the Right Honorable
Sir Patient Ward, Knight, then Lord Mayor of the City of London.
I Do remember that Captain David Fitz-Gerrald at several places has told me,
that the King was clearly against Mr. Hetheringtons proceedings, and that if
the Irish Evidence did follow his directions they were likely enough to fall
out of the Kings Favor as well as he: and the Reason was, because of his
Familiarity with the Earl of Shaftsbury. And that his Majesty would be highly
disconted that any of the Evidence should proceed against Sir John Davis or any
of his appointed Magistrates without his permission. He further told me, that
there was a Collection made for the Irish Evidence, in the City of London, and
that the King had notice of it. And if we would take Fitz-Grralds advice we
might have what money we would, and told me that he had five hundred pounds
Sterling, and a Commission for a Captains place from his Majesty, and that he
was to go suddenly for Ireland, he further told me that his Majesty was
informed, that we the Kings Evidence came over not to serve him, but to cast an
Aspersion upon his Majesty: which we utterly then, and always absolutely do
deny. Hereupon, we drew and presented a Petition to his Majesty, setting forth
the occasion of our coming over: which was to serve his Majesty and the
Kingdom, and that when he pleased, we were willing to return home: after this,
he told me that his Majesty intended to impeach Mr. Hetherington.

Vera Copia.



London ss.
The Information of Mary Cox, Spinster, taken upon Oath the eighth day of July,
1681. before Sir John Frederick Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the City of London.
MAry Cox of Stoke Newington, in the County of Middlesex, Spinster, makes
Oath, that being at Mr. Robert Boulters a Stationer in Cornhil London, the
night before Mr. Plunket was Tried, Mr. Bernard Dennis came to speak with Mr.
Boulter aforesaid, and in Discourse of the Trial of Plunket, Mr. Dennis said,
that coming from the other end of the Town, in Fetter-Lane, by the Cross-Keys,
he saw a Crowd of people, and enquiring what was the reason of it, they told
him it was a Subpena served upon Murphy, and he said Murphy had absconded for
some time, because he would not have been Subpened, and he said Murphy did say,
he would not appear the next day according to the Subpena, but what the Issue
was he did not know; but left them and came straight to Mr. Boulters. After
some Discourse of Mr. Dennis his being in Newgate, and that Mr. Wilmore was
Bayl for him and Macnamarra, my self and Mr. Boulter aforesaid, asked him some
Questions about Mr. Hetherington, and whether he thought him an honest Man, he
told us he thought him a very honest Man for what ever he did see or know
concerning him. Then we asked him what was become of his Man George, he said he
was gone from him over to Fitz-Gerrald, and that he had new Clothes, and was
very fine, and said so might he have if he would turn Rogue, for he said he had
a Letter in his Pocket, which made him great proffers to retract his Evidence.
We asked him from whom he had this Letter, he said from Fitz-Gerrald. Then we
asked him if he were sure it was from him, and how he knew it, he said it was
writ with his own hand, and his Name subscribed to it, and that he knew his
Hand very well, and had seen it several times. And he said in this Letter,
Fitz-Gerrald proffered him Gold and Silver enough holding out his hands, as
people do when full of Money, and that he might have his change of Raiment, and
live Comfortably not only for the present for the future also. But he said, he
hoped he should approve himself an honest Man, and take Mr. Boulters Council,
to keep to the Truth, and then he should never be ashamed. There were present
Mr. Boulters Wife, one Mrs. Norton and my self. We had several other discourses
about diverse Irish Men that were gone off, and about the great endeavor
Fitz-Gerrald made to get the Evidence over to his side, which I cannot remember
so particularly as I did the former.

Mary Cox.
Jurat. octavo die Julij, 1681. Annoque Caroli secundi nunc Angl. etc. xxxiij.
Coram me

John Frederick.



London, ss.
The Information of Robert Boulter of Cornhil London, Stationer, taken upon
Oath, before Sir John Frederick One of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for
the City of London, on the eighth day of July 1681.
RObert Boulter of Cornhil London, Stationer, makes Oath, that he was present
when the discourse happened between Mr. Bernard Dennis, and Mrs. Mary Cox, and
himself, as in her Deposition aforegoing is set forth, and that the same is a
just and true Account of the said Discourse.

Robert Boulter.
Jurat. octavo die Julij 1681. Annoque Caroli secundi nunc Angl. etc. xxxiij.
Coram me

John Frederick.



A true Copy of a Paper, Remaining at the Council Board, attested in pursuance
of an Order in Council, Dated the fifth day of October, 1681.
William Blaithway.
Council Chamger, the fifth day of October 1681.
BRyan Heynes of London, Gent. Aged thirty years and upwards, makes Oath, that
Mr. David Fitz-Gerrald one of the Kings Evidence, about the latter end of
February last, told this Deponent that he the said Fitz-Gerrald possessed his
Majesty, and also gave it under his hand and Seal, that the late Plot was a
Presbiterian Plot, and invented by the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of
Shaftsbury, on purpose to extirpate the Family of the Stewarts, and dethrone
his present Majesty, and turn England etc. into a Commonwealth, or else set the
Crown upon the Earls own head, which the said Earl told the said Fitz-Gerrald,
did more appertain to the said Earl, then to his present Majesty, as the said
Fitz-Gerrald told this Deponant, and this Deponant further says, that one
Robert Power, Agent for the Earl of Tyrone, and likewise the said Fitz-Gerrald
did diverse times tamper with this Deponant, to speak to John Macnamarra, to the
end the said Macnamarra would retract his Depositions concerning the
Popish-Plot against the said Earl of Tyrone, and that in case the said
Macnamarra would deny what he deposed against the said Earl of Tyrone, the said
Robert Power and David Fitz-Gerrald did to this Deponant promise the said
Macnamarra should be provided for all the days of his Life, etc.

Much more this Deponant can say:

And this Deponant further says, That the said Fitz-Gerrald told this
Deponant, he wanted but Mr. John Macnamarra to come in and join with him, and
he would have the said Earl of Shaftsburies Head off, and Sham the whole
Popish-Plot.

S. W.

All these are exact Copies of Affidavits and Testimonies freely made by these
Irish Evidence (except only that of Mrs. Cox and Mr. Boulter, which relate
materially thereunto) And not a man of those Irish-men that made these Oaths,
but has since been great with Fitz-Gerrald, and submitted to his Conduct, and
really done what there they swear, they were first tampered with, and
profferred to be subborn'd unto; Whence we may most naturally raise these
conclusions.

1. Either what they swore then, was True, or False. If True, nothing is more
apparent, Than that this Fitz-Gerrald who is now so much in favor with
Grandees, and one of the preparers of Witnesses, against Protestants, is one of
the worst of Men: And that there were long since ill Designs set on Foot to
corrupt them. And who can doubt but they have swallowed the Bait, that sees the
sudden change of their Condition from Beggary, to Bravery; whilst they swore
against Papists they had not a penny to help themselves, but what peoples
Charity gave them, to keep them from Starving; As soon as they began to talk of
a Protestant Plot, they appear fine, full of money, have Lodgins, and Diet
provided for them, etc. And yet (observe the ridiculous Absurdity) these Men
(amongst other Lies) must now swear, that Ptotestants Bribed them to swear that
Papists. --

On the the other side, If what they swore in these Affidavits be False, They
are virtually and voluntarily forsworn (if not legally perjured) Consequently
nothing any of them shall hereafter (I mean at least against any Protestant,
for as to their Testimony against Papists nothing of such a Biass appears)
ought to be regarded.

2. If such Practices have been used toward these particular Men (the Indirect
Dealings with whom are thus Providentially brought to Light) we have Just
Reason to suspect the like, have (behind the Curtain) been also made use of
with others, and even several of the English Witnesses too have no less receded
from their former Declarations and frequently of late Herd and associate with
these Tainted Irish-Cattel. That Subornation is every where Vigorously
endeavored, and that the Conspirators reckon it worth their while to offer
mighty Temptations, and give large Wages of Iniquity, too Charming for most
Men's slender Honesty to Refuse, is evident by the late Practices with Captain
Wilkinson. That these Plot-shamming Intrigues were at Bottom carried on by
Papists, there is no doubt to be made; Not only because it serves only their
Interest. But also from several Instances of Fact.

1. Whilst these Witnesses (as I said but now, and it is a Consideration
deserves to be repeated) Charged Papists, they were poor, forlorn, miserable,
and had nothing to live on, but what they begged of Protestants (who though
they had the Compassion not to let them Starve, had no such lewd Principles as
to Bribe them to swear falsely against any; That they gave them something to
keep them Alive shows their Charity. That they gave them no more, is an
Indeniable Argument of their Innocence) But no sooner did they pretend a
Protestant Plot, and Damn and Sink against Shaftsbury, Wilmore, etc. But they
were New-Rigg'd, and had plenty of Money and Encouragement. It Is not unknown,
that four of these Post-Knights, viz. Owen Callaghan, John Arthur, Maurice
Fitz-Gerrald, and Murtagh Downy were kept for a considerable time at a certain
place in St. Gileses, and taken care for by one M. an Agent, or Solicitor for
the Duke of Norfolk (a true Friend to the Catholic Cause, till falling out
amongst themselves, one of them declaring he would not forswear himself against
my Lord Shaftsbury, Mr- Hetherington and others; that were Listed in
Fitz-Gerralds and J. W's Black Book, unless he had as much money as the rest
('It Was not doing the Job they scrupled, but not having equal Snacks, divided
them) The Cabal of Sham-Plotters, and Plot-shammers, were forced to meet to
appease the Difference. And for fear it should take wind in Town, that good
Friend Mr. M. moved, that he had a convenient place in the Country and a trusty
Friend that would keep them in Decorum, and be as diligent in Instructing them,
as Castlemain or Dangerfield (in days of Yore) were, in Tutoring the St. Omers
Lads at Gammar Cellierses. Whereupon, they were Transplanted for some time down
into the Fenns, not far from Lynn about a place called Downham, where they
Conn'd their Lesson so fast, and behaved themselves so Insolently, that 'twas
feared they would have sworn Treason against most part of the Country (Papists
only excepted) For they had not only assaulted a worthy Loyal Justice of the
Peace, but were contriving to make a Swear (as they call it) against several
others that would not Associate with them, had not their Mannagers again
thought fit to remove them up to Town with the rest that were entertained in
the Subornation-Office, That they might all the better Concur in their Tales,
first to procure a Protestant-Plot in General, and then to proceed in
particular against all those both in City and Country that were in F. -- G. and
J. -- W's Fatal Lists. Out of which, the Grand Sham-Plotter, Fitz-G. was
pleased to show a great many Names of Persons that were to be charged with
High Treason by him and the rest of his Confederates, to a certain honest Man
of Ireland, by whom he sent several Broad-Picees (part of the price of his
Soul) to his Wife, who was before in a Starving Condition.

2. There was some time since one Mr. H^rley a Protestant that came over, and
could make a very considerable Discovery of the Popish-Plot in Ireland, and
brought with him Letters of Recommendation from a Noble Protestant Peer in that
Kingdom, The Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Shannon, but Fitz-G. and the
rest of that ungodly Tribe, meeting with him, and thinking he had no more
Conscience than themselves, used all means to get him to make up one of their
Number, intended for the Sham-Plot-Office, But he detesting their wicked
Designs, they immediately procured a Fellow to Arrest him in a Fobb-Action, and
clap him up in the Marshals^a in Southwark, where (contrary to a late Statute)
he was thrust amongst the Common Felons; and there continued four or five days
without Meat or Drink, (unless the Pump and kindness of his Companions who had
scarce sustenance for themselves, supplied him) and none of his Friends knew
what was become of him, till a person by chance meeting with Mr. Hetherington,
told him one of the Kings Evidence was in that desperate deplorable Condition,
and that without speedy Relief, he would not live till the next day. Whereupon
Mr, Hetherington taking pity on the poor Man though altogether unknown to him,
was so Charitable as not to suffer a Stranger and a Christian to perish for
want; especially coming on so good an Account as he did, to serve his King and
Country, and the Protestant Religion: and so went immediately and paid his Fees
and got him Released. But the poor Man's Spirits were so far spent, that he
never Recovered, but having Languisht for some time, Dyed; And who at the great
day of Account are to Answer for his Blood, is left to that Tremendous Assize
where all wicked Contrivers and false Witnesses and corrupt Judges shall
receive an Impartial Doom.

3. That these Sham-Office-Evidence are still in their Hearts Papists though
they pretend to be Protestants; appears, for that several of them since they
Listed themselves in Fitz-Geralds Troop have been with the Condemned Priests
and Jesuits and Madam Damnable Celiers the Midwife, or chief Lady of the
Popish Enchantments. And it is highly probable, That they gave them Absolution
(as they did to the beforementioned Arthur, (commonly called Club-Foot) for
swearing against Mr. Hetherington) And upon Condition to do some great Service
for their Interest, as swearing a Protestant Plot against all such as they
should direct, they may again be Reconciled to the Church of Rome.

4, These Witnesses cannot deny, but they have often said, Nay, some of them
have given it under their hands, and declared upon Oath, That it was no sin to
spill Protestants Blood, but a Meritorious Act, and that it is usual with the
Popish Clergy to give Absolution as well before the Fact committed, as after,
the better to effect their Designs. I do for the Truth thereof Appeal to some
of the Papers of that Popish Traitor Bishop Plunket lately executed, which were
delivered by Mr. Hetherington to the King and Council.

There is one thing more I may not omit, which is, That David Fitz-Gerrald
(upon a hearing between him and Mr. William Hetherington, before the King and
Council, did assert, That he could procure forty Irishmen for forty pound, to
Swear to whatever he desired them, upon which it was Replied, That he gave an
honorable Character of his Countrymen.

Several other Deductions and Notes might be made on the foregoing Depositions,
But I would neither weary nor fore-stall the Reader; I conceived my self bound
in Duty to my King and Country and the Protestant Religion, to make them
public, and some other Depositions there are likewise, not less material, but
too long or in some Respects not fit yet to be Printed. I think these
sufficient to give us an Insight into the Intrigue, for he is but an Ill
Woodman, that cannot discover the Nature and Size of the Beast, by the View of
his Excrement.

William Hetherington.

FINIS.

