THE ALTERATION OF THE COIN, WITH A Feasible Method TO DO IT, Most Humbly
PROPOSED to Both Houses of PARLIAMENT. To which is ANNEXED, A PROJECTION, or
SCHEEM of Reasonable Terms, for Establishing a Firm and General Peace in Europe.

By Thomas Houghton, of Lyme-street, Gent.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, 1695.

THE Alteration of the Coin, Most Humbly Proposed to Both Houses of Parliament.
Most Great and Prudent Senators,
YOU cannot but be very sensible of the deplorable Misfortune Your Selves, and
the People of this Nation, are under, by the Clipped and Counterfeit Money of
this Kingdom; the Good Money, which is now left, being so small, and little in
Substance, that it is scarcely to be known and distinguished from the Bad and
Counterfeit, except it be by such who are daily Receivers and Payers of Sums of
Money; for it is every Day more and more manifest, That there are abundance of
Rich, as well as Poor People, extremely Cheated, who not being able to know
Good and Bad Money asunder, are great Sufferers by it, which too frequently
falls amongst the Poor, to their great Grief and Trouble, with whose Clamours
and Complaints the whole Nation rings, the Distemper and Infection being, as it
were Epidemical, and universally spread through the Nation, so that every one
is ready to cry, Lord have Mercy upon us! It is therefore reasonable to
believe, You will All unanimously grant, That there is an absolute Necessity to
alter the Coin; and that You will consider and think upon some proper Way or
Method, this Sessions of Parliament, to amend this overgrown Mischief, which,
if not speedily prevented, will, in a little time, sink the Nation to a low
degree: The real and true Silver Coin being thus shamefully Clipped, and the
Milled Money Melted down, and carried off, there is little left to Trade with,
but such that is Counterfeit, or half Clipped away, which creates so much
difficulty in Paying and Receiving, that Business is found to be a Burden, and
Paying and Receiving of Money become the greatest Perplexity of the People; so
that all Persons hope and believe it will be Your Care, with all the Expedition
that may be, to VOTE, The Alteration of the Coin, and to use Your Endeavors
that it may be Altered, and new Regulated, which may happily prevent many
Disorders that may otherwise fall amongst Multitudes of People in this Kingdom;
and that You will do it in this juncture of Time by such Ways and Methods as
will be least Burdensome to the KING, and all degrees of his Subjects,
considering the great Taxes and Impositions that are to be Paid for Carrying on
the Wars, till an Honorable and Lasting PEACE can be procured; which Taxes and
Impositions will be difficultly raised upon the Calling in the Money, unless
the People find Yours and His Majesty's Favor in Regulating and Valuing the
Coin, and fixing a certain Price upon Guinneas: And in what point that Favor
for Indulging the People does consist, is in the following Paragraphs further
expressed: So that before I come to set forth any of those Ways and Methods for
Altering the COIN, and Favoring the People, it may not be amiss to say
something concerning the Increase and Production of SILVER and GOLD, how, and
by who, they have been procured, when, and from whence, brought to this degree
in Quantity, as they are now found to be in EUROPE.

IT is therefore to be understood, and I doubt not but all People will grant,
That SILVER and GOLD are the Hinges upon which all Trade and Commerce moves in
the most Flourishing Kingdoms on the Earth; and those Nations and Kingdoms that
abound with the greatest Plenty thereof, are, by all other Trading Nations,
most frequented with their Goods, in Order to obtain them, knowing them to be
the most necessary and lasting Instruments to procure all things that are, or
shall be found useful, or any ways serviceable to Mankind, being Portable and
Durable, when most other Goods are Burdensome, subject to Perish and Decay:
Experience having proved This in all Times and Places, makes Silver and Gold
the more coveted and desired; for every Nation, as they abound therewith, are
more or less able to carry on Foreign Trades, -- to make Improvements at Home
or Abroad, to build Ships, and fit out Fleets to Sea, to maintain Wars, or to
do and execute any other Thing or Things that requires Labor or Expense; all
Nations, as well as private Persons, driving their Trades according to the
Proportion of Silver and Gold, they have whereby to procure Goods to Trade with.

IT is also to be considered, That the Trades of EUROPE, especially those of
the English and Dutch, are an Hundred times greater now, than they were Two
Hundred and Twenty Years since; for where there was One Thousand Pounds worth
of Goods imported or exported by either of them in those times, there is an
Hundred Thousand Pounds worth imported and exported by Both of them now: The
principle and chief Reason of This, has been the Discoveries of GUINEY and
AMERICA; for to them the Improvement of all Trade, in and to most Parts of the
Earth, is chiefly owing: They having furnished Silver and Gold, whose
Circulation has procured Goods not only for EUROPE, but for AFRICA and ASIA;
many Parts of EAST INDIA having been supplied, since their Discoveries, with
great Quantities of Money and Silver, both Cony'd and Uncoyn'd, and especially
with Dollars, or Pieces of Eight, by the English, Dutch, French, Portuguiese
and Spaniards; for although Silver and Gold be inanimate, nevertheless they
have, like a grateful Offspring, plentifully supplied AFRICA and AMERICA again
with all necessary and serviceable Things, there wanted for Humane Use, in
Return thereof: So that it may be necessary, for the Information of some
People, to show how Gold and Silver have, of late Years, been expanded or
spread abroad in the World, and by who, and from whence they came, and when
they begun to have this commanding Power and Influence upon Trade, as well as
upon Mankind.

IN the Year 1471. The Portuguiese discovered and found the Gold Coast of
GUINEY, from whence they brought some Quantities of Gold, near the Value of Ten
Thousand Pounds per Annum; before which time there was but very little of
Silver Coin in ENGLAND, HOLLAND, or FRANCE, and but small Quantities of Gold in
EUROPE, in Comparison to what there is now; so that since the Portuguiese
discovered those Parts of AFRICA, they have had some Settlements there, and a
Trade with the Natives; and have brought sometimes greater or lesser Quantities
of Gold from thence into EUROPE.

IN the Year 1492. Christopher Columbus, a Man Born at Genoa, being Fifty Years
of Age, first found some Parts of AMERICA, and amongst them the Island of
Hispaniola, from whence some Gold was brought to Spain, to the Value of 200000
Ducats per Annum, which is 22222 l. and 18 s. valuing the Ducat, as formerly it
was, at 9 s. And after the Discovery of Hispaniola, and the Adjacent Islands,
the said Columbus, with many Spaniards, made several Voyages, and further
Discoveries in AMERICA, bringing to SPAIN what Gold and Silver they found
amongst the Natives of those Countries, who had greater Quantities of Gold than
Silver amongst them in those times, because the Gold lies in the Soil or
superficial part of the Earth, which they could easily come at; and the Earth
being often washed from the Mountains into the Guts and small Brooks, and so
carried down to the Rivers, they had ways to separate it from the Sand;
whereas, the getting of Silver is obtained by Mining, and requires Digging,
Hewing, cutting down the Rocks, and blasting them in pieces with Gunpowder,
which things the Natives of AMERICA did not then understand. Thus GOLD, the
Darling and dearly beloved by Mankind, being plentifully found amongst the
Natives in most Parts of this Newfound World, invited abundance of Spaniards,
with some Jews, and other People, to flock thither, having heard the great
Noise thereof in SPAIN.

BETWEEN the Years 1492 and 1515 (which is 22 Years) there were very great
Discoveries made in AMERICA, by many Spaniards, both on the South and North
Side of the Line, and particularly in these Provinces following, lying between
the North and South Seas, which was thoroughly examined; (viz.) Dariena,
Carthagena, Rio de la Hacha, St. Martha, Granada, Popyan, Venezula, Paria, and
Panama, which Nine Provinces, for the Abundance of Gold that was, and is yet
found in most of them, are called by the Name of Golden Castile. -- At the same
time the Province of Guiana was discovered; from all which Places there were
great Quantities of Gold brought to SPAIN in few Years after; so that when the
Spaniards had fully examined these Parts, and had taken Notice of the extent of
that Isthmus, or Neck of Land, lying between the North and South Seas. In the
Year 1515, they chose out a convenient Place, and there Built the now Famous
and Renowned City, called PANAMA, standing toward the South Sea, to which
Place, all the Gold and Silver that now comes from Peru, and the Southern
Parts, are brought, and there put a shore, this City being the Receptacle of
their Riches, from whence it is brought, part by Land, and part by
Water-Carriage, about 20 Leagues, to a City on this side, called PORTO BELLO,
and from thence Shipped for SPAIN: So that after the Spaniards had made these
Discoveries in the Years abovementioned, they grew mighty Industrious, and
were extremely busied in Fitting out Ships, and Sending Men to this Part of the
Newfound World, there being fresh Discoveries made every Year of New
Countries, and of Rich Mines, in various Parts of AMERICA; so that in the
Reigns of Henry the 7th, Henry the 8th, and Edward the 6th, it was the
Misfortune of ENGLAND not to enterprise or undertake any thing in this kind,
and but very little since in those Countries, where Silver and Gold Mines are.

IN the Year 1521, MEXICO was Conquered, and several Countries thereabouts, in
which the Spaniards found much Gold amongst the Natives, and have since
discovered and laid open many Rich Silver Mines; from whence has been brought
several Hundreds of Tons of Silver in Pieces of Eight, and Bars of Bullion, to
Cadiz in SPAIN; at which Mines the Natives and Spaniards, as now they do at all
other Mines in AMERICA, draw the Silver from the Oar, by the help of
Quicksilver, the Oar being first powdered, and ground small, till it is as
fine as Wheat Flower, then put it into Tubs, mixing Quicksilver and Lyme with
it, grind it in Water, whereby the Quick Silver, being well mixed with the Oar,
in few Days draws the Silver to it; when having well cleans'd and washed away
all the Mud, the Silver and Quicksilver remain together at the Bottom, which
they take out, and put together into a Retort, and lute an Iron-Pipe fast to
it, the other end of the Pipe going into a Tub of cold Water, they then light
the Fire under the Retort, which drives off all the Quicksilver into the Tub
of Water, which is never the worse, but serves for use again and again to mix
with fresh Oar, and the Silver remains by its self in the Retort, which, when
taken out, is Melted with several other Parcels of Silver, Refined after the
same way, and so cast into Ingots, or Bars of Bullion. And although Abundance
of this Silver is brought to SPAIN, nevertheless the Spaniards and Natives in
all Parts of AMERICA, where the Mines are, do keep and detain prodigious
Quantities of Silver and Gold amongst them, having Abundance of Ornaments, and
most of their Vessels and Vtenfils made of those Metals; so that from the
Province of Zacatecas, which lies on the North Side the Line, to the Province
of Chili, that lies on the South Side, You may conclude and believe, There is
much more Silver and Gold ready got, Refined, and above Ground, than there is
now in all EUROPE. Where the Spaniards, in those Parts, have taught the Natives
the way of Buying and Selling with Silver and Gold, which, as well there as
here, and in all other Places, is found more Commodious and Useful than the
heavy and dull Way of Bartering one sort of Goods for another.

IN the Year 1524, The great Country of PERU was Discovered, in which Country
the Spaniards found vast Quantities of Silver, and especially of Gold ready
got, all the People of the Country having some Vessels, or Ornamental
Instruments, more or less, of that Metal: But the Spaniards having Conquered
the Natives, fell into Wars amongst themselves; Francisco Pizarro and Almagro,
Two Spaniards striving who should be Governor (too much Gold making them Mad).
And after Francisco Pizarro's Death, the Quarrels amongst the Spaniards did not
cease; so that from their first Entrance into PERU, those Disorders lasted near
Twenty Years, in which time there was a deal of Spanish and Indian Blood shed
on both sides, considering the Number of Spaniards that were there in those
times, which Wars were a great Hindrance to the Working the Silver Mines in
PERU, till the Year 1546, when Pedro de la Gasca, being sent thither by the
King of SPAIN as Vice Roy of PERU, Conquered Gonsalo Pizarro: After which, the
Wars ceasing, the Old and Famous Mines of Andacava, with many in Los Charcas,
in the Province called the Lypes, and the wonderful Rich Mines of St.
Christophers, in ORURO, were set at work, in which Mines there was, and yet is,
Abundance of fine Malliable Silver in Leaves and Threads, and also in Dust,
like to white Sand, which, of its self, is perfect and pure Silver, brought to
that Perfection by Nature, without Art or Fire, which wants no further
Refining, but only washing and separating the Earth from it, and is then fit
for Melring. If any doubts the Truth of this, and thinks there is no Malliable
Metal produced by Nature, but what is first extracted from an Oar, by help of
Fire, such doubting Persons may be fully and better satisfied, by going to see
the Mineral Curiosities in the Repository of Gressham's College, where they may
see pure Silver and Gold, as they were taken out of the Mines, growing in the
Rocky Spar. There were also set at Work, the Mines called La Trinidad, and
those of Berenguela, with many others near the Lake called Tobacco Nunio; upon
the Brooks or Streams whereof, there stands above an Hundred Silver Mills,
which constantly go Day and Night, stamping and grinding the Oar that is got in
and about its own Banks: These Veins, and many more, with the inexhaustible
Mines of Potozi, were presently set at Work; -- but the first Mines the
Spaniards* wrought and got Silver in, were, the Old Mines of Porco, which had
been wrought many Years before by the INGAS, or Kings of the Country, and
great Quantities of Silver got out of them. After this time the Mines of
AMERICA, both on the South and North Side the Line, were followed with great
Industry, and more new Mines were daily found and discovered, and amongst them
a great many Quicksilver Mines, which have been a great Help to them in their
Ways of Refining; so that from several Places of AMERICA, for near One Hundred
and Fifty Years last past, there have been some Thousands of Tons of Silver and
Gold brought to Cadiz in SPAIN, especially of Silver, of which all Nations in
EUROPE have more or less participated.

IN the Years 1553, and 1554, which was in Queen Mary's Reign, the English made
Two Voyages to the Gold Coast of GUINEY, and brought some Gold from thence, and
have ever since followed that Trade, so have several other Nations, from whence
they have brought considerable Quantities of Gold into EUROPE; so that for
about One Hundred and Forty Years last past, there have been, by the English,
Danes, Dutch, and French, considerable Sums of Gold brought from GUINEY, and
from the WEST INDIES, being first brought thither by the Buccaneers. There have
been many Chests of Dollars, with Abundance of Bullion, and some Parcels of
Gold, for Forty Years last past, brought to ENGLAND, HOLLAND, and FRANCE, of
which, the other Nations of EUROPE, and the EAST INDIES have, in some measure,
been Partakers. You may therefore truly reckon, AMERICA and GUINEY, the Springs
and Fountains from whence the Silver and Golden Streams of EUROPE have flowed;
to which, Barbary has afforded some small Help in Gold, and Hungary in Silver;
but neither of them worth mentioning, in comparison with the other Two.

Having thus briefly mentioned the Mines and Places that have furnished EUROPE
with Silver and Gold, and when they first began to do so; It is now to be
inquired, What Nations have had the greatest Opportunities, and have used the
most Endeavors to be Masters thereof.

And whereas the English, Dutch, and French, have been the chief Trading
Nations of EUROPE, whose Goods and Manufactures are, and always were, in better
esteem and demand by the Spaniards, and Natives of AMERICA, than any of the
other Northern Kingdoms: Therefore, the English, Dutch, and French, (before
these Wars) have not been wanting to furnish them with Plenty thereof at Cadiz,
and in several other Parts of SPAIN; -- And, of late Years, in diverse Parts of
the WEST INDIES, when and where fit Opportunities could be found, especially,
where and when the Spanish Governors have been inclinable to look through
their Fingers, that a Stolen Trade might be had with the Spaniards.

Thus the English, Dutch, and French, had Opportunities to Buy and Sell, and to
Exchange their Goods there with the Spaniards for Gold and Silver, whether in
Dollars, or in Bullion, at very good Prices, whilst the Germans, Danes,
Norwegians, Sweeds and Hamburgers, have had no such Liberty and Freedom in
Trade, for want of Settlements in those Parts; -- so that the English, Dutch,
and French, have drawn great Quantities of Silver and Gold from SPAIN, for near
One Hundred and Fifty Years last past, according to their Proportions of Trade
they have had with the Spaniards, and from the WEST INDIES, for Forty Years
past, by the Buccaneers, and several other Ways, too long to be here recited:
All which time the Germans, Danes, Norwegians, Sweeds, Poles, and Russians,
have stood staring on, having their Hands, as it were, tied up, not knowing
how, nor being able to procure One Hundredth Part of the Silver and Gold the
English, Dutch, and French have done, by reason the Goods of their Countries
are not so fit for the Americans Use as others are, and for want of Settlements
near them: This has been the Cause that has occasioned a great Scarcity and
Want of Silver and Gold in those Kingdoms, having but little amongst them, in
comparison to what there is in ENGLAND, HOLLAND, and FRANCE; especially in
Norway, Sweedland, Poland, and Russia, where there are many great Provinces or
Countries, and some of them near as large as ENGLAND is, a great Part of whose
Inhabitants scarcely knew what Silver and Gold was, till of late Years, having
not 5000 l. in Silver and Gold for some Hundreds of Miles in Circumference; so
that if ENGLAND, HOLLAND, and FRANCE, were at Peace, and were in a Capacity to
furnish these Kingdoms with an Hundred Tons of Silver per Annum, they could
dispense with it, and, as far as they are able, would endeavor to make Returns
by their Country Goods, and allow very high Rates for Your Silver, although
they daily want many of the English, Dutch, and French Effects, sufficient to
balance their Trade; nevertheless, Silver and Gold are become their beloved
Objects, finding them the most ready and most durable Instruments to procure
all necessary and serviceable Things, being more ready, than any other
Commodity, to supply their Wants, as they are known and found to be by all
other People of EUROPE; Experience having taught them in those Parts, That with
Silver and Gold they may Buy and Sell, go to Markets near or remote, and carry
on their Trades more conveniently with them, than they can with Pitch, Tar,
Hemp, Flax, Iron, Copper, Caveer, Potashes, Bristes, Fir-Timber, Furs, or any
of their Commodities: There Is no letting out these Goods at Interest, as Silver
and Gold are done in ENGLAND, HOLLAND, and FRANCE, although they have learned
the Way to do it, if they could procure the Silver and Gold. Therefore, You
have great reason to conclude and believe, If all the Silver and Gold that is
in ENGLAND, HOLLAND, and FRANCE, as well the Coined Money, as the Uncoined
Plate and Bullion, were to be remitted, and sent into Germany, Denmark, Norway,
Sweedland, Poland, and Russia, they would now find Uses sufficient for them,
and would yet crave more, having been all this time kept Hungry, and only fed
with Snaps of what they so much desire, and which they will not be without, if,
for their Goods, they can procure them at any moderate Rates.

IN this lies the Magnet, or Loadstone, that has so attracted and drawn Your
Silver beyond Seas, to which all the Confederate Princes, and several others,
whether Engaged, or not Engaged in the present Wars, have been under a
Necessity of making the same Demands for some Years past; and this you may
truly reckon the Cause of Your Silver Consumption, which will be difficult now
to prevent, especially to take away, so that the Effects may cease, considering
how Circumstances stand, at present, in the Affairs of EUROPE: However, this I
will lay down for a Maxim, which You will certainly find true.

THAT unless the Coin be much Abased and Allayed, or Raised very considerably
in its Value, whenever it is New Coined, it will be Melted down, as it has
been, and sent the same way, when You have done all You can to prevent it;
(whither that is, You have sufficient Information above) for the Inhabitants of
those Countries will have it, if it be possible, though at very extravagant
Rates: Therefore, the best way will be, to make them pay soundly for it, if
they will have it. HAVING premised these things, and showed from whence the
Silver and Gold came, by who, and when brought into EUROPE, whereby the Trades,
not only of EUROPE, but of most Parts of the Earth, have been extremely
Improved, and brought to this Flourishing State and Condition they are now
found in; as is manifest by those Nations which have Money, and are Furnished
with Silver and Gold to Buy and Sell with; their Ways of Living, in all
Conditions, far surpassing the Circumstances of such Countries as are without;
therefore all must grant, Where there is but little Silver and Gold, there
cannot be much Trade, and so, by Consequence, those People live, as it were, in
a State of Nature, miserably Poor, and full of Want. Experience has proved
this of late Years in Ireland; and every County of ENGLAND that has but little
Money in it, verifies and daily confirms the same. So that to encourage the
Importation, or bringing in of Silver and Gold into any Nation, if it be
Coined, is the greatest Increase and Advantage that can be given to the Trade
thereof. From whence it follows, If the Importing Silver and Gold, and the
Coining of them, be an Increase, and an Advantage to the Nation and Trade, then
certainly such Ways and Methods ought to be taken as are most effectual to Keep
and Preserve them when Coined, thereby to Maintain and Uphold that Trade, for
the Benefit and Advantage of the Nation; for Silver and Gold are capable of
driving Trades, and making profitable Improvements, that House and Land cannot
perform; the latter being, in Comparison, a dead, and the former a quick Stock;
either by parts, or in the whole, ready to produce Profits when the Owner has
occasion to use it; he that is provided therewith, has always a ready Friend,
and a constant Servant, that does not only obey, but fulfill his Command with
the least Trouble, -- which cannot be said of him that has only House and
Land, where there must be Conveyances, Mortgages, or other Securities, before
his Wants can be served; so that Silver and Gold being preferable to House and
Land, and the only Instruments that have Increased and Improved Trade; It is
absolutely necessary that all Endeavors be used to preserve them, especially
in these times, when they are in demand by so many high Bidders abroad, who
have found, by long Experience, where there is no Silver nor Gold, there is
little or no Trade; and where the Silver and Gold are, there the Trade must and
will be.

Therefore, it is hoped and believed, You will use all the Endeavors You can,
That Guinneas may be Established at Thirty Shillings, during His Majesty's
Pleasure, which, it is hoped, He will Grant, so long as the Wars continue,
considering the Circumstances of the People, and what Taxes they must Pay for
the Support of the Government: And that such Rates and Prices may be set on the
Money, when New Coined, as will conduce to Keep and Preserve it in the Kingdom.
In Order to which, I will deliver my Thoughts and Apprehensions concerning such
Methods as may be proper to take for Alteration of the present Money, and the
Value that is necessary to be set upon it, when New Coined; which Methods will
not only conduce to the Keeping it in the Nation, but will also make the People
easy, who, in this Juncture, are under great Taxes and Impositions, and must
be further charged for the Support of the WARS: For You cannot imagine, but in
this precarious Circumstance of the Coin, the Damage that may fall by the Loss
of Guinneas, if not Established at a certain Price for some time; with the
great Loss that will certainly accrue by the Clipped and Counterfeit Money, being
all added to the Charge of the present Taxes, and such other Impositions that
are to be further raised for Carrying on the WARS: I say, if You consider all
these together, and examine from whence the Money must rise to make them good,
You will find the Burden too heavy for the People to bear, especially at this
time, when the Money is called in, who, if not made easy by Yours and His
Majesty's Gracious Favor, in the Price of Guinneas, and the Value of the Coin,
may occasion an universal Murmur and Discontent amongst Multitudes of His
Subjects, if it miss breaking out into Disorders, which may give the Government
more Disturbance than all the Enemies thereof dare pretend to, or can possibly
accomplish by any pernicious Contrivance: For be pleased to consider, When the
Money is called in, there will be Abundance of People that can scarcely have
Credit till the Money comes forth again; who being without Money, and void of
Credit, will find their Conditions and Reputations so Altered and Changed, that
'twill be difficult for many to Live, which may make some grow desperate,
especially if they suffer Loss by the Guinneas, and Damage by the Clipped Money
at one and the same time. I therefore most humbly move, That You may proceed by
such Methods as seem Rational, to make the People easy at present; which
Methods, or some others to the same Effect, if not taken, and made use of,
there are many of You will be great Sufferers in this Concern:

Therefore, in all Humility, most Humbly I Propose,

First, That His Majesty be Petitioned to Issue His Royal Proclamation, giving
Notice to all His Subjects in His Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Berwick upon Tweed,

THAT after the First Day of (...) next Ensuing, there shall no Clipped nor
Vnclipp'd Money, nor any other of the present Silver Coin of this Kingdom, pass
in Payment in any Part of England, Wales, or Berwick upon Tweed, above the
Denomination of Two Pence, upon the Penalty of being Seized, and Forfeited to
him or her that shall discover it, who may take out a Warrant, and carry the
Offender before some Justice of the Peace, and he shall determine it upon
Hearing, having sufficient Oath made thereof.

Secondly, That the same Proclamation may Establish Guinneas at Thirty
Shillings that are full Weight, during His Majesty's Pleasure; and such
Guinneas as are not Weight, to pass proportionably to what they Weigh: And if
any offers to Pay them at more than Thirty Shillings, to be forfeited to the
Informer, by carrying the Offender before some Justice of the Peace, and
proving it by Two Good and Substantial Witnesses: And that all the present
Species of Gold Coin pass in their Proportion they hold to Guinneas of full
Weight. This is One of the Acts of Favor, You are desired to Petition His
Majesty for, and it is hoped, He and You will dispense therewith, which will
make the People more Cheerful in Paying their Taxes, and be of great Advantage
to all Trade in the City, but especially in the Country, when the Money is
brought in to be New Coined: This will be a great help to make all Payments and
Receipts easy and expeditious, and will totally prevent and take away those
Scruples People are now possessed with in Paying and Receiving them.

Thirdly, That the same Proclamation give Notice to all Sheriffs, Justices of
the Peace, Mayors of Cities, and County Towns, That they, and every of them,
observe and perform such Orders and Directions concerning Plate, Clipped and
Vnclipp'd Money, in each and every of their respective Counties, and the
particular Parishes thereof, as shall be further set out by Act of Parliament;
and that they meet and consult about this Affair in Twenty Days Time next after
the Publishing of the said Act.

Fourthly, That the said Act of Parliament direct, That an Office or Offices
shall be set up in, or near, every City, or County Town, of England and Wales,
with one in Berwick upon Tweed, which Office or Offices shall be set up, where,
and in what Place or Places, the Sheriffs, Mayors, and Justices of the Peace,
find most convenient and fit for this Business, and the Ease of themselves and
the People; And that the said Office or Offices shall be set up and attended by
them, or their Deputies, to take in and receive all Clipped and Vnclipp'd
Money, and all such Plate as shall be brought thither in order to be New
Coined; To which Offices, all Clipped and Vnclipp'd Money shall be brought,
which shall there be Told, Weighed, Numbered, Marked, and Sealed up by its self,
if it be Twenty Four Pounds Weight or upwards, with the Owner's Name set on it,
and the County and Parish where he or she Lives; which shall be done by the
Sheriffs, Mayors, Justices of the Peace, or their Deputies, whilst the Owner,
or Person that brings it, is present: And the said Sheriffs, Mayors, and
Justices of the Peace, shall be answerable for it, and for all Plate that shall
be brought thither; and shall make good the Losses, if any shall happen, by
Fraud or Mistake, whilst it is in their Office or Custody.

Fifthly, That the Sheriff, or his Deputy, shall give a Note to each particular
Person of the Value, Weight, Mark, and Number of their Money, at the Time it is
brought into the Office, as is aforesaid, upon such Stamped and Marbled Paper
as shall be provided for that Purpose, which Note shall be Signed first by the
Sheriff, and Witnessed by one or more of the other Principals, and Four of
their Deputies; which Four Deputies shall be sufficient to attend one Office in
any Market, or Parish-Town: All which shall be done at the Cost and Charges of
each County, and the particular Parishes thereof, for the Allowances that shall
be Paid the Sheriffs, Mayors, Justices of the Peace, or their Deputies, out of
the New Coined Money hereafter mentioned, when it is returned from the Tower;
which Note so given the People, shall be to this Effect following.

Derb. ss.
I T. B. Sheriff of the County of Derby, do hereby Own and Acknowledge, I have
Received of Mr. C. D. of Middleton, in the Parish of Worksworth, and County
aforesaid, One Hundred Pounds, Eighteen Shillings and Six Pence in Money,
Weighing Twenty Four Pounds, Eleven Ounces, Sixteen Penny Weights, and Twenty
Grains, Numbered 22, and Marked A. for which I promise to be accountable to the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, for the like Weight in
New Coined Money, if the said Cash proves to be equal to Standard Silver, when
assayed at the Tower by the Masters of the Mint, but if they Return it better
or worse than Standard Silver, then to Pay him the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, all they return back to me, whether it be a greater
or lesser Weight in New Coined Money than the Cash abovementioned is; which
Payment shall be well and truly made in Twenty Days next after it is brought
back from the Tower of London to the County Office, only abating the Allowance
Granted by Act of Parliament.

Witness my Hand this (...) Day of (...) 1696. Test. W. S. mayor E. M. F. G. H.
P. P. H. T. B.


Sixthly, That the said Act of Parliament do, in like manner, give Notice, That
all such as shall voluntarily bring or send any Old or New Plate to these
Offices, in Order to be sent to the Tower of London, to be Coined; if the Plate
so brought thither be finer or courser than Standard Silver is, then they to
receive a greater or lesser Weight in New Money for it than the Weight of the
Plate was, according as it shall be found finer or courser than Standard Silver
by the Assay-Masters of the Mint; for which Plate, when delivered into the
Office, a Note shall be given to the Owner, or to the Person that brings it,
for the Owners Use, which shall be Signed by the Sheriff, and Witnessed by one
or more of the other Principals, whether Mayor, or Justices of the Peace, and
Four of their Deputies, as is aforesaid. -- And if any Person or Persons shall
desire it, they may mix their Money and Plate, and put all in one Parcel, and
take a Note for the whole, mentioning both the Money and Plate, and the Weight
thereof.

Derb. ss.
I A. B. Sheriff of the County of Derby, do hereby Own and Acknowledge I have
Received of Mr. E. F. of Crumford, in the Parish of Worksworth, and County
aforesaid, Two Hundred Twenty Five Pounds, Twelve Shillings and Six Pence in
Money, Weighing Forty Four Pounds, Eight Ounces, Ten Penny Weights, and
fourteen Grains, together with one Parcel of Plate, consisting of Eight
Porringers, Six Tankards, Ten Spoons, One Candlestick, and a pair of Snuffers,
containing and weighing Twenty Two Pounds, Six Ounces, and Four Penny Weights,
which Money and Plate being put all together, and Sealed up, is Numbered 23, and
Marked B; for which I promise to be accountable to the said E. F. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, for the like Weight in New Coined Money,
if the said Cash and Plate prove to be equal to Standard Silver, when assayed
at the Tower by the Masters of the Mint; but if they Return it better or worse
than Standard Silver, then to Pay him the said E. F. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, all they Return back to me, whether it be a greater
or lesser Weight, in New Coined Money, than the Cash and Plate abovementioned
are; which Payment shall be well and truly made in Twenty Days next after it is
brought back from the Tower of London, to the County Office, only abating the
allowance Granted by Act of Parliament.

Witness my Hand this (...) Day of (...) 1696. Test. E. W. Justice of the
Peace. W. M. Mayor. M. H. P. M. C. D. R. A. A. B.

lb.. pw. gr. Weight of the Money above 44 08 10 14 Weight of the Plate above
22 06 04 00 Weighing in all 67 02 14 14



That for the Ease and Convenience of the People, the Sheriffs, Mayors, and
Justices of the Peace, shall cause a List of all the Parishes in the County to
be drawn, which shall be set upon the Cross in every Market Town of the said
County, which List shall be Read, (by the Public Cnyer) giving Notice to the
People when their Deputies shall come to the Market Towns; and also to such as
are Parish-Towns, where no Markets are kept, to take in and receive the Account
and Weights of their Money, where they shall receive all Sums, being Twenty
Shillings, or upwards, but no Sum under Twenty Shillings, such being fit for
one Friend to entrust with another; where having first told, then weighed, and
entered them in the Register for that Parish, with the Owner's Name, and his or
her Place of abode; they may then mix all together, till the several Parcels
will make up One Hundred Pounds; but shall not exceed Two Hundred Pounds: And
that no Parcel of Money, or Plate, shall be admitted to be sent to the Tower,
separate or mixed, that is not Twenty Four Pounds Weight, but where it falls to
be the concluding Parcel in a Parish; which shall be done to save the Labor of
making too many Assays in the Tower, which would be an endless and troublesome
thing, if every Five Pound or Ten Pound Parcel should be Assayed: Therefore,
amongst these small Sums, he that has the greatest shall have a Note of the
whole, from which every Man may take a Copy that pleases; and the Deputy shall
leave a Copy with the Parson of the Parish, entered into a Book, to be left
there; and send another Book to the next Justice of the Peace, having first
entered all things fairly down in the Register he keeps for that Parish, in this
Manner following; to which, Parson, or Justice of the Peace, if any shall lose
or mis-lay their Accounts, they may have recourse for another.

April the 24th, 1696.
AT Worksworth Town, for the Parish of Worksworth, taken and received these
Sums of Money of the several Persons herein mentioned, weighing as follows:

l. s. d. lb.. pw. gr. Received of John Adams Senior, of the Town of
Worksworth, 05 12 06. 01 09 12 16. Received of James Wright, Sen. of Ashlyhay,
10 16 04. 02 10 14 12. Received of Henry Wild of Hopton, 20 08 06. 04 00 12
04. Received of Robert Merchant of Gaursey-Banck, 30 12 00. 07 02 16 18.
Received of Anthony Wood of Cawlow, 45 14 06. 12 04 10 12. No 24. and Marked C.
Sum. Weight. 113 03 10 28 04 06 14.

The like to be done for any bigger or lesser Sum of Money; and if there be
Plate, then to incert only the Weight, Number and Mark of it.

Eighthly, That as soon as the Money and Plate are brought to the County
Offices, the Sheriffs, Mayors, and Justices of the Peace, shall meet, of which
there shall be at least Four of the Principals, besides the Sheriff, and Four
of their Deputies present, to see and examine the Value, Weight, Number, and
Mark of each Person's Money and Plate, and that their Names be annexed to it in
a piece of Parchment, which shall be compared with the Register there kept and
taken, and if they agree, they shall then cause the Money and Plate of every
particular Parish to be packed up by it self, though in several Parcels; so
that the Money and Plate of one Parish shall not be mixed in the same Bag or
Chest loose with that of another; and there shall be put into the Bag or Chest
Two Pieces of Parchment, upon which shall be Writ,

The Money and Plate belonging to the Parish of Worksworth, in the County of
Derby. And another of these Parchment-Labels shall be fastened to the outside
of the Chest or Bag.

Ninthly, That all the Officers or Deputies employed in Receiving Money and
Plate, and all such that are any ways concerned in Carrying them to and from
the Tower, shall give Bond to the Sheriff, That they, nor none of them, shall
or will break the Seal or Seals, or open the Parcel or Parcels of any Person's
Money or Plate after it is Sealed up: And that they will not take out, change,
nor suffer to be taken out or changed, any of the said Money or Plate, more or
less, upon Pain of Forfeiting for every Sixpence, Shilling, Half-Crown or
Crown, they shall so take out, change, or suffer to be -- taken out and
changed, the Sum of One Hundred Pounds; one half to be Paid to the King, and
the other half to the Discoverer: For the true Performance of which, each, or
every of them, shall take an OATH before some Master of Chancery, or Justice of
the Peace, deputed on purpose, where such Masters of Chancery shall be wanting;
which shall be to this Effect following.

I W. S. of the Parish of Worksworth, and County of Derby, do Swear I will
Truly and Faithfully do and execute the Charge and Trust committed to me,
concerning the Money and Plate of this County; and that I will not wilfully
break the Seal or Seals, open, alter, or change the Money or Plate of any
Person or Persons, after it is Sealed up; nor will suffer any Alteration or
Change to be made or done by any others, after or before; nor will wilfully
receive, or suffer to be received, any Brass or Iron Money, that does not
appear to be four parts in five Silver, to be mired amongst any Person's Money
or Plate; nor will I hold any Correspondence, or have any Dealing with the
Buyers of Brass and Broken Money; nor will I wilfully refuse the Receiving of
that which shall appear to be Silver, to the best of my Knowledge. So help me
God.

Tenthly, That the Sheriffs, Mayors, and Justices of the Peace in every County,
shall and may consider and take those Ways which they shall think or find most
convenient for the ^ ase of themselves and the People; and if they find it
convenient to send the Money of one Parish up to be New Coined, whilst the
Money in another Parish is Collecting, That it shall, and may be Lawful to do
so, till they have gone through all the Parishes in the County; by which means,
as the Money of one Parish comes up to the Tower, the Money of another Parish
may go down to the Country, whereby the Peoples Necessities may be the better
fitted, than if they should be without Money amongst them till all the Money in
the County be Coined: And the Deputies shall endeavor to make their Parcels of
Money and Plate as large as they can, thereby to prevent the Multitude of
Essays in the Tower; of which Parcels, there shall be none under Twenty Four
Pounds Weight, except it be the last concluding Parcel in a Parish, as is
before-said: And that the Loss of all Counterfeit Money remain where it falls,
or upon them in whose Hands it is.

Eleventhly, That the Office for Taking and Receiving the Money and Plate
within the City of London, and Bills of Mortality, be kept at Guild Hall, in
the said City; And that the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace,
belonging to the said City, or their Deputies, shall give their Attendance
there in Fourteen Days next after the Act of Parliament is Published; and shall
provide Books, Bags, Weights and Scales, Printed Notes, and all other things
that shall or may relate to this Affair, for the well-Ordering and Dispatching
this Business, and shall keep Accounts of all Persons Money and Plate that
shall be brought thither, and undertake the Charge of Carrying and Fetching it
to and from the Tower, and Delivering it out again to whom it may belong; --
for which, the said Officers or Deputies shall deduct, and Pay themselves out
of every Person's Money and Plate, when New Coined, at the Time they deliver it
them forth, One Shilling to be stopped out of every Hundred Pounds, which shall
be all the Charge the Inhabitants of the City of London, and such as Live
within the Bills of Mortality, shall be at in and about the same; and for a
greater or lesser Sum than One Hundred Pounds, more or less, according to that
in Proportion; which Twelve Pence for One Hundred Pounds, if a Million of Money
be Coined out of the Clipped and Vnclipp'd Money and Plate in that compass,
will come to Five Hundred Pounds, which will be sufficient to Defray the Charge
of Attendance in this Affair, which cannot be above Three Months in doing; and
if there be Eight or Ten Deputies or Officers employed about it, Fifty Pounds a
Man for Three Months is very good Pay.

Twelfthly, That the Allowance or Satisfaction that shall be made to other
Officers and Deputies belonging to the Sheriffs, Mayors, and Justices of the
Peace in all other Places, ought to be Rated proportionably to what Money there
may be judged to be in the County, and to the Situation or Distance the
Counties lie from London; for which, I Humbly Propose as follows:

For Middlesex, Surry, Sussex, Kent, Suffolk, Essex, Hartford-Shire,
Berk-Shire, Hamp-Shire, Buckingham-Shire, Oxfordshire, Bedford-Shire,
Northamptonshire, Huntington-Shire, and Cambridge-Shire, Two Shillings out of
every Hundred Pounds of New Coined Money.

For the Counties of Norfolk, Rutland, Lincoln, Nottingham, Derby, Stafford,
Leicester, Worcester, Warwick, Gloucester, Wilt-Shire, Dorset and
Somersetshire, Two Shillings and Six Pence out of every Hundred Pounds.

And that all other Counties of England and Wales may have Three Shillings per
Cent. in Regard of their Distance.

Also, That the Essay-Master in the Tower, shall make such further Provision,
for the quick and speedy Dispatch of the Essays that are to be made for each
County, as shall be found sufficient to discharge Two Counties every Month,
after the Essays for the City of London are finished: And that no Refiner in
the City of London be admitted to Buy any Old Plate, during the Time of this
Coynage, without Carrying it to the Office in Guild Hall, in Order to be
Coined; but that such Refiners may be employed at the County-Mints hereafter
mentioned.

Thirteenthly, Having thus prescribed a Feasible and Quick Way for Bringing the
Money and Plate to the Tower, in Order to a New Coynage; It is necessary now to
mention what Price it ought to be Valued at, so as to preserve it from being
Melted down, and Shipped off, as it has been, under the Pretense of Foreign
Bullion, -- It is also convenient to consider, How You may prevent the
Consumption that is made of it in ENGLAND, by the Working Silver-Smiths, who
daily turn it into various Sorts of Plate: For unless You take such Methods as
will remedy or prevent these Two Things, The Calling in of the Money to be New
Coined will absolutely be Destructive to the Nation; and it had better be let
alone as it now is, than to meddle with it, if You do not all You can to
prevent them. (viz.)

The First is, The Converting it into Plate for Inland Use.

The Second is, The Melting of it down for Foreign Use.

Therefore, If You take such Methods as will conduce to annihilate these Two
Destructive Things, Your Selves, and the People of this Nation, will find the
Benefit thereof; which is in Vain for them to expect, or You to believe, till
They are removed.

So that to prevent the Silver-Smiths from turning the New Coined Money into
Plate, it is necessary, for the future, That all kinds of Plain Plate; as
Tankards, Spoons, Forks, Porringers, Dishes, Plates, Candlesticks, and all
other sorts of Bulky Plate, be not admitted to be Sold when they are Wrought
up, for any more than Weight for Weight in New Money, allowing Two Pence an
Ounce over and above the Weight of the Money, for the Fashion, as they call it,
in regard, their Solder and Allay that is put in some of them Pays for most of
the Workmanship; and this they may very well do, especially if You please to
settle the Price of Bullion, as it is mentioned in the latter part of this
Paragraph: For whilst the Circumstances of Silver Coin and Plate remain thus,
That an Ounce of Plate may be Sold for Seven Shillings, under a Pretense there
is Six Pence an Ounce of it for the Fashion: What Silver-Smith can You believe
there is, that will not give Six Shillings and Six Pence an Ounce for New
Money? when, at One Hundred Ounces, there is Fifty Shillings got by Melting it
down, and Working it up, besides the Advantage of the Solder and the Allay,
where and when they can conveniently place it; which many of them daily
practice, and cannot be prevented from doing it.

Therefore, whilst the Plate carries a higher Price than the New Coined Money,
You may conclude the Money will be melted down, and turned into Plate, as the
Silver-Smiths have occasion to use it:

For, if You please to consider the Nature of the Thing, What Reason is there
to be given why a Pound of Plate in a Man's House should cost more, or be of
greater Value, than a Pound Weight of New Money? when the latter will always be
more ready to supply a Man's Wants, whilst he has a Grain of it, than the
former; and the Money has Workmanship bestowed on it, as well as the Plate;
which, when any has occasion to part with, must Sell to Loss; besides, the
Money is generally finer and better Silver, and therefore deserves to bear a
better Price: From hence it appears, whilst You suffer Plate to bear a higher
Price than the New Coined Money, it is, and will be Destructive to the Coin of
the Kingdom; which all People hope and believe You will do all You can to
prevent; and more-especially, since His Majesty has been Graciously Pleased to
Recommend the Care thereof to You in His SPEECH. --

Fourteenthly, So that the first Step to Prevent the Turning of New Money into
Plate, and to Preserve it from being melted down, and Exported under the Name
of Foreign Bullion, will be to Enact;

THAT all Bullion, or Pieces of Eight, Imported from and after the First Day of
next Ensuing, being equal to Standard Silver, and no better, shall always be
Valued Eight Grains in the Ounce, under the Price the New Money, when Coined,
shall be Rated at: And if the Bullion or Dollars Imported be finer than the
Standard Silver, or Coin of this Kingdom, then to be Valued proportionably
above the Price of New Money, according as the Fineness thereof may deserve,
always allowing Eight Grains for the Difference of Standard Bullion or Dollars,
and Standard Coin; and from thence to compute what the Finer Dollars or Bullion
are worth. -- For when the Silver-Smiths find they can have Standard Bullion
Eight Grains in an Ounce cheaper than they can have New Money, which is
Standard, they will work upon Bullion, and leave the Money, the Bullion being
cheaper by about Eleven Shillings, at Thirty Two Pounds Ten Shillings, than the
New Coined Money will be, provided You Rate it, when Coined, at the Price
hereafter-mentioned; which Price will be absolutely necessary to Fix it at, if
You think to Preserve it from being melted down, and sent to those Hungry
Countries that so much Want and Desire it; and who and where those are, is
before recited.

From hence it appears, if what is abovesaid may be Enacted, The First of
these Mischiefs will be totally taken away; that is, The Turning of New Money
into Plate, by the Silver-Smiths, for Inland Use. The Second Mischief, is, The
Melting of it down for Foreign Use; which being also removed or prevented, the
Money will remain in the Kingdom, when New Coined, in its Species, without
Alteration: To accomplish which, it will also be necessary to rate it so, that
the Price may conduce to Preserve it from being Melted down and Transported,
otherwise, it will be better to let it alone, and to remain in the Condition it
now is, than to Alter it, if effectual Care be not taken to Keep it when
Altered; -- so that before I mention that Price which I judge convenient to set
upon the Money, when New Coined, be pleased to consider.

It is unreasonable for any to think or believe, That the Estates of the Landed
Men in England and Wales should make good the Damage or Loss of the Moneyed
Men, that will arise by the Clipped and Counterfeit Money: And it will be
difficult to find Ways and Means, or a sufficient Fund, in these times, to make
good the Counterfeit and Clipped Money, without affecting (or, as I may say,
squeezing) the Landed Men with more than they can possibly bear of this
Burden: So that when all Circumstances are well considered, with the Loss and
Damage the Nation must sustain by the Clipped and Counterfeit Money, which being
reckoned together, cannot be thought less than Forty Five Pounds per Cent. to
supply which, if there be Six Millions of Money in the Kingdom, there will go
Two Millions and Nine Hundred Thousand Pounds to make them good; which Sum,
besides all the present Cares, and other Impositions that must be further
raised for carrying on the Wars, is too great a Charge for the People to bear
at one and the same time, especially when the Money is calling in. -- So that,
in all Humility, I Humbly -- Propose,

That the Money may, at present, bear the greatest Part of its own Damage, by
Raising it in the Value, when New Coined, Thirty Pounds per Cent, during His
Majesty's Pleasure, or so long as the Wars continue, whereby the People will be
made easy, and freed from most of their Damage, at present, by that which is
Clipped and Counterfeit; and the Money, when New Coined, will, by this means, in
a great Measure be prevented from being Melted down, and Sent Abroad; which
certainly will be done, if any lesser Price be set upon it; for, as You have
before heard, and as Experience has plainly proved, there are so many high
Bidders abroad for it, that Six Shillings and Six Pence an Ounce will scarcely
preserve it from them: And if the Wars continue Two Years longer, I am of
Opinion, You will certainly find, they will give Seven Shillings an Ounce for
it before they will be without it. So that to call the Money in, and to suffer
Forty Five Pounds per Cent. Damage by it, and when New Coined to Value it at a
lesser Price by Twenty Pounds per Cent. than the Foreigners now bid for it; who
would gladly give Twenty Pounds per Cent. above Standard Price to have it; I
say, to Value it thus, is the ready way to serve and uphold them, and an
infallible way to pull down and impoverish our Selves; which the whole Nation
believes, You in Your Great Wisdom, will take Care to prevent. --

Fifteenthly, And whereas a Five Shilling Piece of the late Milled Money,
weighed, or ought to have weighed, Four Hundred Sixty Four Grains and an half;
yet there is not One in Ten scarcely weighs above Four Hundred Sixty Two
Grains, which is Nineteen Penny Weight and Six Grains; Therefore I Propose,
That a Piece of the same Weight and Fineness may be rated, and pass at Six
Shillings and Six Pence, which is Thirty per Cent. more than it went for
before; and that a Piece of the same Weight and Fineness as the late New
Half-Crown was, may pass for Three Shillings and Three Pence; and the Shilling
for Nineteen Pence Halfpenny; and the Sixpence to contain Forty Five Grains
and an half: For without this Advance upon the Money when New Coined, it will
be Melted down, and Shipped off, for the Reasons aforesaid. -- If this Method
be taken, then the Coin remains in the Weight and Purity it was in before; and
if there should happen to be Plenty of Silver at any time hereafter, You may
then reduce it without Calling it in, or Altering the Form, according as You
find we are then supplied with Plenty of Bullion, either to the present Value,
or what You think fit. But if it be Allayed any thing considerably with Base
Metal, then it will be subject to be Counterfeited, and there may be, to the
Value of Six Pence, or Eight Pence, of Base Metal, put in a Crown Piece more
than the Allay there ought to be, and will not be distinguished, unless by such
who are well Skilled in Money; which Opportunity the Counterfeit Coyners would
be glad of, Eight Pence in a Crown Piece being Encouragement enough to set them
on Coining: For which Reason, I do not approve of Allaying the Coin, or
Lessening the Fineness thereof, by any Means. --

Sixteenthly, THAT after the First Day of next Ensuing, all Silver Imported, in
what Form soever it is, whether in Ingots, Dollars, Bars, or Cakes of Bullion,
if it be not Coined here, nor Sold for Inland Use, whenever it is Exported,
ought to pay Twenty pounds per Cent. Custom, for these Reasons following.

He that Imports Silver, and does not Coin it here, does the Nation no Service
by his Importing it, but a great deal of Prejudice: because, if the Value of it
had been brought Home in any other Goods, they must have Paid the King's
Customs, and the Goods would have been serviceable and useful one way or
another for the English People, and several Tradesmen, according as the Goods
should happen to be, might have had Advantage by them; but being brought over
in Bullion, and Shipped out again, there is not a Penny got, but by the Importer
and Exporter; so that to suffer Silver to be Imported and Exported Custom-free,
is extremely Destructive to the Interest and Welfare of the Nation.

For Example, Suppose there was little or no Cocheneal in Holland, and the
English Fleet coming from Cadiz should being Five Tons Home, when the Price in
England is Twenty Five Shillings a Pound, and Thirty Shillings a Pound in
Holland, Is there any Reason why this Cocheneal should be brought into England
by English Shipping, put a-shoar here, and afterward Shipped for Holland,
because the Price is higher there than here, and yet Pay no Customs inwards nor
outward? I say, No; (the KING ought to have his Customs Paid) nor ought it to
be so with Silver. The same may be said for all other Sorts of Goods, as well
as Cocheneal, if they may be brought in and carried out Custom-free, Who would
not deal in those that are so? For suppose the Hollanders and Hamburghers had
little or no Shipping, It is reasonable the English Merchants, or any others,
should Import Goods in England, and, when they think fit, Export them to
Holland or Hamborough, and Pay no Customs in nor out? Surely they ought not,
nor will any reasonable Man say they should, unless he would have the King's
Customs brought to nothing, and the Public Expense barely maintained out of
the Crown Lands: The Case is the very same with Silver, if it be brought in
here, and Shipped out again, it ought to Pay a very considerable Duty outward,
though none inwards; because the Suffering of Bullion to be Exported without
Paying a Duty, under the Pretense of Foreign Silver, has given great
Encouragement, and been the only Cause of the Melting down of our Coin, and
Mixing Thousands of Ounces of it with a few Dollars, which the Exporter has
thought sufficient to make it pass for Foreign Silver; which Method having been
Practiced for some Years past, has swallowed up above one Third of our Coin.
And the same thing will be Practiced more than it ever has been, when the
Money is New Coined, and made ready for them, unless it be raised Thirty Pounds
per Cent. And, at the same time, a Duty laid upon all Bullion, if Transported.
--

Objection. What Man will bring Bullion into the Kingdom, if he may not do what
he pleases with it; either Coin it, or Ship it abroad for the best of his
Advantage?

Answer. What Man would not bring other Goods to England, as well as Silver, if
he may Import and Export them Custom-free? Goods that Pay Custom inwards, in
Reason ought to have a draw-back, if Exported; but Silver Paying nothing
inwards, ought not to be suffered to be Exported without Paying a very
considerable Duty, for the Reasons aforesaid. (viz.)

The Melting down of our Coin, and the Mixing great Quantities of it with a few
Dollars for Foreign Use.

Some others may Object, and say, If the Value of the Coin be raised,

The King's Revenues, Landlords Rents, Officers by Land and Sea, Servants
Wages, and many other Things, will be lessened.
This is a Mistake, and a false Imagination of those that assert it, for want
of well considering the Nature of the Procurer, and the Thing procured,
together with the Influence, Law and Custom, or an Act of Parliament, will have
on both. -- For Example. --

Suppose with Forty New Half-Crowns, Weighing Thirty Nine Ounces, I Buy Sixty
Else of Bays at Twenty Pence an Ell; and with Forty Clipped Half-Crowns,
Weighing Twelve Ounces, you Buy as many Bays every way equal to mine in
Goodness; Have you not as much for your Light Money, as I have for mine that is
Heavy? Does not daily Experience show it, That a Shilling Clipped, Buys and
Pays for as much as a Shilling Unclipp'd? Does not that which is Valued Six
Pence in Copper Money, Buy as much as Six Pence in Silver will? although the
Copper, in its Intrinsic Value, is not worth above a Groat. These are the
Effects of Law and Custom, when Denomination has given them the Power of
Operation; and it will be the same in the New Coined Money; a Shilling Weighing
Ninety One Grains and an half, will pass for Nineteen Pence Halfpenny, and Buy
and Pay for so much, as well as Nineteen Pence Halfpenny does now; and the New
Crown-Piece, when Valued at Six Shillings and Six Pence, will Buy and Pay for
as many Goods as Six Shillings and Six Pence now does, when Established by Law
and Custom, to pass no more for Five Shillings, but for Six Shillings and Six
Pence. --

In short, The Valuing the Crown-Piece at Six Shillings and Six Pence, will
neither -- affect nor lessen

The King's Revenues, The Landlords Rents, The Officers by Sea and Land,
Servants Wages, nor any thing else of that kind:
But it will have a very great Influence upon the Working Silver-Smiths, and
such as used to Melt down the Coin for Exportation; they only will be defeated,
but no Body else will be prejudiced by Raising the Value of the Coin; and
therefore such Persons may think they have Reason to exclaim against it: But
for the Satisfaction of them, and all such who shall offer any Arguments
against Raising the Value of the Coin, I shall only ask 'em this Question,
which will determine the thing, and put an end to all their weak Disputes.

What if the King of SPAIN should shut up all his Ports in AMERICA, and bring
no Silver from thence for Seven Years or more? or, How if any Difference or
Disorders should fall amongst the Spaniards and Natives there, and the King of
SPAIN, to hinder the Mines from Working, so that they should Export no Silver
from thence in that time? Would not your Crown-Piece be worth Seven Shillings
then? Yes, Sir, Twould be worth Eight Shillings and more; and happy would he be
that could get it: and One Shilling, or an Eighth part of the Crown-Piece then,
would Buy, and Pay for, as much as a Shilling does now, without Lessening the
King's Revenues, Landlords Rents, or any thing else. And those Persons who have
offered Arguments against Raising the Value of the Coin, or the holding up the
Price of Guinneas, have rashly done it, without considering the following
Circumstances, and their Effects. -- So that, My Lords and Gentlemen, what You
have chiefly to Consider in this Affair, I Humbly conceive, is for the greatest
part included in these following Articles.

First, The great Damage and Loss there will be by the Clipped and Counterfeit
Money, being at least Forty Five Pounds per Cent. whether it be better to Raise
a Tax, to make the Clipped Money good, at the same time when the Money's Called
in; or to raise the Value of the Money Thirty Pounds per Cent. whereby the
Money will bear most of its own Damage, and excuse the Land, -- till a more
plentiful time of Silver comes, and then the Coin may be reduced again as You
see cause.

Secondly, The Demand and great Necessity Foreigners have of Silver, and the
highest Price they will give for it; from hence we may judge, How to Value our
New Coin, which certainly ought to be Valued Five Pounds per Cent. above the
highest Price they will give for Silver, otherwise it will not escape them.

Thirdly, When any Bullion is Imported, what it ought to be Rated at, being
equal to Standard, and how many Grains that Rate shall be, under the Price of
Standard Money, -- otherwise, the Silver-Smiths will Work upon the Coin, and
not give themselves the Trouble to seek out for Buying Bullion; Nor will any
Person send Bullion to the Tower to be Coined unless the Coined Money be above
the Price of Bullion.

Fourthly, What Price the Silver-Smiths shall Sell their Bulky Plain Plate at,
being Standard, above the Price or Weight of New Coined Money, which ought to
be very little.

Fifthly, That a Duty answerable to what Foreigners will give for Silver, above
the Price of our present Coin, be laid upon Bullion, if Transported; (with a
Proviso for the East India Company, and all our Plantations; as also for what
has Reference to His Majesty's Affairs) which Duty will prevent the Melting
down of our Coin for Foreign Use. --

Sixthly, To consider if it will not be more convenient, and a great Ease and
Satisfaction to the People; as also, a Help to Finish the Coynage with a
quicker Dispatch, To have Twelve Mints set up in the most convenient Places of
England and Wales, where the County-Offices shall be kept, rather than to bring
all the Money from the Remote Parts of England and Wales to London: And that
there be a Refiner at every Mint to Melt down the Bad Money, and to blow the
Base Metal from it, till it is brought to the Perfection of Standard Silver.

Seventhly, That if You Raise the Coin Thirty Pounds per Cent. That will nearly
Discharge the Loss of the Clipped Money; and when it appears, by the Register
of every particular County, and the Parishes thereof, what further Damage than
Thirty Pounds per Cent. each Parish shall suffer, That then it be Enacted;

THAT every Parish shall Tax and Assess it self with a Tax, to be Paid at Four
Yearly Payments, to make the Remaining Damage good.

With Submission, I Humbly Offer this, as my Reason, because, in all Public
Affairs, one Parish does not bear the Charges of another; for, certainly, the
more Money there is in any Parish, the better able that Parish will be to bear
this Tax. And I know no Reason why that Parish, or that Man, who has little
Clipped Money, should bear the Burden of such as have.

Eighthly, Whereas some Persons have Writ against the Price of Guinneas going
at Thirty Shillings, and seem to assert, as if that Price had been, or would
be, a Damage to the Nation; this proceeds from Want of Consideration, and
therefore renders them that think so Guilty of Mistake; for having not Examined
the past, present, and future Circumstances of England, their Opinions are
given without any Reason, or just Cause, for what they say, as may appear by
what follows. -- I am of Opinion, That the Price of Guinneas coming up to
Thirty Shillings, has done the Nation such a piece of Service, that all the
Industry and Wit of Man could not have found out a better way; for the Support
of the Government, and Good of the People, in this Juncture, which I make out
thus. -- Suppose there have been 500000 Guinneas Imported in England since
Christmas 1694, the Guinneas are but Returned to the Country where they ought
to be; and without this Accident of their Rise, we could not have contrived any
way to have brought them to England again: Now, Valuing each Guinnea at Thirty
Shillings, although they came in at cheaper Prices; but admitting them to be
Eight Shillings and Six Pence more than they formerly went at, the Advance upon
them comes but to 212500 l. -- And, What if it does? Is this so much? every
Penny of this Money, and more, has been, and will be got before Christmas
next, by the Advance of our Goods, which have been, and will be, Shipped off
for Foreign Use. Since the First of May last, by this Happy Accident of the
Rise of Guinneas, we have brought all Europe, a great Part of Asia, some Places
in Africa, and the most Parts of America, that have any Correspondence with
Europe, to be Contributors toward the Charge of the War, which no other
Contrivance or Invention could have affected, but only the Rise of Guinneas;
and whether this be taken Notice off or no, it is infallibly true. France it
self, since the Rise of Guinneas, has not escaped bearing a proportionable
Part of our Charge; for since the Rise of Guinneas, all Goods we Export have
Risen, and now the Foreigners Pay for them, which, before the Rise of Guinneas,
they had, in a manner, for Fetching away, whereby the Natives of England bore
all the Burden, and wrought only to make the Foreigner Rich.

Objection. But some may Object, and say, The Foreigners will pour in all their
Gold upon us, if Guinneas go at this high Rate.

Answer. The more they bring, the better, Experience will show it self, and
'twill certainly prove true, Wherever the Gold or Silver is, there the Trade
must and will be. But there is no Reason for such Persons to believe, that any
Part of Europe is so flush of Gold, as to hold out Annually with the Production
or Manufactures of the Goods of England. Gold does not multiply and increase in
Holland every Day, Week, and Month, as the Goods and Manufactures of England
do, (especially when they are encouraged in Price). Those that sent the
Guinneas before, may send as many more, if they can tell where to have them,
and be furnished with Goods again. They have nothing but the Labor of our
Hands for their Gold; and that Labor, or the Product thereof, for good Prices
we are very willing to afford them, and should be glad of the Opportunity, that
all our Hands might go to work. -- But some Persons (whose Heads are only
possessed with Chimaera's) are apt to say, The Dutch and Hamburghers have
Bought as many Goods as will serve them some Years, and that they will want no
more for some time. These are the Fancies and Expressions of such People as
neither know nor consider what Use or Occasion all the North-East Parts of
Europe have for our Clothing in these times; such Persons never thinking what
Consumption and Expense there is of them in Holland, Flanders, Germany, Poland,
Russia, Sweedland, Norway, Hamborough, and Denmark; if they did, they might see
or understand there has been no more Bought than what there is present Demand
and Occasion for; and so 'twill be found, they will be as ready to Buy the next
Year, as they have been this, especially if they could hear of the Fall of your
Goods, and the Price of Guinneas. --

Another sort of People are so Ignorant to affirm, by our taking their Guinneas
at high Prices, they have drained us of our Goods. I wonder at the Weakness of
such People* and tell them, at this Day there is in England, in the Oars of Tin
and Lead, and in those Morals ready made, in Wool, and the Woolen Manufactures
ready wrought up, above the Value of Two Millions in Pounds Sterling; all which
we are ready to part with for good Prices, and should be either glad of more
Gold or Silver for them; -- Knowing very well we can soon make as many more:
But I desire such Persons to consider and understand, It is not Holland,
Hamborough, nor any Part of Europe, that is in a Condition, or can and will
spare or part with One Million of Guinneas, or the Value thereof in other Gold,
in these times, unless we English will sell them our Goods for little or
nothing, as we have done of late Years; and then, doubtless, they would be ready to
purchase them. --

Is there any thing more fresh in Memory, than what the People of this Kingdom
have suffered for Six Years last past? during all which time, the Manufactures
and Goods of our Product, as Lead, Tin, all sorts of Clothing, etc. have been
at such low Prices, that many Thousands of Families could scarcely get Bread;
nay, Multitudes have been forced to go a Begging, and leave their Habitations,
because those that had Stocks of Money, and used to Employ them, cast them off,
in regard they could get nothing by their Labor, when they had Wrought it up,
by reason of the low Price of our Goods? Did not this Discourage the
Undertakers for Employing them? upon which, many have been frequently heard
say, lamenting their Condition; What should I Work for? My Work affords me
nothing when I have made it? Can this be thought any thing but a dismal and
deplorable State of the People? and since those times are grown better, by the
Advance of Guinneas, which occasioned this Rise of Goods, is it not necessary
to keep Both up, whereby to prevent the People from Groaning under that Burden
again? What better can any Person be by Lowering the Price of Guinneas, which
have done so much Good? I am sure there are few, if any, in England, that will
be Gainers by their Fall; but, it is certain, Abundance would be very great
Losers, if their Price should come lower. And You may conclude, The Foreigners
desire nothing more than the Fall of Guinneas here, whereby they might have an
Opportunity to compass them; and then they doubt not but to bring down the
Price of our Goods again, and so free themselves from Bearing any Part of our
Charges of the War; Therefore, I will lay down this for a Maxim: Whilst such
Goods of our own Growth carry a high Price, as are Exported for Foreign Use,
all Parts of the Earth, wherever they are used, contribute toward our
Charges of the War; and when such Goods are low here, we only bear the Burden,
and the Foreigners have the Advantage thereof. Therefore, What Prudence can
there be in Lowering the Price of Guinneas, which have caused so much Good? If
Guinneas fall, the Price of Goods go down, and then You will hear of fresh
Complaints from these People and Places following, who, for Six Years past,
have labored under very great Difficulties, and a Multitude more in England
besides these, whose Number is not a few.

In the County of Cornwall there may be Employed in the Tin-Mines, and such as
have a Dependence upon them for their Livings, one way or another, about 30000
People. And upon Lead-Mines, in the Counties of Somerset, Cardigan, Montgomery,
Denby, Flint, Shrewsbury, Derby, York, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
Northumberland, and Durham, about 120000. In all Sorts of Woolen Manufactures,
and Clothing Trade, in the Counties of England and Wales, at least 1500000.
Making in all 1650000.

Working People, who if Guinneas fall, and the Price of Goods go down, at a
time when the Money's Called in, and they Charged with further Taxes (than they
have been) which, together with their then Want of Credit, added to to the Loss
by Clipped and Counterfeit Money, will render them inclinable to reckon
themselves like so many Victims Sacrificed by Oppression, and thereby appear
both Unable and Unwilling to Pay their Proportions of their Taxes.

So that, with Submission, in all Humility, I Humbly offer it as my Opinion,
for the Good of the People, That Guinneas be Established at Thirty Shillings
during the Time of the War, or till there is greater Plenty of Silver, and good
Money abroad in the Nation, which will add very much to make the People easy,
and enable them to Pay their Taxes cheerfully; and also conduce to the Keeping
up the Prices of such Goods as are fit for Foreign Use, whereby our Exports
will over-balance our Imports, and, in a little time, remove that great
Mischief and Damage there is, at present, by the Exchange of Money; which Loss
has insensibly stolen upon us, by Reason of the low Price our Goods have Sold
at for some Years past. --

For Example. --

Suppose my Correspondent at Amsterdam in May last sent me One Hundred Pounds
Weight of Cloves at Four Shillings a Pound, which comes to Twenty Pounds; and
ordered me to Return him Two Fodders of Lead by the same Ships, which being
very low at Nine Pounds a Fodder, came to Eighteen Pounds; so I became Forty
Shillings indebted to him, by reason of the low Price of the Lead, which if it
had been at Eleven Pounds a Fodder, as it has been since the Rise of Guinneas,
he must have allowed me Twenty Two Pounds for my Lead, and then he would have
been Forty Shillings Indebted to me; and so my Export had over-balanc'd my
Import. This has been the unhappy Circumstance we have lain under, for several
Years past in all Goods; which, if this Sessions of Parliament would be pleased
to consider, and think upon some Expedient to Remedy this Mischief, it would
alter the Exchange, and cause a considerable Advantage to the English. To
Accomplish which, I shall offer my Opinion as follows. --

It is very well known, The Danes, Sweeds, Norwegians, Bremors, Hamburghers,
Hollanders, and Flemmings, can fetch our Goods from Yarmouth, Boston, Hull,
Stockton, and Newcastle, and carry them into any of their Countries as Cheap as
we can bring them from these Places on our own Coast to London; so that we can
send no Goods from London, to any of those Places, in English Ships, Sealed by
English Men, but what will stand us in near Ten Pounds per Cent. more than they
will do them. --

It is also known, That the Genouese, Portuguese, and the People
beforementioned, do fetch our Goods from London, and carry them Abroad, much
Cheaper than we can, because our Freights are dear, and Seamens Wages high; and
they Sealing with fewer Hands, and Paying lesser Freights, over-do us.
Therefore, I Humbly move it with Submission, Whether it may not be reasonable
to lay such a further Duty upon all Goods that are Shipped in Foreign Bottoms,
and Sealed with such Hands, as may reduce this Advantage they have of us at
present, and enable us to perform our Delivery of Goods Abroad as Cheap as they
can? -- This, although a Digression from the Coynage, I hope may be Pardoned.
--

Lastly, Be pleased to consider, That Man who had 100 Pounds Worth of Goods at
May Day last, and makes Four Returns of them between that time and Christmas
next, has or will have, One Hundred and Sixty Pounds Worth in New Goods or
Gold; and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Sum; Does not this enable
him to Pay the King's Taxes, assist him in setting Hands to Work, and gives him
such Encouragement as to go cheerfully on? and, Who Pays for this? Is it not
the Foreigner, who desires to hear of nothing more than the Fall of our
Guinneas, and the Price of our Goods; concluding then he should be freed from
bearing any Part of our Charges, and we only left to Support the Burden of the
War: Whose Desires and Designs therein, it is hoped, You, in Your Great Wisdom,
will take all the Care that may be to prevent. Which is what offers at present
upon this Subject,

By Your most Humble, And most Obedient Servant, T. H.

POSTSCRIPT.
ALL such as have, or shall hereafter use any Arguments against the -- Raising
the Value of the New Coined Crown Piece to Six Shillings and Six Pence, or are
not for Establishing Guinneas at Thirty Shillings, as aforesaid, are desired
to consider, That Silver was formerly at Twenty Five Shillings the Pound
Weight; and then such a piece of Silver as the New Crown Piece is, 27 Ed. 3d.
went for Two Shillings; and, at the same time, a Pound Weight of Gold was
Valued at Fifteen Pounds, or Twenty Five Shillings an Ounce; and then a piece
of Gold of the Weight of our Guinnea went for Six Shillings and Nine Pence;
whereby it appears, That the Prices of Silver and Gold have risen in all Kings
Reigns, proportionable to the Trade there was then in Merchandising, and to the
occasions the Governments had for them in those times; so that it has been
Customary to raise the Value of Silver and Gold, as the Occasions of Trade and
the Exigency of the State have required. And every Rational Man must own and
confess, There is a greater Want of Money now, to Supply Trade, and to Support
the Government, than ever there has been; and therefore the greater need to
raise them. -- Neither have such Persons any solid or true Reason to offer
against Raising their Values, but because they have been lower before, they
would yet have them be so; and this is no Reason at all; for Time, Trade, and
Circumstances, have quite Altered and Changed EUROPE extremely to what it was
formerly, when no Standing Armies were on foot; which things being well
considered, such Persons may find, and see Cause sufficient to be of another
Mind. They ought also to consider, That Foreigners have nothing to do with the
Species or Substance of our Coin, but only with the Value thereof. --

Furthermore, Be pleased to consider, as an expedient to remove that great
Mischief we labor under by the Exchange of Money, and for and toward making
our Exports balance our Imports; as also, for Increasing the King's Revenues,
and for a Fund for Raising Supplies.

In all Dutiful Submission, I Humbly Propose,

That a BILL may be brought in to lay a Double Duty upon all Goods that shall
be Shipped for Foreign Use, after the 25th of March 1696, from any Port or
Place in England or Wales, excepting the Port of London; and that the Duties
and Customs may remain and continue there as they now are; because, it is
manifest, since the Wars began, and Goods have been Sold at low Prices, either
Foreigners, or any others, may Ship them from these Places, and carry them
Abroad Ten, Fifteen, Twenty, and Twenty Five Pounds per Cent. Cheaper than they
can be Shipped out of the Port of London, which, like a Snake in the Grass,
has bit the Nation extremely: Few Persons knowing the true Reason of this,
have met with great Disappointments in the Sales of their Goods Abroad, not
understanding where their Misfortunes lay.

As for Example.

A Dutch Ship, or any other Foreign Ship, takes in One Hundred Fodder of Lead
at Hull, at Nine Pounds Ten Shillings a Fodder, which, with Twenty Shillings a
Fodder for the Customs, and Three Shillings a Fodder for other Charges, stands
him on board in One Thousand Sixty Five Pounds, and so returns to Holland for
the rest of his Cargo. -- At the same time I Ship One Hundred Fodder of Lead
from the Port of London, at Ten Pounds Fifteen Shillings a Fodder, and Twenty
Three Shillings for the King's Duty, and other Charges, as aforesaid, which
stands me in One Thousand One Hundred and Ninety Pounds; and his Costing but
One Thousand Sixty Five Pounds, stands him in less by One Hundred Twenty Five
Pounds than mine does me; besides, he has Seven Fodder and Three Hundred and
Twelve Pounds Weight in Lead, in One Hundred Fodder of Lead at Hull, more than
I have at London, which over-Weight is worth Eighty Eight Pounds more to him;
so that in the over-Weight, and the difference of Price, he has an Advantage
of me to the Value of Two Hundred and Thirteen Pounds in One Thousand One
Hundred and Ninety Pounds laying out; and, therefore, at Lisbon, Cales,
Leghorn, or Venice, can under-Sell me Twenty Five Pounds per Cent. and yet get
as much as I do. Is not this a prodigious Advantage to the Foreigner, or
who-ever makes use of it? and it is real Matter of Fact.

Therefore, with Submission, I humbly conceive, It is but reasonable, during
the Wars, to double the King's Customs in all Places of England and Wales, the
Port of London only excepted: and, by this means, the Foreigner will be brought
to bear some part of our Burden of the War, by Paying for our Goods, whether
he has them at Home or Abroad; and this Additional Duty will be a good Fund to
raise Supplies for His Majesty's Use; and will raise near Two Hundred Thousand
Pounds per Annum, and greatly conduce to amend the Loss there is now by the
Exchange of Money.

FINIS.

