Here is a true and just account of a most HORRID And BLOODY PLOT, Conspired
against his most Sacred MAJESTY And his Royal HIGHNESS By the wicked
Contrivances of Colonel John Rumsay, Richard Nelthorp, Edward Wade, Richard
Goodenough, Captain Walcot, William Thompson, James Burton, and William Hone.
Since which time there is an account that Colonel John Rumsay is taken, and
has been upon his Examination.
NOtwithstanding the unparaleld clemency, of our most Gracious Sovereign,
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith. Such is the insatiate desire of never satisfied
malignant Spirits, that they cannot be contented to live peaceably under the
Government of a renowned Prince, the very pattern of pity, and mercy, but most
wickedly, and maliciously conspire, and contrive the death of their Prince, the
ruin of the Nation, and the loss of their own Souls, as may appear by the
following lines, which give perfect testimony of the horrid design and bloody
Plot, designed to be carried on by the wicked contrivance of these Barbarous
and Inhumane Wretches. Namely John Rumsay, Colonel, Richard Rumhold Minister,
Richard Nelthorp Esquire, Edward Wade Gentleman, Richard Goodenough Gentleman,
Captain Walcot, William Thompson, James Burton, and William Hone Joyner, who,
as it is testified upon Oath, did most Traitorously, and Villainously design
the death of his most Sacred Majesty, and not contented with the blood sucking
of a Monarch, so matchlesly merciful, did also contrive the murder and
destruction of his Royal Higness, James Duke of York. But being by Divine
Providence, interpose in their wicked design, and prevented of the evil hatched
in the infernal lake, by a happy and timely discovery of their dreadful
enterprise, they fearing that Justice, the continual pursuivant of such
inhumane Conspirators, should overtake, and lay hold of their Rebellious
Contrivances, have, for the prevention thereof, absented their habitations, and
absconded themselves, which gives a clear and large Demonstration of their
Guilt.

And it is very likely, his Majesty, will, by, and with, the advice of his most
Honorable Privy Council, issue forth a Proclamation for the apprehending of
the Malefactors above named, that they may be brought to the Bar of Justice, to
receive the reward due to their Conspiracies.

And these persons so discovered, and brought to condign punishment, I hope may
be an Example to all others for the future, to forbear and abhore such bloody
Contrivances and inhumane Barbarity, as to Conspire the death of a Prince, most
Merciful, Gracious, and Pitiful: but the Malignancy of these, and such like
Rigicides, cannot, nor will not be forgotten, by any Loyal Subject, though they
may be punished according to the heinousness of the Crime: I wish with all my
heart it may be the last Plot that may ever be conspired against our Sovereign,
whose mercies are daily manifested to many offenders, and whose virtues are as
much admired, as their impudence wondered at, who do or shall ever attempt such
enormities, against the pattern of Princely Monarchs.

It is much to be minded and observed, how graciously God has been pleased to
protect and preserve our Sovereign King from the bold and desperate attempts of
his Conspireing Enemies, who, wanting Grace and the Fear of God, would
audaciouslie presume, and venture on the most execrable murder of the most
merciful Prince the World could ever boast of. But if we look back upon the Eye
of Providence, we cannot but see the great, and particular kindness, our most
blessed Creator has for our most Gracious King. what a miraculous preservation
was that at Worcester, when a Prince of the greatest Splendor in Europe was
forced by the rebellious (though then prevailing party) to take up his Lodging
in an Oaken Tree, only accompanied sometimes with a few Loyal Nobles, who like
worthy Souls, were free to participate of the deplorable sorrows his Majesty
then met with? What strange and wonderful designs have been since, several
times contrived against him, whom the Heavens have preserved: but we may
conclude with this Ancient Proverb, Si Deus pro nobis quis contra nos? and it
is undoubtedlie true, that he that shows mercy, shall also find mercy; it
has so happened to our Sovereign. And I hope the mercies of the most high will
still continue to him, and be multiplied more, and more, that our poor Nation,
too much divided by Faction, may be blessed by the long continuance of an
unparraleld Monarch, whose clemency is to be amired, whose mercy is to be
praised, and whose Enemies hope will be defeated. And those that shall either
attempt, or at least imagine the least harm to his Princely person, may they
be utterlie confounded in their evil designs against him: that poor England may
again Flourish as before, that has lately been encumbered with prodigious
Conspirators, hatching such wicked and hellish Contrivances, that it is a shame
to all Loyal persons to reiterate, or rather to harbor in the secret Corners
of their Loyal hearts.

And I think no reasonable person can reckon less than severe punishment to be
the Portion allotted for them: and it is undoubtedlie a duty incumbent upon
all persons to endeavor to make a discovery of these Malefactors, which will
be a piece of good Service to the Nation, and unquestionablie will be well
rewarded by his Majesty, who was ever, and will be still an encourager of well
doers, and who can do more for a Prince, then to study how to detect the
Villains that shall so impudentlie undertake a design so monstrous, so
inhumane, and so diabolical? But such is the unreasonableness and sordid
disposition of some ill qualified, and ill tempered persons, that whereas they
should be won by the clemency and favorable kindness of an obliging Prince,
that they on the contrary, are rather imboldned to presume to the greatest
hight of impudence that can possibly be imagined, and in stead of being won to
a dutiful obedience, are more and more animated to all kind of mischief, that
the Devil, and an ill Conscience, can find out, or invent: nor can the
affability of an endearing Monarch make any impression on obdure and
impenetrable hearts, but they still persist in their beastly and rude
behaviors, till time and providence, bring them too late to repent, of their
unjust, and wicked practices.

Here is also an undoubted assurance of the apprehending of Colonel John
Rumsey who was seized and examined; of which proceedings, we will give you a
more perfect account by the next.

Windsor June the 21st 1683, This day the Sheriff, and common Sergeant of
London, by the express Command of the Lord Mayor, and the Court of Aldermen, in
pursuance of an Order of Common Council, waited on His most gracious Majesty,
and with all Submission, most humbly acquainted him, that the Common Council,
had agreed to acquiesce with the Regulations required by His Majesty, and had
deferred the Election of Sheriffs, and other Officers, which usually were
chosen on Midsummer-day. until the 18th of July next.

So I conclude, with my Prayers for the preservation of his Majesty, and his
Royal Highness, that no Traitor may ever Assassinate, or ever have power to
prejudice their Princely Persons, and so leaving them to the Tuition of the
Omnipotent, I conclude with a Vive le Roy, or long live the King.

AN ACCOUNT Of the Discovery of the NEW PLOT, Made manifest by several of the
Conspirators Conveened before His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council at
Hampton Court on the 23. of this Instant June 1683.
NO Wonder if Sacred Princes, Vicegerents to the King of kings, are Heavens
peculiar care, since Wicked Men so frequently are Combined (with the Powers of
Darkness, in malice to Him that Instituted them by His Eternal Decree to Govern
the Inferior World) do disturb their Reign, and Conspire their Hurt; but in
vain are all the Machinations and Devices of a Turbulent Faction, who seek to
overthrow the Established Government; which is Heavens peculiar Care, though
like Bulls in Bassian, they have pushed for some years past, to overthrow
Great-Britains Monarchy, yet have their Devices been brought to naught, as
appeared by the late Discovery, when Ignoramus Juries were brought as Salvo's,
yet the Eyes of the Nation were too open to be deceived with Shaddows,
Spectrums, or Fantoms, when apparent Truth presented her self in her Native
shape, and much more now, since a more then ordinary Discovery has been made
by such who were in the Combination against the best of Kings, who is indeed,
next Heaven, our only Refuge, and the Breath of our Nostrils; a Prince so Good,
so Bounteous, and so Just, that Heaven thought him only fit to Rule so great a
People.

But to the purpose, some days since, Depositions having been made by one
Keeling (who, as Heaven would have it, was altogether restless ti^l he had
Disimboged the dire Secret) that a Hell^sh and Damnable Conspiracy had for a
long time been Brooding, and carried o^ by several of the Disaffected Party,
many of which he Named, and depos^d likewise the several Circumstances, so far
as his Knowledge Retained, that attended the damnable Conspiracy, no doubt laid
deep to deprive true Loyalists of all they hold dear on this side Heaven; upon
which Deposition, one Mr. West, a Councellor at Law, and one who formerly was
Active in the behalf of Stephen College, had his Chamber Seized by Order of
the Secretary of State, and diverse Papers secured by the Officers Employed to
that purpose, many of which contained matters of dangerous Consequence, tending
to the countenancing Sedition and Rebellion, etc. Upon notice of which, he, the
said Mr. West, Councellor at Law, for sometime absconded himself; but being
moved by the sense of his unnatural Combination against his Sovereign, he
expressed a deep, and past doubt, an unfeigned sorrow for his offense, which he
discovering to his Father in Law, who is doubtless a man of unbyassed
Principles, he advised him to throw himself at the Feet of that Majesty, which
in so high a Nature he offended, but he not daring to approach such Innate
Goodness, against whom he had causelessly conspired, before his Atonement was
in some measure made, he by his Agents, if not in Person, applied himself to
the worthy, (and of unquestionable Loyalty) Sir George Jefferies chief justice
of the County Palatine of Chester, and his Majesty's Sergeant at Law, etc.
Humbly beseeching him to Interceed with His Majesty, that Fountain of Mercy,
for his Pardon, and confiding in such his Intercession, and His Majesty's never
failing compassion, to those that sincerely confess their Offenses, he
surrendered himself into the hands of Justice, and this day being the 23d of
this Instant June, attended the Honorable Privy Council (for that and other
Important considerations) Assembled at Hampton Court, upon Examination he laid
open (according to our best information) the Hellish Conspirac^e against the
Person of his most Sacred Majesty, and his Royal Highness, the Illust^ious
Prince James Duke of York, in order to the overthrow of Monarchy, and all that
can be called dear to Loyal and Peaceful Subjects, in which diverse of the
d^saffected had involved themselves. I shall endeavor to show you the true
Narrative of Honorable and Credible Persons, this Plot was to be Acted (as we
hea^) by the Whiggish Party, when the King came from Newmerkat last and the
manner of their attact was this, at Hodsdeen, which is betwixt Newmerca^ and
London, there is a strait passage, through which two Coaches cannot pass at
on^e, and Hedged on each side, and they for a Stratagem, had designed two Carts
to meet the Kings Coaches in the Lane, which would undoubtedlie cause a stop,
and w^ilst the King sto^ped, they were to unleaden eight or a dozen of
Blunderbushes in the King and Dukes Coaches, but as the wonderful Providence of
God ordered it, His Majesty left Newmercat sooner then ordinary by two Weeks,
by reason of the violent Fire which happened there at that time: which
Conflagration caused his Majesty and Royal Highness to depart, and take their
way to Cambridge: In this design many were Involved as by some Papers Seized
appears, and upon discovery of which, diverse are fled, nor cannot be yet
found, diverse Messengers have been Empowered to apprehend them, and of this
pernicious number, Mr. Goodenough late under Sheriff for the City of London,
etc. Is shrewdly suspected for one, as also a Lawers Son of note, but till the
wisdom of the Nation (in Council assembled) make a further Progress in this
happy and timely discovery; I shall acquiesce, wishing that all such, as
either in thought or deed attempt the hurt of His most Sacred Majesty, may
undergo the Punishment due to the worst of Traitors.

HIs Majesty being satisfied of the Truth of this Conspiracy against His
Sacred Person, and the Person of his Royal Brother, caused His Proclamation to
be Issued forth, Commanding these Conspirators, viz. Colonel John Rumsie,
Richard Rumbal, Richard Nelthrop, Edward Wade, Richard Goodenough, Captain
Walcot, William Thompson, James Burton, and William Hone, to render themselves
to his Judges, Justices, etc. Strictly forbidding any of his Subjects to
conceal, harbor, or releave them; and that whosoever shall apprehend any of
them, and put them into the hands of Justice, shall receive for each so
apprehended, One hundred pound as a Reward.

Entered according to Order.
Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1683.


