A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE Judges of Assize, AT THE Cathedral in
Lincoln, July 21. 1673. Sir William Humble Baronet, BEING HIGH SHERIFF of the
County.

By Richard Hollingworth, Minister of God's Word at West-ham near London.

London, Printed for Robert Boulter, at the Turks-Head in Cornhil, over against
the Royal Exchange, 1673.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND. Father in God WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Lincoln.
My Lord,
WHen I had the honor last to wait upon your Lorship in your own Palace at
Lincoln, you was pleased to signify such an approbation of this Discourse, as
to command from me a Copy of it, which when understood by some other Persons of
no small acount, I was vigorously pressed by them to make it Public, they
hoping thereby some good might accrue to that Church, in the Government of
which your Lordship bears so considerable a share to so good purposes: And
being not willing to shun any opportunity whereby I might serve the Public,
obey your Lordship, and give contentment to my Friends, I buckled my self
presently to a transcribing of it in order to the Press.

And now, such as it is, I present to your Lordship, desiring that as it
derived the boldness of appearing abroad from your Lordships good liking of it,
so it may receive Protection from your Lordships Power and Authority. For
Discourses of this nature, if they be not well fortified, your Lordship knows
are quickly blasted by soul Reproaches, and unworthy Reflections either upon
the Authors or the Principles; and what men want in Argument and Proof, they
usually make up in Slander and unjust Imputations. And truly, had I not had a
greater value for Truth, for the Peace and Settlement of the Kingdom, for the
prosperous and quiet Reign of our Great Master the King, then I have for mine
own Esteem and Reputation, among some sorts of people, I would never have made
my first Essay in Public of so ungrateful a nature, as I know this must needs
be to many men.

But we are to consider we were not born for our selves, and so that the Cause
of God may be carried on, the Interest of the Protestant Religion maintained. I
think every man ought to make a venture of all that is near and dear to him,
and think himself very happy, if, with the loss of all, he can be serviceable
to so great and good Purposes: A thing which we whose years have not been
multiplied to the number of your Lordships, have very great encouragement to
do, both from your Lordships Example, and many other worthy Persons in the late
bad Times, who, to defend the Principles stated and recommended in this
Discourse, suffered you Selves to be stripped of all those external Comforts
which Philosophers tell us have a very great share, in contributing to our
happiness while we are here. But now as God has been pleased to restore the
Church to its ancient Constitution, and your Lordship, and many other eminent
Sufferers, not only to its Wealth and Revenue, but its Defense and Support; so
I pray God it may continue with the advantage of such Lights as long as the Sun
and Moon endure. For it is plain, take away the Church, and destroy the
Principles by which it is settled, and we introduce all disorder and confusion
into the World immediately, and every man turns Reformer, and every week
presents us with a new Model, vainly boasting it self fetched out of the Old
Gospel, which of how dismal consequence to Religion, and to civil Societies, is
no difficult thing to judge.

But that such a Desolation may never overtake the Church again, thanks be to
God, has been the care of this present Parliament, in several Acts framed on
purpose; is the endeavor and care of your Lordship, and several others of
great worth and moment, and shall, I assure you, be the daily Prayer (as indeed
it ought to be of every good man) of him,

Who is your Lordships humble and faithful Servant to Command, Richard
Hollingworth.
Westham, Aug. 7.
TO THE HONORABLE Sir William Humble Baronet, High Sheriff of the County of
Lincoln.
SIR,
IT was a very wise return that a Reverend Divine, now in being, made, when the
Act of Uniformity was framing; Who being asked, What he intended to do:
Answered, That if the Act was tolerable, he would comply; and the reason was,
because he dreaded Faction, not knowing when once he got into it, how far it
would drive him, meaning, I suppose, that when men once come to think
themselves hardly and unkindly treated by their Governors, and see the
Encouragements of the Nation disposed of to others, whom they think not so
truly worthy as themselves; this works such a discontent in them, as disposes
them to any Action or Opinion, whereby they may keep at the greatest distance
from the Commands of Governors, and express their hatred both to their Persons
and Authority.

And, truly Sir, we have sadly seen this thing, that be feared of himself, come
to pass in many others, and those who some years agone contested with the
spirit of Separation, and both preached and wrote vigorously against the
Principle from whence it took its birth and being, and denounced the heaviest
Curses both of Heaven and Earth against all those who were Fautors and
Promotors of it; and now (I am afraid too much thorough a spirit of discontent
and anger at the Government under which they live) baptized into the same
Principles, and become Examples of the same Separation, which they condemned so
violently, and with so great an heat in others, and cannot be content only to
meet and gather people from the several Quarters both of City and Country, but
they must choose the same time with those who are the only legally constituted
Preachers; and that is not all, but they pitch in those places, and plant
themselves in those streets, where they acknowledge the Parish Minister is
worthy and laborious, and where they know there is Love and Unity betwixt both
the Pastor and his People.

And what this looks like, but revenge against the Government, and an obstinate
resolution to do what in them lies to undermine the present Ministry, I cannot
tell; a thing which I am sure the Puritans of old, whom they pretend to be
followers of, would have disowned, and vehemently declaimed against.

Sir, The sad and serious consideration of this, was one occasion of bending my
thoughts upon the following Subject, after you had been pleased to give me an
invitation to appear in so honorable and judicious an Assembly. And, in
earnest, he that considers well what must needs be the Consequences of all this
hereafter, be must necessarily vindicate any honest-hearted and true
Englishman, that stands up, and according to the power he is invested with,
endeavors to put a stop to these irregular proceedings. And those men who,
notwithstanding all that can be said or urged to them from their former
professed and avowed Practices and Principles, will yet so far countenance
their rage and prejudice, as to continue in this unseasonable and irreligious
Schism, I dare tell them, that they are making Rods for, and putting Weapons
into their Adversaries hands, wherewith to fight against themselves.

And if they would but impartially look back upon the late bad Times, and
consider when they had thrown down the Churches Walls and Fences, what was the
natural product of those Principles by which they found so great fault with,
and afterward destroyed the Constitutions and Injunctions of our Church, and
how quickly the Wars and furious Billows of Separation (raised and occasioned
by those Principles) flowed in upon them to their total overthrow and
destruction. I am confident, if they be not resolved upon Ruin, it would
either bring them back to an honest and just compliance with the Orders of our
Church, or else make them more modest in their dissenting from us.

And now Sir, if any man shall be provoked against me for this plain and honest
dealing both here and in the subsequent Discourse, I have no more to say, but
that I am resolved to be patient under his Censures: He shall be the object of
my Pity, the subject of my Prayers, but not mine anger; and to this purpose, I
shall only desire that I may be furnished with some good degrees and
proportions of that excellent meekness and ingenuity, of that admirable candor
and obligingness, which I have always found both in your Self, and in the
several worthy Branches of your Family, by which you have, and always shall
engage to any Service him,

Who is your humble and faithful Servant to Command, Richard Hollingworth.

Titus 3. Verse 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work.


THe Honor and Reputation of the Christian Religion are things which every man
ought to be tender of, careful to maintain, and forward to spread and propagate
abroad: and he that does anything, and lives in the omission of any Duty,
whereby it is eclipsed or darkened, whereby standers-by have any occasion either
to think amiss, or to speak evil and reproachful words of it; he acts neither
according to those Obligations that in Baptism he laid upon himself, nor any
ways in correspondence to the intrinsic worth and excellence of the thing it
self: For Religion having so near a relation to the Soul, and being so
immediately conducive to the true and proper interest of it; it ought to be
every man's care to carry himself worthy and becoming of it. Now among many
other things whereby this admirable contrivance of Heaven did at first thrive
and prosper, and obtain such a general footing in the Eastern parts of the
World, you shall find this one (to wit) the peaceable and obedient carriage of
those who were its first Votaries to their Governors, and those who were set
and appointed over them, their readiness to execute their Commands, their
willingness to undergotheir Censures and their Punishments; their Patience
under all those Afflictions their Profession did expose them to, did hugely
recommend the Doctrine of Christianity to many that stood gazing upon them, and
engaged them in a studying of, and afterward in an hearty compliance with that
which was attended with so rare and excellent, with so unfrequent and so
unknown a temper. And when Christians lost this spirit, and began to dispute it
with their Governors at first with words, and afterward with blows; when,
instead of the meekness and patience of their Ancestors, they were clothed
with the revenge and malice, with the cruelty and bitterness of lasps'd and
apostatized Spirits, and every little fancyed Provocation put them upon
plotting mischief, and overturning Governments, why then this incomparable
product of Divine Wisdom (I mean Religion) lost ground, and a great part of the
World, instead of turning or continuing Christians, betook themselves either to
the Tents of Mahomet, or else obstinately persevered in Heathenish Idolatry and
Superstition.

And how much this Nation peculiarly has gained by the late unhappy Breaches
and unnatural War in this particular, pray let the actions and common carriage
of the Inhabitants give evidence: And if Atheism and Profaneness, if an
increase of all manner of wickedness be any way for the promotion and
advancement of Religion, then indeed we have cause to be thankful for the
spirit of Sedition and Rebellion; but if the contrary (as no one of common
sense or reason can doubt) then we have all cause to bewail it, and endeavor
for the future the prevention of it. And truly I know no other nor better way,
then men's hearkening to Reason, and discharging themselves of those fond
Notions, and groundless Perswafions, whereby they are drawn into a liking and
allowance of such dangerous and disturbing Principles: And that I might
contribute to so good and necessary a work, I have made choice of these words,
Put them in mind to be subject to Pincipalities, etc.

In the treating upon which words, I shall do these three things.

1. Show what things we are to obey Magistrates in. 2. What things we are to
refuse Obedience in. For it is possible for a Magistrate to command unlawful
things, such as he has no right to impose, and we no liberty, without
violating the Injunctions of an higher Prince, and so consequently contracting
guilt upon the Conscience to comply withal. 3. We will consider by what ways
we may understand our Duty in both these respects.
1. If we would be satisfied what things exact our Obedience; I answer, all
Lawful and honest things, such as have a foundation both in the general and
particular Precepts of holy writ. Or else,

2. Such as have no contradiction to them; then farther, if we would know in
what things we are not in an active manner to obey our Superiors in, that may
be quickly understood, to wit, in such things as are as certainly moral Evils,
as Obedience to Authority is a real good; and if we barely doubt, and are not
as well satisfied of the real tuipitude and evil of a thing commanded, as we
are that Obedience to Authority is good, then we stand obliged to obey; and he
that upon this Principle does refuse, he lays no foundation for a good and
comfortable account at the last day in the other world.

1. We are to obey Magistrates in all Lawful and honest things, such as have a
foundation both in the general and particular Precepts of holy Scripture; and
though Obedience to such Commands is not simply fetched from the Authority of
the Magistrate, but the Authority of God, yet we may justly say the Magistrates
interposal strengthens the Obligation, and the neglect or contempt of the Law
under such circumstances introduces a greater blemish into, and fixes a deeper
stain upon the Soul. And though he sins severely that breaks so much as we are
obliged to keep of the Sabbath, notwithstanding the Injunction of the fourth
Commandment; yet the sin is heightened if he break the Sabbath after strict Laws
of Authority super-added thereunto; because the Principles from whence so great
an affront to Laws do flow are more bold and daring, and the contempt is
offered as well to the visible, as the Power that is invisible; and the man
sins as well in the face of present punishment, as of future pain and torment;
and he offends not only the Law by which the Command is bound upon us, but the
great Law too, by which he is so strictly enjoined to obey those that are set
over us. And therefore consider thus much, that though Drunkenness and
Swearing, Fornication and Adultery, and such other notorious Impieties are
severely forbidden by God in Scripture, and upon that score lay us under an
Obligation to crucify all those lusts that dispose and incline us thereunto:
Yet we act under further pressures to abstain from them, and that from the Laws
of Man, which if we do offend, we contract a greater guilt, and do pollute our
Souls with a more spreading and contaminating filth.

2. We are to obey Magistrates as well in those things that have no
contradiction in them to the Commands of holy Scripture; an assertion, which if
but well weighed, and rightly understood, would silence many of those unhappy
Differences that are now abroad, and pleaded for with so great and extreme a
passion. The Word of God, as to many things, has only given us the Rules of
Duty in general, and left the precise and particular determination of things as
they relate to the several advantages of Societies, and Bodies Politic, to the
Governors under whom we live. And indeed had God in the holy Scripture
determined every particular carriage in all those various relations in which we
stand, had He resolved that no one thing should ever be done, no attempt should
be made, no enterprise set upon, no design pursued without a particular
encouragement, and allowance from some particular Command in Scripture, the
Bible certainly must have swelled up into a Volume too big for most to buy, and
for men of business to consult and read. And therefore, He having given Men
rational Souls, capable of prudential and wise Considerations, He was pleased,
in many things, to prescribe our Duties to us in general, and leave the
particular accommodation of them to those general Rules, to our own prudence
and discretion, to our own honesty and fidelity; and though He enjoins us to
live soberly, yet he does not acquaint us with the fixed measures of Meat and
Drink beyond which we are bound not to go, but He supposes us so wise, or at
least that we ought to be so, as by reflecting upon the temperature of our
Bodies, to know what is most conducive to our health, and to order our selves
accordingly: And though He enjoin us to live righteously, yet He does not tell
us of all the Rules and Measures of exact justice between man and man, but
leaves them to the legal constitution of a Nation to decide. And when He
commands us, by the Apostle, to let all things be done decently and in order in
the Service of God, He does not make such a particular Description of those
things in which that order and decency does consist, as He did under the Law of
Moses; but considering that the Gospel was not to be confined to one Nation or
People, as the Law of Moses was, and that the Customs of Countries alter the
several notions of decency and order: The Gospel therefore, I say, being
designed to be ecumenical and dispersed over the face of the whole Earth, He
left the Determinations of these outward circumstances to the Governors of
those several places. And though I know some men look upon this assertion as an
impeachment of the faithfulness of Christ, and that if this be true, have the
confidence to affirm, That Moses did in point of Trust excel him; yet he that
shall consider what it is that the Apostle, Heb. 3. 5, 6. in that so often
mis-quoted and mis-interpreted place does mean; namely, his complete fulfilling
the Office of a Mediator, he will quickly find that Christ looses nothing of
his Supremacy and Praerogative, of his Sovereignty and Dominion by a Princes
care, that men do not address themselves to God in a rude and disorderly
manner; and besides, we may well look upon this power we give to the civil
Magistrate, as no abridgment of the just Power of this great Prince the Lord
Jesus, till these men who raise this Objection can produce a Government of
their own so modelled by plain and unforced Scripture, as to have nothing of
humane counsel and prudential determination in it, till they can bring us out a
Draught so exactly to the Pattern in the Mount, that Humane Invention is not
concerned in one stroke or line of it; and truly until this be done, I think
the quarrel against the innocent Constitutions of our Church is unjustly
maintained.

Now it being so that God has entrusted Governors with such a Power, we must
have a very special care how we part with the Duty of Obedience to those who
are our Rulers. If the things commanded be not in plain downright terms, or by
evident and easy consequence, opposite to the Word of God, the Rule of our
Faith and Manners; if there do not appear in them some real turpitude and
filthiness, some immorality and natural evil, we must consider well before we
shake hands, and part with our Governors; for nothing will vindicate our
Consciences at the last day, and embolden them to lift up their heads, and
plead their cause, in case of non-obedience to Authority, but commands bearing
a perfect and flat contradiction to the Laws of God; 'twas this made the three
Children with so great and undismayed Countenances enter into the fiery Furnace.

And therefore those men who in compliance with a boundless passion, or out of
disdain of any particular Person, or from a Principle of Pride, because they
may not with the Pharisee sit in the highest place of the Synagogue, refuse to
come to the public and constituted places of Divine Worship; why, these men do
perfectly affront the Law, and set up their own private wills against the
public; they are real Breakers of the Fifth Commandment, and Sinners against
all those Injunctions to Obedience with which both the Old and New Testament
does abound. And they have no plea commonly for what they do, but what is
fetched from those little Magazines which our Gallants are wont to make use of
for their duelling, and their other Sins; namely, that they cannot do this or
that in point of Honor, it is below them to make such ungentile
condescensions, and the World, forsooth, would laugh at them as arrant Fools,
and hen-hearted Persons, if they should submit. Well, but how strong, and of
what force these Arguments will be either upon a deathbed, or at a solemn
trial, I leave you all to judge. I am sure then nothing will bear us out for
the contemning of those Laws made by the wisdom of God's Trustees and
Representatives, but some real and apparent evil that was in the matter of
those Commands; and he that is not as certain of the wickedness of the thing
imposed, as he is of the goodness of Obedience to Authority, does not deal
justly and with integrity with his Conscience, if he disobeys.

And truly, I wish with all mine heart, that this thing was but well weighed,
and thereby better understood. I am certain it is a Principle which would very
much heal the Breaches, and break down those walls of Separation that are too
many and too high amongst us; it would very much preserve and keep up the
honor and veneration of Authority, and Dignities would be more in esteem then
now they are. The reputation of all good Laws would be in heart, and civil
Sanctions would lead a better and more quiet life then now they do, (things
very desirable by every man, who understands the interest of all united and
incorporated Bodies whatsoever); for when men once by virtue of their
Principles and religious pretenses hang loose to Authority, and entertain mean
and despicable thoughts of what is prudently thought convenient to be enacted
into a Law, they always grow (unless prevented by an excellent natural
disposition) tumultuous and seditious, and stand ready upon every slender
alarm to besiege and attempt the honor and the quietness of that Government
under which they live, and so they continue, if the natural influence and
tendency of these Principles be not prevented, plo^ting and conspiring till
they have either by the hands of violence forced the enjoyment of their own
Fancies, or else by the destruction of their proper Masters, usurped the Throne
themselves.

And now by what has been discoursed under this first Head, you have a direct
answer to the second thing propounded, to wit, wherein we are not to obey
Magistrates. If we are verily assured that the thing commanded is a real Evil,
we are then with all modesty to withdraw our selves from the Command, and with
patience to suffer the Penalties that are laid upon us; and he that does so is
a good Christian, and a good subject, and does nothing that can in the least
impeach his Principles, or discredit his Profession: For thus did the Primitive
Christians of old, and all other good men truly influenced by the Divine Spirit
ever since.

But on the contrary, if men either from a bare jealousy that the thing
commanded is unlawful, or out of revenge, because their own Fancies and
Opinions do not take place, and have not a public countenance and
encouragement, do speak evil of Dignities, and whisper against the Government,
and by sly and subtle, remote and dark expressions, either in Prayer or
Preaching convey into the minds of people suspicious thoughts of the Powers
that are above them: If in praying for a Princes Reformation, they make such a
particular description of his faults, as render him odious to his people; why,
these men are so far from being good Subjects, or good Christians, that they
deserve to be marked out for Firebrands, and kept within bounds, as Persons
whose design is nothing else but Sword and Battle, as men who, like the
Disciples, know not what spirit they are of; or else if they do, are resolved
to ruin themselves, provided they can but work the destruction of others at
the same time. A Principle so far from having any thing that is masculine and
generous, that is Evangelical and Divine in it, that it is raked out of the
bottomless Pit, and never knew what it was to have a being, till by a voluntary
lapse and fall from God, Angels were turned into Devils.

And now if any man by what has been discoursed, is convinced of his Duty of
Obedience to God's public Ministers and Instruments of Justice, and is
desirous to understand how he may know this Duty, and distinguish between
Commands Lawful, and those that are Unlawful, by reason of their being morally
evil. I must then, in his inquiry, desire him to take these things along with
him by way of caution; which is the third thing propounded to be discoursed of.

1. That he never judge of any thing commanded by his Rulers, by those odious
and scandalous titles men of perverse and refractory spirits fix upon it, but
let him bring the thing to a settled and appointed Rule, and according to its
agreement or disagreement with that, either close with it, or else shun it, for
they are Rules prescribed by God the great Lawmakers, by which we must be
judged at the last day; and therefore they are the same Rules by which our
Actions must be regulated. It has been a common way you know to revile some
things that have been enjoined amongst us, under the name of Popish and
Superstitious; a charge considered in it self, and where it is truly laid, very
weighty and worthy of every man's thoughts and care. For to call and assert a
thing Popish and Superstitious, is to assert it as a thing having no foundation
in Scripture, and yet thrust and obtruded upon the minds of men; as a necessary
Article of Faith, a thing to be believed and entertained with as true and
divine a Faith, as any of those Articles which are contained in that which we
call the Apostles Creed; and under this notion do the Papists assert
Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the Dead, Purgatory, etc.
And he that will not swallow these down, he is proscribed and cut off, as a
Person to whom Satan has the greatest right. Now I must confess, that if any
Magistrate impose any thing that is not either plainly raid down, or easily
deduced and drawn from the holy Scripture, and under such a severe Notion as
this, we stand no ways obliged to an active Obedience to his Laws, for therein
that so often used, and so very much abused Text takes place, Whether it be
better to serve God or man, judge ye. But on the contrary, if things commanded
by the Authority and Wisdom of our Governors have no such necessity fixed upon
them, and are declared to be alterable, and enjoined only as they are thought
to minister to the purposes of Order, Decency, and Edification; and are
declared to lay no further Obligation upon the Conscience, then was derived
from those Texts of Scripture whereby we are commanded to obey our Governors, I
think no wise man can justly, and upon serious thoughts, brand them with the
name of Popish and Superstitious.

For, in a word, the true proper and formal notion of Popery, is to force men
with the same necessity to believe and practice such things as have no
foundation in Scripture, but have been brought into the Church to serve the
corrupt Humors, the proud Minds, and covetous Designs and Interests of the
Court of Rome, as they do believe and practice: Those things which are plain
and obvious in holy-Writ, which is certainly an inpairing and dividing the
Kingly Office of Jesus Christ.

2. If you would know whether a matter commanded be good or evil, and so fit
for your practice or forbearance, look into Scripture impartially, and compare
one Text with another, and weight the scope and design of the Penmen in those
several places, and be not resolved to bend and draw them to the Service of any
Party or Opinion whatsoever: For this in all Ages has done much wrong to
Truth, and opened the very Floodgates of Disobedience, and contempt of humane
Laws. For instance, if a man in order to keep you out of the loving and
pleasant arms of Truth, and to fix you in a pernicious Principle or Opinion,
say as the Apostle once said, Come out from among them, and be you separate,
and touch no unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17. Or as the same Apostle in another
place, Touch not, taste not, handle not; why, your business is to weigh and
judiciously and deeply to consider upon what score these words were spoken, and
what it was the Apostle designed to preserve the people to, whom he wrote from
the pollution of; and upon search you will find, that when the Apostle cries,
Come out from among them, he means from the Idolatry of the Heathens; and then
you must be sure, that the Church from which you are tempted is as truly
Idolatrous as that was out of which the Apostle invited the Corinthians, or
else that Scripture will not be a sufficient warrant for your departure and
separation from it. And when the Apostle, Colos. 2.20, 21. advises them neither
to touch, nor taste, nor handle, you will find they were certain Impositions,
as abstaining from Marriage, and some sorts of Meats as utterly unlawful; which
though they might be abstained from, yet when they were forbidden as things
detestable, and unlawful in their own nature, the Apostle tells them, That it
is giving away the liberty Christ had purchased for them; and this Text
therefore, as many other which are quoted to very bad and pernicious purposes,
will be found to strike indeed at the Romish Church, who, as I said before,
imposes upon the minds of men things as absolutely necessary, which have no
such necessity neither in their own nature, nor by virtue of any Command from
God; but it reaches not at all any legal Injunction, recommended as
indifferent, and declared not to change its nature, but that it may be altered
and removed out of the way, when the Governor sees it good so to do.

And truly, if Scripture was but thus weighed, we should soon come to an end of
most of our unhappy Differences, that are now too much alive among us, and then
Love and Unity, Amity and Friendship, Peace and Good Will, would have a greater
room in the World then now they have. But then,

3. There is one thing more that I would recommend to every persons
consideration, and that is when he enquires into the nature of the things
commanded in order to his satisfaction, and more especially, if he enquire
after the lawfulness or unlawfulness of those three Ceremonies, which are the
great stones of offense at which so many persons in this Kingdom stumble. I
desire him to consider how doubtful and unsatisfied, how wavering and
unresolved many of those persons are who are the Ringleaders of Dissension from
our Church, and most ready to form men into Bodies and Parties against our
settled Discipline, which to me is a consideration of no small strength and
force. For, notwithstanding many indiscreet men, with a very great and raised
zeal, vent both in Pulpits, and other popular Discourses, their Spleen and
Anger against these Institutions, fixing such names upon them as they know will
stir the choler of the more rude and ignorant sort of people, such whereby God
in anger represents his indignation against the Heathen Idols; yet if you come
to examine their judgments of these things, by some other actions, you will
find they are not so rationally satisfied of the unlawfulness of these things,
as by these furious Belches they would make the World believe.

He that considers how many of these angry men studiously and advisedly educate
their Children, in order to the advantages and improvements of an
University-life, where, when they come, they are assured they must swear to
obey their Governors and be observant of the Statutes; where they know they
must wear a Surplice, and daily attend upon those Prayers which they load with
so many vile Reproaches; why, he must needs conclude them either men of no
Conscience, that will advisedly send their Children to places, where they must
certainly swear to, and live in the practice of such things as in their own
Opinion work in God the greatest Displeasure and Indignation (which I thank God
the honor I have for several Dissenters, will give me no liberty to credit
them, or else (which indeed any man may more safely incline to) that they are
not so fully satisfied in the Evil of these things, as in their transports and
heats among popular Auditories they would make the World believe.

And farther, he that looks back upon a very few weeks since, and considers how
many persons thoroughout this Nation, who were before professed Enemies to our
Church, have, in compliance with a late seasonable Law, joined with us in our
Public Worship, and devoutly used that Ceremony of kneeling at the Sacrament,
which has been so notoriously branded by many of their Masters; that Ceremony,
I say, which is the only one in which the Laity is concerned; he must needs
say, that these are Demonstrations that neither they nor their Teachers are so
well convinced of the Evil of these things, as they would (I will not judge for
what ends) force upon the belief of other men. For if these things were so
concluded, men of Principles and Conscience would rather loose their Estates
and Lives, all that is near and dear to them; then comply; but being nor so
concluded, we find what little things serve to bring them back to our
Communion; and since they are returned, I pray God keep them there; for I am
assured they stand obliged so to do, for no man can withdraw from Obedience,
but he that believes the things evil in their own nature that are commanded;
and he that can once in a year, with a satisfied Conscience, obey Authority in
any one thing commanded, he stands bound to do it every day in the year that he
is called to express that Obedience: And whosoever does otherwise, he is false
and perfidious, and Government has no security from a man of such Principles
at all. For to come to the legally settled places of Worship one day, and the
next to follow the Camps of Separation, and so alternately, is an argument that
not sense of Duty, but Humor and Fancy, Passion and Interest, governs and
rules the man; from which government we may all well say, Good Lord deliver us.

Now let me entreat thee, whosoever thou art, when thou take these things
into thy thoughts, in order to thy satisfaction, let these actions of men be
weighed, and I do not doubt, but then thou will equally be inclined to the
evidence and fullness of the Arguments used on both sides; which if thou art, no
question thou will be quickly found walking cheerfully in the plain and
harmless road of Duty and Obedience: For I am sure that Bugbear words and
reproachful Expressions have more prevented men's compliance with the Orders of
our Church, then ever solid Proof and rational Arguments have done. And thus I
have briefly discoursed the notion of Obedience, a thing certainly worthy of
every man's consideration; let me therefore in a word invite you all, according
to those several Orbs in which you move, and capacities and circumstances in
which you stand, to do all that lies in your power to spread abroad and
propagate these Principles. To encourage you to which, I may boldly and yet
safely say, That your Lives and Fortunes, your Liberties, and all other
enjoyments lie at stake, and are near a ruin, if these Principles do not
obtain. I list not to rake into former Sores, but yet this I will say, That
from the want of these Notions of Obedience, I dare derive our former
Commotions and Disturbances, and the miserable consequences of them which to
this day we feel; and he that notwithstanding all that can be said or felt,
will yet hug those two pernicious Principles (for so I may well call them) to
wit, that the Magistrate has nothing to do in Church affairs, and then that
nothing must be done in or about Divine Worship but what there is a particular
Prescript for in Scripture. I say, he that will still hold these, I say no
more, but that I pray God the Government of this Nation may never lie at his
Feet; that he may always be in Subjection, and never sit at the Helm; for
doubtless these are Opinions that do naturally tend to set up Fancy against
Judgment and Reason, and to make private groundless Interpretations of their
own, the standards by which all things in Religion and Worship must be
modelled; and when it comes to this, then farewell all Order and Decency. It Is
this that breaks Church-windows, and defaces the goodly Monuments of Antiquity:
It Is this that tears the comely Garments of the Priest in pieces, and fixes such
odious Names upon that ancient Order of Episcopacy; and after that, calls all
Messengers of the Gospel by the names of Priests of Baal, and dumb Dogs. It Is
this that denies Children their right to the Ordinance of Baptism, and laughs
at the solemn confirmation of them in that Faith, which by their Trustees they
undertook to maintain and defend. Farther, it is this that makes such a noise
and quoil about the Spirit of Prayer, and will allow nothing to come from God,
but what is powered out without any regard to modesty, or sense of distance
betwixt the Creator and the Creature: For had Reason and unprejudiced Judgment
taken place, and Fancy waited upon them according to her bounden duty, we had
not been troubled with those swarms of Heresies and poisonous Opinions that now
fly up and down, to the great disturbance of Laws and Government, and to the
molestation of men's minds and spirits, whereby they are taken off from the
constant and laborious practice of those plain and clear Instances and
Requisites of Religion, and hindered from the dutiful and necessary prosecution
of those Callings and Employments to which Divine Providence has fixed them.
Nay, in a word, it is this which, if it prevail, will at last be modelling the
Civil Government, and altering that excellent Constitution, by which, at such
times as these, Justice is brought to our very doors; for these are Principles
very busy and pragmatical, and State as well as Church Affairs must be ordered
by them. Now therefore, we are all obliged to do what in us lies to suppress
and curb those Principles which give fancy so great a sway, and to settle all
that belong to our care and charge in these generous and catholic notions of
Obedience and Subjection; then may we hope to sit under our own Vines and
Figg-trees with delight, then may we expect the return of Primitive Christianty
again, wherein Faith and not Faction, Reason and not Fancy, internal Holiness,
and not groundless and fond Opinions, shall prevail and triumph. All which
things God of his mercy grant, through Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

FINIS.

