DIFFICILES NVGAE: OR, OBSERVATIONS Touching the TORRICELLIAN Experiment, AND
The various Solutions of the same, especially touching the Weight and
Elasticity of the AIR.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for William Shrowsbury, at the Sign of the Bible
in Duck-lane, M. DC.LXXIV.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE Title of this Book gives thee little encouragement to buy or to read it,
and it was purposely so given. If it performs but as much as the Title
promises, thou art not deceived; if more, thou art advantaged.

The Subject is seemingly trivial, and suitable to the Title; yet it has
exercised the Wits and Pens of many Learned men, and makes way to Natural
Discoveries, and consequences of greater importance; at the worst it may be an
innocent Divertisement, and possibly delightful to those that are pleased with
Speculations and Experiments of this nature.

The Experiments therein are some new, some vulgar and common, and some
borrowed from those Excellent persons, whom though the Author highly honors
for their Learning and Industry, yet in some things dissents from them in their
Solutions and Conclusions from those Experiments that they have most
ingeniously found out and delivered.

The Author pretends not to an equality of Learning to those from whom he thus
dissents, much less to Infallibility; there may possibly happen want of
Exactness in his Trials, there may be imperfect and mistaken Computations. The
Diagrams though but few, yet rude. The Resolutions and Conclusions may either
be imperfect, or not so clearly or evidently expressed, and inferred, or
deduced.

But he that considers the intricacy of this Inquiry, the various
complications' of Causes, and Effects, and Appearances that occur therein, the
great difficulty of arriving to exactness in the Experiments themselves, will
rectify or easily excuse such mistakes or inadvertencies, if any such occur in
these Papers.

If the Inquiry has not attained its full complement and perfection in these
Papers, yet the Author has obtained his End therein, namely, to give hints and
occasions to Ingenious persons to make farther and better Discoveries, and to
rectify (if there be occasion) the mistakes of these or other men's Solutions;
and to give a little warning to men of Wit and Parts, not to be too hasty or
positive in exterminating the Aristotelian Philosophy, and entertaining new
hypotheses, 'till they have fully and maturely considered, and well looked
about them. The Author's Name is not prefixed, for it would be of small
advantage or use: and he is thereby the fitter to bear the correction of his
Errors, and to retract them with more ease, and less observation, if any such
shall occur to his discovery or notice; and therefore has left the Book it
self, and the matters therein delivered, to bear their own burden, and to
stand or fall as they deserve.

Observations touching the Torricellian Experiment, and the Weight and Spring
of Air.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction, containing the order of the ensuing Enquiries.
AMong the many Experiments of latter Ages, there has been invented that
Engine that commonly goes under the name of the Torricellian Experiment, which
is but this: A Glass-Tube of three foot or more long, closed at one end, and
then filled with Mercury or Quicksilver, and then the open end stopped with the
finger, and inverted into a vessel of restagnant Mercury and and when the end
is sufficiently immersed, then the finger nimbly removed so that no Air get in,
the Mercury will subside in the Tube to the height of 29 Inches, and half an
inch, or near thereabout; but infallibly between 27 and 30 Inches, leaving the
residue of the upper end of the Tube emptied of the Mercury.

This Experiment, and the solution of it, has exercised the Trials and Wits,
and Invention of very many excellent Persons, such as were Helmont, Gassendus,
Kircherus, Shottus, Dr. Carleton, Mr. Hobbs, Mr. Sinclere, Monsieur Pecquett,
Monsieur Pascall, Magnanus, Mr. Boil, Linus, Honeratus, Fabri, and diverse
others; who though men of great Learning and Industry, have run into several
Parties, and given Solutions, and raised Conclusions from it, extremely
contradictory the one to the other.

And although this seems but a very trifling and ludicrous Experiment, yet
almost all dissenting Parties have made it to suffragate to their several
preconcerned Sentiments, and Persuasions, and that in Philosophical Points of
as great moment and importance perchance as most to be found in natural
Inquiries. Some from hence confirm themselves in their Persuasion, that there
are both interspersed and coacervated Vacuities or Spaces, empty of any
corporeal substance in the Universe; others again as confidently concluding the
untruth of that Opinion, and that from the same Experiment. Others again from
hence confirming themselves in the Cartesian supposition of his Tria Principia,
and especially of that Materia Subtilis, which cannot be excluded from
pervading the most contumacious and solid body: Others attributing the same
Power to the more subtle parts of the aerial consistence; some from hence
concluding an actual pressure and gravitation of the Air upon all subjected
bodies, and that thereby the Mercury is sustained by way of Pressure, and
Trusion, and Counterpoys, and have substituted thereupon as an undoubted
Hypothesis, a world of admirable consequences in natural appearances, not only
in the greater World, but also in the lesser World the humane structure. Others
again have hereupon maintained their opinion of Attraction as the necessary
effect of Tension, and resolve this suspension of the Mercury unto the force of
attraction and suction, occasioned by that Catholic Law of Nature for
preservation of the continuity of the Universe, and all its parts, and the Fuga
Vacui, and are no way satisfied with that confidence that decryes it.

From this diversity of Judgments of Learned men, we may learn, first, how
little it is in natural Effects that we really and truly know and understand,
when so trivial an Experiment that we have so easy an access unto, and handle
with our hands, and perceive by our sight its motion, which yet so gravels, or
at least divides men of great Parts, Judgment, Learning and Experience. 2. How
strangely partial men are to those Sentiments that they have once entertained,
and perchance taken much pains to mould and fashion, or have even publicly
engaged unto or for; whereby it comes to pass that men are not willing
impartially to consider what makes against their opinion, and frame a thousand
imaginations to evade the strength of the opposite reasons, and to construe all
appearances (as melancholic persons do the sound of Bells) to speak what they
fancy; And possibly all the opposite Opinators in this business are under the
like partiality and unindifferency.

There is a great odds between a Matter propounded only as an Hypothesis, and
propounded as a real truth. In the former there is nothing more required than a
true understanding of the Phenomenon, and a ready Wit to contrive some Model,
and to dress it up so handsomely, that it may answer the Phenomenon, and to fit
up such expedients as may meet with and stop the Leaks that otherwise would
happen in the Hypothesis: And such a man tells us not so much what the truth of
Nature is, as what he thinks he could have made it, if he had had the handling
of it; such may be the Systemes of Ptolomy, Copernicus, and Tycho Brahe, which
cannot be possibly all true, though possibly they may be all false. And yet
every of them is so fitted and accommodated by the Wit, Invention, and Industry
of the Authors, that they solve the Phenomenon very near equally: And thus if I
remember aright des Carts fairly propounds his tria Principia's; and some
other parts of his New Philosophy.

But to propound a thing as really a truth in Nature, is another kind of
business, and requires not so much a dextrous Invention, but an impartial
inspection into the things themselves, and examination how all things stand one
with another, as we truly find them, and not as we mind to make them: For the
Laws of Nature are stable, and settled, and regular, and not like the Laws of
Men, or the fashions of our Clothes, mutable, according to new Modes, or
devices of Fancy.

Therefore the bare accommodation of Hypotheses to the Solution of the most
obvious Phenomenon is not always the measure of its truth, for that may be but
the product of Invention and Wit. For it is apparent, that though it is
impossible that all the varying Solutions of this trifling Experiment can be
all true, yet they are all so dressed and pieced up, that they do solve the
most obvious Phenomenon in this Experiment, well near equally each with other.

But on the other side, if any Phenomenon happen clearly either in this or any
other instance, that do cross and thwart that which is taken up as a necessary
postulatum in any of these Solutions; it is if not an undeniable, yet a great
and possibly a clear demonstration, that the Hypothesis its self is false, and
ill Founded, especially if it be the great Basis upon which such Hypothesis is
bottomed and built.

And if the foundation of a Hypothesis, or the general postulatum upon which it
is bottomed, be false, or only imaginary, although the Inferences and
Conclusions made upon such a Basis be deduced with all the fineness and
subtilty imaginable, and such (as were the postulatum it self true, upon which
they are bottomed) would be as necessary and consequential, as the
Demonstrations of Euclide, yet the whole fabrique will fail when it comes to
trial, and become like the Astrological Predictions Calculated with Art enough
upon a false Ephemerides.

I that come after the Labors and Scrutinies of so many Excellent Men that
have gone before me upon this Subject, cannot promise my self or others that I
shall say much in this Matter that has not been said before; and the necessity
of a free Discourse requires that I should take in somewhat of other men's
Labors. But I shall avoid, as much as I can, the imputation of a Plagiary, by
mentioning the Authors as I have occasion: But yet, though somewhat that I
shall say has been said before, especially by Linus, and Fabri, yet somewhat
will be new, although the most I shall do herein will be to make the Method and
manner of Explication of it as much my own as I can, which I shall do in this
order.

First, I shall explain some Terms which I shall have occasion to use, that so
I may write intelligibly according to that sense I gave my words; though it may
be possibly not according to the sense wherein others have used them.

Secondly, as preliminary to what I shall say touching this Experiment, I shall
set down some Statical Observations, that may be useful to me upon this
inquiry, not that I shall engage my self in the whole Theory of Statical
Principles and conclusions; this has been done already by those worthy Persons
that have ex professo handled this Subject, as Archimedes, Steving, Mr. Boil,
and others; but only shall glean up some general Observations therein necessary
to this inquiry.

Thirdly, I shall set down what it is not, that may be supposed in the space
derelicted by the Mercury, namely, it is not Nothing, nor Air, nor Ether, nor
any Body that comes from without.

Fourthly, I shall set down what I think it is that possesses the place
derelict by the Mercury.

Fifthly, I shall set down what I think is not the cause that suspends the
Cylinder of Mercury, in the Tube to that Altitude of 29 Inches, or thereabouts;
namely, not the Gravitation or pressure of the impending Air, nor its
Elastricity.

Sixth, I shall set down what I think is the cause, that suspends the column of
Mercury from subsiding in the Tube below Twenty nine Inches, or thereabouts.

Seventhly, I shall set down those objections, that seem of the greatest force
against the last supposition.

Eighthly, I shall take a particular examination of some other Experiments, as
touching the cohesion of Polished Marbles, and the Magdeburgh Hemisphere, and
the rising of Water in the common Pumps.

And this Order I shall as near as I can observe in the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. II.
The Explication of some Terms, that may be of use in the following Inquiry.
FIrst, I shall observe the difference between the specifical or intrinsique
Weight of a heavy Body, and the extrinsique Weight or pondus molis.

For instance, a pound of Mercury, and a hundred pound of Mercury, have the
same intrinsique Weight, but yet not the same extrinsique Weight: A pound of
Water and a pound of Mercury have the same extrinsique Weight, for each
quantity weighs but a pound, but they have not the same intrinsique Weight, for
quantity for quantity, Mercury is heavier then Water.

Those Bodies are said to have the same specifical or intrinsique Weight, when
the same bulk or quantity counterpoiseth equally the other; and those Bodies
are said to differ in intrinsique Weight, where a greater quantity of the one
is required to Equiponderate a less quantity of the other; as for instance, a
Cylinder of Mercury, of an Inch long, and half an Inch Diameter, counterpoiseth
a Cylinder of Water of the same Diameter and 13 Inches or 14 Inches long, or
thereabouts. But although a Body specifically or intrinsically lighter than
another, may in some cases have the advantage in point of speed in motion of a
Body of equal extrinsical Weight, because it takes up less room, and so meets
with less resistance in the medium, yet upon the Scale they equally
counterpoise each other.

But again, there is this difference between them; a Body of a greater
intrinsique or specifical Gravity of an equal extrinsique Weight, with a Body
of less intrinsique weight, will sometimes equally press upon a Fluid Body,
upon its Superficies, but will press more than the lighter, when both have the
advantage to get below the Superficies; for instance,

Take a pound of Lead, and a pound of Wood, whether lighter or heavier than a
quantity of Water equal to it, lay them each upon a piece of Cork that will
support them in the Water; the pound of Lead, and the pound of Cork will both
swim upon the Water.

But if the Cork be taken away, the Led will sink, and the Wood will swim if
lighter than a like quantity of Water, and if heavier than the like quantity it
will sink, but not so fast as the Led.

2. There is a difference between an intrinsique Weight, and an accidental
Weight, which may be various; as for instance:

In respect of the position of the one and the other: Water and Water are both
intrinsically of the same Weight, yet if Water be in a Tube, open at both ends,
and be stopped with the Finger at the lower end, and then when contiguous to the
Water in a Vessel, the lower end it is opened, all the Water in the Tube will
subside to an equal Superficies with the Water in the Vessel, because its
higher position gives it an accidental Weight more than that in the Vessel.

So again, Air and Air have the same Weight, though it be hardly measurable,
but if Air be compressed as in a Windgun, it gains an accidental Gravity by its
Compression of parts more than the common Air.

3. There is a difference in Terms between Gravitation, and pressure of heavy
Bodies; for instance, A Tube stopped at the upper end, and driven down in a
Vessel of Water forcibly, the pressure of the Water upon the Air in the Tube,
will contract the Air as much as it can (suppose it an Inch) and the rest of
the Air in the Tube will press upon the Water, because it will not yield more
to the Water; this is properly Pressure in the Air upon the Water, and of the
Water upwards upon the Air; yet neither are properly Gravitation, though
possibly, I may in some passages use the words promiscuously.

4. There is a difference between Gravitation ad motum, which I call sometime
sensible or perceptible Gravitation, and Gravitation ad pondus, which I
sometimes call real or insensible, or Physical Gravitation: For instance,

If a cubical Vessel of Water contain 56 pound weight of Water, and a piece of
Cork, or parcel of Oil of two pound weight be placed upon the top of the Water,
it will not sensibly gravitate, but will be born up by the upper Superficies of
the Water, whereunto the lower Superficies of the Cork or Oil will be
contiguous, because being specifically or intrinsecally lighter than Water, it
is sustained by it, and makes no motion in the subjected Water.

( Fig. I.) But yet it is plain that in concretion with the water, the whole
weighs 58 pound, whereas before the water alone weighed but 56 pound; so that
here is a gravitation ad pondus added hereunto in concreto to the water. But
let us suppose that the Vessel A, B, C, D, be filled with water unto the
superficies C, D, and the tube E, open at both ends be immersed into the water,
and then a quantity of oil, that is lighter specifically than water, be poured
upon the superficies of the water; this will raise the water into the tube E,
above the common superficies of the water, to such a proportion of height in
the Tube as will countervail the weight of a like Cylinder of Oil, which will
be some. what near to the superficies of the Oil, because the water at G, is
not equally pressed with the rest of the superficies of the water by the
incumbent Oil. The disparity of the pressure causing motion or elevation of the
water in the part not equally pressed; so it is gravitatio ad motum, and not
simply ad pondus. So if upon a vessel of water there be placed a Body
specifically heavier than water, but not exactly commensurate to its
superficies; here is gravitatio ad motum, as well as ad pondus; for the body
sinking into the water must needs raise up as much water as the space it self
takes in subsiding into the vessel of water.

And upon the same account it is, if the subsiding body be a Fluid, as Mercury,
it will by sinking into the water drive up as much water as the room it takes,
and so make the superficies higher; so that an unequal pressure of any Fluid
must necessarily make a motion upwards of the parts of it, and thereby raise
the superficies by so much in bulk of water as will countervail the room that
the immersed body takes up in the water. And this and the like I call sensible
gravitation, or gravitation ad motum.

5. There is a difference between Pondus, and Potentia; and this is well enough
evidenced in the instance of the Oil and Water above given: The oil gravitates
upon all the superficies of the water, except that subjected to the orifice of
the Tube E there is the pondus of the oil and the water driving up, and
sustaining the water in the Tube to that height that equiponderates a like
column of oil there is the Potentia.

Mr. Sinclere and others, that contend for the Solution of the Torricellian
Experiment by the Gravitation of the Air, apply this difference unto two
instances, which possibly in the event of their Examination will appear
otherwise; namely: 1. That the Air equally pressing the restagnated Mercury in
all places thereof, but that which is directly under the column of the
suspended Mercury, and thereby Equiponderating a column of Mercury only of 29
Inches and no more, keeps it suspended at that height by the Equipondium of
both, there is the Gravitation of the column of Mercury, which is the pondus,
and the Impending column of Air, which is the potentia sustinens, that
Counterpoyseth that pondus. I shall have occasion to use this difference of
pondus and potentia, in relation to this Experiment also, but in a different
way. 2. The other instance, to which he applies this difference, is in all
Fluids, whether Air, Water, Mercury, or any else: Namely, if a Body be in any
depth of Water; suppose above it were 20 foot of Water, and below it two,
three, or four Foot of Water, or more, subjacent to the lower Base of the Body.
The upper column of Water is supposed to press downwards, per modum ponderis,
upon the upper Superficies of the Body, and the lower column of Water,
contiguous to the lower Superficies of the Body, is supposed to press upwards,
per modum potentioe. And he supposes that the pressure of the potentia
upwards, is always equal to the pressing of the pondus downward: This is a
supposition fitted principally for the accommodating of the Solution of the
Cohesion of Polished Marbles, by the Gravitation and potentia of the Air,
pressing upwards and downwards, and some other instances, whereunto the single
Gravitation of Air downwards will not be sufficient: The proof whereof will be
considered hereafter.

6. There is a difference between the resistance or Renitence of a Fluid, and
the Gravitation or pressure thereof: If a man strikes forcibly with the flat of
his hand upon the Superficies of the Water, he shall find near as much pain as
if he struck upon a Board, although the Water does not counter-move the hand,
but receives and resists its sudden force; the like occurs frequently in Air:
The fierce striking of a wand through it, bends the wand, and the fierce
Collisian of the Bullet against it, is not without a resistance of the Air,
though too weak to encounter it.

And this Renitence or resistance, without any counter-motion at all by the
Water, is that which makes the Motion of the same heavy Body through the Water
considerably slower than through the Air; and the same Weight of Led or Iron,
or other heavy Body in Water, to weigh less upon the Scale, than when it is in
Air, the retardation of its Motion, and the correction of its weight, being the
same effect of the same Cause; namely, the resistance of the Water, greater
than in the Air, without relation to any counter-motion, or counter-pressure in
the Water it self.

7. There is a difference between Rarefaction and Tention, and between
Condensation and Compression, though the effects be much alike in both.

Rarefaction, (for instance, of the Air) is the Extention of its parts,
commonly by heat, or what is equivolent, the fiery Partacles that it receives,
whether from the Sun, the Ether, or common fire, or other Calefactive nature.

Tension, is when the parts of the Air are distended by virtue of some force or
power that lays hold of its Extremes, as a Lute-string is under a Tension to a
greater length, by a considerable weight appended to it; only it has this
difference, a Lute-string or the like, is not capable of Tension in length, but
it must have a contraction in thickness, but Air as it has a motion every way,
so it is capable of Tension every way.

The effects as well of Tension as Rarefaction, are these, viz. the same
substance holds thereby a greater and more extended space. 2. The Body, thus
either by heat or force, Rarefied or Tensed beyond its true natural size and
staple, has a Motion of restitution, narurally contracting it selfd, and
pressing inward. 3. The Body thus contracting it self, by the Catholic Law of
Nature, to preserve the continuity of the World, lays hold upon the Bodies
next adjacent, and conterminous to it, and as much as it can draws it inward.

Again, Condensation and Compression differ in this, that the former is
commonly made by the Constipation of Cold; the latter, by any other forcible
pressure, as in Wind-guns, Aeolipiles, and the like.

They both agree in their effects. 1. That the Air Condensed or Compressed,
takes up less room or space, than its natural and due size. 2. That they have
each a Motion of restitution, by expanding it self to its just size.

And this Elatory or Spring, I allow to the Air; namely, of retraction, and
expansion, when put out of its natural size or staple: But the imaginary
prodigious Spring, attributed to the common Air, as its natural tendency, I
take to be only invention.

It is hard to say to what proportion Air may be Rarefied or Tensed; some think
to above 70 times its common extension, or to what degree it may be Condensed
or Rarefied; some think to seven, nine, or ten times, less then its ordinary
consistences, or more: Quod vide apud Morsen in pneumaticis, et aliis.

8. There is a difference between the common Gravitation of a Fluid of any
kind, as it is a heavy Body, and the appropriate Gravitation of it as it is a
Fluid Body: In respect of the former, it does as all heavy Bodies, press
perpendicularly downward toward the Center; But as it is a Fluid Body, it has
an appropriate Gravitation of its own, whereby it corrects and allayes in some
sort, its common Gravitation: For instance, Water in its own consistency, has
a lateral Motion, a Motion per declive, an Horisontal Motion, within the
compass of its own Superficies; yea, and a Vertical Motion upward, within the
compass of its own Superficies: As if a Tube full of Air, stopped below, be
immersed into Water, and then unstopped, the Water will heave as freely upward
as it would otherwise downward, till it attain its own common level or
Superficies; and suitable to its Motion is its Gravitation, which is nothing
else but motus, or conatus ad motum.

And besides this appropriate Gravitation of Fluids, there is a certain proper
and connatural Texture in Fluids, and especially in Air, whereby the subjected
parts do suspend, and hold up considerably the Superior parts from any
considerable Gravitation, so that no Body, or portion of space less than the
whole Base of the whole Fluid is considerably pressed upon by any such
imaginary Column Commensurated to the Base of the subjected Fluid, as has been
elsewhere observed, and will be further Illustrated in some of the following
Chapters.

9. There is a common and allowable difference beween the pure Air, such as may
be in the upper Region, and that which is now commonly called the Atmosphere.
The former is so pure and subtle, that the greatest pretenders to the Ayrs
Gravitation that I have seen, do not take upon them to to determine, that it
has any Weight.

The Atmosphere, is that portion of the Air that is the common receptacle of
Vapors, and the Effluvia of the Earth and Water, whereby it is less subtle
than the pure Air.

Though some, out of the confidence they have of their attaining the just
proportion of weight between Water and Air, and the just proportion of weight
between Mercury and Water, and upon the high confidence they have of the just
Equipondium between 29 Inches of Mercury, and a Column of Atmosphere of the
same thickness with the Column of Mercury, have undertaken, to define the just
height of the Atmosphere; some determining it to be just 7000 Fathoms, some 7
Miles; yet the Doctors much differ among themselves in their account; some
telling us, they take it to be 22 Miles high, others 50, others above 100.

And there must needs be an exceeding incertainty in this way of Computing it.
For first, Though the just proportion of weight between the Quicksilver and
Water is easily and certainly discovered to be truly as Mersennus, and others,
have accounted it, viz. that one Cubick Inch of Mercury will just counterpoise
13 Cubick Inches and of Water; yet the proportion of weight that Air bears to
Water, (if it have any real weight at all,) is not to be exactly Calculated,
whatsoever Experiments have been made thereof by Mersennus and others; the
former telling us, that the weight of Water to Air, is as one to about 1300;
the others telling us it is as one to 1000, or at least some small proportion
less. 2. Admit the proportion were justly known, yet those that take their
measure of the height of the Atmosphere, or Gravitating Air, (if any such be)
by the supposed Equipondium, between 29 Inches of the suspended Mercury; and a
Column of Air commensurate in thickness to such a Mercurial Column, have
bottomed themselves, as I think, upon a false Foundation. 3. But if it were
true, as they would have it, yet even upon their own principles, it is
extremely mistaken and convinced by their own suppositions and Experiments, as
shall be observed in the ensuing Chapters.

And thus far to render my self intelligible in my expressions in the future
Inquiry.

I shall only add some Matters that will be useful as to the point of
Calculation.

The weight of Water is various, according to several places; Stevin tells us,
that in some parts of Holland, a Cubique Foot of Water weighs 63 pound; as I
remember, Mr. Sinclere Computes it to 56 pound, and consesequently, a Cube of
Water 6 Inches square, weighs 7 pounds; and I have by trial found, that it
weighs 7 pounds wanting two Ounces; but the Standard of 56 pound and 7 pound,
ordinarily suits the proportion of weight of those two Bodies: Upon trial, I
have found the proportion very little differing, viz. a Cube of 6 Inches square
of Water to weigh 7 pound wanting two Ounces, and consequently a Cubical Foot
to weigh 55 pound 4 Ounces.

The readiest way to avoid Fractions and the long process of Arithmetical
Calculations, is by immersing any regular or other Solid Body into a Vessel
full of Water, and to save that which is impelled over by the immersion of the
Solid Body, to discover the proportion of weight between such a Solid, and a
Fluid of the same Moles or Dimensions.

The measure of a Cubique or Square Body, is by Multiplying the one side into
the other, to find the Area of Inches; and by Multiplying the Area by the
measure of Inches in profundity.

The measure of a Cylinder is by multiplying half the Diameter into half the
Circumference, which yields the Area, and Multiplying the Area (of Inches) into
the number of Inches, in the depth of the Cylinder: I mention these Figures,
because the most ordinary and useful in Hydrostatiques.

Mercury is thirteen times and an half and somewhat more heavier than the like
quantity of Water, as I have found upon trial: If it be taken fourteen times
heavier, it will not be much out of the way, and avoids Fractions. And
therefore upon that computation, if a Cube of six Inches Square of Water weighs
seven pound, a like Cube of Mercury will weigh 98 pound Averdupoise.

The often use of Mercury even in the Torricellian Experiment, but especially,
where there is occasion of frequent Superfusion or Infusion of Water in the
operation, will certainly much alter its Texture, Weight, and Use, as I have
Experimentally found.

It is a matter of great difficulty to avoid the immission of Air in the
Torricellian Experiment, which will much disorder the operations.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Gravitation of Bodies; and first, concerning the Gravitation of
Fluids, in relation to Fluids of the same kind and consistence: And therein
also, first of the Gravitation of Water upon water.
ALL heavy Bodies have a Physical Gravitation belonging to them, as the natural
effect of that Gravity; for Gravitation is either Motion, or conatus ad motum,
which is the natural effect or action of Gravity.

And yet although the parts of all continued Homogeneal heavy Bodies
participate of the same common Gravity, that is common to the whole continuum;
Those parts are impeded in their actual or sensible Gravitation one upon
another, by the support that each inferior part gives to the superior parts,
as the upper parts of a Cube of Lead do not actually Gravitate upon the
inferior parts, because the upper are Mechanically impeded by the lower, from
their actual Gravitation upon them; yet every Atom thereof contributes to the
Gravitation of the whole upon the Scale.

But if the Solid Body be not all of the same consistence, but the lower are of
a lighter or more laxe Texture, or consistence than the upper, there the upper
parts will not only Physically and really, but Mechanically and sensibly
Gravitate upon the lower, according to the measure of their excess of weight
and solidity above the lower, as if the upper part of a concrete Cube consists
of Lead, and the lower parts of Clay, in process of time, at lest the upper
will crumble away and decay the lower, by their more prevalent Gravitation, and
the impority of the resistance and sustentation of the lower.

Touching the Gravitation of Fluids upon Fluids, of the same kind and
consistence, I shall premise something; and first, concerning the Gravitation
of Water upon Water, and then of Air upon Air.

It seems clear, that the upper parts of Water do not actually or sensibly
Gravitate or press upon the lower parts of Water; They do indeed Gravitate ad
pondus and Physically upon the lower, so as to make the whole heavier, but they
do not. Gravitate ad motum, or sensibly: That which persuades me hereunto is
Reason and Experience, or Observation.

( Fig. 2.) For Reason, I allege, that if the upper parts, suppose the Cube of
Water C should Gravitate sensibly upon D, and consequently upon E, in the
Vessel of Water A B, it must either be by displacing of D and E from their
position, and so C to subside in the place of D, and after in the place of E,
or else it must be by Compressing of D into a shallower space; but it can be
neither of these, and therefore it cannot sensibly or ad motum, Gravitate upon
D, and consequently upon E.

As to the first Proposition, we cannot, that I know of, think of a third; It
is true, it has a Gravitation ad pondus, because it adds the weight of a Cube
of Water to the common weight of the Water, but as to any sensible Gravitation,
or Gravitation ad motum it is otherwise.

As to the minor Proposition, it consists of two Parts; 1. An Exclusion of the
displacing of D: 2. An Exclusion of its compression or contraction in height.

1. It cannot remove D from the place it holds, because the Cube of Water C is
of equal weight and solidness with that of D; and it must be either a Body
intrinsecally or at least extrinsecally heavier than D, that must make D give
place to it.

If it be said that D may get out of either side, and so give way to the
pressure of C; that cannot be, for the Collateral or Transversal Column of
either side, as strongly compresseth D as the Cube C, because each side is not
only pressing with its lateral pressure against the sides of D, But there
impends upon that lateral Column a Cube or Column, of equal height with C, and
presses as hard upon it.

2. Again, if C should actually and sensibly Gravitate upon D, and consequently
C and D upon E, and so C should subside, that which is driven up would possess
the place of C, and then that should subside again, and other should succeed in
its place, and so the Body should be in perpetual Motion, which is not only
contrary to common Sense and Experience, but to Reason also.

3. Again, (which is but a various Explication of the first instance) it is not
possible for a Body of equal weight (such as C is to D) to impel or drive out
of its place a Body of the same equal weight, for the resistance is as strong
as the power that should move it, which necessarily must give rest; for if the
Cube D be driven out of its place unto a higher Superficies, it must be driven
up by a greater weight than it self, otherwise it will never obey it, nor yield
to it.

Some therefore finding these difficulties, have resorted to the second part,
namely, That the Cube D is comprest into a shallower consistence: But this can
not be neither.

First, if it be compressed downwards; namely, between C and E, and also E
between D and the Fund, then it must be comprest narrower also, because for the
reason before given, the lateral pressures against the sides of D must be as
effectual as that upon the upper Base of D; which would make strange work.

Secondly, Though the quality of Air be such, as it may be capable of
Compression, yet Water is utterly incapable of it; if we lay a weight of a
hundred pound upon a Vessel of Water, indeed if it do not compress the whole
Superficies of the Water entirely, it will drive it up where it does not press;
but if it strictly cover the whole Superficies of the Water, it will never
press it shallower.

Thirdly, It is more evident to Experience, that the lower parts of the Water
are not pressed by the upper: For first, If it should be so, a Tube of Water,
suppose ten Foot long, filled and closely stopped at both ends, would break the
Glass, if it lay Horizontally, or if a reclined Tube were exactly filled, yet
being set up perpendicularly, it would leave a vacancy, which it will never do,
notwithstanding the pretended Accession of the Gravitation of Air to boot.
Again secondly, Let any man try it in a Tube of Water of considerable length,
and put in a little button of Wax, enclosing a piece of Lead to make it sink,
it will sink to the bottom of the Water, rather with some little degrees of
Acceleration, the lower it descends; which could never be, if the Water were
more compact and pressed below than above.

As to Experiments and Observations, it is agreed by all persons, that have
treated of Hydrostatiques, that I know, only one excepted, That if a Solid
Body, suppose of Wood, of equal weight with the like quantity of Water, be
placed in Water, it will reft in all Positions under the Superficies of the
Water, which could not possibly be, if the Water to wards the bottom were more
compressed than it is toward the Superficies: This is agreed by Archimedes,
the Master of Hydrostatiques, in his Book, De Insidentibus Humido; by Stevin,
in his Hydrostatical Elements, Prop. 4. By Mr. wallis, Mr. Boil, and others.

Only a late Author, in his Hydrostatical Theorems, tells us, that such a Solid
will emerge so, that its upper Superficies will be contiguous to the
Superficies of the Water; And this he concludes, not so much upon his
Observation or Experience, for ought I can find, as upon this very supposition,
that the Water below is more compressed than that above.

It is a difficult matter to find any Solid by its own specifical uniform
weight, to be just equal to the weight of a bulk of Water of an equal dimension
to it, without application of some subsidiary supplies to equal it, which
possibly may make the Experiment it self uneffectual; yet upon the best trial I
could make by such subsidiary applications, I rather find such an
Equiponderating Solid rather to be apt to subside to the bottom, than emerge to
the top.

2. Again, the next Experiment which I shall mention, shall be that of the same
Author, in his seventeenth Experiment, wherein, if I understand him aright, he
contradicts what he had delivered in his fifteenth Theorem: viz. If a Glass
bubble with a long stem turned up, heated, and then the stem Hermetically
sealed and depressed into the Water, by a convenient weight of Lead, and the
Bubble tied with a string to the Beam of a Balance, with so much weight as
might counterpoise the Bubble, then the stem broken with a Forcept, whereby the
Water entered and half filled the Bubble, the Bubble subsided and required an
addition of a farther counterpoise of 4 Drams and 38 Grains, to reduce it to an
Equilibrium, then the Bubble taken out, and the Water driven out of it, weighed
4 Drams and 30 Grains: This instance being given by a worthy Person, to prove,
that Water weighs in Water: But the Author, in answer thereunto, clearly
evinceth, that the Water in the Bubble is supported by the subjacent Water, and
concludes evidently thereupon, that Water weighs not in Water.

3. Again, if Water should sensibly Gravitate upon Water, it must as sensibly
Gravitate upon any Body subjected in it, especially if it be at the Base or
fund of the Water: But the Experience of diverse, of the agility of Fish of a
great breadth, lying at the bottom of the Water, and infinite more, do
sufficiently evince, that the weight of the superior parts of Water Gravitate
not upon the inferior parts, with any sensible pressure, for if it should, it
must of necessity Gravitate upon the interjacent Water, lying between the
uppermost Cube and the Body; and if it should do so, if must considerably
Gravitate upon the subjacent Body.

But this Non-gravitation of Water upon Water, or upon subjected Bodies, and
the reasons thereof, I have elsewhere examined.

( Fig. 3.) An excellent Person, in the first, second, and last Chapters of
Hydrostatical Paradoxes, has endeavored to prove the actual Gravitation of the
superior parts of Water upon the inferior, by three instances, viz. If in the
third Figure, the Vessel AB be filled with Water unto the Superficies c d, and
then the Tube be by suction filled with Oil of Turpentine (a Body lighter than
so much Water) be stopped nimbly at the top, whereby the Oil remains suspended,
and then the lower open end be immersed in the Vessel of Water unto any depth,
suppose H, and then the Finger be removed from G, the Supersicies of the Tube,
the Oil will be kept up to such a height as may counterpoise the like Column of
Water in the Vessel; and if it be immersed lower, the Oil will rise in the Cube
considerably higher, and if it be lifted up higher, nearer to the Superficies
of the Water, the Oil will subside lower, and discharge part of it self into
the Water, because then the like Column of Water in the Vessel grows shorter,
and has a less counterpoise to the Column of Oil in the Tube, which he
concludes to be a concludent evidence of the various degrees of Gravitation of
the Water upon the various imaginary Superficies thereof. The second instance
is like it, namely, That if the same Vessel were filled with Oil to the
Superficies C D, and the Tube g filled three or four Inches with Water by
suction, and the upper end g nimbly stopped with the Finger, and then the lower
end H immersed in the Oil, the deeper it is immersed, the higher the
Superficies of the Water in the Tube will remain sustained, and the nearer it
is brought to the Superficies, the lower it will subside, by reason of the
various degrees of Gravitation of the Oil in several imaginary Superficies;
though at the highest elevation of the Tube of Oil, in the first instance, the
Oil, in respect of its less Gravity than Water, will sit some what higher in
the Tube than the Superficies of the Water; and the Water in the Tube, in the
second instance, will sit lower than the Superficies of the Oil, because
exceeding it, quantity for quantity in specifical Gravity. 3. The third is that
of the valve, which deeply immersed in Water, the cover of the value will be
sustained by the Gravitation of the Water, with a considerable weight appended
to it.

But it seems to me, that these Experiments concludes nothing to this business;
but only evidence a resistance of the Water to that Body which will raise its
Superficies. For it is apparent, that there is required a pressure, or force,
to raise the Body of Water to a higher Superficies, exceeding the weight of so
much Water as is so impelled higher than before, or at least equal to it.

Now the pressing down of the Tube of Oil into the Water, or the Tube of Water
into the Oil, raises the Superficies of the Water or Oil so much as the Tube
is impressed into the Water, namely, a quantity of Oil or Water in the Vessel,
equal to the Body impressed and immersed in it, is raised thereby, and put out
of its former place, which it contents against, by a Renitence resistance, or
contrary pressure; and as the less of the Tube is immersed, the less Liquor in
the Vessel is moved up; so the more of that Body is immersed, the more is
pressed up, and consequently, the greater pressure is made upon the Water, the
lower it is immersed; because it takes up more room in the Water, and a greater
force is thereby exercised, to the elevation of a greater quantity of Water;
and that Water, the more it is, has the more accidental weight, or rather,
resistance, against that force which thus raises it up above its common
superficies, which before it obtained.

And that this is the true reason of it, and not the various Gravitations of
the superior parts upon the inferior, seems evident by this one instance, which
because it will be useful hereafter, upon other occasions, I shall here insert
more largely, though the thing be commonly known.

I filled a Tube of Lead of six Inches Diameter, and four Foot deep, and close
at the bottom with Water; And took a Porringer of Pewter, five Inches Diameter,
and about two Inches deep, and filled it with leaden Shot, and poured Water
into it, to fill up the chinks, and making four holes, I suspended it with a
Packthrid, like the Dish of a pair of Scales, and exactly weighing it, and the
Shot, Thread, and Water, it weighed all exactly 78 Ounces, wanting of an Ounce;
then suspending the Dish with a Packthrid, to the end of the beam, I set it
down 40 Inches deep into the Water, below its Superficies, and it lost its
weight, by the resistance and crassitude of the medium, viz. the Water 9 Ounces
of its weight in Air; and so weighed 68 Ounces, and near about of an Ounce; and
just the same weight it held, when raised 15 Inches, when raised 28 Inches,
though it was then within 12 Inches of the Superficies; but at last, when I
raised it 12 Inches higher, so that the Superficies of the weight was equal
with it, and yet it lost not above of an Ounce; which I decrement, was, as I
think, because possibly the four strings that sustained it were not now under
Water.

What then is the reason why, when the Tube of Oil or Water is sunk lower, the
pressure of the Water is unequal? and why in this instance, the weight of the
Dish is no more charged with the weight of the Water, at 40 Inches, than when
just even with the Superficies of the Water: I say it is not the Gravitation of
the superior parts of the Water upon the inferior, for then my weight of 5
Inches Diameter could never keep the same weight at 40 Inches depth of Water,
at 12 Inches depth, and just at the Superficies; but the true reason is,
because in the weight of the Porringer and Shot, being the same bulk at 40
Inches deep, as at the very Superficies, drives up no more Water out of its
place at one station, than another; namely, a bulk commensurate to the bulk of
the Porringer, Shot, and included Water, which is the same, both at the fund of
the Tube, and when its Superficies is contiguous to the Superficies of the
Water: But in the instances of the Tube, if it were suppressed an Inch
Diameter, when it is immersed an Inch its potentia, lifts up but a part of
Water commensurate to that Inch; and therefore the resistance, or Renitence
between the Tube, and the Water, is but little; but when it is immersed ten
Inches, there is ten times more Water driven up, and therefore the Renitence is
the greater, and impels the Liquor included in the Tube the higher; But this
concerns nothing the weight of Water in its quiet consistence: His other
Experiments, in order to the proof of the Gravitation of Water upon Water, I
shall consider in the fifth Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Gravitation of the Air upon Air, or any subjected Bodies in it.
THe Question in hand concerns not Air put out of its ordinary texture, but
touching the free Air, wherein Men and Animals live and breath.

And now to state this Question aright, we must consider, 1. What the Question
is not, and 2. What the Question is.

1. The Question is not whether Air compressed and thrust together, has a
weight in it that may put it into a considerable Gravitation upon other Air,
either not compressed at all, or less compressed; for it seems very probable by
the Experiments of these Excellent Men, Mersennus, Shottus, Mr. Boil, and
others, that have set themselves unto trials, in order to this inquiry, that
such a Gravitation may and does happen by the compression of Air in AEolipiles
and Wind-guns, that such Air may have a pretty evident preponderation to so
much free and common Air.

2. Neither is it the Question, whether there may not be, or are not
interspersions of Vapors Effluvia, and Effluvia, or other Moleculoe even in
the free and common Air, that considered in themselves, have a preponderation
even to the Air it self; for although the strict intermingling, interweaving,
and contiguation of some Vapors and Effluvia, grosser and weightyer than the
Air it self, may enable the Air to sustain and bear up many of these grosser
Bodies, (as Water oftentimes sustains minute Bodies, or Gravels of Sand
specifically heavier than the Water) yet we every day see, that if these
portions of interspersed Vapors or Effluvia, grow too heavy for the Air to
sustain them, they are precipitated out of it, and discharge themselves upon
the Earth, as we see in Hail, Snow, Rain, and Mists. 3. Neither is the
Question, whether a portion of the free Air, separated and disjoined from all
communication with the foreign Air, has any Gravitation or no, for it seems to
me, that it may have, by such a separation an actual Gravitation, which is not
by reason that it acquires any new quality or accession of weight, than it had
before, but by reason of such separation it does Removere prohibens of its
actual Gravitation; namely, the contignation that it has with the common Air,
into and with which it was in continuity, it was interwoven, and that little
inconsiderable Gravitation that it naturally and simply considered has, is
overmatched and broken by those interveining Filaments of the rest of the Air,
with which it is in continuity.

And therefore I do think, that if Air of the same consistence with the Air we
live in, were freely let into a Bladder, which we will per imposibile suppose
to be destitute of all weight, such a Bladder of Air, thus filled, (though
without the help of inflation, by our longes, which must needs carry with it
some fuliginous Ingredients;) I say, such a Bladder of Air would subside in the
same common Air out of which it was taken, and would Gravitate upon the
Balance, more than the like quantity of free and open Air incumbent upon the
other Balance.

Nay farther I dare adventure to say, That if we could suppose a Tube, open at
both ends, so long, as to reach from the top of the Atmosphere, unto this
Earth, such an included portion of Air, severed from communion with the
Atmosphere, would have some Gravitation more considerable perchance, than we
have ever felt from the open Air.

For I do much attribute the exclusion of all sensible Gravitation of the free
Air, to that mutual interweaving of the Filaments of Air one into another, like
a vast Net, with small Mashes or interstitia, filled gradually with parts more
and more subtle; and this contignation sustains and keeps the parts of it from
that separation, that otherwise the interposition of a grosser body would
intercept: And although Water, in respect of its weight and texture, be more
subject to disjoyn from the rest of its body, than Air is, we shall find in the
next Chapter somewhat Analogous to this, even in a consistent Body of Water.

4. Neither is it the Question, whether even the free Air it self may have some
intrinsique Gravity, though admirably little and inconsiderable; for if we do
suppose the compression of diverse Particles of Air may render that compressed
Body of Air sensibly heavy, we may not wholly exclude those Particles from all
kind of Gravity before compression, for no weighty Body can arise from the
coalition of such parts as had no manner of Gravity before.

5. Nay, yet farther, the Question is not, whether as the free Air has some
intrinsique Gravitation; so neither is it the Question, whether this free Air
has not some, though very inconsiderable measure of actual Gravitation; it is
not impossible but it may have some, though scarce perceptible to sense,
notwithstanding all the interspertions and mixtures of Vapors and Effluvia
from the Earth and Water.

But the Question is, whether the free and common Air, wherein we live, which
is commonly called Atmosphere, extending upwards about seven Miles or more,
has any sensible actual Gravitation upon the lower World. 2. Admit it have,
whether any determinate portion of that Atmosphere, as a Column or inverted
Cone, for the purpose, of six Inches square at the Base, has any actual
Gravitation upon the subjected Base, upon which it is supposed to rest. 3.
Admit it has, whether that Gravitation be of any considerable, and of what
moment.

Before I come to discuss the Questions themselves, it will be necessary to
repeat somewhat that I have before said, touching the proportion of
Gravitation, that is alloted to a portion of, for instance of six Inches square
of the Atmosphere, when it pertingeth near to the Superficies of the Earth.

A Cube of Water, six Inches square, contains 216 square Inches, and upon the
exact Calculation of those that have tried it, weighs just seven Pounds, and a
Cube of twelve Inches square of Water weighs 56 Pounds.

A Cube of Quicksilver weighs fourteen times as much as the like quantity of
Water, though Mersennus, and some others, nearer to the truth, compute it to be
thirteen and; but I will make my Calculation by fourteen, to avoid Fractions.

The consequence whereof will be, that a Cube of six Inches square of Mercury,
will weigh 98 Pounds, which is fourteen times as much as the like Cube of Water.

The consequence whereof is, that fourteen such Tubes of Mercury weighs 1372
pound.

In the Torricellian Experiment, the Mercury is sustained to the height of 29
Inches; to avoid Fractions, let us reckon it 30 Inches, be the Column never so
large.

If the Column of Mercury be six Inches square at the Base, then there will be
five such square Cubes of Mercury in that Column will weigh 490 Pounds:
According to the late Philosophy, this Column of Mercury is counterpoised with
a Column of the Atmosphere of six Inches square, and extending from the
restagnant Mercury to the upper surface of the Atmosphere.

And consequently, this Column of Air or Atmosphere, does actually gravitate
with a weight of 490 Pounds, upon the restagnant Mercury, and really and
actually weighs as much as that comes to; and consequently, when I hold a
Trencher in my hand of six Inches square, there is incumbent upon it 490 Pound
weight of Air, though there be found a help in that case to support it, by the
recoyling Column of Air, commensurate to it; whereof in its due place.

And this is the supposition I contend against in this paper, viz. that 1. The
whole Body of the Atmosphere has no considerable Gravitation either upon its
own parts, or upon the subjected Body of the Terrestrial Globe, much less such
a prodigious Gravitation as is here supposed. 2. If it had, yet any given
portion or Column of the Atmosphere, has no such Gravitation.

Touching the Gravitation of the whole Atmosphere in general, upon the
Terrestrial Globe entirely, I shall not say much, because it is not capable of
Experiment, only my reason and sense suggests it to me, that it is neither
evident nor likely to be of so vast a Gravitation as the late Philosophers
affirm.

First, I confess I am none of those Adepts in Philosophy, that can tell us how
to solve all the effects in Nature, without recourse to the infinite Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness of the Glorious God, who certainly knew better how to frame
the World, and fix the Laws of Nature, than the wisest of Men or Angels. I must
confess, I know not how to resolve the reason of the Motion of weighty Bodies
downward nor why or how either the Sun holds his regular Motion, if the
Hypothesis of Ptolemy be true, or why the Earth, as other Planetary Bodies,
holds its regular Motion, if the Systeme of Copernicus, and Galilaeus, be true,
and a thousand such instances; but into the primitive disposition and
ordination of the Most Wise, Powerful, and Sovereign Lord and Maker of the
World, who has fixed the Order and Law of Nature, by his Sovereign Fiat, with
the most exact accommodation of it to the concerns of the Universe, and all the
parts thereof, and with most incomparable Congruity. This Sovereign Architect,
that has made all the parts of this Mundus aspect abilis in Order, Weight, and
Measure, and designed the Earth and Air, for the habitation and use of Men, and
all other breathing Animals, and likewise for Vegetables, has so ordered and
digested the texture of the Air, that the inferior part is more gross than the
superior, and fitted for nourishment and respiration; the upper parts more
subtle, and pure, and light, and destined to other uses, has balanced the
Air, so that the more light and subtle parts are inclinable perchance, more to
ascend; and the lower parts gradually more laden with Particles of a grosser
allay, and so possibly thereby inclinable to subside; and he has connected the
more subtle, and the more Feculent parts thereof, so together, that they hold
an Equilibrium as a state and posture more serviceable to the ends and uses he
designed for it, and for which they serve: The proceeding of this Sovereign
Architect in the Frame of this great Building of the Universe, not being like
to the Architecture of men, who begin at the bottom; but he began at the Roof,
and Builded downwards, and in that process, suspended the inferior parts of the
World upon the superior. But this kind of reasoning, I know, is not grateful to
the palate of the present Philosophers; I therefore proceed.

Secondly, Therefore I say, that the common appearances of the World, so far as
they are obvious to our common senses, contradicts this immense, nay, or any
considerable Gravitation of the Atmosphere upon subjected Bodies; It is hardly
conceptible, how Birds could raise themselves upon their wings, and keep
themselves in free Air, if a burden perchance of above 1000 pound weight
should lie upon their Wings and Bodies; it were not possible for me to breath,
to walk, to stand upon my Feet, if at every time I open my Mouth, a Column of
Air of three hundred pounds weight were pressing into it, it would tare open
the valves of my Larinx, and blow up my Stomach and Intrals, like a Bladder,
and break my Ribs, if it had an admission; and if it had not the circumjacent
pressure of the Air, would press me to death: These and the like instances
render this prodigious Gravitation of the Air incredible to us vulgar Souls,
that are apt to creditour senses.

But I very well know, that these will be said to be vulgar common places, and
that they have many handsome Solutions of these common difficulties.

And it is true, I very well know, they have colorable Solutions for those
sensible occurrences, as the supposed counterpoise of included Air, and of the
recoyling Columns of Air; which I shall in due time consider.

But I do reply, that though these common instances perchance amount not to
demonstrations of the untruth of the Hypothesis, yet they do require a very
great and very clear evidence to encounter even those vulgar experiences; and
therefore, if any Solutions offered of them, are not perfectly concludent, but
strained, and the instances they give in their favor, are capable of any other
Solution, than this which is so visibly and apparently contrary to our sense;
such Solutions and such instances are too weak and impotent to build such
uncouth conclusions upon.

Thirdly, Therefore I say, there is not any one instance or experiment, that
ever I yet heard of, for the evincing of this imaginary Gravitation of the free
Air, but is readily capable of a more suitable Solution more adequately fitted
to the Phenomenon, and less encumbered with difficulties than this new
Solution, by the Gravitation and Elatory of the Air. I shall refer my self
herein to Mr. Linus his Tract De Inseperabilitate Corporum: And Honoraly Fabri,
in the 6th of his late Philosophical Conferences, wherein all the instances
given from the Magdeburg Engine, and the English Air Pump, and particularly the
Torricellian Experiment, are sufficiently and much more satisfactory and
naturally solved, without recourse to this imaginary Weight or Spring of Air.

And there are above an hundred Experiments of this kind and nature, which can
never by this solution be explicated (without intolerable torture of them) some
instances whereof we shall in due time remember.

But omitting more that may be replied in general to the common Gravitation of
the Air; I shall more particularly and closely apply my self to the second.

2. Therefore, admitting it were possible to suppose the whole Body of the
Atmosphere might Gravitate upon the Earth in general, yet no one particular
portion of the free and common Air, impending upon any one determinate
Superficies, can at all or at least can sensibly or considerably Gravitate upon
any determinate Basis.

And the reason seems to me to be this, because although we should admit a
considerable Gravity of a portion of Air taken, divided and separated as one
entire separate Gross Body (as in a Bladder, a Glass Bubble, or the like) so
that it partakes of the common quality of heavy Bodies, yet there is a peculiar
pressure or Gravitation belonging to this subtle Fluid Body, which has its
lines of direction every way within the compass of its own extreme Superficies,
whereby that perpendicular Gravitation, which is common to all Bodies, is
corrected, abated, and in a great measure suspended. 2. Because that if there
were no such allay given to its common perpendicular Gravitation, by its proper
Motion or Gravitation of its own; yet the Air being one continued Body, and so
interwoven and mortaised as it were, one part in another, the other parts of
the Air that are contiguous every where to the Earth, do sustain and bear it
up, like the sides of an Arch, from any sensible pressure or Gravitation upon
any determinate or particular Body, that is within the compass of its pressure;
as I have elsewhere enforced the Argument in relation to the Gravitation of
Water upon subjected Bodies, narrower than the common Base that supports such
Water.

And although the Air has an intermingling with it of Vapors and Terrestrial
and Aqueous Efftuvia heavier than it self; yet they are so interwoven in the
very Webb and texture of the Air, that it supports many of them, and those that
are too heavy for it, or much disunited and separate from it, are precipitated
upon the Superficies of the Earth, and the Air discharged of them, as in Rain,
Snow, Hail, subsiding Gravel Sand, and c.

And although the instance that I am now giving, is more proper for the next
Section, yet it is in some kind suitable for the explication of what I intend.

Of all hands it is agreed, that the Water, though a Fluid Body, is, some say,
thirteen hundred times heavier than the like portion of Air; others, that it is
a thousand times heavier; they that speak least, say it is above nine hundred
times heavier than Air: And it is obvious to any that attends it, that there is
not the same strict Cohesion of one part of Water with another, as is of one
part of Air with another, unless divided by a more firm and stable Body then it
self: And therefore there is far more reason, that one part or Column of Water
in its consistency should Gravitate upon a subjected Body, than there is, that
a Column of Air should in the free and open Air, Gravitate upon a body
subjected to it; And yet it will be found, that in libera aqua, that
Gravitation that it exercises upon a Body subjected to it, and capable of it,
is not above one half so much as the weight of such a Column of Water, divided
and separated from the common consistent Water.

It is true, I had not so dextrous a Messenger, to make the Experiment in the
bottom of the Sea, or 20 Fathom within Water, as Dromo is Poetically related to
have done, though I believe he never made that trial: But I will give an
account of what I have tried and found.

( Fig. 4) I took a Glass Siphan of a quarter of an Inch Diameter, the longer
leg 32 Inches, the shorter 8. Inches long, open at both ends.

I filled the short leg with Mercury, which accordingly as it must, rose to 8
Inches high in the longer leg; and then stopping the shorter leg with my
Finger to avoid any violent pressure by the fall of the Water upon the Mercury,
I then filled the longer leg to the top with Water, and gently removing my
Finger from the shorter leg, to avoid too violent an Exsilition of the
Mercury, I found the Mercury to subside in the longer leg two Inches and a
quarter, and as much driven out of the shorter leg, by the accession of the
weight of 24 Inches of Water in the longer leg, (which I confess is somewhat
less than the proportion of weight between Water and Mercury; wherein,
according to an exact calculation, 28 inches of Water counterpoiseth 2 Inches
of Mercury. But then emptying the Water and Mercury out of the Tube, I again
filled up the Tube with Mercury, to 8 Inches in both legs, namely to the top
of the short leg.

And then filling a glass Tube, of about three Inches diameter, and 32 Inches
long, with Water, I immersed the Siphon with the Quick-filver to the bottom of
the greater Tube full of Water. And although the column of Water in the great
Tube, impending upon the orifice of the shorter leg, was full 24 Inches, yet
it drew down the Mercury in the short leg, and raised it in the longer leg,
empty of Water, only one Inch, and no more, whereby it did rise in the longer
leg to 9 Inches, and subsided in the shorter to 7 Inches, as I could easily
perceive through the great Tube, by a Scale of Inches, and quarters, fitted to
each leg of the Siphon.

I then tried it doubly, viz. pouring in the Water into the longer leg of the
the Siphon, whereby the subjacent Mercury subsided in the longer leg two
Inches, and as much thereof driven out of the shorter leg, and then immersed
the Siphon into a glass-vessel, 32 Inches deep, filled with Water; the Mercury
thereupon subsided in the short leg somewhat near an Inch, and no more, and
accordingly impelled up the Mercury and incumbent Water in the longer leg near
an Inch: whereby it appears, that there was no AEquipondium between the pillar
of Water included in the Tube, and the imaginary pillar of Water in the open
vessel.

And in this experiment I must remember, that the orifice of the shorter leg
of the Tube, and the leg it self, was of somewhat a larger diameter than the
longer leg; and that might give some advantage to the pressure of the Water in
the vessel upon the shorter leg. But notwithstanding that advantage, the
gravitation of the external Water, or any imaginary column thereof was not half
so much as the gravitation of the Cylinder of Water included in the Tube; which
is sufficient to convince the mistake of those that assign an equal pressure to
an imaginary column of free Air or Water, with an equal column of Air or Water
that entirely presses upon the Mercury, and has no other circumjacent base to
lean upon.

And it is to be noted, that although, as I have said, a Cylinder of two Inches
of Mercury does really counterpoise a Cylinder of 28 Inches of Water, of the
same diameter, yet in this instance of the Siphon, 24 Inches of Water drew down
two Inches of Mercury, and raised as much out of the shorter leg. And the
reason seems to be, because the Mercury being in aequilibrio, was more capable
of a sensible pressure by a less quantity of Water in this libra naturalis,
than it would be, if both were weighed in their gross consistence in an
artisicial Scale.

And the reasons why the pressure through the Tube, is stronger than the
pressure by the open vessel of Water, are these: 1. Because in the Tube the
Water included had no communion with any open or free Water, nor had any
sustentation thereby, but in the common Water there is a communication and
mutual sustentation of one part by another. 2. And principally because when in
the Tube the Water had no other Base but the Mercury, to which it was
commensurate, and therefore singly, and entirely, and adequatly pressed it. But
the Water in the vessel had another Base circumjacent to it, namely the bottom
of the vessel, from which it was built like an Arch over the short leg of the
Mercury, whereby the weight, pressing upon the Mercury, was broken, abated, and
intercepted. For Water will find the lowest Base for its rest.

And surely if this be true in Water, as upon more than one trial I found it,
it will be much more so in the open Air, which will much disorder the whole
hypothesis of the Gravitation of the Air, and those very subtle and fine
Conclusions that are spun out of it, and built upon it.

But I would not be mistaken, as if I meant that the Column of 24 Inches of
free Water did gravitate upon the orifice of the shorter leg of the Siphon, to
the weight of near an Inch of Mercury, for That is wholly contrary to my
Supposition: but only I hereby show the great disproportion of the appearing
Gravitation of Water, where it has no lower nor other Base upon which it
leans, but only the body of the Mercury, and where it has another or lower
Base upon which it leans.

For in this instance of the Siphon, there is another reason of the Gravitation
of the free Water upon the cavity of the shorter leg of the Siphon: for here
the pressing or keeping down of the body of the Siphon into the free Water,
displaceth and raises up a portion of Water answerable to the bulk of the
whole unequal Superficies of the Siphon, which is far greater than its cavity,
and that Water so diplaced does indeed press upon the Tube that displaceth it;
and because it can find no part yiedling to its pressure but the orifice of the
shorter Tube, it presses there in such proportion, as the whole bulk of the
Water so lifted up by the immersion of the Siphon, bears to about an Inch of
included Mercury, and 24 Inches of the Water included in the Tube. But of this
more distinctly and exactly, when I come to examine the reason of the Valve.

2. But having thus offered my reasons against this prodigious Gravitation of
the imaginary Aerie Cylinders, I shall proceed to some plain and home^^
Experiments and Reasons, which seem to me very much to encounter the
Supposition.

I shall begin with that whereunto I am sure they are furnished with an Answer,
but such an Answer as will give me the opportunity of a Reply, which possibly
may be of more moment, than if the Experiment it self were without an Answer.

Take a pair of Scales, the one Dish of 12 Inches of diameter, the other of 3
Inches diameter, yet of that thickness, that it may be just of the same weight
with the other, each dish weighing for the purpose three Pounds. These two
Dishes will yet exactly equiponderate, yet the one sustains a Column of Air of
above twelve times the weight of the other, yea and according to the proportion
above computed, possibly the greater Column impending upon the greater Dish,
may weigh above 4000l weight.

But there is a common Answer singularly fitted to this difficulty. For it is
said, there is a Column of Air below each Dish, that has a Superficies
commensurate to the lower Base of each Dish, which though it be but 3 or 2 or 1
foot, nay but an Inch above the Earth, bears up each Dish as strongly as the
Column of Air of 7 miles high bears them down, and so there is an aequipondium
between the pondus deprimens upon the upper side of the Scale, and the
patientia sustinens of the lower side, and the Pillar of a Foot of length,
between the Earth and the greater Scale, is of a Foot diameter, and sustains it
as forcibly as the pondus deprimens of a Foot diameter depresseth it, and so it
is supported by an equal force impelling it upward, as it is depressed by the
weight of Air incumbent upon it. And the case is the same with the lesser
Scale, and so the greater Scale, though it has a greater weight than the
lesser impendent upon it; so it is recompensed with a more forcible power than
the less has to sustain it, and so there is an aequipondium.

But although this seems mavelous, that the potentia of a Pillar of Air from
the Earth to the Base of the Scale should counterpoise so vast a weight, as
what is incumbent upon it, yet to serve the turn, and to give a Solution by the
weight and power of the Air to maintain the cohesion of two polished Marbles (
de quo infra) this reason is given, that as there is a vast weight of
Atmosphere upon the Scale, so there is the same Gravitation of Air round about
it all, but what is just under the Scale; and this impending Air round about
the sides of the Scale, as it is so much, so it is somewhat weightier than that
which impends upon the Scale; for this reaches only to the Scale, and that
reaches somewhat farther in length, even by so much as the distance is between
the Earth and the Scale; and this does so gird and help in that short Column of
Air subjacent to the Scale, that it is as firm a Pedestal or potentia to
sustain the Scale, and to press it up by the auxiliary Columns of Air, that
supply and support it, as the impending Column is to depress it, and so between
both there is an aequipondium. So that in all cases, as well in Air as Water,
the subjected Column sustaining and impelling upwards, and the potentia thereof
is of equal force to the pondus of the superior Column, depressing the upper
Superficies of the intermediate Body.

And the same they suppose in Water, the instances whereof is the Valve, and
some other instances; but of these in the former Chapter.

And now upon this Supposition of the potentia sustinens of the recoiling
Pillar, as I may call it, sustaining and impelling up the lower Supersicies of
the body, they have raised most mavelous Paradoxes and Consequences, namely,
that if a Millstone were by some art suspended in the Air, if it were possible
that the Pillar of Air incumbent upon it were either wholly taken away, or
deprived of all Gravitation, this Millstone would be sustained by the subjected
Column of Air, and possibly carried up much higher, yea, and if a long Column
of Brass were let down deep enough into the Ocean, they assign a depth, at
which the Column of Brass would sink no lower, but be sustained by that
mavelous potentia of the recoiling or subjected Column of Water: things that
I confess are wittily deduced, and consequential enough upon their postulata
admitted, but such as are warily enough propounded, because impossible to be
tried.

But in answer to this Question likewise, I say this will be found untrue, and
therefore although the Consequences are Logically enough inferred upon such
premises; yet the thing proving false in the event, the Premises, Principles,
and Postulat a themselves must needs be fictitious and vain.

Suppose therefore two small Cylinders of Brass, each of 41 weight, but the one
of two Inches diameter, the other of one Inch diameter, and therefore about
double the length of the other, were weighed in a vessel of Water by a pair of
Scales, with the Superficies of each just even with the Superficies of the
Water in the vessel, they will each lose a just equal portion of their weight
by the thickness of the medium, and will still hold their aequipondium, yet the
imaginary column of Air impending upon the two Inches Cylinder above treble the
weight to that impending upon the one Inch diameter, and here is no recoiling
Column of Air to sustain them.

But I easily foresee the Answer to this Instance, and therefore I gave it to
let in what I have to say; for it will be said, that the Gravitation of the Air
upon the residue of the Water, gives a greater concrete weight to the Water, by
so much as the Column of Air, commensurate to the Superficies of the Water,
adds to it, and so both Air and Water make one common pressure, and
consequently the recoiling or sustaining Column of Water, has as great a
potentia sustinens as the weight of both put together can contribute. But to
avoid this Effugium, sirst I took two Brass Cylinders, weighing each four
pound, but one of double the others diameter, I took then two Laton-Tubes of 6
Inches diameter, and about two foot in length, closed at both ends, only in the
center of the close Cover of the one I caused a hole to be made, commensurate
to the Superficies of the Cylinder of Brass of 2 inches diam. and a like hole
in the other, commensurate to the cylinder of Brass, of 1 Inch diameter, so
that they might just play upon them without any considerable distance between
the weights, and the concavity of the holes. I then filled the vessels brim
full of water, and weighed the Cylinders with their Superficies just equal with
the Water and Cover. Here could be no Gravitation of the Air upon any part of
the Water, but only upon the Weights, so that the Column of Air, pressing upon
the greater Weight, being, as is supposed, above treble to what presses upon
the less, must needs drive it down, because the recoyling Pillar of Water,
could not countervail such a disparity of pondus of Air.

And yet I found not above one Grain odds in their Weights, the broader
weighing about a thin Groat more than the narrower.

But because I would have no evasion, by supposing that that small distance
between the Weights and the Hole, might give some more help and strength to the
sustaining Pillar of Water by letting in some Air to lean upon the Water,
thereby to enable it to keep the Equipondium. I took a very flat piece of Lead,
with a hole in the Center, no bigger than would let through Freely that small
Packthrid that suspended the Weight, and letting the Third through the hole,
and pressing the Lead so exactly close, that no Air can pass to press upon the
Water and Weight, but just that little passage for the Third which impended
also in the very middle of the Weight, and thereby covering the Orifice, fitted
to the one Inch weight; yet the Equipondium between both, continued exactly the
same, as when both holes were left open, one of two Inches, the other of one
Inch Diameter, at both times, the Vessels being perfectly full of Water.

And yet according to the supposition, the supposed Weight of the Pillar of
Atmosphere impendent upon the two Inch Weight, could not be so little as 200
pound, and the weight of Air, pressing upon the Center of the lesser Weight,
and no where else, being not a quarter of an Inch Diameter, could not in
proportion, weigh the 100th part of 200 pound, according to the supposition of
this new Philosophy: And all this while the entire Superficies of the Water,
discharged of all manner of Gravitation of superior Air, by the close cover
that every where covered its Supersicies.

I do not understand what evasion can be made, unless they will suppose that
the little hole for the Third, might by a strange Contagion, infect the entire
Body of Water, with a new Gravitation, which nevertheless is so impossible,
that it deserves no other answer than what our common sense allows; for this
little pertuse, letting in that little Column of Air of a quarter of an Inch
Diameter, impends not upon the Water, but is wholly received by the Brass
Weights, upon whose Centres it leans.

So that the imaginary repercussive Column bearing up the Body into an
Equilibrium, with the impendent Column of Air (admitting the Air should have
such a Gravitation downward) must needs be a fiction upon a fiction, and
therefore upon the whole matter laid together, both are fictions, and neither
true.

2. But yet farther, if such a pressure upward of the inferior, or (as I have
called it) the recoyling Column of Air should be admitted, it does wholly
destroy the supposition of Gravitation of the superior Column of Air, because
in truth it renders the superior and inferior Columns of Air in a perfect
aequilibrium, every lower portion of Air checking and counterpressing the
superior, with the same strength or potentia sustinens, that the superior
portion charge the inferior with a pondus deprimens.

( Fig. 5.) For suppose in the 5th Figure A B were a Cylinder or Column of Air,
reaching from A the Supersicies of the Atmosphere, to B the Superficies of the
Earth, and of 12 Inches diameter. If the portion B E F press with an equal
potentia upward to the portion A E F, pressing with an equal weight downward;
then these two portions of Air must be at rest, and in aequilibrio, and so far
every divisible part of every other portion of the entire Column. And if the
superior and inferior parts of the Air be by this means in aequilibrio, there
can be no more Gravitation downward than upward; for all motion must arise from
a disparity of weight and weight, or power and power, or power and weight. And
therefore it is that although one Scale be charged with a hundred pounds
weight, and the other Scale be charged with as much, the Scales will be at
rest, because in aequilibrio; and by the advantage though but of a Grain of
weight, added to one Scale, they will be put into motion, but not 'till then.

But then it will be required to make out that, upon the Supposition, that in
our first Instance the greater Scale is kept in aequilibrio by the pondus of
the superior, and the potentia of the inferior Air; that there will be the same
aequilibrium between the pondus A E F, and the potentia E F B, upon or in every
imaginary Superficies of the Column of the Atmosphere; as E F C D, or any other
imaginary superficient, interjacent between the top of the Atmosphere A, and
the Superficies of the Earth at B.

And surely there need not be much pains taken to prove this: for it is not the
interposition of the Scale that makes the aequilibrium, but it is the
counterpressure of the superior and inferior part of the aerial Cylinder, which
must needs be as effectual, and of the same kind and strength, if that Scale
were removed out of the way; for though the interposition of the Scale hinder
the contiguity of the upper and lower Cylinder, yet it contributes nothing to
the Gravitation of the one, or pressure upward of the other.

Upon all which large digression, it seems to me that their very answer given,
that the equal Gravitation of each Scale, the greater and the lesser, is by the
equal pressure, viz. by reason the greater Scale as it is pressed by a greater
aerial Cylinder, is also supported by a reversed or recoiling Cylinder of Air
of equal sustaining force, though not of equal length with the superior,
destroys totally their whole Supposition of the Gravitation of the Air, and
renders their contrivance of the investigation of the weight of the Atmosphere,
by the aequipondium thereof, to a Cylinder of 29 Inches of Mercury, utterly
ineffectual.

And this it seems to me must be admitted, namely that the inferior Cylinder of
Air recoiling and returning from the Earth, or any other solid Base, does in
truth sustain the impending pondus of the same Cylinder, and so there is an
aequipondium in any given or imaginary Superficies of Air between the pondus
deprimens and the potentia sustinens, in the same perpendicular Pillar or
Column: and so the Air becomes not heavy in it self, but yet that it gravitates
entirely upon the Base, which is as it were the common hypomoclian that
receives the impression of the impendent Air, and remits the potentia upward in
counterpoise to it.

But then they say, that where in that Pillar of Atmosphere the Contiguity
between the superior and inferior Column is interrupted by some intervenient
body: as in the first instance, by the intervention of the Scale the
aequipondium between the pondus deprimens, and the potentia sustinens of the
aerial Pillar, is wrought by another means, namely the imaginary Pillars of
Atmosphere circumjacent to that intercepting body: as suppose the three Columns
of Atmosphere A M B N C O, and the Column B were cut off at D by any solid body
(suppose the Scales, in the first instance;) yet the two adjoining Columns
gravitate upon the inferior Pillar of Air (suppose it transverse,) and so give
it as vigorous a repercussion as if it were in the same perpendicular Column:
as in the figure,

Suppose B H be a Column of Air, impending upon the cube H, of six Inches
square; H to be (for instance) a cube of Brass, some way there sustained; E N
be the subjected Column of the same base, resting upon the Superficies of the
Earth at N. Suppose also A D m, and C F o, be two lateral Columns of Air,
pressing g upon a lateral or transversal Pedestal of Air G I K L, upon an
imaginary Superficies, contiguous to the lower Base of the cube H, namely G D F
I; here the Cylinders H D and C F press so strongly upon the entire transversal
Base G D E F G K L M N O, that the portion thereof E N is so strongly bound
together, compressed, and fortified by the columns A D and C F, that it
sustains the cube H as forcibly as it would have sustained B H an entire Column
of Air, and so makes an aequipondium and sustentation of the cube H.

( Fig. 6.) To examine the truth of this Supposition, let us suppose in this, A
to be the base of the cube B C D, and E to be the bases of four Pillars or
Columns of Air, contiguous to the four sides of this cube, equal in Base to it,
and all these Bases, both of the cube A and of the four collateral Pillars of
Air, to be upon the Superficies of the Earth. If A be removed higher, as to H
in the former figure, the intermediate space between H (in the former figure)
and the Superficies of the Earth, viz. the space H N, must be furnished with
Air; now the Air, that must supply that space, cannot be immediately thrust in
from the Pillar superior to the cube, viz. H B, because the descent of that
Pillar of Air is obstructed by the interposition of the cube H, whereupon it is
bottomed. Therefore of necessity each of the collateral Pillars of Air, B C D
E, must thrust in an equal portion of their stock of Air, to supply the
interstitium of H n in the former figure; and then they will want so much of
their Pillar, as will make good what they have thus contributed to fill that
space. And this they are to borrow from the Pillar H B, that lay perpendicular
to the cube, which now at this Elevation is B H: for as the cube it gradually
raises from N toward H, the Pillar of Air incumbent upon it must be
displaced, and what is so displaced, must be thrust into the lateral Pillars B
C D E, to supply what they contribute to the relicted space H N: and so in
every Elevation higher of the cube H, so much space as it leaves, must be
immediately thrust in from the collateral Pillars adjacent to the Tube, and
must be made good in the same moment from the Air, thrust out of the
perpendicular Pillar B H, by the gradual Elevation of the cube to supply the
collateral Pillars. By this process of one part of the Air into another, to
accommodate the motion of its parts, it seems evident, that there is not that
pressure of one part of the Air upon another, nor of all upon the common Base,
that should be like so many Wedges to keep every portion of Air just in that
place it has; or by Gravitation of one part upon another, to keep all the
parts so tight one to another, as the Supposition imports. For then certainly
there could be no motion or transmigration of one part of the Air into another,
as we see there is not only in the Instance above given, but in a thousand
more. The most forcible Winds could no more remove one portion of Air out of
its place, then they could remove a Pyramid of Memphis, if this Supposition
were true.

Therefore there seems to be very little ground for the late Masters of
Experiments, to lay any weight of proof for their supposed Gravitation of the
Air, upon the Torricellian Experiment; which, by what I have said, and shall
hereafter say more at large, depends upon a clear other Solution.

And thus far in general, touching the Gravitation of Air in Air, or upon any
other Bodies; wherein I have been the longer, because I shall perchance
hereafter have recourse to some of the things said in this Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the Gravitation of heavier Fluids upon those that are lighter.
THere be those that contend, that there is no Body positively light, but only
comparatively; and that the Ascension of any Bodies is not from the intrinsic
nature or quality of the Bodies themselves, but because others that are more
heavy than those are, and more vigorous in their descent, do drive up those
that are less heavy, by taking their places, and so force them to mount higher.

Whatever may be said in this respect, in relation to Air, yet surely it holds
true in other grosser Fluids, and sometimes in solid Bodies also: Oil is truly
heavy, and yet driven higher by Water, which is ordinarily heavier than Oil.
And the same is true in relation to Water and Mercury, the latter driving up
the former though a heavy Body, because not so heavy as Mercury. As I have
before said, there is a double Disparity or aequipondium of heavy Bodies; one
in relation to their intrinsic of specifical weight, another in relation to
the external or quantitative weight. Water is specifically heavier than Oil,
and Mercury than Water; whence it comes to pass, that a bulk of Mercury weighs
more than a bulk of Water equal to the bulk of Mercury; one square Inch of
Mercury, counterpoising near 14 square Inches of Water. But yet the bulk or
quantity of Water may be so much, or so great, that it may overpoise the
Mercury, two ounces of Water necessarily being more, and weighing double to an
ounce of Mercury, though specifically heavier than Water.

And therefore in the consideration of the gravitation of heavy Fluids upon
lighter, we are to take these two parts into consideration. viz.

1. The Gravitation of a Body, specifically heavier, upon or in a Body
specifically lighter; as the Gravitation of Mercury upon Water, or Water upon
Oil or Air.

2. The Gravitation of a Body specifically lighter, yet in quantity or
extrinsically heavier than the Fluid it presses; as two pound of Oil upon a
pound of Water, and the like.

As to the former of these, there seem to be four ways, wherein the Gravitation
or pressure of a Fluid upon a Fluid, specifically lighter, sensibly is
exercised. viz. 1. By way of Penetration, 2. by way of perpendicular, or other
descending Depression, 3. by way of lateral Pressure, 4. by way of Elevation of
the lighter Body.

For the first, if a cube of 12 Inches square be filled 9 Inches with Oil, and
the other three be filled up with Water; though for the present the Water
gently poured on will flote upon the Oil, yet in a little time it will
penetrate through it, and get under it, and the 9 Inches of Oil will swim upon
it, pressing its Superficies equally every where.

And so if a lumen be at the bottom of the cube, the Water first, and then the
Oil, will gravitate upon the Air, and press through it.

But if the top of the cube be closely covered, so that Air cannot get in above
the Water, the Oil will not descend through the lumen, the reason whereof is
hereafter explained.

For the second, it is very plain, that the heavier Fluid will in some
Instances press upon all the lighter, by a depression where it can have way;
sometimes immediately, sometimes mediately, viz. notwitstanding the
interposition of another body. For instance,

If an empty Bottle or Glass-bubble be placed in a vessel of Water, at a small
depth, the Air included in the Bottle or Bubble, being a Body lighter than
Water, will mount up to the top, if it be not kept down: for a small pressure
of Water, though it press upon the included Air as much as it can, yet it
cannot compress the Air so much, as to drive into it a quantity of Water, that
may make the Bottle and included Water equal in weight, or more in weight than
the like bulk of simple Water; but if more Water be poured into the vessel,
whereby a weight of Water incumbent upon the narrow mouth of the Bottle or
Bubble, is sufficient to compress the included Air, to such a contraction, as
may admit Water enough to make the Bottle, with the admitted Water, to
counterpoise more than a like quantity of simple Water, the Bottle or Bubble
will subside, and sink to the bottom again; if the vessel be unladen
considerably of its Water, whereby the Air included in the vessel being under a
less pressure, can expand it self to its natural dimension, and thereby thrust
out of the Bottle so much of the included Water, as may render the Bottle, with
the included Water, lighter than a like quantity or bulk of simple Water, equal
to the bulk of the Bottle, the Bottle will emerge again.

This is the Experiment mentioned by Shottus, in his Magia hydraulica, part 3,
l. 5, problem. 3. and the excellent Author of Hydrostatical Paradoxes, page 16,
53, 153. and elsewhere. The Experiment is certainly true, but the Solution
thereof, and the Conclusion deduced from it, of the Gravitation of the upper
parts of the Water upon the lower, is as I think wholly mistaken; for the
reason of it is not from the imaginary Gravitation of Water upon Water, but of
Water upon Air, which being a lighter body than Water, and capable of
compression into a narrower compass, by the Gravitation of Water upon it,
sustains that weight of the Water, and is compressed by it, and under it: it is
not an effect of Gravitation of Water upon Water, which is of equal intrinsic
or Specifical Gravity, but of Water upon Air, which is a lighter Fluid, and
compressible. Again, this Gravitation of heavier Fluids upon lighter, though
not immediately contiguous, is plain by this instance.

If a Cylindrical vessel of Water be of 6 Inches diameter, and there be a
rundle of Wood specifically lighter than Water of five Inches diameter placed
at the very bottom of it, the Water will drive it up to the Superficies of it,
because it is a Body specifically lighter than the Water. But if there be a
hole of five Inches diameter in the bottom of that vessel, and the Rundle be
placed upon that hole, so that it somewhat overlaps the hole, so that the
Water cannot pass out of it, and then it be filled up with Water; the Rundle
will gravitate upon that hole, and the incumbent Cylinder of Water,
commensurate in Base to that Rundle, so hard and close, that it requires a
weight in a pair of Scales, near commensurate to the weight of the impending
Cylinder of Water, to raise it from the bottom; and the reason is, because the
Rundle being the Operculnm of that hole, through which the Water should pass
into the lighter Fluid, the Air, and so is the impediment of the Waters
passage, it gravitates upon it, because it has mediately a lighter Element
upon which it gravitates, namely the Air. It is Stevinus his Experiment, in his
practical Hydrostaticks, upon his 10. Proposition.

And upon the same reason it is, that if a Glass-bottle filled with Seawater,
and stopped, be let down twenty fathoms into the Sea, it will not break, for it
is filled with a Fluid of an equal weight, and so the external Water does not
sensibly gravitate upon it, for it has within a sufficient power to resist the
external pressure. But if it be full only of Air, and stopped, and let down as
deep by a weight appended to it, (as it must) it will be broken by the pressure
and weight of the Water immediately upon the included Air, which is lighter
than so much Water, and so it presses upon it, to drive it up, and crusheth
the glass into it.

And this I take to be one reason, though not the only reason of the Experiment
of the Valve, and likewise of Oil thrusting up Water into a Tube, though of a
specifically heavier consistence; and possibly may contribute something to the
instance in the fourth Chapter, whereby a Siphon filled up with Mercury to the
hight of the shorter leg, and immersed in Water, the Mercury in the shorter
leg will subside a little, and ascend in the longer leg, although the Mercury
be a Body 14 times heavier than Water; for in these instances, though the
immediate contiguity be of the heavier Body to the lighter, as Oil to Water,
and Water to Mercury, yet in as much as the Mercury in both legs is in
aequilibrio, and the Air is behind the Mercury in the longer leg of the
Siphon, and behind the Water in the Tube, the Water in the one case, and the
Oil in the orther, does in truth gravitate upon that Air mediately and
effectively, rather than upon the intermediate heavier. Fluid, especially if
the body of the Air be any whit lower than the Superficies of the Water.

And thus far touching the Gravitation or pressure of a Fluid specifically
heavier, upon a Fluid specifically lighter. I should now come to consider the
pressure of a Fluid specifically lighter, yet with an excess of extrinsick or
quantitative weight upon a Fluid specifically heavier; as two pound of Water
upon a pound of Mercury, or two pound of Oil upon a pound of Water: but because
this and some other considerations, for the better clearing of the matters
contained in this Chapter, may occur in the next, I shall remit it thither.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the Pressure or Gravitation of lighter Fluids, upon those that are
specifically heavier.
IT is certain, that every Body, whithe fluid, or solid, incumbent upon
another, though that Other be a thousand times intrinsically and also
extrinsically heavier than the incumbent Body does gravitate and press upon it.

And therefore if we should suppose the Air to have a weight, but a thousand
times less than the like portion of Water, a portion of one square foot of Air
incumbent upon the Ocean, would have some pressure upon it: somewhat like the
Problem that passed in the Affirmative among Fresh-men in the University, That
if a Horse had as much as he could carry, the addition of the weight of the
thousandth part of a Feather would break his back.

But this is not the pressure or Gravitation I am speaking of, but such a
Gravitation or pressure, as would put the subjected heavier Fluid into a
sensible motion, or change of place or situation.

In a pair of artificial Scales, a pound of Feathers or Water, will
equiponderate a pound of Gold or Mercury, and 2 pound of Feathers will
preponderate a pound of Gold or Mercury, not withstanding the great disparity
of their intrinsic weight.

And so in a Balance that seems more natural, if a Siphon of half an Inch
diameter, with one leg of six Inches long, and the other of thirty four Inches
long, or more, be filled with Mercury to the height of the shorter leg, and
then stopping the Orifice of the shorter leg with the finger, fill the longer
leg with water, and then opening the Orifice of the shorter leg, the Water in
the longer leg, though specifically lighter than the Mercury, will drive out
the Mercury out of the Siphon, because the extrinsick or quantitative weight of
so much Water exceeds the extrinsick or quantitative weight of the subjacent
Mercury.

If a cubick vessel be filled six Inches high with Water, and a Glass-pipe open
at both ends be immersed at one end in the Water, and then superinfuse gently
(to avoid disturbance) so much Oil as will fill it up ten Inches, viz. four
Inches of Oil, and six of Water, the Pipe will be filled with Water near to the
level of the Superficies of the Oil, but not quite level to the Superficies of
the Oil, it will want so much, as the like quantity of Water in the Pipe, is
heavier than the like quantity of Oil.

But if a Pipe filled with Oil, and the upper end stopped with a finger, whereby
the Oil remains suspended in the Tube, or Pipe, and then the open end be
immersed in the Water, the Oil, while it obtains a Superficies in the Pipe
considerably higher than the Water in the vessel, will subside 'till it come to
such an Elevation above the Superficies of the Water, as is proportionable to
the degree of specifical Lightness that it obtains more than the like quantity
of Water. And 'till then it subsides into the Water, because it has a greater
proportion of accidental weight by its so great Elevation above the Supersicies
of the Water: for the Elevation of one fluid body above another, gives the
greater strength and swifter motion to its descent: whereby though a lighter
body, it conquers the resistance of the Water of a lower Superficies.

Which is the reason, why a Tube of Water, four foot high, casts out more Water
in the same portion of time, through the same lumen, than a vessel of the same
diameter, and but two foot high, as I shall hereafter more at large observe.

And this is the reason, why if a small Glass-Tube of six Inches long, be
filled with Water, and the upper end being stopped with the finger, whereby the
Water is suspended in the Pipe, and then the lower end being immersed in a
vessel of Water six foot deep, and then the upper end unstopped, the whole
Water in the Pipe will empty it self, 'till it attain a Superficies equal with
the Water in the vessel, and will not be kept suspended in the Pipe by the
resistance of the Water in the vessel, because if it obtain never so little
more height in the Pipe than in the vessel, it has a greater force to press
downward, than the Water in the vessel has strength to resist it.

If a Tube stopped at one end be filled with Mercury, and inverted in the open
Air, the Air will ascend and terebrate through the Mercury as fast as that
descends; so there is a kind of pressure of the Air ascendendo upon the
Mercury, and thereby both the Air and Mercury obtain their several natural
motions, this descendendo, and that ascendendo, whereby Vacuity is prevented,
and the continuity of the parts of the Universe preserved.

But if the Tube be very small, so that the Air cannot make its way through the
lower orifice, to gratify the Mercury with a descent, by that means the
Mercury will remain suspended in the small Tube, and will not descend. The like
will happen, if such a small Tube be inverted into Water, the smallness of the
orifice not admitting the ascent of the Water to supply the space derelicted by
a descent of the Mercury, the Mercury by force of the Catholic law of Nature
will remain suspended, and its natural descent will be thereby superseded.

So that the pressure or Gravitation of a lighter Body upon a more gross and
weighty, will be occasioned, 1. Either by the Excess of the quantity and
extrinsick weight of the Fluid specifically lighter, or 2. by the advantage of
its Position or Elevation above the Superficies of the grosser Fluid, or 3. by
the interposition of that common law of Nature, ut evitetur vacuum.

I shall conclude these general Observations, touching the Gravitation of
Fluids, with that of the Valve, described by the Excellent Author of
Hydrostatical Paradoxes, cap. ultimo, which was certainly a most ingenuous
Experiment, though I am not at all satisfied with the Solution he gives of it,
nor the Consequences deduced by him from it, touching the Gravitation of Water
upon Water, (I mean sensible Gravitation) of the superior parts upon the
inferior parts of the Water in free water.

And I am as much dissatisfied with that obscure Solution that is given thereof
by the Learned Author of the Enchiridion Metaphysicum.

And because in this one Experiment duly observed and improved, many of the
most abstruse Conclusions of Hydrostaticks may be cleared even to sense, I
shall distinctly examine it, and the phenomenon appearing in it.

The Instrument is thus made, according to that form which I made use of.

I took a hollow Tube of Laton, closely sodered at the Sides and joints, of 39
Inches long, two Inches in the diameter from the top to the bottom, with a
Brass Valve at the end of it sodered to it, and a brass Sucker or Cover of the
same fashion with those used in Pumps, only in Pumps the Cover or Sucker has
its head upward, in this Instrument the head is downward, whereby it being
inverted it falls out about an Inch below the Valve, but cannot fall out more,
because stayed by the Frame of the Valve.

Fig. 7. This Sucker exactly covers the mouth of the Valve, that no water can
come in, when the Sucker is closely strained up, by a string fastened to it in
the inward pin of it, and so conveyed up through the Tubes. The Sucker thus
fastened to the Valve or Box, and the Box soder'd close to the Tube, and the
string conveyed up through the Tube to the open end of it, the Engine is formed
according to the Figure in the Margin, representing A the Tube, B the String, C
the brazen Box of the Valve soder'd to the Tube, D the Sucker or Cover of the
Valve let down as low as it will go, with a Hook to hold any weight appended to
it; which Sucker being strained up with the string, closely stops the lower
orifice of the Tube, and Box of the Valve.

The Valve thus prepared, I strictly weighed the whole Valve, Tube, Sucker, and
Third, with the wooden Nut upon which to roll the string, which weighed in all
three pounds, two ounces and a half, or 50 ounces and a half.

The Sucker (for so I shall call the name of the Valve) weighed seven ounces
and one half: and I was curious in weighing these things, because the great use
of my Experiments consisted in the comparison of weights of the Instruments
themselves, and the Water.

I took then a great glass Tube, of about five Inches diameter, and about two
foot and a half long, and filled it with Water; though I used also a Leaden
vessel of six Inches diameter, and four foot long, for the immersion of my
Valve, which though it were deeper, yet the Glass vessel was more accommodate
to my use, and served as well, and therefore I used it, and thereupon made
those several Trials.

( Fig. 8.) 1. The Tube let into the Water, with the Valve open, would freely
subside to the bottom of the Water, be it never so deep, the water getting up
into the cavity of the Tube: for the moles of the Tube in that instance, is no
more than the length and thickness of the Laton, the Brass Valve and Sucker;
but the weight thereof being more than such a single moles of water, it must
necessarily subside to the bottom of the water.

2. The Valve being drawn up, and sustained by the Third wound about the wooden
Nut at the top of the Valve, whereby no water could come into the Tube, and
then left freely to subside in the water, would subside to a depth of one and
twenty Inches, and so swim erect in that depth of water, one and twenty Inches
being immersed in the water, and eighteen Inches of the Tube being in the open
Air, above the Superficies of the water.

And the reason is, because though the Laton and Brass be specifically heavier
than Water, and therefore will sink, as in the last Instance; yet because now
the Tube sits upon the water, as one entire Cylinder, and a Cylinder of Laton
thirty nine Inches long, and two Inches broad filled with Air only, is not
heavier than a Cylinder of Water of one and twenty Inches long, and two Inches
diameter, but do equiponderate; therefore the Tube sinks no lower than one and
twenty Inches to make an aequipondium between it self and the like bulk of
Water.

3. I therefore with all the exactness I could, measured the weight of the
Water commensurate to a Cylinder of two Inches diameter, and one and twenty
Inches long, (the quantity of the Tube swimming in the Water.)

First therefore filling my Glass Tube very full of Water, I immersed the Valve
open into one and twenty Inches deep; then at that depth lifting up the Sucker,
and enclosing the one and twenty Inches of Water thus imprisoned in the Tube,
and so taking it out closed; and then when out of the Glass Tube setting it to
run into a vessel weighed before, I find the weight of the included Water
weighed forty and seven Ounces and half, or three pound wanting half an Ounce,
which is about three Ounces less than the weight of the whole Instrument. And
this abatement it has for the thickness of the Tube and Valve, because the
water that is pressed upon by the Tube and Valve, and so raised out of its
place, is pressed up by the unequal or outside of the Tube and Valve, and
commensurate to it.

Therefore again straining up the string of the Valve, whereby no water could
get in, and filling my Glass Tube of restagnant water to the very brim or brink
of the Glass, and then I immersed my Tube into the water to one and twenty
Inches depth; the Valve strained up by the string, and preserved the water that
was impelled up by the immersion, and thrown over: and this I likewise exactly
weighed, and found to weigh near upon the point of fifty one Ounces, or three
pound three Ounces and half, which is about an Ounce more than the weight of
the Engine; which disparity might happen for want of exactness. But the sum
of it is, there is no considerable difference between the weight of the whole
Engine, and the weight of so much Water, as will countervail in quantity to so
much of the Engine or mingled Cylinder of 21 Inches thereof immersed in water.

Which gives us a plain account, why and how much a Body lighter than the like
quantity of water, will sit above water, and why, and how it comes to pass,
that some Ships draw more water than others, and how much burden they will
bear, before they will sink, viz. if the Ship or Barge with all its Cavities
and Lading, be not heavier than such a solid bulk of water, as equals the whole
Moles and Cavity of the Ship or Barge, the Barge will live, though it draw
water near to the very top of the sides of the vessel. And if the Ship or
vessel be lighter than such a moles of water as equals the whole continent of
the Ship or Barge, so much of the Ship or Barge will emerge above the water.
For in the instance in hand, in as much as 21 Inches of immersion of the Tube,
was the product of its whole weight of three pound, two Ounces and half; and
those one and twenty Inches thus immersed, were equal in weight to a bulk of
Water, commensurate to that Cylinder of 21 Inches immersed, the rest of the
Tube viz. 18 Inches, did flote erect upon the Water; for if it should have
subsided, the moles of Water lifted up out of its place would have exceeded the
weight of the whole Valve, viz. three pound, two Ounces, and half, which by the
rules and Laws of Hydrostaticks it may not do,

4. If the Sucker be drawn up, and then immersed so low, that the portion of
Water impelled up by the Tube, do exceed the weight of the Sucker, viz. 7
ounces and half, the Sucker will be sustained by the pressure of the Water upon
it: as suppose in the 8th Figure it were pressed even to L M, or N O, which is
nine Inches below the Superficies of the Water. And the reason is, because the
Sucker is now the moveable Basis of the included Column of Air, which is a
light Body, and so gravitates nothing upon the Water; and the Sucker being as
it were the Basis of that Column, and moveable, weighs but seven Ounces and
half, and the Tube subsiding as low as L M or N O, presses up a portion of
Water of double that weight, and this portion of Water bears against the Base
or Sucker more forcibly and powerfully than the Sucker can bear against it.

5. But if the weight of a moles of Water, commensurate to so much of the Tube
as is immersed in the Water, be less than the weight of the Sucker, the Sucker
by its own weight will subside, notwithstanding its immersion into Water.

By iterated Trials I found, that if I kept up the Sucker by the Third, and
immersed it to ten Inches, or more, and let go the string, whereby the Sucker,
though now at liberty, would yet not subside, but remain suspended by the
pressure of the Water upon it; yet if I gently raised it up, 'till it came only
to an immersion of four Inches and half, the Sucker would subside; wherefore
closing in the included Water at that depth, by lifting up the Third, and so
closing the Sucker, I weighed that enclosed Water, and found it just weighed as
much as the Sucker, viz. seven Ounces and half, and there could be no
considerable odds here by the thickness of the Tube, the immersed portion
thereof being butsmall, and the sides very thin.

6. But because I would pursue the proportion to the uttermost, I kept up the
Sucker with the string, 'till the Tube came to the immersion of four Inches and
half, and then subsided; I then enclosed that four Inches and half of Water,
and kept up the Sucker, and immersed the Tube with the enclosed four Inches and
half of Water, and gently raising it up, it subsided at nine Inches immersion.

And the reason is the same as before, for the included cavity of nine Inches,
had in it four Inches and half of Air, which weighed nothing, and four Inches
and half of Water, which as before is shown, weighs seven Ounces and half, and
the weight of the Valve which weighs also seven Ounces and half, the whole
weight of the included Air, Water, and Valve, weighing only fifteen Ounces, and
a Column of Water of nine Inches high, and two Inches and half broad, equal to
the cavity of the immersed nine Inches of the Tube, would have been of the same
weight with the four Inches and half of included Water; and the Sucker, whose
weight is now to make good the uppermost four Inches and half of Airy space,
and so there is and aequipondium between the included four Inches and half of
included Water, together with the weight of the Sucker to a Cylinder of Water
of nine Inches long, and two Inches and half broad, commensurate to the like
cavity of the Tube, and the like quantity of nine Inches of Water, impelled out
of its place by nine Inches of the Tube immersed below the Superficies of the
Water.

And the same rule and proportion will hold upon the like quantity of more
Water taken in, and a deeper immersion, allowing the same thing for that
thickness of the sides of the Tube, which upon a deep immersion is more
considerable than upon an immersion of four Inches and half.

7. And although I did not make an actual trial how much weight in an empty
Tube, deeply immersed, would be sustained by the Sucker without subsiding; yet
by this proportion it is easy to be calculated, viz. that the Tube being kept
empty, and immersed to any depth below four Inches and a half, the Sucker will
sustain without subsiding such a weight, as is equal to a portion of Water
commensurate in bulk to so much of that empty Cylinder in the Tube, as is
depressed below the Superficies of the vessel of restagnant water.

So that if the empty Tube will sustain seven Ounces and half (the weight of
the Sucker,) at four Inches and half immersion, it will sustain fifteen Ounces
at nine Inches immersion, thirty Ounces at eighteen Inches immersion, sixty
Ounces at thirty six Inches of immersion; for an empty Cylinder of thirty six
Inches long and two Inches and half broad, will contain a Cylinder of Water of
sixty Ounces weight, allowing somewhat as before, for the thickness of the
sides of the Tube.

8. In this it appears that the Water does not gravitate upon the Water, but
gravitates upon a Body lighter than it self, though this Gravitation be
immediately upon a Body as heavy or heavier than it self. When there is nothing
but Air in the Tube, the Sucker is the moveable Basis of that Air, and it
gravitates immediately upon the Sucker, but mediately and remotely upon the Air
above it, when there is a little column of Air in the top of the Tube, and
below the Superficies of the Water, and under that a column of Water, and under
that the Sucker. If the whole Concrete be lighter than so much Water, it
gravitates upon the Sucker, Water, and Air, because though the Brass be
specifically heavier than Water, and the Water over it specifically of an equal
weight with Water; yet the quantitative or extrinsick weight of both is less
than the weight of so much Water as is equal to a Bulk or Cylinder of Water,
entirely commensurate to the quantity of the Air, Water, and Sucker, below the
Superficies of the Water.

9. That when a Body lighter than so much water is within the compass of the
Superficies of the body of restagnant water, the water presses upon it upward,
impelling it up, as here upon an immersion of the Valve laden with four Inches
and half of water, and likewise with the weight of the Sucker, into nine Inches
of water, an equal quantity of water to the moles of the immersed Tube, viz.
nine Inches sustains the Sucker, notwithstanding its own weight and the weight
of four Inches and half of water incumbent upon it, because those two weigh but
fifteen Ounces, and nine Inches of the exterior water weighs as much, and so
there is an aequipondium between the potentia sustinens, and the pondus
deprimens.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the Space derelicted by the descent of the Mercury in the
Torricellian Experiment, and what it is not, or what it is that fills it.
HAving gone through the two premised Considerations, preliminary to this
Inquiry, I now come to the third General, namely what it is that fills the
space derelicted by the descending Mercury in the Tube. And first I shall
consider, whether it be a Space purely void of any Body. 2. If it has some
Body that fills that Space, I shall consider what it is not that fills it. 3. I
shall consider what it is that most probably may be thought to fill it.

First therefore I say it is not Nothing, or a pure Vacuity, but it is some
corporeal substance that succeeds in the head of the Tube, derelicted by the
Mercury.

And here 1. I shall not enter into any large debate touching the possibility
or impossibility of interspersed or coacervated vacuities in any parts of the
Universe; neither 2. shall I insist upon those obscure evidences of the
inexistence of a Body in that derelicted space; as namely the communication of
Sounds, or the reception of Light, or transmission of Colors, or other visible
species in or from it. But 3. I shall ground my Conclusion from those more
sensible and apparent Phenomenon which do evince it; namely, those sensible
plain Effects in that seeming empty Space, which could never be produeed but by
the contiguity and presence of some corporeal substance, filling that supposed
empty space.

1. It is most evident to any man's sense that will but try it, that if the
Tube be open at both ends, and filled up with Mercury, and then one end stopped
with the finger, and the other end inverted and immersed in the restagnant
Mercury, whereby it descends from the top of the Tube, a strong and sensible
Attraction is wrought upon the pulp of the upper finger that closes it, which
continues and grows more and more forcible, sensible, and evident, the farther
the Mercury is removed from the upper end, and approaching to its usual station
of 29 Inches.

This Attraction is impossible to be without the contiguity of some Body to the
pulp of the finger, which cannot be the Mercury it self, for That in a Tube of
four Foot long is removed above a Foot distant from the finger, by that time it
comes to its station; yet all this while the strong suction upon the pulp of
the finger continues.

And they that go about to tell us, that it is not Attraction or Suction by any
power within the Tube, but by the pulsion of the incumbent column of Air, need
no other confutation than their own sense to assure them the contrary; for most
evidently the force that the finger feels is from within, and not from without:
and this Solution by Pulsion, is given only to gratify that imaginary
Supposition that some have entertained of the Aerie Column, whereof in due time.

2. The instance of Hanoratus Fabri in the 6th of his Physical Dialogue,
(though not tried by myself, yet asserted to be tried by him) puts it out of
question. If at the upper end of the Tube there be fixed a folded Paper, which
may be extended by any force, but otherwise contracting it self (in the manner
of Paper-Lanthorns made by Schoolboys), this plicat a charta will by the
subsiding of the Mercury be unfolded and extended, which could not be, but by
the contiguity of some Body unto it.

3. The instance given by Linus, and improved by Fabri, ubi supra, of an empty
Bladder close tied, and fastened to the upper end and the inside of the Tube,
extended after the descent of the Mercury, and again contracting it self to its
former dimension by the inclination of the Tube, makes it plain, that this
Extention is the effect of some included Body in that relicted space, which is
not the bare gross body of the Mercury, which is removed a Foot or more below
it, and in which there is not so much as pretended to be any Magnetic quality
in relation to the Bladder.

And they that tell us it is the Elatery of the Air included in the Bladder,
that extends it by a natural expansion, tell us an invention fitted to serve
the Supposition of the prodigious natural Elatery of uncompress'd Air, whereof
hereafter.

It is true, that if this Bladder has any little orifice, or hole open in it,
the distention will not ensue; but the reason thereof is evident, (not upon
their Supposition of the impediment of the natural Elater of the Air included
in the Bladder,) but because in that case the Attraction is made as well upon
the inside of the Bladder through the orifice, as upon the outside, and so the
Bladder obtains the same consistence as at first; but where there is no
orifice, the Attraction can only be but upon the outside of the Bladder, upon
which there necessarily follows an Extension of the Bladder, and a necessary
Consequent thereof is a Dilatation and Expansion of that little particle of Air
included in it, to the uttermost dilatation that that attractive force can give
it, or produce in it, which is not by natural Elasticity, but by forcible
Tension.

Upon these and the like sensible and plain Instances it seems undeniable by
any, that will not abandon his own sense, that it is not Nothing that is in
that derelicted space, but it is some bodily substance; for otherwise it were
impossible that those, and the like sensible effects could be produced: for
regularly, all natural bodily effects are wrought by a contact of some Active
body upon the Patient.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the Body supplying the derelicted Space in the top of the Tube, and
first what it is not.
IN the former Chapter I have concluded, that it is some corporeal Substance in
the space derelicted by the Mercury in the top of the Tube, though not
conspicuous to the sight: and now I shall consider first what it is not, and 2.
what it seems most probably to be.

There are two general Opinions touching it: one that supposes it is some Body
that comes de foris into that derelicted space; and those again fall into
several Opinions; some suppose it to be the foreign Air that pervades either
the Pores of the Glass, or the Mercury; others that it is Ather, or Ethereal
matter, or (which is a differing kind of Explication of the same thing) that it
is des Carts his materia subtilis, or his Third Element, the ramenta or
filings of Atomical Bodies. The other general Opinion is, that it is a bodily
substance, not coming de foris, but arising from the included Mercurial Body.

Now as to the former of these general Suppositions that it comes de foris, I
shall discharge the question from that Supposition of des Carts his materia
subtilis, for there is no probable evidence of any such Principle, it being
only an imaginary substitution; and if it be any thing besides imagination, it
seems to be but Air, or at most that subtler part of the Universe called
Ether, which possibly may be nothing else but the subtler and more refined
parts of the Air, disgrossed of those vapors or Effluvia, which obtain
ordinarily in the inferior parts of the Air, commonly called the Atmosphere.

And therefore one method of discussion of this question will possibly be
applicable to both these Suppositions, of the admission of foreign Air or
Ether into the derelicted space in the Tube above the Mercury.

If therefore it be foreign Air or Ether that occupies that place, it must be
upon one of these accounts, viz. either that the Air or Ether, upon the
account of its own subtlety and tenuity, freely and of its own accord pervades
the Glass or the Body of the subsiding Mercury, and so takes up the derelicted
room; or else that although of its own accord it would not penetrate through
either of those two Bodies, yet that it is as it were forcibly strained through
the pores of the Glass or Mercury, and by the subsiding of the Mercury, and the
resistance of Nature against Vacuity, percolated into that vacant space.

As to the former of these Solutions, it seems altogether unreasonable to
imagine any free or unconstrained penetration of the Air, or Ether, into that
space: for although the Glass, and likewise the Mercury are not altogether
destitute of Pores, yet they do not run in a straight uninterrupted line, but
are crossed and obstructed by interposed filaments, that must necessarily stop
the free passage of the Air or Ether through them, so that they are not wholly
pervious to those Bodies.

And that this is so, appears by this one instance, which is as good as a
thousand.

If it were true, that the Air or Ether did freely pass through the supposed
pores of the Glass or Mercury, the Mercury would never be suspended at twenty
nine Inches, but would wholly sink into the vessel or restagnant Mercury; for
the insinuation of the Air or Ether through the Glass or Mercury, would supply
the vacuity, as well below twenty nine Inches as above, and so accommodate the
derelicted space in all its Evacuation, as well as in part, and likewise would
accommodate the Mercury in its natural descent without any inconvenience; and
yet we find, that at twenty nine Inches the Meccury keeps up, and subsides not.

And that which puts it out of question, that the natural irruption of the Air
or Ether fills not this Space, is this: let but the least orifice, no bigger
than the point of a small Needle be made in the top of the Glass Tube, the
Mercury would entirely descend, and not be sustained at twenty nine Inches,
because here is an admission of foreign Air to supply the space derelicted by
the Mercury, as fast as it descends. And the same effect would follow, if the
Air or Ether did penetrate through the small pores of the Glass or Mercury.
And since we see it does not obtain that effect, we have reason unquestionably
to conclude, it has not any admission ab extra through those supposed pores of
either of those Bodies.

It remains therefore to be considered, whether that by the great contention of
Nature against Vacuity, and the forcible stress of the Mercury on its descent
downward, there be not a kind of forcible straining of some Aerie or Ethereal
Particles through the Glass, or at least through the Mercury, which is partly
exposed to the external Air.

I answer, first, as touching the permeating of Air or Ether through the
Glass; it seems utterly impossible, for the reason before given. Indeed the
vigor of Light or Fire penetrates the Glass, not (as it seems) by any
transition of any Corporeal Substance, but only of a vis, virtus, or vigor,
which communicates the quality of lumen or calor to the Body that it finds
there, but conveys not any Corporeal Substance transmitted through the Glass.

Secondly, as touching the supposed straining of the Air or Ether through the
Mercury, and discharging it in the summity of the Tube: I must needs say, that
in some instances the foreign Air will make a visible perforation and
transition through the body of Mercury, as well as of Water.

If a Tube of Glass, sealed at one end, be filled with Water, or Mercury, and
then inverted in the free Air, (unless the Tube be extremely small) the Mercury
will subside and descend by the sides of the Tube, and the Air ascend through
it in a Pillar or Bubbles in the midst, in the very same successive order as
the Mercury descends; the Mercury thus laterally descending, making way for the
ascent of the Air, and the Air in the same successive moments ascending,
filling the room relicted by the Mercury: and this ascent of the Air is evident
and conspicuous to the Eye.

But in the matter in question, there seems to be no such pervading of the Air
through the pores of the suspended or restagnant Mercury.

First, if such a transition of the Air were through the column and restagnant
Mercury, it must needs (as in the former case) make a visible appearance
thereof in the Mercury, and raise some tumultuous phenomenon in it, but no such
thing appears to the eye in the Torricellian Experiment!

Secondly, the difficulty of the transitus of the external Air through the
Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment is infinitely greater than in the
instance above given: for in that instance the Air has but one motion upward,
and is assisted in it by the Mercury giving way to it. But here in the
Torricellian Experiment, there must be a double intention and motion of the
Air, viz. 1. It must descendendo terebrate through the restagnant Mercury, and
then when it has passed that difficulty, it must terebrate through the erect
column of Mercury ascendendo. And it is not conceptible that the pores of the
erect and restagnant Quicksilver, crossing one another in respect of their
position and situation, can accommodate such a crooked and contradictory motion
of any particle of Air.

Thirdly, again it cannot reasonably be thought, but that if there were such a
transition of the Air through the restagnant, and suspended Quicksilver, but
it should be as reasonabe to continue after the subsiding of the Mercury to
twenty nine Inches, as before, the passage remaining still open through the
Mercury. The consequence whereof would be, that the whole Tube would be
supplied with Air, and consequently the whole body of Mercury be emptied into
the restagnant vessel; as when a little Pin-hole is made in the top of the
sealed Tube.

Fourthly, again if it were foreign Air or Ether that were admitted, it is
not easily conceptible, how the finger stopping the upper orifice of the Tube,
should be attracted inward, or the Bladder distended, as in the former Chapter;
for the immission of foreign Air through the Mercury, or Glass, must rather
contract than expand the Bladder, by the accession of an external compression
from it, as will happen upon the least hole made in the Tube. Upon these and
the like reasons it seems to me altogether improbable, that the derelicted
space should be filled with Air or Ether from without, by an intromission of
it through the Glass or Mercury.

CHAP. IX
Concerning the other Supposition, namely, that this derelicted Space is filled
with a Body ab intra.
Since therefore I have concluded, that this derelicted Space in the Tube is
filled with a Body, and that That Body comes not ab extra, and there is no Body
within to suppply that room but the Mercury, or that which must be extracted
from it: and in as much as the Mercurial consistence it self is descended to
twenty nine Inches, it remains necessary that this Body that fills the
derelicted interstitium, must be a subtle body extracted from the Mercurial
body. But how, or in what manner this is effected, is inquirable.

And now before I come to the Inquiry it self, I must take notice that there
are three kinds of instances of the Torricellian Experiment.

1. The first is, where the Tube is just twenty nine Inches and half long, and
sealed at the top, and then filled with Mercury, and inverted into restagnant
Mercury, without any admission of any Air; and though that be difficult to
effect, yet if it be effected, there is no vacant space left, but the column of
Mercury adheres to the top of the Tube, it being its just station.

2. The second is, when the Tube is above twenty nine Inches and half, suppose
four foot long, sealed at the top, and filled up to twenty nine Inches and
half, and then inverted, whereby the Air rises to the top of the Tube, and the
Mercury subsides not only to twenty nine Inches and half, but much lower,
namely as far as that column of Air in the upper end of the Tube is by tension
extendible by the force of the descension of the Mercury, which being about
eighteen Inches of Air, possibly by the descent of the Mercury will be extended
to above twice the length, whereby the Mercury may subside it may be to about
fourteen Inches, (I am not curious in the Calculation.)

3. The third Instance is, where the Tube for the purpose is four foot long,
sealed at one end, filled with Mercury without any portion of Air admitted,
whereby the Mercury inverted into a vessel of restagnant Mercury, subsides to
twenty nine Inches and half, and so leaves about eighteen Inches deserted by
the Mercury.

And though in the pursuit of this discourse there will be use of the
discussion of the two former Instances, yet in this place only the last of the
three yields the Inquiry, namely what it is that fills that space derelicted by
the Mercury.

And I adventure to conclude, that it is a subtle Corporeal Substance extracted
from the gross Mercurial Body, or forced out of it.

The methods of this Separation are two, the one proposed by Linus, the other
offered by others.

That of Linus (if I understand him aright) seems to be this: namely that by
the descent of the Mercury, and in obsequium naturae universalis, for
preventing of Vacuity, there are taken away successively from the superficies
of the Mercury certain scales as it were of an indivisible profundity, and
these are rarefied into a subtle invisible consistence or vapor, which supply
that deserted space, and make up a kind of funiculus that suspends the Mercury
to the Tube, and is coextended to the whole vacant space gradually, as the
Mercury descended.

This seems to be somewhat difficult, especially considering the heterogeneous
parts of the Mercury, whereof some seem to be of that solidity, that are
incapable of such a separation.

Besides it would be difficult to conceive, how these superficies of this Body
should in a moment, by the inclination of the Tube, be rejoyned to the
Mercurial body and consistence; and in a moment again, upon the re-erection of
the Tube to its perpendicular posture, be rarefied from so gross a consistence
into so subtle and invisible a nature; both which will be the effects, one of
the inclination, the other of the re-erection of the Tube.

Therefore I shall rather choose another, and, as I think a more accountable
Solution.

It is plain to our daily observation, that all Bodies, especially such as are
liquid or fluid, do continually send out from them certain subtle Effluvia,
scarce perceptible to the Eye, but manifest in their effects. It is also
evident, that all Bodies, especially fluids, and such as consist even of
Heterogeneous parts, by strong agitation, by heat or motion, have many of their
parts resolved into a more subtle consistence, than appeared before such
agitation. Thus Water by heat or violent motion resolves it self into vapors
or steams.

Mercury is of it self an heterogeneous body, consisting of some more solid,
other more fluid and moist parts. If any man shall take the pains violently to
shake Water and Mercury together, and thoroughly wash it, he shall find the
shining parts that are the more fluid, severed from little black or dark
granules like Sand, which will gradually subside visibly in the water into a
heap, before the nimble shining particles united to them, and also certain Airy
corpuscles rising to the top of the Water.

And as thus by the separation by water, so by a strong heat the Mercurial
Bodies will be in a great measure resolved into a fume or smoke, which
nevertheless (as is said) will coagulate again, and assume the former Mercurial
consistency, at least in a great measure.

Mercury, though it be one of the coldest Minerals, does contain and send out
from its body certain Effluvia, and noxious vapors, as they experiment that are
conversant in Mines of that kind.

If any man observe the descent of the Mercury from the top of a long Tube in
the Torricellian Engine, he shall find the descent not so quick and nimble, as
if both ends were open, and (contrary to the usual acceleration of descending
heavy Bodies) more and more slow and faint, the nearer it comes to its station;
which is an evidence that there is a luct a and contention in Nature, while it
extrates, separates, and abrades the parts, that must supply the derelicted
space, and likewise in giving them a tension or dilatation answerable to it.

They that have exercised much the Torricellian Experiments, and those of the
like nature with Mercury, have apparently found that the frequent iteration of
these Experiments have much imbased the nature of Mercury, depurating it from
those subtle steams and Effluvia that naturally attend it, and thereby the very
Mineral it self becomes more vapid, discharged of its subtle Spirits or parts,
and rendered less useful not only for Medicinal but Mechanical Experiments:
whereby it appears that it loses somewhat of its more subtle substance by
iterated Experiments, and will prove more sluggish. For this I call to witness
Honoratus Fabri, in the latter end of his Philosophical Dialogues, and some of
our own Nation that have asserted the same, and in my own Experience I have
also found it true.

It is certain, that when Mercury, or any other fluid falls in a Tube, the
higher it falls, the more force it has, and the greater compression the lower
parts receive from the upper; for all Bodies that descend, descend with the
greater force, according to the altitude of their descent, as I shall have
occasion hereafter to observe.

The descent therefore of Mercury in a Tube of six foot high, is much more
powerful than a descent from four foot high; and That than a descent from three
foot, or twenty nine Inches high, and consequently the compression of the
inferior parts by the superior; and in a greater descent than in a less. the
agitation of all is the more vigorous

And yet (as I before said) it is evident in the descent of the Mercury from a
Tube of four foot high, stopped above, and immersed beneath in restagnant
Mercury, is not without a lucta or contention; and although the higher the Tube
is, the descent at first is more quick, yet it gradually grows slower and
slower, 'till it come to the common station of its suspension, viz. twenty nine
Inches and half, or thereabouts. But yet even in the first efforts of its
motion, it is not so quick or violent, as its own natural motion would
otherwise attain for it, receives a remora and impediment by the difficulty of
separating of its subtle parts.

These things are apparently true to any man's observation, and from these
observations I frame these Conclusions.

1. That the substance that fills the head of the Tube, as the Mercury
descends, are the Effiuvia, steams, or subtle vaporous parts of the Mercurial
Body.

2. That these steams or vapors are separated from the Mercurial body by a
double immediate means. First by way of Expression, or driving them out by the
strong descending motion of the Mercury, the compression of the inferior parts
by the superior, and the great agitation of its parts; the grosser Mercurial
parts coming closer together, and driving out the more subtle and vaporous
parts. Secondly by way of Extraction, or straining out those parts that are
more subtle and fluid, and capable of Expansion, and from hence arises that
lucta and mora in the descent of the Mercury, by the straining of the Mercurial
vaporous bodies, and raking them out. And

3. That those parts thus extracted are dilated and extended to as great an
amplitude and tension, as the strength of the descent of the Mercury, and the
amplitude of the space it leaves requires; which tension also contributes much
to the retarding of the swiftness of the Mercurial descent.

4. And because at twenty nine Inches and half, the weight of the Mercury
decreaseth to such a state, as cannot work any farther separation of subtle
matter to supply any more room, it stays there, and descends no farther, not
having strength enough at that hight to separate any subtle matter from it
self, to supply the space it should leave by such descent.

5. Although the immediate cause of the separation of the subtle matter of
Mercury, and the expansion or dilatation thereof, be the force of the descent,
and weight, and pressure of the Mercury, yet this is performed in obsequium
universalis naturae, for the avoiding of the dissolution of Continuity, or,
which is all one, obfugam vacui.

6. And the same reason mutatis mutandis will be applicable to the suspension
of water in a Tube, which will be suspended at 31 foot, or thereabout, as
Mercury is at twenty nine Inches. For by the same means that subtle parts are
separable from Mercury, subtle parts are much more separable from Water, by a
strong tension or compression of it, as appears by the raising of innumerable
Airy Bubbles out of a vessel of Water, by the strong tension of the Air in the
Air-pump, large instances whereof appears in Mr. Boyle's Experiments, 19, 21,
22, 23, etc.

The whole process and model of the suspending of Water in a long Tube above
one and thirty foot long, and how it subsides to about one and thirty foot, and
no longer. vide apud Shottum in his mirabilia Vari lib. 3. cap. 2. in
Experimento Robervalli Magnani and Bertii.

And now if it be said, suppose the Tube were seven, eight, or ten foot long,
or if it were three or four foot long, and the upper end were a Bolts head,
that should contain three or four pound of Mercury, this would subside to
twenty nine Inches: where should there be Effluvia to fill so great a space?

I answer: the more Mercury descends to twenty nine Inches, the more Effluvia
there will be to fill that place that the Mercury left, and so the Supply will
necessarily be as liberal, as the space the Mercury took up before its descent
to 29 Inches and half, because there is a greater stock of Mercury to yield it,
and a greater continuation of motion to extract it. And there seems no
necessity of any great quantity of subtle matter to be driven, or driven out of
the Mercurial Mass, because it is a substance capable of dilatation to a
greater expansion than its own natural consistency, by the subsiding of the
Mercury.

Mersennus tells us, that by experience he finds, that by a strong tension of a
particle of Air, it is capable to an expansion of near seventy times the space
of its ordinary consistency, as in Aeolipiles, and the like Engines. And we see
that if an Inch of Air be left in the top of the Tube, it will by the bare
force of the descent of the Mercury be expanded to near ten times its former
space. And upon the same account it will fall out, that the quantity of one
Inch of those Mercurial effluxes will, by the descent of the Mercury, be
stretched out and expanded to fill the derelicted space of the Mercury, far
exceeding their common and ordinary extension.

Fig. 9. The most considerable Objection against this Supposition seems to be
this. That if the Tube of four foot long filled with Mercury, and then immersed
in restagnant Mercury, whereby the Mercury subsides to twenty nine Inches, and
leaves a space of about 18 Inches seemingly empty, yet if the Tube be inclined,
as in B, to an altitude parallel to twenty nine Inches of vertical hight. The
Tube B will be as at first filled with Mercury, drawn or driven out of the
restagnant vessel, and no vacant space left; and if again it be erected
perpendicularly as before, the Mercury will subside as before, viz. to twenty
nine Inches; what becomes of the subtle exhalation upon the inclination of the
Tube?

I answer, it is true, that by the inclination of the Tube the Mercury that
descended out of the. Tube into the restagnant vessel of Mercury, will be drawn
up into the Tube, and the Tube filled again with it, the same by the
inclination of the Tube becomes of less accidental weight. But this does no way
cross what I have supposed: I therefore answer,

1. That by the inclination of the Tube at B, the Mercury does not press so
urgently upon the subjected Mercury, as it does in its perpendicular position;
for it is sustained according to the laws of Staticks by leaning upon the
inclined Tube, and presses not so forcibly upon the fund or Base.

2. That therefore the pores or consistency of the Mercury in the inclined Tube
are more lax and open, and regain more of that natural texture of its Mercurial
consistence, and receives into it again those connatural steams or effluxes,
that were shot or drawn out of it by its former compression, and the attraction
made upon it by reason of its descent.

3. And by its re-erection unto its former perpendicular posture, they are
again thrust or drawn out by its contraction and compression, and the forcible
attraction wrought upon it by that Catholic Law of Nature, preserving the
continuity of the Universe.

And that which seems evidently to evince the truth hereof, is the instance
given by the Excellent Author himself, in his 20, 21, 22, 23, but especially in
his 24th Experiment of the Air-pump; wherein the violent attraction of the
Pump, and the strong tension of the Air included in the Receiver, raises from
the bottom of an included vessel of Water Oil, but especially Spirit of Wine,
great Bubbles to the top of the vessels, (which is performed either by that
forcible extraction of the more subtle and Aerial Particles included in that
liquor, or by subtilizing or rarefying some parts of the liquor. But as soon as
that strong tension and attraction by the included Air is taken off, by the
immission of fresh Air into the Receiver, the Bubbles subsided, and the subtle
parts included in it were again rejoined, and reunited to the same liquors from
whence they were exhausted, which by a new tension wrought by a new repeted
suction of the Pump, might be again extracted.

And thus far touching the third General, namely what it is that is included in
the space derelicted by the Mercury.

CHAP. X.
The enquiry touching the Cause that keeps the Mercury suspended in the Tube at
29 Inches, or there about; and first what is not the Cause of this Suspension.
THE consideration of what it is that remains in the derelicted space, in the
upper end of the Tube, and the consideration what it is, that keeps up the
Mercury to twenty nine Inches, or thereabouts, are of two several kinds: for
although the former Consideration is necessary to be known, before we can
arrive at a reasonable discovery of the latter; yet it would not be simply of
it self impossible, that there should be such a corporeal substance, as I have
above conjectured, in the derelicted head of the Tube, and yet the Mercury
might wholly discharge it self in the restagnant vessel, which yet we see it
does not.

Therefore having in the former Chapters finished the former, which was the
fourth general Inquiry, namely, what it is that fills the derelicted space; I
now come to the fifth and sixth Inquiry, namely what is not the cause of this
suspension of the Mercury, and what seems to me the true cause thereof.

And among those that are assigned for causes of this suspicion, which yet are
not causes thereof, I shall mention only these three; namely the renitence or
resistance of the Mercury in the restagnant vessel; 2. and the counterpoise of
the impendent column of the Atmosphere, equal in base to the base of the
Cylinder of Mercury suspended in the Tube; and 3. the Elatery or Spring of the
inferior part of the Air.

Of the former briefly in this Chapter, of the two latter more at large in what
follows.

Stevinus in the Explication of the 10th Proposition of his Hydrostaticks,
assirms, that the resistance of the base of any fluid Body, is greater in
proportion than the pondus deprimens of a like fluid: which Fabri in the sixth
of his Philosophical Dialogues, page 480. and 493, goes about Geometrically to
demonstrate: but I confess that it is performed with so much intricacy, and
obscurity, that I do not fully apprehend it.

And if this be so, it may seem at first view, that the resistance of the
restagnant Mercury in the subjacent vessel, which is as it were the base or
foot of that Mercurial Column of Mercury, that is suspended in the Tube, may
contribute something to its sustentation in that position.

But upon due consideration I find this is but an imagination, and contributes
nothing to this phenomenon.

Indeed, if a liquid be impendent upon solid base, as Mercury upon Marble; or
if a lighter or less compacted fluid be bottomed or imbased upon a much more
gross and compacted fluid, as a Tube full of Air upon a Superficies of Water,
or a Tube full of Water upon a Superficies of Mercury, though the Tube be open
at both ends, the Base will sustain the Column of the lighter or less compacted
fluid.

But if they are of the same kind and consistence, the Base contributes nothing
to the sustentation of the impending Column. But if there be no other
impediment, it will wholly subside. And therefore if a Tube, open at both ends,
be filled with Water, and the lower end stopped with the finger, be immersed
under a vessel of Water, and then unstopped; or if an open Tube stopped at the
lower end with the finger, be immersed in a vessel of restagnant Mercury; in
the former case the Water, and in the latter the Mercury will wholly subside to
the level of the Superficies of the Water or Mercury in the subjacent vessel,
which would not be, not withstanding the Tube were open at both ends, if a Base
of the same fluid had any force or resistance against its descent.

Nay the truth is, the position of the Water or Mercury in the Tube, in any the
least degree higher than the Superficies of the Water or Mercury in the vessel,
has an accidental Gravitation upon a lower Superficies of the same fluid, by
reason of such position or elevation of the fluid in the Tube, above the
Superficies of the fluid in the vessel, and by that position presses upon it,
as shall be farther illustrated hereafter. And therefore the pondus deprimens
of the same fluid in such an elevated position, conquers and overmatcheth the
potentia sustinens of the subjected fluid, though it were an Ocean of Water. I
therefore lay aside this Supposition, as contributing nothing to this
phenomenon, and proceed to the examining of those, that with great pretension
and patronage are suggested to be the Cause of this Suspension.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the supposition of the aequipondium of a pillar of the Air, or
Atmosphere, as the Cause sustaining the Mercurial Cylinder.
THis latter age, as it produced the Torricellian Experiment, so it has
produced a new Systeme in Nature for the Solution of it, namely the Gravitation
of the Atmosphere, and an aequipondium of a Column thereof to the weight of the
Mercurial Cylinder contained in the Tube, whereby it is sustained; a fuller
Explication whereof hereafter follows.

And it is admirable to see, how much this new opinion has, obtained among the
Virtuosi of this latter Age; so that as a new fashion is greedily entertained
among the Gallants of the times, and an old fashion despised and contemned; so
this new hypothesis is as greedily entertained by the great Wits of the times,
and has obtained the style of a Doctrine; and the Old Peripatetical Learning,
touching Vacuum, and the Inseparability of Bodies, exterminated, under the
reproach of decantata fuga.

Nay the theory is so much idolized, that some late Authors have strangely
contended for the dignity of being the first Inventers of it.

And some that have defended the Peripatetical Solution of fugavacui, as
Shottus, when he wrote his mirabilia Hydraulica and pneumatica; yet whether
overwhelmed and astonished with the Magdeburgh Experiment and varieties
thereof, or whether he was not willing to seem to perceive less than the
Virtuosi, that had espoused the new Solution, becomes a Convert, and fairly
retracts his former Opinion, and gives up the Solution of the Torricellian
Experiment to the aequipondium of the like portion of the Atmosphere, in his
Technica Curiosa, l. 4. cap., 6.. 2.

And it is pleasant to see what a wonderful progeny, and voluminous Systems of
Theories, Consectaries, and Conclusions have been since built upon this
Supposition! wherein though the Authors have shown much wit, subtlety, and
learning, yet they have lost the expense of much time, and invention, and
pains, if at last when all is done, it prove but an imagination.

The Supposition therefore seems to be this: I. That the Atmosphere or lower
portion of the Air, some say seven, some twenty two, others fifty, others an
hundred miles high, has a considerable Gravitation upon its inferior parts
upon the Earth, and upon all Bodies in this lower world.

2. That where a Tube, sealed at one end, is filled with Mercury, and then
inverted into a restagnant vessel of Mercury, the Mercury will subside to
twenty nine Inches and half, and no lower, because a column of Atmospherical
Air, of the same base with the cavity of the Tube, and incumbent upon the face
of the restagnant Mercury, does just counterpoise such a column of Mercury of
twenty nine Inches and half high: so that if the Mercurial Cylinder be of that
bulk, as to weigh five pound, the Atmospherical Cylinder weighs just as much,
and so as one artificial scale being charged with an equal weight with the
other, stands in this aequilibrium: so in this natural Scale the Atmospherical
Cylinder pressing upon the restagnant Mercury with an equal weight, to the 29
Inches and half of Mercury in the Tube, sustains and keeps it up in an
aequilibrium.

3. But if while the Mercurial Cylinder stands thus suspended, there be any
little hole made in the sealed top of the Tube, the weight of the Air now
pressing in upon the Mercurial Cylinder, takes away that aequilibrium which it
had with that external column of Atmosphere, while it was protected from the
impendent column of Air by the sealed top of the Glass; and now the Mercury is
driven down by the equal weight of the Air, and wholly subfides into the
restagnant Mercury; for now the Aereal Cylinder without the Tube, and that
within and upon the Tube, have the same common weight or Gravitation upon the
Mercury. And upon these Suppositions they graft innumerable Conclusions, and
among the rest that the Air gravitates upon all Bodies; that the exact
proportion of the weight of Air is herehence necessarily deducible; for if a
column of Mercury, of half an Inch diameter, and twenty nine Inches and half
high, weighs two pound (for instance,) then a column of Air of the same
diameter, extending from the restagnant Mercury to the top of the Atmosphere,
weighs just as much. And from hence they measure the hight of the Atmosphere,
or ponderous Air; namely, Air being about a thousand times lighter than the
like bulk of Water, and Water being fourteen times lighter than the like bulk
of Mercury, it must follow by the rule of proportion, That if two pound of
Mercury give a column of half an Inch diameter, to be twenty nine Inches high;
then two pound of Atmosphere must give a column of twenty nine times 14000
Inches high: (I am not curious in the proportion, but only show the method of
their inferences:) and abundance of such fine Consequences are built upon this
Platform, which were too large to enumerate.

Now as touching this Solution of the Suspension of the Mercury in the Tube, by
the aequipondium of a Cylinder of Air, of the same diameter with the Cylinder
of Mercury, I say it seems to me an Imagination, and to be utterly untrue.

I will not repete what I have formerly said against the Gravitation of the
Air, in the fourth Chapter, which yet I take to be sufficient to evince the
untruth of this Supposition: but I will subjoin two or three homely
Experiments, which with the application of them will, as I think, detect the
untruth and inefficacy of this Solution.

1. I will begin with one offered by the Asserters themselves of this Solution,
of a late learned Author, in the 11. Proposition of his Hydrostaticks, and the
Scholium thereupon, which I shall agree to be a true Experiment, but the
application thereof too much distorted, to gratify the hypothesis, but in
truth and reality utterly confounding it.

Take a vessel of reftagnant Mercury, of seven Inches deep; then take a Glass
Tube of half an Inch diameter in the cavity, and of half an Inch thick in each
side, sealed at the one end, and of 3 foot long; whereby the entire Tube will
be an Inch and a half in its whole diameter: Fill it with Mercury, and stop it
with the finger at the open end, and invert and immerse it to the bottom of the
restagnant Mercury. It will then come to pass, that about twenty nine Inches
and half, the ordinary altitude of the column of Mercury, will be above the
Superficies of the restagnant Mercury, and the whole Tube will thereby remain
full to the top: but the Glass being lighter than the Mercury, will be impelled
up by the restagnant Mercury near to the Superficies thereof, whereby there
will remain about six Inches of the upper end of the Tube empty of the Mercury,
but still there will be about twenty nine Inches and half of the Tube still
full of Mercury, namely, the usual station of its Suspension.

I will suppose the twenty nine Inches and half of Mercury, suspended in the
Tube, to weigh one pound, and that the Glass Tube of it self weighs likewise
one pound.

I will now suppose, that the upper end of the Tube were fixed by a string to
the Beam of a pair of Scales, as in his 319th figure in that book. I say that
two pound in the adverse Scale will counterpoise this Tube with the included
Mercury, and if any little advantage of weight, suppose an Ounce, were added to
the adverse Scale, that Scale charged with two pound and an Ounce, will
preponderate it.

And I say no more than what the Author says was determined touching it by the
Royal Society, whereunto he subscribes, page 727. in these words. Pondus in
adversa lance contraponderans aequipollebat suspensi hydrargyri cujusounque
altitudinis, at que simul (quantum conjectando aestimabant) suspensi tubi ei
parti quae stagnantis in subjecto vase hydrargyri superficiei supereminebat.
Now it is certain that if the one pound of Mercury contributes to this weight,
it is not sustained by the adjacent external column of Air, pressing the
Superficies of the restagnant Mercury; for if so, it is sustained by the
aequipondium of that Aereal column, and cannot affect the Scale with its
weight; for it is sustained by another counterpoise, and not by the two pound
weight of the Scale.

And again it is as certain, that if the Mercury do contribute to the
counterpoise of the Scale, it must by some means be as it were fastened to the
Scale, (we will suppose it to be Linus his funiculus,) for otherwise the Glass
would only weigh as a separate thing from the Mercury, which would of it self
contribute ( ex suppositione) but one pound to the weight, which would be
necessarily preponderated by the adverse Scale charged with two pound weight.

And therefore it is most clear, if the included column of Mercury contributes
one pound weight to the balance, it is not sustained by the imaginary column
of Air equal in diameter to the Mercurial Cylinder, but by an intrinsic
connection or ligament to the Tube, whereby it weighs as one concrete Body with
the Glass, which I call the Funiculus ex subtilibus Mercurialibus effluviis
contextus.

The Author, to avoid this difficulty, therefore tells us, that this thing
primo aspectu incautis nonnullis ad Staticam minus attentis facile imponeret;
and to avoid the imposture, tells us, that all this while it is not the Mercury
that contributes to the weight, for that has another kind of Sustentation by
the aequipondium of the foreign Air; but it is another column of Air, that
impends upon the upper end of the Glass Tube as its Base, and therefore
commensurate to the suspended Mercury in weight. And this is the effect of the
Solution, namely, that only the Glass, and the column of Air impendent upon it,
makes the counterpoise, and the Mercury contributes nothing to it.

And indeed if the column of Air, charging the Tube, were of an equal diameter
with the Mercury, or the cavity of the Tube, the Evasion were handsome and
suitable to their hypothesis, though untrue: but the instance in question, as
it is proposed, quite shatters this Solution, and renders it not only untrue,
but unsuitable to their very principles.

For in this instance, the diameter of the column of Mercury is but half an
Inch, but the diameter of the whole Tube is an Inch and half, which gives an
area to the base of the Cylinder of Air impending on it, more than four times
bigger than the Base of the Mercurial Cylinder. And therefore if a Cylinder of
the Atmosphere of half an Inch diameter, be commensurate to the weight of the
Mercurial Cylinder, and consequently weighs a full pound at that scantlet; the
Aereal Cylinder, commensurate to the upper area of the Glass tube, which is an
Inch and half diameter, must necessarily weigh above four pounds, and therefore
would not be equiponderated by the two pound weight in the opposite Scale.

This instance therefore which is delivered with the memorial of the day, and
place of its Exhibition, seems to make more to the disadvantage, than the
advantage of this new Philosophy.

But to this Objection there is a Solution offered, namely, that let the Glass
be of what thickness it will, That alters not the case; for the Mercury is
pressed up by the counterpoise of a Cylinder of Air, answerable to the cavity
of the Tube, not to the crassitude of its sides: for Glass being a Body
specifically lighter than the Mercury, the Glass it self is sustained by the
restagnant Mercury, which is its Base, and supports it.

But still this Answer, though it be true, avoids not the Objection. For 1. let
us suppose, in stead of a Tube of Glass, a Tube of Gold, which being
specifically heavier than so much Mercury, would sink to the bottom, and not be
sustained by the Mercury, but must be lifted up, and sustained purely by the
weight in the opposite Scale: 2. or suppose the Tube of Glass were charged in
its closed end with a greater quantity of Lead, that, though specifically
lighter than Mercury, would by its excess of extrinsical weight, depress the
Tube to the bottom of the restagnant Mercury: or 3. though the Trial were made
by a Glass Tube filled with Water, and inverted into a vessel of Water; for
there the Glass Tube, with the enclosed Cylinder of Water, would subside to the
bottom, being altogether in its concrete heavier than the Water, and could not
be supported by the restagnant Water, but by the weight in the adverse Scale:
in these Instances the difficulty will not be salved.

Therefore I took a Glass Tube, the cavity whereof was half an Inch diameter,
the thickness of the Glass incircling the cavity ^of an Inch; and consequently
from outside to outside the diameter of the Tube was of an Inch; the length of
the Tube eighteen Inches, the weight thereof in the Air two ounces of an Ounce,
and being heavier than the like bulk of Water, it would freely subside
perpendicularly to the bottom of a vessel of restagnant Water deeper than 18
Inches, notwithstanding the sustentation it had by the included Air, being
empty, and so the Water contributed nothing to the support of the Tube when it
came to be weighed, but only the thickness of its medium, which yet was not
able to support it from sinking.

The Water which the Tube would contain, weighed one Ounce and three quarters,
wanting about a Grain or two at most.

The Tube was tied at the closed end with a string to the Scale of a Balance
and filled with Water, and stopping it with the finger, inverted into a vessel
of Water 18 Inches deep, or more: and then the Tube with the included Water
thus immersed in Water, carefully weighed, the Water still remaining suspended
in the Tube, (as it will do as long as it stands so immersed,) and the Events
were these: When the Tube was full six Inches above the Superficies of the
Water in the Vessel, it weighed just two Ounces and three quarters of an Ounce,
which weight in the opposite Scale kept it in an equilibrium; for now the rest
of the Water in the Tube, below the Superficies of the Water in the vessel,
weighed nothing at all, because it obtained so far the same common Superficies,
and was therefore sustained by the common weight which it had with the Water in
the vessel, and only six Inches of Water contributed to the counterpoise,
together with the weight of the Glass Tube it self, though refracted by the
thickness of the medium: so that now these six Inches of suspended Water, and
the Tube it self, weighed no more at this position in the Water, than what the
Tube alone weighed in the Air.

But when the Tube, with the included column of Water was raised very near
eighteen Inches above the Superficies of the vessel of Water, so that there was
as little as could well be to keep the orifice of the Tube under Water, viz.
about a quarter of an Inch, it then required an addition of very near one Ounce
in the opposite Scale, to hold the Tube in an aequilibrium which equalled the
true weight of the Tube it self and Water included, when in the free Air, viz.
two Ounces and three quarters, and one Ounce and three quarters, in all four
Ounces and half; because now the Water in the Tube had now in effect its due
weight, which it had when divided from the Water in the vessel, and so had its
due Gravitation upon the Scale.

Upon this Trial of it with Water these things are observable.

1. That according to the proportion of the Elevation assigned to Water, it
would have been sustained in a Tube of one and thirty foot high, and
consequently in this of eighteen Inches the Water had not attained a twentieth
part of that height, at which it might in a Tube be kept suspended.

2. That according to these men's Suppositions, the Suspension in the Tube,
either of Water or Mercury, is supposed to be by the pressure of a column of
the Atmosphere upon the Water or Mercury in the vessel, and thereby the column
of Water or Mercury is by that counterpoise driven up in the Tube. This Tube
being but of eighteen Inches long, the foreign Atmospherical pillar still will
urge the Water or Mercury to rise to an aequipondium with it, namely the
Mercury to twenty nine Inches, the Water to thirty one foot, or thereabouts.

3. And consequently, according to their Supposition, the Cylinder of Water, in
the instance in question, within the Tube, presses up the Tube, and would lift
it up to one and thirty foot high, had the Tube been long enough.

4. But as the Atmospherical Cylinder without the Tube presses up the Water,
so the Atmospherical Cylinder incumbent upon the head of the Tube, presses it
down; and so according to those men it is not the Waten in the Tube, that gives
any counterpoise to the opposite Scale, but the Atmospherical Cylinder,
answerable to the cavity of the Tube, that presses upon the head of the Tube.

5. And that weight of the Atmospherical Cylinder upon the head of the Tube, is
counterpoised by the foreign Cylinder, abating only so much, as the proportion
of the Water thrust or kept up in the Tube, amounts to; which being in the
instance in hand about a twentieth part of what the foreign Atmospherical
pillar weighs, the Atmospherical pillar incumbent upon the head of the Tube
weighs just so much as the Water included in the Tube amounts unto. But upon
the whole matter, this fine Theory appears to be but a handsome Imagination. For
it is plain, in the instance in hand, the Atmospherical Cylinder, incumbent
upon the head of the Tube, is larger than the cavity of the Tube, and
consequently more weighty by far (if it have any weight at all) than that
foreign Cylinder of Atmosphere, which is supposed to sustain the included
column of Water, and the Tube it self is not sustained nor sustainable by the
Water in the vessel, but is wholly raised by the weight in the opposite Scale:
and therefore the Supposition, that the weight that presses upon the Scale, is
the weight of the Cylinder of Air upon the Tube it self, is vain; for then it
should sustain the weight, not only of the Tube, but another weight far greater
than the foreign column of Air could counterpoise.

And that which seems to me to convince this mistake in the whole proposed
Theory, is this plain and obvious Experiment.

Fig. 10. I therefore took a Glass-tube of about half an Inch diameter, 18
Inches long, closed at one end; and weighing it exactly in the open Air, it
weighed two Ounces and three quarters of an Ounce, and heating it very hot,
whereby the included Air was highly rarefied, I suspended the closed end upon
one Scale of a Balance, and let the open end sink a little into a vessel of
Water, and counterpoised it in the other Scale with two Ounces three quarters;
and because the end of the Tube did but little more than touch the Water, it
held the same weight as before upon the Scale, viz. two Ounces three quarters.

As soon as the Tube was thus contiguous to the Water, it attracted and raised
the Water so, that in half a quarter of an hour the Tube was filled twelve
Inches with Water, the Air contracting in self to six Inches in the top of the
Tube, whereby it appears it was rarefied two thirds beyond its natural and
ordinary rise and standard, which now again it acquired by contracting it self.

The Water which it attracted being carefully marked at its highest Elevation,
and then strictly measured, weighed one Ounce and a quarter.

Now the things observable in this instance are these. 1. That the single Tube,
with the included rarefied Air, did really weigh even in the external Air but
two Ounces three quarters, and by that weight in the opposite Scale it was
perfectly kept in aequilibrio. 2. That when it touched the Superficies of the
Water, and thereby attracted the Water into it, it presently grew more weighty,
which it gradually increased, and accordingly more and more subsided, Tube and
all, into the subjected vessel of Water, as it received into it more Water, and
consequently grew more weighty, 'till its full complement of 12 Inches of Water
drawn up into it 3. That when it was filled with twelve Inches of Water, then
it weighed the full weight of the Tube, and the Water viz. two Ounces three
quarters for the weight of the Tube, and one Ounce and a quarter for the weight
of the Water intato four Ounces, and therefore four Ounces in the opposite
Scale would keep it just in aquibrio. Only care must be taken, either by
depressing the Water, or raising the Balance, that the Tube must only touch
the top of the Water, for otherwise the Water will run out, and prevent the
trial. Now to discover what it is that thus depresseth the Tube gradually, as
the Water rises up into the Tube, whether the weight of the Tube, or the
weight of the Water included in it, I will consider, 1. What the external
column of Air, which those Masters suppose to press up the Water in the Tube,
contributes to it. and surely according to this Supposition of theirs, this is
so far from causing any access of Gravitation to the Tube or Water included in
it, that it rather presses up the Tube, by pressing and impelling the Water
into it, and indeed it is that which they themselves say, and build their
Theories upon it, viz. that for this reason the Water in the Tube weighs
nothing.

2. What the column of Air impendent upon the top of the Tube, commensurate in
diameter to the cavity of the Tube, does contribute, which according to their
Solution must be it that weighs down the Tube by pressing upon it. But
certainly this does nothing in this case; for if the Tube it self, filled with
rarefied Air, weighs in the open Air but two Ounces three quarters, it can
never come to weigh four Ounces when in the Water, (where by reason of the
thickness of the medium, it must lose, and not gain weight,) and it had the
same column of Air impendent upon its top, as well before its immersion into
the Water, as after. And before its immersion (whether it were full of common
Air, or of Air thus highly rarefied by heat) it still weighed neither more nor
less than two Ounces three quarters.

3. Therefore it remains, that it is the weight of the Water, that thus creeps
up in the Tube, and in its ascent to twelve Inches weighed just one Ounce and a
quarter that gravitates in the Tube, and renders the weight of the whole to be
four Ounces, which in the opposite Scale holds both Tube and Water in
aeguilibrio.

And as the Tube is suspended to the Balance by the string or third, so the
included rarefied Air is suspended to the top of the cavity of the Tube, by the
powerful Laws of Nature, and lays hold upon the Superficies of the Water; and
as it contracts it self more and more, draws up the column of Water higher and
higher; as a Lute-string fastened to a fixed Body above, and to a small Weight
below, after a high tension raises the Weight by contracting it self, and this
to maintain the continuity of the parts of Nature.

And this is a plain sensible and unforced Solution; and it seems to me, that
those that tell us, that it is only the Tube, and the incumbent Cylinder of Air
only, that gives the weight, were imposed upon, though not by ignorance of
Statical Laws, yet by fondness and partiality to a new invented hypothesis.

2. The second Instance that I shall give, shall be this: Take a Glass Tube,
closed at one end, of an Inch diameter in the cavity; fill it with Mercury,
stop it with a small Engine, and invert it into a vessel of restagnant Mercury
of an Inch and half diameter; then opening it by a contrivance which is not
difficult, after it is inverted in the Mercury, the Mercury will be sustained
at twenty nine Inches and half, as well as if the vessel of restagnant Mercury
were of six Inches diameter.

And yet it is apparent, that the rim or round Superficies of the vessel of
restagnant Mercury, is not above one fourth part in area of the Mercurial
Cylinder, and cannot be pressed with a column of Air commensurate to the cavity
of the Tube; for the incircling column of Mercury is not a fourth part of the
area of the Tube, neither can it be pressed with a column of Air of a greater
diameter or dimension than that little rim of Mercury that incompasseth the
Tube. So that it is not the aequipondium of the Atmospherical Column that
sustains the Mercury in the Tube, for if it should; a column of Air of the
fourth part of an Inch diameter, should be as weighty as a column of Air of an
Inch diameter, because it must in this Instance make an aequipondium to a
weight of Mercury, commensurate to a column of Air of an Inch diameter.

Therefore it is not the aequipondium of the Air that sustains the Mercury in
the Tube, but something else, and what that is, we shall here after examine.

3. My third Instance is that common one: If the Torricellian Engine be put in
practice, in a great Glass Receiver, wholly excluding any communication with
the foreign Air, the Mercury will be suspended at twenty nine Inches and half,
as well as in the free Air. And yet here can be no Atomospherical column,
reaching from the top of the Atmosphere to the restagnant Mercury, with its
Gravitation, to sustain the Mercurial column, the same being intercepted and
broken by the interposition of the Glass.

And this plain obvious evident Instance had wholly destroyed the hypothesis,
and utterly disordered and scattered all the porismata and Consequences built
upon it, had not another supplemental invention stepped in to relieve it, namely
the prodigious Elatery of the free Air, which upon a due examination will prove
as great a mistake, and as impotent to relieve this deficient hypothesis as the
former; and if it prove so, I doubt our new Philosophers must be fain to return
to the decantata fuga vacui for a better Solution.

CHAP. XII.
Touching the Elatery or Spring of the Air.
I Come now to consider that subsidiary help, substituted by the New
Philosophy, for the Solution of the Phenomenon of the Torricellian and other
Experiments of this nature: and herein I shall consider these things.

1. What Elatery or Spring is of all hands agreed to be truly found in the Air.

2. What Elatery or Spring is substituted by the late Philosophy, and how
applied by them to the Solution of phenomenon of this kind.

3. The Arguments, Reasons, and Evidences that evince the mistake of this new
Elaterical Supposition.

First, as to the former of these, this is agreed of all hands, that the Air
being a subtle Fluid, is capable of an accidental Elasticity of very great
efficacy and force: namely, when by accidental impression upon it, it loses
that common and natural state or consistence, that otherwise belongs to it.

As I. by a great compression of its parts together, such as we see in
Windguns, whereby it is compressed into a space sometimes seven times less than
that which is natural to it, and then by a natural and strange motion of
restitution it has an Elasticity, whereby to regain its natural state and
position. 2. By constipation of its parts by Cold, whereby it is bound up
sometimes to a narrower room, and then by the approach of convenient heat, that
constipation is relaxed, and the Air regains its natural liberty, motion, and
consistency: and 3. by Rarifaction by heat, whereby it is expanded beyond its
natural size, and as it grows cold, it obtains a kind of Elasticity in ward,
and an inward endeavoring to contract it self to its natural size and
dimension. 4. In a strong tension by an accidental or collateral force,
whereupon it contracts it self as much as it can to its natural state, and
resists that tension which discomposeth and extends it; from whence follows
that which is usually called Suction, or Attraction, of which I shall have
occasion hereafter to write more at large.

Again 2. it must be agreed, that although the Air in its natural consistence
is by a great force compressible into a close order, yet it does resist such a
compression, and does not easily yield to it; and therefore take a Tube of any
considerable length, closed at one end, and the open end inverted upon the
Water, and pressed down, yet the Air included will retain very much of its
natural state, and receives but a small contraction by the counterpressure of
the Water, possibly an Inch in two or three, or somewhat more, according to the
depth of its immersion.

But these Elateries are not such as concern the present question.

Therefore I come to the Supposition of the new Philosophy, in relation to this
business of Elasticity of the Air, which the attribute to the common and free
Air in which we breath and live; and if I mistake them not, their Supposition
is this: I. That the Air is a kind of Spungy Body, not much unlike (as to this
purpose) to a Sponge or Fleece of Wool, capable of compression, and under that
compression endeavoring to loosen and discharge it self by that which we call
Springiness or Elasticity.

And herein we do not considerably differ, only they say that this Elasticity
is of a vast, and almost unlimited nature, that scarce has any bounds to it;
we say that it has more contracted and determined limits of its Elasticity,
and those are such as every portion of free Air obtains in a common and usual
state of the temperament of the Weather.

2. Again they say, that the Body of the Air, or at least of the Atmosphere,
consists of a great many little crooked filaments like Springes, which when
extended to a greater straightness than is suitable to them, as in its high
tension or rarifaction, endeavor regaining of their natural curvitude; and
when by any weight or force they are drawn close together, they, spring out to
their just extension, and that gives a common Springiness to the Air in such a
consistence or circumstance.

3. That the superior parts of the Air gradually gravitate and compress the
inferior parts, and therefore the higher the Atmosphere or Air is, the less it
is compressed, but the lower it is, the more it is compressed, the lowermost
parts receiving and sustaining the pressure of all these parts that are above.

4. That the actual Elatery, or Spring of the Atmosphere, or Air, is the issue
or effect of this Gravitation; and the more the Gravitation is, the greater the
Spring of those parts are, when they can but get liberty to expand themselves;
for the greater weight does the more bind and incurvate these crooked
filaments, which makes them fly out extremely, when they can get themselves
unfettered from the oppressing weight, and even while they are under that
pressure they have their cona^us for their liberty.

5. That because the lower parts of the Air next the Earth are most pressed
upon by the superior parts, therefore the lower parts of the Air have the
greatest Elasticity and Springiness, which it exercises according as it gets
liberty.

6. That therefore this inferior Air has a natural vast propension to
Extension, and amplifying of it self, insomuch that if we should suppose any
part of the Universe were free from any Body, or had a more subtle Body than
that of the common Air, if a portion of the lower Air next the Earth were
placed there, it would upon the account of its own natural Elasticity, expand
it self as largely, and it may be much larger than those Artificial Expansions
wrought by fire in AEolipiles, and other Engines, wherein nevertheless the Air
may be so ordered, as to possess seventy times more room than before it had.

7. That therefore when we see a little portion of Air included in a Tube, in
the Torricellian Experiment, extended upon the descent of the Mercury four,
five, or six Inches, or into a larger room than it possessed upon its first
inclusion this is no forced tension of the Air, but a free natural expansion of
it self, having gained room and opportunity, by the descent of the Mercury, for
its recception; and therefore this natural expansion of that included particle
of Air, is one great help toward the descent of the Mercury, 'till it comes to
its station.

8. That in as much as the Elasticity of the Air, when contiguous to the Earth,
or other solid Body, is impeded in its Elasticity downward by the resistance of
the Earth, it is as it were reverberated upward, and laterally, where it may be
exercised: which is a great means of that support that the recoiling Aereal
particles give to weighty Bodies, which is seen in the sustentation of the
lower of the adhering Marbles.

9. That every part of the lower Air is under the same compression with the
same region wherein it is, and therefore if a portion of the free or open Air
be enclosed within a Glass-Receiver, closed on every side, yet it has the same
Elasticity that the portion of Air had, out of which it was taken.

10. And because that Airin the Glass is on every side penned up, and its
Elasticity being as it were reverberated from every side of the Glass, does the
more intensely and forcibly recoil inward: and therefore it comes to pass, that
though the great Glass Receiver, compassing in the Torricellian Engine on every
side, be destitute of the weight of the column of Atmosphere, to suspend the
Mercury by its aequipondium; yet the included Air does the very same thing by
its Elatery or Spring upon the restagnant Mercury.

And thus we see how, for the accommodating of the Torricellian phaenonomena,
and some others of like nature, where the pondus Atmosphoericum cannot be had
nor acquired, what a laborious invention and process is framed for the supply
of that deficiency.

Therefore I come to considerand examine, whether this laborious process have
any thing of truth and reality in it, or whether, as that of the pondus
cylindri Atmospharici, it be only a fine invention to help and support a lame
and languishing hypothesis or Solutions.

Although whatsoever does oppose the Gravitation of the commen Air, does as
necessarily conclude against this Elasticity of the free and common Air; and
although much of what I have written in the third and tenth Chapters, against
the Gravithtion of the Air, is equally applicable against this imaginary
Elasticity thereof, since the Elasticity is by the hypothesis supposed to be
the effect of its Gravitation; yet I shall repete nothing, or very little, of
what I have there said, but apply my self singly to the discussion of this
Elatery or Springiness of the common or free Air, both by Reason and by
Experiments.

1. The Spring of the Air is bottomed upon the supposition of the actual
pressure of the superior parts of the Air or Atmosphere upon the inferior, and
the lower parts being under the greater pressure, has consequently the greater
Elatery. But upon what has been before said, in the third Chapter, there is no
such Gravitation or pressure of the Air or Atmosphere, and consequently no such
Elatery in the free and open Air.

2. If there should be admitted any such Elasticity in a portion of the Air
below in this inferior region, included within a Glass vessel or Receiver, (the
instance for whose sake this invention was principally devised,) so as to
sustain the suspended column of Mercury, then of necessity there must be the
same Elasticity of the same or the like portion of the common Air, (for it is
all supposed under the same common pressure of the superior parts:) the
consequence where of must needs be, that either the attribution of that
Suspension to the Gravitation of a Column of the Air, and all the delicate
Consectaries thereupon, are more Fancies and Mistakes, because the whole
phenomenon is performable and performed by the Elasticity of the Air, as well
without as within this close Glass vessel; or else the joint power of the
pondus, as well as the Elasticity of the foreign Air, must raise the Mercury
in the Tube to fifty nine Inches, since the Elarery of the Air alone, without
the aid of the Gravity of the Atmospherical Cylinder in the enclosed vessel, is
able to keep it suspended to twenty nine Inches and half. But we see the
contrary in the Experiment tried, as well within as without the enclosed Glass;
therefore either the weight of the Atmospherical Cylinder, or its Elatery, must
be laid aside in this Solution, or, which is the truer Conclusion, neither the
one nor the other are to be admitted, but both are to be rejected as crossing
one another, and also the truth of the Solution.

3. Nay, but yet farther, if this Elatery be admitted, the whole Scheme of the
Gravitation of the Air, or any part thereof, must be rejected as fictitious,
and impossible; and on the other side, if the supposed Gravitation of the Air
or Atmospherical Cylinder be admitted, the Elatery must be rejected, and the
whole Air will be in aequilibrio, in as much as upon this supposition of this
New Philosophy, the Elatery presses as much upward, as the Gravitation does
downward, and e converso the Gravitation as much downward, as the Elatery does
upward: so that after all this laborious apparatus of Gravitation, and
Cylinders, and Atmosphere, and Elatery, the Air is at quiet, at rest, and in
aequilibrio, which is easily granted without all this difficult hypothesis.

For according to these men's supposition (if we should admit it) the Atmosphere
were seven Miles high, we must needs suppose that the greatest Elatery is next
the Superficies of the Earth, because there it is more charged with the weight
of the superior parts of the Air; and because the rerrestrial Globe checks the
Elatery of it downward; the Elatery must discharge it self by its motion
upward, and so encounter the pressure of the Air, by how much more its Springs
and crooked Particles are charged. And a Mile higher in the Atmosphere where is
less pressure, there is consequently less Elatery or resistance of that
pressure, and yet sufficient to keep that rundle of Atmosphere in an
aequilibrium.

And it is plain, that this Conntermotion of the supposed Spring, or Elatery,
and Gravitation of the Air, must by their mutual conflict, one cheok and
refract the other.

But then it is hoped, that the interposition of another gross Body between the
ponderous Air tending downward, and the reverberated, recoiling, Elastical Air
tending upward, may part the fray; and thereupon in the instance of the two
cohering Marbles, the upper column of impending Air may press down the upper
Marble, and the lower column of recoiling Air may press up the lower Marble.

But this will do nothing to help the business in hand, touching the Mercurial
column in the Torricellian Experiment (for as for the cohesion of the two
Marbles, and the reason of it, I shall in its due place examine.)

For it is plain there, that if there be any Elasticity in the Air next the
Earth, there is proportion for proportion as much Elasticity in the Air next
the restagnant Mercury, upon which it is incumbent, and which we may if we
please, place even to the Superficies of the Earth; for the column of Air ( ex
suppositione) proportionable in base to the Mercury, is as really gravitating
upon the Mercury, as upon the Earth, and consequently there is the very same
Elatery or sursum pressure of inferior parts of that Atmospherical pillar
incumbent upon the Mercury, that would break the Gravitation of that upper
Atmospherical Cylinder, and render it ineffectual.

Besides all this, as it requires a strong Phantasy to suppose this wonderful
Elasticity of the Air, so it requires a much more potent phantasy to keep the
Elasticity of it within the precise lateral dimensions of the Atmospherical
pillar in a straight line: for the Elastical particles of the Aereal parts,
adjacent to that Atmospherical Cylinder, will incroach and break it upon this
Cylinder, and disorder and refract its pressure, besides what the concussion of
Winds would effect.

4. But suppose in the free Air the pondus deprimens of the Atmospherical
Cylinder were too hard for its Elatery, so although in an enclosed Glass the
Elatery does the whole business in suspending the Mercury in the Tube, yet in
the open Air the pondus deprimens conquers its Elasticity, and the whole
phenomenon shall be there performed by the pondus deprimens of the aereal
Cylinder: I say such a Supposition as this would render the lower parts of the
Air unmovable, and bind it up so, that it could never stir without an
admirable relaxation of it by the violence of heat, which is contrary to all
the experience of the World. For we see by the smallest winds the motion of
Smoke, and a thousand Instances more, the lower parts of the Air are in a
perpetual flux and motion, which it could never do, if under so rigorous a
constipation and compression by its superior parts. And though this immediately
contradicts the great pressure of the inferior Air by the superior, yet by
necessary consequence it contradicts the supposed Elatery thereof.

5. But as to the very instance before given, of the suspension of the Mercury
in a Tube placed in a closed Glass Receiver, protected from the impendent
aereal ponderous Cylinder; I say, that the suspension of the Mercury is not
caused either by the Weight or the Elatery of the Air. Not by its weight,
because the Atmospherical column is intercepted, and kept off by the
interposition of the Glass; it remains therefore that it must be done by the
Elatery or Spring of the Air included in the vessel: but that cannot possibly
do it, for these Reasons. 1. Because that Elatery that must sustain the column
of Mercury, cannot be an Elatery pressing upward or laterally, but it must be
such an Elatery as must press downward, to bear against the excursion of the
suspended column of Mercury, and thereby keep it in aequilibrio: and certainly
if there be any Elatery of the Air, it must bear rather upward against what
presses it down, and causes it, than downward. 2. But if it be said that by
the Receiver, or Glass enclosing the Air every way, the Elatery is as well
turned downward as upward, and so counterpoiseth the column of Mercury, and so
it is not like the recoil of the Spring of the Air from the Earth, which must
be principally upward, because checked and reverberated at its base; but here
the repercussion is from all parts of the Glass, as well from above as beneath.
I say this very objection renders it utterly impossible, that the Elatery of
the Air in the Glass can cause this Suspension, or in any measure contribute to
it. For let us suppose the Glass Receiver to be spherical, the repercussion of
the Elatery of the Air must be equal from all parts: the consequence whereof
must necessarily be, than this Elatery presses as well upwards as downward,
and from every part of the Spherical cavity of the Glass, the consequence
whereof must needs be, that the whole Elatery is in suspense, and one Elastical
line breaks, refracts, and retunds, another; so that the tendency of this
Elasticity is neither upwards nor downwards, not from any point of the Compass,
but all things are at rest, as where Winds blow with an equal strength every
way, the Air is undisturbed, and so no pressure at all made upon the Mercury,
but it is but a mere evasion to shore up an hypothesis.

CHAP. XIII.
Certain Experiments, evincing that the common Air in its ordinary consistence,
has no, or no considerable. Elasticity or Spring, without an accidental or
preternatural Compression.
IN the former Chapter I have given the reasons against the wonderful
Elasticity of the Air, or Atmosphere, and the insufficiency of that Supposition
to give a Solution to the phenomenon in the Torricellian Experiment. And I now
come to some experimental Instances, farther illustrating and proving what I
have said in the former Chapter, namely that either there is no Elasticity at
all in the common Air, nor in any part thereof enclosed in the vessel, de quo
supra, or if any at all, yet very little, and such as is no ways able to keep
such a column of Mercury suspended, which may possibly weigh according to the
amplitude of the Tube two or three pounds, which yet we see suspended in the
Torricellian Experiment.

For it is a certain and demonstrable truth, that if any potentia, be it what
it will, sustains a weight or pondus deprimens, the potentia sustentans must be
of an equal strength to that weight, otherwise it must give way, and yield to
it.

Therefore if the potentia of the Elasticity of the common Air (not compressed
or constipated accidentally) be not equal in this instance to two pound of
Mercury, it can never sustain or keep it suspended: and this is that which I
shall endeavor to make good.

Fig. 12. Take a Bottle-Glass A, fill it with Water to B, which may contain
about six Ounces of Water, the rest of the Bottle full of Air; then take the
Bolts-head C, heat it very hot, that the Air may be in a great measure driven
out of it, and the rest highly rarefied and expanded: Invert it into the Glass
Bottle, so that the free Air may come in, (though but at a Pin-hole,) as the
Air in the Bolts-head grows cool, and consequently contracted near to its
natural size and state: the Air thus rarefied, the Water in the Bottle will be
drawn up into the Bolts-head to supply the vacancy, which otherwise would
happen by the restitution of the Air. But if the fissure between the Bottle and
Shank of the Bolts-head had been hastily so closed, that no Air could enter
into it, some Water would arise as suppose to D, but the whole Water would
never be driven up out of the Bottle by any Elatery of the Air included in it;
but only the superior Air in C, being so highly rarefied by the heat, that one
third part of the Air in C, as it stood unrarified, takes up the whole
Bolts-head by rarifaction; and as the Air in the Bolts-head grows to its
natural temper, and consequently endeavors to retract it self to its natural
dimension, so having the fluid Water to work upon, it draws it up, and by the
advantage of that attraction gives a tension or expansion to the Air in the
upper part of the Bottle, as much as is capable to be obtained by the strength
of the attraction and suction of the rarefied Air in the Bolts-head, which
drawing up the Water, and leaving less Water there than before, must needs
expand the enclosed Air in the top of the Bottle, to supply that recess.

Now if the Air in the head of the Bottle, being taken out of the common Air,
and of the same consistence with it, had that strong Elatery that these men
suppose, so that it reaches as it were after a dimension five, nay forty times
larger than that it has, it would thrust up the whole Water in the Bottle as
high as E, as it would have done if the fissure between the Bolts-head and the
Bottle had not been strictly closed.

And this it should have done the rather, because the superior Air is so much
rarefied, that it takes up three times the room of common unexpanded Air, and
so is capable of a more effectual impression from the Air in the Bottle, and
would not rest at D, but drive up the Water as high as E.

And if any shall say, that the weight of the interposed Water is too great for
its Elatery, to thrust it up as high as E; certainly he that shall suppose that
the Elatery of the Air, included in a close Receiver, is able to thrust and
keep a column of Mercury to twenty nine Inches high, which column weighs
possibly a pound or more, cannot doubt but the Elatery of the Air in the top of
the Bottle, if it were of that force that these men suppose, would thrust up
five or six Ounces of Water, about five or six Inches high, into the Bolts head.

But the plain truth is, that in this instance, nor any of the like nature, it
is neither the weight nor the Elatery of the Air included in the Bottle, that
forces up any drop of Water above its Superficies, but the powerful attraction
of the expanded Air in the Bolts-head, endeavoring its own contraction when
growing cold, and so attracting the Water to supply that casma, that would
otherwise follow upon its attraction.

And therefore when by the descent of the Mercury a little portion of Air in
the top of the Tube in the Torricellian Engine, gains four or five times a
greater extent than it had before; this is done by the tension of that little
aereal Cylinder, by the force of the descent of the Mercury, as shall be more
at large shown hereafter, and not as is groundlesly supposed by the natural
Elasticity or expansion of that portion of Air. For if that should be the
cause, it were necessary that the finger stopping the top of the inverted Tube
open at both ends, should be thrust up, and not drawn in, and an empty Bladder
should be more compressed than distended by such Elasticity of the included
Air, the contrary whereof is evident both to Sense and Experience.

CHAP. XIV.
The consideration of some Arguments for the weight and Elatery of the Air.
I Shall not spend much time upon These arguments, but only note some general
Observations upon them, and then single out some Instances wherein I shall be
more particular.

In general therefore I say, 1. That all those Instances and Experiments
produced to prove such a Weight or Elasticity of the free Air, that may be
capable of effecting the phenomenon in the Torricellian Experiment, yea or in
the Magdeburgh Instrument, or the English Air-pump, are all capable of another
Solution, as appears by the answers that Linus has given to them, which I need
not repeat.

2. That the application of the Weight and Elasticity of the Air to the
Solution of these phenomenon, is forced, streined, and in many instances
contrary to the evidence of Sense; so that though the appearances themselves
are true, yet those Causes assigned are very inevident, full of difficulties
and absurdities, and require such a train of supplemental Suppositions to make
them but Tolerably applicable, that no man disingaged from a party can easily
subscribe to them.

3. That there are some Instances and Experiments that are so untractable to
this method of Solution, that all the inventions of the most Mercurial wits and
highest engaged in the patronage thereof, cannot by any means relieve it.

4. That the plain and common Solution of them by the inseparability of Bodies,
and the fuga vacui, (pleasantly by some styled decantata olim fuga vacui) does
most naturally, and without any stress offered to Sense or Nature, answer all
Instances and difficulties, and fails in none.

5. That it is most evident to any man, that without prejudice or partiality
shall observe it, all or the most part of those Instances and Experiments,
which (to serve the hypothesis of the gravitation and Elasticity of the common
Air) are resolved into Pression or Elasticity of the Air, are plainly performed
by Suction and Attraction of the Air, when put under a great tension or
rarifaction, which wholly subverts the Solution by Pressure or Elasticity of
the Air.

Now as to some particular Instances.

First, we are told that the Torricellian Engine, wherein at the bot^^^ of the
hill, the Mercury rises to twenty nine Inches and half, carried up to the top
of the hill Puy de dome in France, subsided three Inches: and some Instances of
like nature given in Lancashire, it subsides near two Inches. From whence it is
inferred, that this variation arises, because upon the top of the Mountain,
which was 3000 foot high, the column of the Atmosphere was shorter, and so
gravitated less upon the restagnant Mercury, than it did at the bottom of the
hill, which caused the disparity of the position.

I answer, admitting the fact true, yet the cause assigned is non causa pro
causa, or at least we have no sufficient evidence that this is the cause.

The various Elevation or depression of the Mercury is not in respect of the
height or lowness of the place, where the Instrument is used, but in respect of
the temperamont of the Air wherein it is used. The Excellent Author tells us,
in his eighteenth Experiment, that the Torricellian Engine placed in his Chamb^^
window for a good season, the Mercury had various Elevations and subsidings,
according to the temper of the Air; and that this variation was considerable,
namely two Inches, and that in cold weather, contrary to the use of other
Weather-Glasses, it fell much lower than at other times. And if this beso, it
is no wonder, at the top of the hill, where the Air was much colder, it might
subside considerably from the height it had at the bottom.

But whether it were colder or hotter, yet certainly there is that difference
of temperament in the various regions of the Air, that might make a various
position in the Mercury. What if we should say, that the vis igneapenetrativa
AEtheris is stronger there than below the hill, and so might strongly dilate
that small portion of Air upon the top of the hill, though the sense of heat be
there less?

But I cannot choose but observe, that if we should assign this Subsidency of
three Inches of Mercury to the shortning of the Atmospherical Cylinder, by 500
Fathoms of perpendicular height; we must necessarily conclude the great
mistakes in the computation of the gravitable Air or Atmosphere, and must
render it of a prodigious height beyond all the Estimates of the latter
Elaterists, whereof some tell us it is seven Miles high. By others Computation
that it is 33893 Feet, which is 5648 Fathoms, somewhat less than seven Miles.

But if a Mile next the Earth should abate but three Inches in the height of
the Mercury, six Miles more would hardly abate three Inches more, viz. six
Inches; nor twenty four Miles more would abate nine Inches. For a Mile of Air
next the Earth (if the gravitation of the Air should be admitted) would more
than ten times counterpoise the next Mile about it, because it has these
advantages, 1. of the greater incumbent weight of the superior Air, 2. of the
stubborn resistance of the terrestrial Globe, whereby it is more constipated
and bound together the nearer it is to its reflection and repercussion. 3. The
great concrement and accession that it has of grosser vapors, and terrestrial
effluxes, wherewith the lower parts must needs be more laden than the upper; so
that form the first gravitating particle of Air or Atmosphere to the lowest, it
will increase by a Geometrical Progression in every part, as 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or
very near it, which will render the lowest Mile prodigiously more weighty than
any of the superior Miles.

But I dismiss this business of the gravitation of the free Air as a mere
Notion.

The Instances to prove the Elasticity of the Air, are for the most part such
as are endeavored to be made out by the tension or rarifaction of the Air by
the Wind-pump, or Magdeburgh Instrument. And the answer to any one of them
gives an answer to all, for the application of them to the Elasticity or Spring
of the included Air is bottomed upon one common mistaken ground. I shall
therefore mention but one or two of them.

The Excellent Author in his Book of Physico-Mechanical Experiments, Exp. 5.
gives an account, how a dry Bladder well tied, and blown moderately full, and
fastened into the inside of the Receiver in the Air-pump, upon a strong
exhaustion of the Pump was broken; and in the 16th Experiment, a Glass included
in the Receiver, broken by the exhausting of the Air. And in the Continuation
of new Experiments, Exper. 7 and 9, the same Instance of breaking of included
Bladders and Glasses is repeted, and attributed always to the natural
dilatation of the internal Air included in the Glass and Bladder, the
circumjacent Air being rarefied by tension.

But the true Solution of both is quite another matter. The Bladder is dilated
by the attraction wrought by the tensed or expanded Air, upon the outside of
the Bladder, and thereby the included Air necessarily expanded by that force,
stretching out the sides of the Bladder that includes it, and when it is
capable of no greater stretching it breaks, not by the natural expansion of the
included Air, but by the strong tension wrought upon the Bladder by the
attraction of rarefied or tensed Air in the Receiver, that tears the Bladder.

And as to the Sealed Glasss-bubble, the fracture thereof with that violence is
not by the natural Elasticity of the Air included in it, but by the strong
attraction wrought upon every part of its external Superficies, by the tension
of the strongly circumjacent tensed Air in the Receiver.

And therefore if the Bladder or Bubble were filled with Water, and closed
fast, (which is not capable of any natural Elasticity) I make little question
but the strong attraction of the expanded Air in the Receiver would break the
Glass and Bladder, especially if it have any angles, (though I confess I cannot
be very confident of what I never tried.)

And yet if it should succeed according as I suppose, though the natural
Elasticity of included Air would be thereby convinced of untruth; I expect
there must be another expedient invented by the Elaterists to salve it, viz. as
prodigious a weight in the included Water, as there is supposed an Elasticity
in the included Air.

In the late Book entitled, New Experiments about the Pressure and Spring of
Air upon Bodies under Water, Experiment the second, I find this Experiment,
which is to the effect following.

Take a Bladder, and squeezing out the greatest part of its Air, tie the neck
very close, and fastening a competent Weight to it, place it in a great large
Glass, and placing that Glass upon the Air-pump, fill it with Water, and then
covering the Glass with a large Receiver well luted to the Pump, the Air pumped
out of the large Receiver, the Bladder below the Water would gradually swell,
'till by often pumping out the Air, the Bladder would be full blown. And the
Supposition is this, that the Air being highly rarefied and extended in the
Receiver, whereby the strength of its counterpressure or Spring was weakened and
abated; the little portion of Air in the Bladder, notwithstanding the
interposition of the Water, having the advantage thereby of expanding if self,
did accordingly fill up the Bladder.

The truth of the fact is unquestionable, but the Solution of it by the natural
Spring of the Air in the Bladder, is an assignation of non causa pro causa; but
the true Cause is, that by the strong tension of the Air in the Receiver, it
lays hold and attracts upon all the parts of the Water, and all that is
included in it, and the Bladder being within the reach of that forcible
attraction, has its sides thereby distended, and the included portion of Air
expanded and rarefied by the tension upon the Bladder; not by any natural
Elasticity of the included Air, but by the forcible attraction wrought upon the
external Superficies of the Bladder, and pulling it asunder, whereby the
included Air by the common Law of Nature is necessarily expanded to prevent a
vacuity.

And as if there had been no Water interposed, the Bladder would thus have been
extended, and the Air included in it expanded, by the strong attraction of the
rarefied Air in the Receiver; so the same effect will as necessarily ensue,
notwithstanding the interposition of the body of Water: for that vis attractiva
of the expanded Air in the Receiver, though it immediately fasten upon the
Superficies of the Water in the vessel, yet thereby and there with it also
pervades the whole body of the Water, which being a fluid body has thereby a
tension made upon it, and all its parts, and all that is included in it.

And the truth of this appears beyond dispute, for the Learned Author in his
19, 21, 22, 23, etc Experiments, tells us, and that truly, that by this pumping
and rarifying of the Air in the great Receiver, Water, Spirit of Wine, etc.
will be raised to run out of a Glass included in it, and that bubbles will
thereby be formed at the bottom of the included vessel of Water: whereof the
true cause (whatever be otherwise assigned) is the forcible attraction of the
tensed and expanded Air in the Receiver upon the included Water, which strongly
pervades the whole body of Water, penetrates to the very fund or bottom of it,
and puts it altogether into a various agitation.

And therefore as this attraction pervades the whole body of water, so it
pertingeth to the included Bladder in the very same manner as it does upon the
Water, though with a more sensible extumescence of the Bladder, because more
capable of it.

We need not resort to a more evident Instance than that common and ludicrous
Experiment, yet taken notice of by Regius, of immersing the small end ( Fig.
13.) of a lighted Tobacco-pipe B under Water in a Vial, and sucking another
Pipe C, not touching the water, the Glass being closely covered, the strong
attraction of the Mouth upon the one Pipe will, through the Water upon the
orifice of the immersed Pipe, draw the Smoke into the other, notwithstanding
the interposition of the Water, and will put all the parts of the Water, to the
very bottom of it, and the granules of Sand lying at the bottom of the Water,
into motion and elevation, as in the Figure.

And the very same Answer is most clearly to be given to the third and fourth
Experiments in that place, and to others of like nature, without recurring to
an imaginary natural Elasticity in a small portion of included Air, whereby to
expand it self without any forcible attractions to such a prodigious amplitude.

And thus I have done with what I have to say against the Solution of the
Torricellian Experiment, either by the Weight or Elasticity of the Air or
Atmosphere; which to me seems a Supposition contradictory to our very Senses, a
Supposition attended with infinite absurdities and inexplicable difficulties.

And yet, as I have before said, it is wonderful to see with what tenacity, and
with how great confidence it is asserted, and how marvellously it has obtained
among the gens literata, and what Systems of new Physics, what rare trains of
Consequences, what Propositions, porismata, Scholia, it has multiplied!
wherein if the Foundation it self prove but a mistake, men have spent much
labor in vain upon it.

Therefore laying aside this Solution as untrue, I proceed to that which the
more steady Modern Philosophers, consonant to the ancient Principles, have
given in this case, and seems to be most consonant to truth.

CHAP. XV.
Concerning the true Cause of the suspension of the Mercury at twenty nine
Inches and half, or there about, in the Torricellian Engine.
I Come now to consider of that cause of the suspension of the Mercury at
twenty nine Inches and half, or thereabouts, in the Torricellian Engine.

They that assign the Diversity of the Weights of fluid Bodies, tell us; 1.
That although Air be intrinsecally heavy, yet it is near one thousand times, or
as Mersennus will have it, about 1300 times lighter than the like quantity of
Water; and this they endeavor to evince by Experiments. But this Conclusion is
very doubtful and difficult.

2. That Water is fourteen times, or very near thereabout, lighter than
Mercury, quantity for quantity, and this as it is easy to be tried, so upon
trial I find it very near the truth, though Water it self in several places
differs somewhat in weight, and therefore it is not casie to make this the
common standard for all Waters, though the difference be not considerably great.

Though Water be ordinarily fourteen times lighter than Mercury, yet this is
not the just proportion of the suspension of one and the other in a Tube.

For if a Tube of Water, above one and thirty foot long, stopped above and
immersed at the other end in restagnant Water, it will subside as is ordinarily
said to thirty and one foot, others say more, whereof see the Experiment apud
Schottum in Technicis Curiosis, l. 3. cap. 2. Exper. 2, and 3.

But in the case of Mercury, if the Tube of above twenty nine Inches and half
long, suppose four foot, be stopped at the top, and immersed at the open end in
restagnant Mercury, it will subside to twenty nine Inches and half, or
thereabout.

But although in these two fluids, of this different gravity, the subsiding of
either vary, yet the reason both of the subsiding and suspending of the one and
the other will be the same.

Therefore what I say in relation to the suspension and subsiding of Mercury,
will be in its reason applicable to the other, and therefore I shall here only
treat of the suspending of Mercury, because the Instruments to try the
Experiment in Water are more massy and untractable, but, as I said, the reason
of one will be the reason of the other.

There be three Instances of the suspension of the Mercury in the Torricellian
Engine, which though they all are resolvible into one common reason, yet that
reason has a various application severally to them.

First, when the Tube exceeds in length the ordinary station of the suspended
Mercury, viz. twenty nine Inches and half, as suppose it be four foot long, and
the Tube receive only thirty Inches of Mercury, or though the Tube be filled
more than twenty nine Inches and half of Mercury, yet it is not so perfectly
filled, but that there remains a portion of Air in the head of the Tube, upon
its inverting into the restagnant Mercury.

In this Instance, if the portion of Air be so great before its Expansion, that
being expanded by the descent of the Mercury, it can reach below twenty nine
Inches and half, as suppose to 20, 23, 24 Inches or less, then the Mercury will
subside to that scantlet that the portion of Air is extendible unto.

If the portion of Air be less than can be extended, below twenty nine Inches
and half, or the distance be so great that the extension of that portion of Air
cannot by its expansion supply a greater room than what just answers to that
station: as suppose the Tube were above 4 foot long, and filled with Mercury
all but half an Inch, and then inverted into the vessel of restagnant Mercury,
whereby before its subsiding there would be about half an Inch of free Air in
the head of the Tube; and by the descent of the Mercury to twenty nine Inches
and half if that little portion of Air were yet so much as were capable of such
an extension, it would be extended to that length, viz. eighteen Inches and
half; but if that task were too hard for so small a portion of Air to be
extended unto, then the same would be supplied by the subsidiary steams and
effluvia out of the Mercury, to make a retreat for the Mercury, to a descent of
twenty nine Inches and half, as has been shown, and shall now farther be
declared in what follows.

In this Instance these things are to be noted. 1. That by the descent of the
Mercury there is no vacuity left in the place derelicted by the Mercury, as
has been shown Chap. 2. That there is no new Air admitted into the Tube de
foris, as has been shown before, Chap. 3. But that little portion of Air is
extended from the very head of the cavity of the Tube to the subsided Mercury,
if it be of that substance that is capable of such an extension to the
Mercurial station of twenty nine Inches and half: and if it be too little for
such an extension, it is supplied by a suitable portion of the Mercurial
steams, as has been shown. 4. But that extension or dilatation of that little
portion of included Air, is not by any natural Elatery or expansion of its own,
as has been shown in the two former Chapters, for it is a portion of the free
Air; but it is a strong tension of that portion of included Air, to prevent
that casma and separation of Bodies without any thing intervening, or the fuga
vacui, so often mentioned by the Ancients. 5. And consequently, though in
relation to the laws of the Universe, it be a natural expansion or dilatation
of the Air in this circumstance, in obsequium naturae universalis, 01 yet in
relation to the particular state and consistence of that portion of the Air
thus expanded or tensed by the subsiding of the Mercury, it is forced and
violent. As the erect posture of my Body is natural to me, while it makes one
common composition with my Soul and Spirits, and in Concreto, though it be
violent in relation to the moles corporea of my Body, which would otherwise
fall down to the Earth. 6. And the consequence of this tension of the included
portion of Air (considered conjunctly with the natural inseparability of the
parts of the Universe, which is all one with that which the Ancients called
fuga vacui) is the sustentation of the Mercury, that column of descended Air,
which Linus not absurdly calls funiculus, being inseparably united, and
adhering to the top of the Tube at one end, and to the Mercurial Cylinder at
the other end, and this funiculus aereus not being capable to be extended
farther than to twenty nine Inches and half, being the Mercurial station, by
the force of the descent of the Mercury, sustains and holds it up at that
station: and so the pondus deprimens of the Mercurial Cylinder is equal to the
potentia superne sustinens of the Aereal descended Cylinder upon it, in a kind
of aequilibrium, the Mercurial Cylinder by its natural motion endeavoring its
descent downward, and the aereal column by a motion of restitution to its
natural size and staple, retracting it as much as it may upward; and the same
reason will hold of the portion of included Air, be so much as is capable of an
extension below twenty nine Inches and half of the Tube: but not sufficient by
such a force to be dilated to a full depletion of the Mercury out of the Tube,
as possibly to 20, 15, 10, or 5 Inches from the restagnant Mercury, in which
case the Mercury will subside to such a degree, and no lower.

The reason therefore, 1. Why the Mercury subsides so low as twenty nine Inches
and half, its usual station, (or lower, if the portion of included Air be
greater, as is before said) is, because the weight of the descending Mercurial
column is of that strength, to give the included Air that tension or
dilatation. 2. Why it subsides no lower, is because when the Air has attained
its utmost tension that the descent of that column of Mercury can give it
(which ordinarily is at the height of twenty nine Inches and half) that aereal
descended Cylinder holds it there, and keeps it up to that height, the weight
of the Mercury being now lessened.

And that this is the cause of its sustentation, appears evidently by these few
Instances. 1. If the Tube of Mercury in this sustentation be suddenly lifted up
from the restagnant Mercury, there will be a strong resilition of the Mercury
toward the top of the Tube, that will endanger breaking it; as we see a
Lutestring, if hanged upon a Nail, and overcharged with a Weight or strength at
the lower end, by which it breaks in the middle, the upper part of it will
forcibly resilire in its contraction to its ordinary size. 2. If the Tube be
inclined to a Level in the same parallel line to twenty nine Inches and half of
the erected Tube, whereby it loses its weight by the incumbence that it has
upon the sides of the declined Tube, the Air will contract it self to its
former consistency, which it had before that tension, being by this inclination
of the Tube delivered from it.

And they that object against the tension of the Air in this case; because if
it had a tension in length, as the Lutestring has, it would have likewise a
contraction in its breadth, and so would not fill the Tube, must remember that
the Air is a tensible Body of such a nature, as is at the same time tensible in
breadth as well as length, and in such its tension as closely adheres to the
sides of the Tube, as it does at one end to the top of the Tube, and at the
other end to the Mercurial column.

I shall not here enlarge with Instances, to show, that the tension of the Air,
or any other tensible fluid. Body necessarily effects attraction on the Bodies
to which it is contiguous, but shall reserve that to the following Chapters:
and I have been the longer in the explication of this Instance, because it
fully opens the reason of the second Instance, which now next follows.
Therefore, 2. The second Instance is, where a Tube closed at one end, above
twenty nine Inches long, suppose it four foot long, is entirely filled with
Mercury, and no Air admitted into it, and then inverted into a vessel of
restagnant Mercury, without admission of any Air into it, either upon its
inversion or immersion, (which though it be difficult, may yet be done) in this
cases the Mercury will subside to twenty nine Inches and half in the Tube.

This derelicted space of eighteen Inches and half, is, as I have before said,
filled with a Mercurial steam or vapor, extracted out of the Mercury it self,
and abraded from it by the descent and compression of the parts of that
Mercurial column, as I have before shown Chap. and thereby likewise rarefied or
tensed, as the Air is in the former Instance.

And this being either real Air included within the pores of the Mercury, and
expressed from it, or else a subtle Ingredient into the Mercurial composition,
and extracted, and in its extraction dilated, as the Air is in the former
Instance. It performs the same office in relation to the suspension of the
Mercury, as the included extended Air did in the former Instance, and therefore
it need not to be repeated.

Only I shall add this farther, 1. That it appears the extraction of the
subtle effluvia, and their dilatation, is performed with a great stress or
straining of them out of the Mercurial Body, and with little less labor
extended; which appears by the slow descent of the Mercury, arising from the
lucta or contest that grows between the weight of the Mercury descending on the
one hand, and the straining and abrading of those subtle particles, and their
tension or rarifaction of the other hand. And the like slow descent there
appears in the first Instance, especially as the Mercury more and more
subsides; for then the Mercury having near acquired its ordinary station, grows
lighter, and the strength of its pressure begins utterly to languish and decay
too, being near equally matched with the potentia sustinens of the extracted
subtilized particles in this Instance, and by the tension of the Air in the
former instance; the reason whereof shall be farther enlarged, when I come to
the third Instance. 2. Whereas in the former Instance, by the inclining of the
Tube, the Air regains its former contracted extent, here by the inclining of
the Tube these subtle particles extracted out of the Mercury, and dilated, are
not only contracted, but refumed into the Mercury from which they were
extracted, as is shown in the Chapter. 3. That upon the over sudden Elevation
of the Tube out of the restagnant Mercury, there will be the like resilition of
the Mercury into the top of the Tube, as in the former instance.

By this funiculus subtilis materiae the Mercurial column is sustained at
twenty nine Inches and half, as in the former Instance of the funiculus aereus.

But now how it comes to pass, that since there is yet remaining twenty nine
Inches and half in the Tube, which doubtless has a residue of subtle matter
extractable out of it, to supply a greater room, that what is yet left above
twenty nine Inches and half, how it comes to pass that by the weight of that
twenty nine Inches and half of Mercury, there is not more of the Mercurial
effluxes extracted and dilated, which may give a total descent and evacuation
of the Mercurial column into the restagnant Mercury remains to be considered,
which shall be done in the third Instance which follows.

3. The third instance is, when the Tube is but just twenty nine Inches and
half, or shorter, suppose 25, 20, 10, or 5 Inches long, and filled entirely
with Mercury, and then inverted into the vessel of restagnant Mercury; in that
case the entire Mercury will remain suspended, and remain contiguous to the top
of the Tube, and no part will descend, neither will there be any such funiculus
of Air or subtle Matter to connect it to the top of the Tube.

The reason of this is what in effect was given in the former instances, though
the application be disserent.

First, if in this instance the Mercury should any whit subside, either it must
leave the interstitium between it self and the top of the Tube vacant of any
Body, or it must yield some subtle matter to supply the place it leaves abraded
from it self, as in the second Instance. And if it can do neither of these,
manet sors tertia, only to continue its station united to the top of the Tube.

The former of these cannot be, for I have supposed, and shall further enforce
the contradiction of the Law of the Universe to that Supposition.

Therefore it remains, that either there must be a subtle matter extracted out
of the included Mercury, or of necessity the Mercury must hold its entire
possession of the whole Tube.

Although the remote cause of this extraction of subtle parts out of the
Mercury, in the second Instance, be that law of the Universe, to hold together
the continuity of its parts, and consequently to avoid a vacuum or casme in the
Universe destitute of matter; yet the immediate cause of this extraction and
rarifaction is the descent of the Mercury from the station that it has, and
the weight of its Body is the cause of that descent.

And because it requires a strong compression of the Mercury, either to drive
or draw out this subtle matter, and as it were to rake it out of the bowels of
the Mercury, and to extend it, and consequently a strong weight to effect that
compression and extension, if that weight which it has at 29 Inches and half,
or under, be not effective of such an abrasion or extension of the subtle
matter so abraded; such abrasion or extension not being effectible by that
weight, the column of Mercury must hold its position, and becomes its own
funiculus, and remain suspended to the top of the Tube.

Now it seems, that although a Mercurial Cylinder of a height above thirty
Inches, as suppose three or four foot, has such a forcible pressure, weight,
and gravitation upon the restagnant Mercury, not only to drive down the
Mercurial Cylinder to twenty nine Iches and half, but also to extract and
strain out of it, and extend a sufficient portion of subtle matter out of the
Mercurial Body to supply the room it leaves; yet that the weight only of twenty
nine Inches and half, or below it, will not be able to drive, or draw out, or
extend a portion sufficient for that Exigent.

And that is the reason, why at twenty nine Inches and half, or under that
gage, whether the Tube be just twenty nine Inches and half, or longer; yet the
Mercurial Cylinder rests there, wanting a sufficient potentia below that
station by its weight, to extract or to rarifie any of its subtle parts, to
supply the place which then it should desert or leave.

And herein the bigness or smallness of the Glass Tube, or the Mercurial
Cylinder included, makes no odds; though possibly according to the various
diameters of the Tubes, one Cylinder of Mercury of 29 Inches and half high, may
weight five times another Cylinder of the same height, and yet both would
remain suspended in the Tubes.

But the disparity of the potentia deprimens, is from the disparity of the
height of the Tube. And therefore the cause why the Cylinder of Mercury,
filling a Tube of 3 or 4 foot long, will subside upon inversion unto twenty
nine Inches and half, and there stay, is, because before its descent to that
station, its potentia was sufficient to abrade and extend the subtle matter,
but at twenty nine Inches and half that potentia was spent.

And therefore the reason why the Tube of twenty nine Inches and half, or
under, does not subside at all, but remains cohering to the top of the Tube,
is, because it has not that potentia at that gage to abrade from it self
matter to supply that place, if it should leave it.

And for this purpose it will not be amiss to take notice of what Galilaeus,
and after him the Excellent Mersennus have given us in relation to the
disparity of the motiva potestas of the same fiuid in different positions of
height or elevation.

The acceleration of motion of heavy Bodies is ut quadr at a temporum, in which
they move downwards; as if in the first Minute, a Body moves one foot, in the
second minute it will move four foot, viz. two times two; in the third minute
nine foot, viz. three times three; or, which comes to all one account, heavy
bodies in their descent, in every given portion of time, as a minute will
percur portions of space per numeros impares ab unitate; as if in the first
minute it descend one foot, in the second it will descend three foot, in the
third five foot, in the fourth minute seven foot, and so onward.

Mersennus partly upon this, Theory, and partly upon his own experience, makes
two Conclusions, (which I have experimentally found true) that are apposite to
explicate what I mean in this matter.

First, if there be two vessels of equal height, but of differing diameters,
and with an equal lumen or hole in the bottom of each of them, and both filled
with Water; the smaller vessel will in the same portion of time empty from it
self as great a quantity of Water as the greater, for the Gravitation of the
Water upon the Lumen is secundum altitudinem, not secundum latitudinem vasis:
and upon the same account it is, that if the lumen be at the side, and the
vessels be placed in the same horizontal parallel, the Parabolical line made by
salient Water out of each vessel, will be of the same length and amplitude.

2. That if there be two Tubes or vessels of Water, A and B, of the height of
nine foot, containing nine Gallons of Water, and B were a vessel of sixteen
foot containing sixteen Gallons of Water, and each vessel had a small lumen in
the side next to the Base, of equal bigness, and of that bigness, that were
there but one Gallon in the Tube, it would empty that Gallon in one minute. In
these Instances, A filled with Water would empty five Gallons in the first
minute, three Gallons in the second minute, and one Gallon in the last minute.
Again B, if filled with Water, would empty seven Gallons in the first minute,
five in the second minute, and three in the third minute, viz. in ratione
subduplicata altitudinis. And this I have experimentally found to be true.

The consequence whereof is, that every fluid Body the higher it is elevated,
has the greater and more effectual pressure by its position upon its lower
parts or other fluid, than what barely arises from its weight: so that in a
column of Mercury in a Tube of four foot high, though the lowest foot and the
highest foot of Mercury be of an equal weight, yet the pressure of the
uppermost or fourth foot, which I call its potentia deprimens, is to the third
as seven to five, and the third to the second is as five to three, and the
second to the first as three to one, namely when it has a liberty of
descending motion, as the Mercury has in this Experiment; for the intermediate
weight contributes to the pressure of the uppermost foot.

And hence it is that the power to serate and segregate, and strain, and extend
the subtle matter out of the Mercury, is vigorous and effective in a Mercurial
column of 4 foot high, and gradually is less and less 'till it come to twenty
nine Inches and half; and then though it has a considerable Gravitation, yet
it is not equal to effect such a separation, and therefore must needs stand
suspended at that height, or leave a vacuum behind it, which the Catholic laws
of the Universe do not permit.

And thus far touching the Explication of the Solution, which seems to me to be
the true Solution of the Torricellian Experiment.

And in the next place I shall subjoin some Instances that seem to me to
confirm it, and answer some Objections that are made against it.

CHAP. XVI.
Concerning the two Suppositions that are necessary to maintain this Solution,
viz Natures abhorrence of vacuum, and the Attraction of tensible fluids, or
other bodies when under a tension.
THere are two Suppositions that are necessary to be proved, to render the
Solution above given evident or probable. I. The exclusion of a vacuum or space
in the Universe wholly empty of any Body. 2. That any Body, capable of tension,
or rarifaction by tension, (such as are the Air and thin effluvia of Mercury)
to be attractive upon the contiguous Bodies, when actually under that tension.

1. As to the former of these, I need not much labor for it, upon two reasons.
1. Because there have been large Tractates upon this Position, and to repeat
them would be but actum agere. 2. Because the exclusion of the Gravitation and
Elasticity of the Air, invented or substituted by the modern Elaterists, does
necessarily conclude, that there can be no vacuum in Nature; for all those
Experiments and Instances, which they produce to prove that Gravitation or
Elasticity, and by which they go about to solve them, must (if those Solutions
prove untrue, or ineffectual) of necessity maintain that ancient Peripatetical
position, because they are incapable of any other Solution. And in my judgment
that Gravitation and Elasticity of the common Air is sifficiently convinced by
what has been before said touching it.

And when I meet with those Objections that I find used by Learned men, namely
how the Mercury or Water comes to know there will be a vacuum, if they do not
leave their natural Gravity, and so ascend or remain suspended to supply it,
and how those stupid inanimate Elements or Minerals come to understand, that
Nature so much abhors a vacuum; are much of the same kind, as if a man
should ask the Sun, if it move according to Ptolemy; or the Earth, if according
to Copernicus it move; how they came to know that when they come to the
Northern Tropic, they must move again to the Southern Tropic? or when it has
touched the Southern Tropic, it knows that it must come back to the Northern,
and steer its course accordingly? Or as if a man should ask, how does the Stone
understand that he must descend, when yet all the men in the world can never
give any satisfactory reason for its motion to the Earth, more than to the
Moon, but only Nature that is the principium motus and quietis, or rather the
God of Nature, whose standing and statuminated Law Nature is, has so ordered
it, and ordered so in the best way for the use, beauty, and accommodation of
the Universe. The plain truth of it is, the very consideration of the many
attempts that have been made to explicate the reason of the descent of heavy
Bodies, is enough to let us see, that we tire our selves in vain to determine
the clear reason of it, without resolving it into the statuminated Law of
Nature: though the Stone and the Earth are inanimate, or at leaft unreasonable
Bodies, such kind of Objections therefore as these are fond and weak.

2. As to the second, namely the attraction of Bodies extended, whether by
rarifaction or tension, especially of the Air, or this subtle matter that
arises from the Mercury. This affection and effect is as natural as any thing
in Nature, as is truly observed by the learned Fabri, in primo tractatu
physico, prop. 205, 206, 208. For a strict contiguity in all parts of several
Bodies is a kind of continuity of the Universe and all its parts; neither can I
imagine how those that are fond of the Epicurean hypothesis, can better
maintain the cohesion of the parts of solid bodies, their atomi hamati being
but fancies of what men never saw in them.

The Air is the common cement and connecter of the different parts of this
inferior world at lest, and strictly interposeth between their fissures and
interstitia, to maintain a kind of common continuity between the different
parts of the Universe, and makes it as it were one continued Body.

But to come to particular Instances, which shall not be laborious but familiar
and common, to evince this cohesion of the parts of tensed or rarefied Air, and
the contraction that it makes upon contiguous bodies, in its endeavor of
restitution to its natural state and consistence.

1. The instance of Cupping-glasses, where the Air is highly rarefied or
evacuated by the included burning Tow, and applied to the flesh, draws up the
flesh strongly unto it, when by the extinction of the Tow the rarefied Air
contracts it self to a narrow room, which can be no otherwise than by the
cohesion of the particles of Air to the skin, and driving it in to the Glass,
while it contract, it self to a narrower compass. And certainly they that tell
us, that this is done by the pressure of the ambient Air upon the contiguous
flesh, which thrusts it up into the Glass, either do not believe themselves
while they say it, or are so transported with a love unto or engagement for
their beloved hypothesis, of the prodigious gravitation of the free Air, that
they are content to say any thing in its behalf.

Qui amant ipsi sibi somnia fingunt.

Shottus (who while he wrote his mirabilia hydraulica, was well satisfied with
the Solution of the Torricellian Experiment by the common Solution of fuga
vacui) was indeed afterward, when he wrote his mirabilia Magdeburgica,
converted to the new Solution, being not willing it seems to be thought to see
less in Nature than the new Tribe of Virtuosi that were concerned in that
Engine. But for all that, this Instance of Cupping-glasses was too hard for
that new Solution, and were fairly fain to have recourse to the decantata fuga
vacui, or else it must stand unsolved, and so must any else that means an
impartial and unpreingaged search into Nature.

2. If an empty Bladder be tied close about the neck, and fastened to the top of
the Tube, Hermetically sealed in the Torricellian Experiment, upon the
subsiding of the Mercury the Bladder will be expanded, not by the natural
Elatery of the little particle of included Air, but by the strong attraction of
the tensed Air in the Tube, by the descent of the Mercury, whereof before.

3. The Instance given in the tenth Chapter, of the Tube heated, and appended
to a Balance, so as it touch the Water, the Water rising in the Tube, the Tube
will be drawn down, which is only done by the adhesion of the two extremes of
the enclosed rarefied Air, the one Extreme laying hold upon the top of the
cavity of the Tube, the other end laying hold of the Water, and drawing it up,
and therewith necessarily drawing the Tube down, whilst the included Air is
contracting if self to its natural and narrower dimensions.

And because the Experiment made by a wide-mouthed Glass would yield some
discoveries of this attraction by the rarefied Air, which are not so visible in
so narrow a Tube, I took a Beer-glass, as in the Figure 14, and suspended it by
a Third to one Scale of the Balance, and weighing it with a weight in the
opposite Scale, and found it weight two Ounces and half; then, as we used when
we were School-boyes, sticking up a Candle in a Basin, I let down the Glass
over the Candle contiguous to the Superficies of the Water, the Candle going
out there was a portion of Water drawn up into the Glass, the Air upon the
Candles going out, and the Glass drawn down into the Water, the included Air
being under a cause of rarifaction, namely by the heat of the Candle, and by
the extinction of the Flame now gradually contracting it self, and thereby
drawing up the Water to supply that place.

The water drawn up into the glass was about half an Inch; we marked exactly
the weight that was required now to lift up this Glass and included water was
an addition of 4 Ounces and of an Ounce; so that the whole weight that raised
the Glass and Water enclosed, and severed it from the Water beneath, was six
Ounces of an Ounce, and then, though not without reluctance, the Glass was
raised out of the Water.

Then taking the exact quantity of other Water, equal to that formerly
included in the Glass, (which was not difficult to do by the help of the
remaining Mark) we weighed it, and found it to weight exactly three Ounces and
half, and a very few Grains.

So that the weight of the Glass and enclosed Water amounting to six Ounces,
there was requisite an addition of about half an Ounce to sever the Glass from
the Superficies of the restagnant Water, which did apparently to the eye and
touch adhere together, notwithstanding the counterpoise of six Ounces, equal to
the weight of the Glass and included Water.

And this half Ounce of additional weight was due purely to the adhesion of the
glass, Air, and enclosed water to the Superficies of the restagnant Water.

1. It seems evident, that not only the Glass, but the Water included in it,
gravitates upon the Scale, for the counterpoise of six Ounces in the opposite
Scale, equals the weight both of the Glass and Water enclosed in it, which
could not be, unless both contributed to the aequipondium.

2. That it is impossible that the included Water could gravitate upon the
Scale, unless the rarefied Air were contiguous and cohering to the top of the
Glass, and also to all the parts of it included within the cavity of the Glass
above the Superficies and whole body of the included Water, and also firmly
adhered to the Superficies of the included Water, for they all make up but one
common weight, and there must be a vinculum that must connect the Glass and the
enclosed Water, and otherwise they could not gravitate together; so that the
vinculum that binds the Water to the Glass is this funiculus (as Linus well
calls it) of the rarefied Air, as the Third is the vinculum that binds the
Glass to the Scale: for otherwise the Glass would be only raised, and leave the
Water to subside into the vessel of restagnant Water, and would never hold an
aequipondium to more than two Ounces and a half, which was the just weight
singly of the Glass.

But as for the fancy above mentioned, Chap. 10. that it is not the Glass and
Water that make up the weight of six Ounces, but the Glass and the column of
Air incumbent upon it, the vanity of that imagination is sufficiently convinced
in that Chapter.

3. That consequently, the included rarefied Air thus fastening upon the cavity
of the Glass and the included Water by a strict cohesion, according to the
nature of tensed fluids, contracting it self as much as it can by its motion of
restitution, draws up the Water in the vessel into the Glass, and raises it as
high, 'till there be an aequilibrium between the pondus natural deprimens of
the Water, and the potentia sustinens of the Air, thus now contracting it self,
and endeavoring its restitution to its just natural dimension.

4. As a specimen of this cohesion of the Air and Water included in the Glass,
there is also a cohesion of the Limb of the Glass and the included Water unto
the Superficies of the restagnant Water, which requires half an Ounce of weight
to break that continuity between the upper and lower Water. And no other
imaginable cause can be assigned for it, but that Natura aegre patitur
disjunctionem partium continui.

And as with the hand you lift up the Glass toward the Superficies of the
restagnant Water, the Water included will rise with it much above the
Superficies of the external Water, which cannot be by the imaginary pressure of
the external Air, but by the adhesion of the column of Water to the included
tensed Air, and of that to the concave Superficies of the Glass per modum unius
continui, which any man's trial will make more plain and evident to him, than
words in writing can easily express.

But some exception is taken to the word funiculus, and we are asked what
Grappers there are belonging to this funiculus, that can so steadily lay hold
of the Water and the Glass, and hold them thus tight togher?

And I must confess, that I wonder, that any that approves the Atomical or
Epicurean Philosophy, can make that Question, since all their pretense of the
cohesion of the imaginary Atomical Particles in any the most solid continuum,
are certain atomi hamati, that interlock one in another, which yet they never
saw.

But let it be: I answer, the power of the laws of Nature are so efficacious,
that they can and do colligate strictly parts even of most distantial textures
and consistences, without the help of Vellicle, Hooks, or Grappers. What are
the Hooks or Grappers, whereby the Humane Soul and Body, yea the Souls and
Bodies of Animals are knit together, whereby the Blood and the Spirits are
colligated, whereby the Loadstone attracts the Iron, notwithstanding an
interposed Plate of Brass or body of impervious Glass, and a thousand more
Instances of Attraction between Bodies, without the intervention of sensible
Grappers and Hooks, or such gross Mechanismes.

This, and some other as light as this, and some toying with the word
funiculus, are the greatest Objections that I find against what Linus has in
this matter delivered, which seem to me of no moment. Words were made to render
Conceptions of things, and if they do that, they do their office.

And thus far concerning the Solution of the Torricellian Engine. I shall add a
few words, as I promised, touching the cohesion of two polished Marbles, and
the insufficiency of the Solution thereof given by the Elaterists, and the
truth of the ancient Solution thereof.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning the Cause of the Cohesion of two polished Marbles.
THere are two Experiments, for the Solution whereof the Gravitation and
Elatery of the Air is by the late Philosophers applied, which in this last
place I shall examine according to my premised method.

The first is that of the cohesion of two polished Marbles. For instance, take
two polished Marbles, of one dimension and figure, and exactly in the center of
each Marble let there be a Ring, whereby to suspend the upper, and whereby a
weight may be appended to the lower. These two Marbles, especially if their
smooth sides be a little oyled, and applied each to other, will adhere so
strongly together, that the upper being suspended by its Ring to a post or
frame, ( Fig. 15.) the lower will sustain a weight of 20, 30, or 40 pounds,
though the Marbles be not above three Inches diameter.

And as it will do this in the open Air, it will also perform the same, though
the Marbles be enclosed within a close large Glass-Receiver, whereby it is
severed from the common Air, or any impending column of the Atmosphere.

The reason that the vulgar Philosophers were wont to give in these cases are
these: First, as to the strict cohesion of the two Marbles, they give this
reason; that the cohesion is ob fugam vacui. For if they should be severed by
the appended weight, the separation of them would be in the same indivisible
moment, because they do contingere in puncto.

And in as much as all Bodies move successively, and not in an instant, it
would be impossible for the circumambient Air in the moment of the separation
of these two Marbles, to pervade the whole interstitium that would happen upon
the first separation, and consequently there would be a mean time wherein the
interstitium would remain empty, therefore the cohesion is so obstinate to
prevent that monster in Nature, namely vacuum.

And to evidence that this is the reason, they say that if the aperture be
attempted at the sides, either by pulling them at one side, or by appending the
weight more to one side than the other, they are easily separated, because that
aperture makes an Angle, ( Fig. 16.) and gradually admits the Air into it; for
then the aperture is not all at once, but is apertio continuata from the first
opening. For although if the Base of the acute Angle, viz. A, were but a hairs
breadth, the Angle were divisible Mathematically unto the uttermost extremity
of it; yet it is not so Physically, it but gains a successive latitude,
according as it gradually opens, and so is accommodated Physically to a
successive intromission of the Air: but if the aperture were altogether, the
separation in all parts of the Superficies must be Physically as well as
Mathematically in the same instant, which were too quick to give an admission
to the successive motion of the aerie body in the same instant.

But now we will consider what Solutions the late Philosophy gives in this
instance.

Namely I. That in the free and open Air there is an impending column of
Atmosphere, reaching from the summity thereof to the upper Marble, and
commensurate in its diameter and circumference to the area of the upper Marble
that presses it, with an excessive weight downwards, and so upon the upper
Hemisphere if suspended parallel to the Horizon.

2. That again there is a returning or recoiling Cylinder of Air, reaching from
the Superficies of the Earth upwards, of as great a potentia sustinens as the
superior column of Atmosphere has a pondus deprimens: and this inferior or
resulting column is commensurate also in its diameter and circumference to the
lower Marble, or brazen Hemisphere, and thrusts that as vigorously up to the
upper Marble, as the upper column presses downward. And so the potentia
sustinens being equal to the pondus deprimens, the lower Marble is able to
sustain a weight equal to the weight of the upper atmospherical Cylinder; the
reason of which admirable power (according to their Supposition) is opened
supra cap. 5.

3. And in as much as there runs down as weighty and potent aereal Cylinders or
Atmospherical portions by the sides, as well as perpendicularly, therefore
although the Marbles were not placed parallel to the Horizon, but vertically
(as when each is drawn several ways) this lateral pressure of the Atmosphere is
as effectual to hold the Marbles together in that close posture, as if they
stood parallel to the Horizon.

4. And because they will have a Salve for all Sores, although these Engines be
placed in a close Glass-Receiver, whereby the aereal Columns, as well superior
as inferior, are wholly intercepted by the interposition of the great Glass
Receiver, the Elasticity of the portion of Air included within that Glass
Receiver, undertakes and effectually performs the phenomenon, by its vigorous
Elasticity or counterpression both upward, and downward, and laterally, upon
the included Marbles or Hemispheres.

And this is the Solution that now obtains among the Virtuosi.

And upon these premises there are admirable trains of Philosophical
Consequences deduced with great industry and subtlety, in this particular
instance of the Marbles, which a man may read at large in the late book of
Hydrostatical Experiments, Exp. 13, and elsewhere.

And now for ought I know the matter is brought to this issue, whether this or
the former Solution be the truer, (for I know not a third) and if this prove
untrue or uneffectual, the former of the Vulgar Philosophy must obtain, 'till
some third be found out.

And therefore I will proceed in the examination of this new Hypothesis.

And although I think I have said enough against this whole Scheme of the
Gravitation and Elatery of the Air, as it is propounded in the fourth, tenth,
and eleventh Chapters; yet I shall here add some things more specifically
applicable to these Engines and Experiments, and remit the Reader to those
Chapters, as to the general untruth of the entire hypothesis.

First therefore, as to the cohesion of the Marbles I offer these
considerations: 1. It is plain, that the lower Marble, if there were nothing
else to sustain it but the recoiling Cylinder of Air impelling it upward, it
would certainly fall to the Earth, notwithstanding that imaginary potentia; for
if it were otherwise, it would be a necessary consequence, that though it were
not contiguous to the upper, it would be sustained by that potentia sustinens,
and so we should have Milstones floting in the Air, according to the fancy of
the last mentioned Author of Hydrostatical Experiments.

But the help for this is, that in that instance the impending superior column
of Air being of equal strength with the recoiling column of Air, there is an
aequipondium between that pondus and potentia, and so the solute Marble or
Millstone, having the advantage of his own weight, and the weight of the
superior column would conquer the inferior; but here the inferior Marble is
protected from the weight of the superior column of Air, and so has nothing
but his own weight to contend with the inferior column, and its potentia, which
latter overmatcheth it, and so keeps it suspended.

But this will not cure the Sore; for suppose it were two pieces of Wood, or
that the Marbles were not excellently polished, so that they did not contingere
in puncto, but some little fissure or interstitia did let in any small portion
of Air, the Marble would fall off; and yet there the lower Marble is protected
from the impendent column of Air by the superior piece of Wood, or unpolished
Marble as well as here.

And to say these little filaments of interposed Air, which if all put together
would not make a column of Air of a larger diameter than a small pin, should
conquer the reflected Cylinder of Air, and its potentia, which these Masters
suppose to be equivalent in power to thirty, forty, nay one hundred pound
weight, renders the whole Supposition it self to be but utterly improbable.
Some what therefore else it is, that keeps the lower Marble suspended to the
upper, and not the imaginary potentia of the reflected column of Air
commensurate to the area of the inferior marble.

2. If the lower Marble were sustained upon the account of the potentia
sustinens of the inferior column of Air, and by force thereof it could sustain
(for instance) forty pounds weight, suspended in the center of the Marble, it
were not easily conceptible how if but an eighth part of that weight were
hanged near the limb or circumference of the lower Marble, it would fall
asunder, as it will; for the potentia sustinens of the subjected column of Air
is applied equally to all the area of the subjacent Marble. And the separation
will follow, if the Marbles being oyled, the one may be slided off from the
other without any difficulty; and then when they are so slided off, they are
easily thereby severed, because no vacuity or instantaneous motion of the Air
would follow thereupon: which could never be done, if they were so strongly
wedged up one to another by so strong and powerful a counterpressure of the
reflecting column of Air, which presses up according to the new hypothesis
with a potentia able to sustain near a hundred pound weight.

3. Stevinus tells us in the observations upon the tenth Proposition of his
Hydrostaticks, that if a vessel be made in the form of Fig. 17. with a hole in
the bottom, and a piece of Wood lighter than Water, viz. B B. Cover that hole,
and then let the vessel be filled with Water; as great a strength will be
required by the string at A to move that rundle of Wood from the hole it stops,
as if a weight of Water commensurate to the area of the rundle, from B to A,
were impendent upon it. And this the Learned Author of Hydrostatical Paradoxes
avouches to have tried himself, and yet the Water included is not an half nor a
quarter of that weight of Water. And the column of Air that these Masters
suppose to press the Water at A, can be no larger than the orifice of the Pipe
at A, which is not one fifth part of the amplitude of the rundle B, nor of the
hole which it stops. But if there were such a reflected or recoiling column
pressing upward to the hole of the vessel and rundle that covers it, which is
five times larger than the orifice at A, to let in a column of gravitating Air;
this rundle, and the Water incumbent upon it, should be forcibly thrust up by
the recoiling column of Air: and yet Experience tells us, that it is so far
from being thrust up by the potentia sustinens of the inferior aerie column,
that it is hardly to be raised without difficulty by a Third.

4. Again, take a vessel of Laton, of a cubical or cylindrical figure, about
eight Inches diameter; make a round hole at the bottom of four Inches diameter.
Then take a round piece of Brass or Lead, or smoothed Wood, of six Inches
diameter, which may weigh two Ounces; wax it well, and exactly, and closely
cover the hole, that it may overlap, that no Air may go in or out by it, then
rarifie the included Air, but not to any considerable height, for then growing
cold it will draw up the cover when closed. Then close the top very close with
Laton and Soder, that no Air can get in; the Air I suppose rarefied may take up
more room than its natural dimension by about two square Inches, which is more
than the dimension of the Stopper: so that the supposed Elatery of the Air has
no resistance to its impelling upward, because it has room for its reception.
I say that this Stopper will not be impelled up by the pressure of the
recoiling Cylinder of Air, though it weigh but two Ounces, and will be lifted
up by a force or weight of three Ounces. And yet according to these men's
Supposition, this recoiling column has a potentia to impell or keep up forty
pound, nay an hundred pound weight, being commensurate in power to an
Atmospherical Cylinder of six Inches diameter, which according to their
Supposition must weigh about 500l weight, namely a Cylinder of Mercury of six
Inches diameter, and twenty nine Inches high, viz. 783 square Inches of
Mercury, which is near 500l weight. It is true I have not tried this, but my
observation of the third Experiment makes me little doubt of this.

CHAP. XVIII. Concerning the Magdeburgh Hemispheres, and their Cohesion, and
the reason thereof.
THE Air is capable of tension by force, and of rarifaction by heat; both which
agree in this, that they both give a large expansion of a less portion of Air
into a greater space than is natural to it.

But herein they partly differ, and partly agree; that the immediate effect of
a strong tension of Air by force (such as are the Air-pump, and the Magdeburgh
Engine, and the Cacabus Evacuatorius described by Shottus in his Technica
curiosa, lib. 1. cap. 5. and sequentibus) is attraction of the Superficies, to
which the included tensed Air is contiguous.

But the immediate effect of rarifaction of the Air, which is performed by
heat, is a laxation of the filaments of the Air at first; for the Air being
dilated, takes up more room, is more relaxed and expanded: but consequentially
there follows a contraction as the heat decays, and the Air endeavors its
restitution to its natural texture, and so endeavors its contraction, and
consequently lays hold on the contingent Superficies, within which it is
imprisoned, and attracts it with its own contraction. The instances of both
which motions and effects we have in the Magdeburgh Hemispheres described by
Shottus, ubi supra, and hereafter more fully explicated.

Fig. 18, 19, 20. The Engine is thus described. Let there be two Brazen concave
Hemispheres AB, with rings in the Poles or center of the unequal Superficies of
each of them at C and D, and a ring of Leather dipped in Wax to be placed between
the two Hemispheres, viz. E, to keep the limbs or joints of them close from
admission of any Air between the commissures or joints of the Hemispheres; and
a Stop-cock in the lower Hemisphere at E K, both the Hemispheres conjoined with
the Leather between them. These Hemispheres thus joined, the Stop-cock at F to
be left open, whereby in the Cacabus Evacuathius or Magdeburgh Engine, the Air
in the cavity of the Hemispheres may be as much exhausted as may be, and
consequently that which remains being thereby put into a great tension, to be
enclosed by turning the Stop-cock, that no foreign Air may be admitted. These
Hemispheres thus ordered, will cohere so strongly together, that the strength
of many Horses will not sever them, if the Hemispheres be large.

And the event is infallibly true, but the contest is touching the reason or
Solution of the phenomenon.

The modern Philosophers, with Schottus in his fourth Book of his Technica
curiosa, cap. 7. reversed 3. (being now a Convert to the Gravitation of the
Air) tells us, that the reason hereof is, that the weight of a column of Air
impendent upon the upper Hemisphere, and the reverse column of Air pressing
upon the lower Hemisphere upward, is the cause of this cohesion.

And that in case the Hemispheres be not placed erect, but laterally, with
their Poles parallel to the Horizon, the lateral pressure of the two adverse
columns of Air perform the business, and keep them strictly together against a
most powerful force endeavoring their separation.

But still with this caution, that the separating force work upon the center of
the Hemispheres, and so draw upon all parts alike: for if the potentia separans
be applied unequally, viz. at one side of each Hemisphere, and not equally from
the center, then the separation will easily follow upon the application of a
small separating strength, which is also most certainly true. Again, if but a
little portion of Air be let into the Stop-cock, the separation of them quickly
follows, which is also true.

But now the vulgar Speculators think, that this Solution is untrue, and that
the true reason of the cohesion of these Hemispheres is, because that the
included portion of Air is not wholly exhausted, neither is it possible by
humane power wholly to evacuate it. But a great part therereof is exhausted,
and that which remains enclosed is under a very great and violent tension, and
has a strong natural conatus of restitution to its natural staple and
standard, and that the filaments of the Air lay hold upon every point of the
concave Superficies, and draw them inward, as it endavours its own contraction.

That there is not, nor can be, any casma or interval of empty space between
the unequal Superficies of the included Air, and the concave Superficies of the
including Hemispheres, for that is contrary to the common law of Nature; and
yet the Air by its intrinsic texture, and proper motion of restitution, to
that just dimension that Nature has assigned to it, affects its own
contraction to its own state, and with it draws together, and holds together
the ambient body including it.

Not much unlike the tension of Lutestrings, highly wound up by their Pins,
which have a tension and contraction of the extremes, to which they are
fastened, namely the Bridge and the Pins.

That the reason why, if any Air be let in, even at a Pin-hole through the
Hemispheres, it is greedily sucked in by the tensed and stretched Air, to
relieve it from the Rack upon which it is stretched, and being taken in it
relieves that tension, looseneth its contraction, and takes off its forcible
attraction upon the concave Superficies of the including Hemispheres, and gives
the included Air a fair relaxation to its due size, staple, and standard; and
so the cohesion cease.

Fig. 21. That the reason why an aperture is easily wrought, when the divulsion
is only of one side, is partly the same with the reason of the like divulsion
of the the two cohering Marbles. 1. Because the aperture is angular, and not
all at once. 2. The aperture is cunei formis, which every body knows is more
forcible than a parallel aperture. And 3. by this kind of angular opening the
filaments of the Air are broken successively one after another; but in a
parallel aperture all the filaments must be broken at once, and so make one
common resistance to the force. As a piece of Cloth may be torn with ease by
one man, when third is broken after third, but cannot be torn by four men, when
all the thrids are strained together, and so have an united and uniform
strength and resistance.

And they say, that although this Engine is contrived with great pomp, yet in
truth it is no more than that Experiment, which we practiced with our Nutshels
when we were children, where by clapping half a Nutshel to our lips, or the
back of our hands, and sucking out the Air, they would stick so close, that we
could not easily fillip them off.

These are the two reasons that contend for the Solution of this Experiment,
the Gravitation of the Air or Atmosphere of the one hand, and the motus or
conatus restitutionis of the Air, and the natural inseparability of Bodies
without any intervening Body of the other hand. If the former be laid aside as
untrue, the latter needs no great labor to prove it; for these be the only two
Competitors for the Solution of this Instance, that I ever heard of.

And I think it is very plain, that the imaginary gravitation of the Air,
neither has nor can have any thing at all to do in this business.

And because I had not those Evacuatory Engines before described, and if I had
had them, yet I would not have singly rested upon them, without making trial by
rarifaction by heat, I took the method hereafter following, for the full
examination of this Instance.

For it is obvious beyond dispute, that that if there be a cohesion wrought
after rarifaction of the Air by heat, in the Instances hereafter given, as
there is when there is a tension of the Air by a forcible Evacuation, as in the
former Instance; the true cause of each cohesion must be one and the same. And
if the pondus externi aeris contribute nothing to the cohesion of the
Hemispheres after rarifaction of the included Air by heat, it contributes as
little to the cohesion of the Hemispheres forcibly evacuated by an Air-pump, or
the Cacabus Evacuatorius before mentioned.

And on the other side, if the cohesion of the Hemispheres after rarifaction by
heat be caused by the motus restitutionis of the included rarefied Air, and by
the strict continuity (as I may call it) of the filaments of the Air to the
cavity of the Hemispheres, to avoid that Vacuity which would otherwise happen
by the contraction of the Air into a less room than would fill the whole
cavity; the same is unquestionably the reason of the cohesion of the
Hemispheres forcibly evacuated as above.

The Instances therefore that I tried are these that follow, which I shall
mention severally, with my observation to each of them. For if I mistake not,
this one Experiment, duly improved, wholly sets aside the imaginary Gravitation
of the Air, so usually applied to the Solution of the Torricellian Experiment,
the cohesion of Marbles, the raising of Water in Pumps, and by Suction, and
many more of like nature.

First, I caused two Brass concave Hemispheres to be cast, each of six Inches
and a quarter in the cavity, and about seven Inches diameter in the convexity,
exactly closing one to another on their rim, and the lower let up into the
cavity of the upper about half an Inch, for their more exact closure; and the
outward rims of each about a quarter of an Inch in breadth, exactly closing one
upon another, so that being closed they made one perfect Sphere, according to
the form of the Magdeburgh Hemispheres above described.

The lower Hemisphere weighed six pounds, seven Ounces, and a half, viz. 103
Ounces, and half; the upper weighed only six pounds.

I then took a circular piece of Calfskin, a little above half an Inch broad,
and in length sufficient to compass the Hemispheres, and dipping it in melted
Beeswax, with a very little Rosin, so that it might just lie between the
commissures of the two Hemispheres, and stop out all access of the foreign Air
between them.

First therefore, without any thing more done, I applied the two Hemispheres
each to other, with the interposed girdle of waxed wet Leather, and pressed
them close and hard together, that no commerce might be between the included
and the common Air.

And so there neither was nor could be any force of compression used to the
included Air, because 'till the closure of the. Hemispheres it had a free
intercourse with the external Air, and when perfectly closed it was but just as
much as the Hemispheres would freely contain, and consequently of the same
texture with the foreign Air.

In this Instance, the upper Hemisphere raised gently by the ring, there seemed
a little weak cohesion between them, because the rims were perfectly closed,
and the separation was altogether in the same moment, but the cohesion so faint
and weak, that it would not sustain the hundredth part of the weight of the
lower Hemisphere, and scarce perceptible.

And the reason of the disparity between the cohesion of these Hemispheres, and
that before mentioned of the 2 polished Marbles, are these. 1. Because the
contiguity of the two polished Marbles is in all points of their Superficies,
but here the contiguity of the rims of the Hemispheres was but in a circle of a
quarter of an Inch broad, and so the foreign Air had a shorter journey to go
in the moment of the separation of the Hemispheres, than in the moment of the
separation of the polished Marbles. 2. Because the contiguity of the polished
Marbles is without any interposition of Leather, which possibly would impede
the firmness of the cohesion of the two Marbles themselves.

But now if the pressure of the aereal Cylinders either in the polished
Marbles, or in the instances of the Hemispheres, before and hereafter given,
were the cause of their cohesion, what imaginable reason can be given why these
two Hemispheres should not cohere as firmly in this Instance.

For though there be Air included between the two Hemispheres, yet all
communication between the included and foreign Air is perfectly excluded by
walls of Brass, and the impervious Leather girdle.

If it be said, that the Elasticity of the included Air resists the compression
by the foreign Air, and so impedes the cohesion.

I say if any such Elasticity were admitted in the Air, (which I do not) yet
most certainly the included Air has no greater Elasticity than the common Air,
whereof it was but just now a portion, and has received no more compression by
the juncture of the Hemispheres, no more than Air in a Bottle covered with a
flat Board or Paper.

The consequence whereof is, that the Elasticity of the foreign Air is as
strong as the Elasticity of the included Air, and must needs keep it in
aequilibrio. And the consequence thereof is, that if the pondus externi aeris
(if it were any way considerable) would have its free exercise upon these
Hemispheres, though filled with Air; for according to these Masters
supposition, the Cylinder of Air of each side pressing each Hemisphere, is
above seven hundred pound weight, which it may freely exercise, the imaginary
Elasticity of the included and foreign Air being ex suppositione equal. But
the ensuing Experiments will render this more evident.

Secondly therefore, I took a handful of flax, and leaving the mouth of the
lower Hemisphere upward, I put in the flax, and gave fire to it, holding the
upper Hemisphere close over it, whereby the Air in both was greatly rarefied,
and a considerable portion of the space taken up by the flame of the flax. Then
clapping the upper Hemisphere upon the lower, with the interposed Leather
girdle, I pressed them together with all the strength I had, neither were they
possibly capable of a nearer or closer contiguity to the interposed Leather,
though the imaginary Cylinder of the Atmosphere had pressed them, and hereupon
the flame and fire was presently extinguished.

The Events were as follows.

1. There grew a present cohesion of the two Hemispheres together, even while
they were hot, and the included Air under a high degree of rarifaction by the
heat, and so could not have any considerable tension while the heat continued.

And the reason of this cohesion was plainly this. That the fire and flame had
not only rarefied the Air included within the compass of the Hemispheres, to an
expansion far greater than was natural to it; but also the flame and fire took
up a considerable portion of the space between the Hemispheres, which being
extinct in the moment of their juncture, that very rarefied Air that was
within, was forced to take up so much more space as the flame took up before
its extinction. And from thence grew necessarily an attraction upon the cavity
of the Hemispheres, though that very Air was under a rarifaction by the
continuing heat.

2. But this cohesion was but weak, because the Air was then under a strong
dilatation by the continuing heat, and therefore the upper Hemisphere lifted up
by the ring, would not sustain the weight of the lower Hemisphere.

3. But when the Hemispheres thus heated, and the included Air greatly rarefied
thereby, were permitted to continue together closed 'till they were perfectly
cold, and thereby the Air had opportunity to contract it self, or at lest to
endeavor it as much as it could. Now the cohesion of the Hemispheres grew
strong, so that the upper lifted up would raise the lower in conjunction with
it, with the addition of some weight appended to the lower ring. And the reason
was, because the heat which was the cause of the great dilatation of the
included Air was now ceased, and the Air by its motion of restitution
endeavored to contract it self to its natural Expansion.

And because the included Air (it may be) was expanded to above four times its
true natural size and dimension, and now endeavored to contract it self into
that space, but could not attain it, unless three fourths of the space included
within the Hemispheres should have been left perfectly empty, the Air
endeavoring its contraction, according to the particular inclination of its
own motion; yet by the common law of the Universe was kept under its former
Expansion, to prevent the casma between the Air and the concave Superficies of
the Hemispheres, and so as much as was possible attracted upon them, and kept
them together, no foreign Air being admissible for the relief of the included
Air, to help to restore it to its due size and texture: as a living Oyster
contracts its shell together by its own contraction within its shell, when a
person is opening in. The comparison is homely, and suits not in all things,
because the Oyster is a vital Being, but yet it serves to explicate the method
of this attraction, by the filaments of the Air upon the contiguous concave
Superficies.

And from this instance of fired flax (resembling very much the common instance
of Cupping-glasses,) it appears plainly, that in those Glasses the flesh is not
driven up by pressure of the foreign Air upon the glass or the contiguous
parts of the flesh; but purely by the attraction of the included residue of Air
upon the extinction of the flame. For the Hemispheres were at first pressed
together as close as they could be, and no man can imagine that the external
Air can have any influence through these Brazen Walls, that are near half an
Inch thick, where yet the Attraction upon the included Superficies is visible
and apparent; and in this and my other Experiments it was not possible for the
Hemispheres to receive a greater or closer contiguity than I gave them on their
first union: and therefore I do not wonder, that Schottus, though too hastily
subscribing to the pressure of the Air, as a Solution of some Experiments, yet
in his Technica Curiosa, l. 4. cap. 12. I. is forced to confess carnem and
sanguinem subintrare cucurbitas, nec pressione Aeris externi carni circum illas
incumbenti, nec pressione aeris illas incumbentis and deprimentis, ac intra
carnem mergentis, sed suctione and attractione.

3. Because I would improve the Experiment to the uttermost, I made a trial
with a stronger heat. I therefore put burning Coals and red hot Iron into each
Hemisphere, 'till they were hot as I could well touch them, and then casting
out the Coals, the Air within the cavity of each Hemisphere was highly
rarefied; then clapping the Leather girdle about the rim I closed the
Hemispheres very close, as my strength could force them together; the Events
whereof were these:

1. While the Hemispheres were hot, and so the included Air under a high degree
of rarifaction, there was very little or no cohesion, for the Air was under the
same laxation as at first, and therefore they would presently fall asunder, the
upper being raised by the ring.

2. As the heat decayed, and the Hespheres grew gradually colder and colder,
and consequently the Air more and more endeavors to contract it self, and as a
consequence thereof attracted more forcibly upon the cavity of the Hemispheres,
the stronger was there cohesion; because as the Air grew colder, it endeavored
more and more to acquire its just natural dimension and texture.

3. At last, when the heat was quite extinct, and the Hemispheres grown
perfectly cold, the cohesion was so strong, that the upper Hemisphere suspended
upon a hook, did not only sustain the lower Hemisphere, which weighed near
seven pounds, but also a weight of twenty eight pounds more, in all about
thirty five pound weight, before they would be disjoined.

For now the Air being discharged of that heat that kept it laxe, and without a
bent, or tension, or contraction inward, did now endeavor its contraction
strongly, and therewith pulled inward the Hemispheres, from which it could not
be severed, by reason of common Natures declination of a Vacuity.

4. My fourth Trial was this, that when the Hemispheres were first heated, and
clapped together, and thereby when they became cold, cohered exceeding strongly;
yet when they were under that strong cohesion, that they would sustain a
considerable weight as before, without parting asunder, yet if afterward they
were brought but to a moderate heat, either by a chafing dish of Coals put
under them, or by holding them near the fire, they would suddenly fall asunder
of themselves, without any weight appended to sever them.

The reason whereof is apparent, namely that by the heating of the Hemispheres
the included Air is again expanded, and its tension laxed, and the filaments
thereof which were before under a tension and contraction by the Air, striving
to gain its natural temperament, are now let loose, as a Lutestring is let down
by the unscrewing of the Pins. And consequently the suction and attraction of
the Air upon the concave Superficies of the Hemispheres, which before held them
together, is relaxed and discharged.

And thus we have the true phenomenon of this Engine, and, as I take it the true
reason and solution of them.

And upon these Instances I do conclude,

1. That men have had very little reason to conclude the Gravitation or
Pressure of the Air upon the inferior World, or the parts thereof; for the
cohesion of these Engines is most plainly upon another reason, as appears by
what is before declared.

2. That this instance is so far from concluding the Gravitation of the Air in
that measure, that the late Masters contend, that plainly that Supposition
neither has nor can have to do in the solution of these Instances.

For most unquestionably, the Air does as much gravitate (if at all) upon the
Hemispheres, when the included Air is rarefied by heat, in these Instances, as
it does when the Hemispheres are grown cold; and yet in the former case there
is no cohesion, but contrariwise a separation of the cohering Hemispheres if
again they are heated.

3. That the cause of the cohesion therefore is not ab extra, or de foris, but
ab intra; namely, one specifical to the Air, whereby becoming cold after a
great expansion by heat, it endeavors its contraction to its due space and
texture, by a motion of restitution; the other common to all parts of the
Universe, that common law of Nature that preserves contiguity, or indeed rather
continuity of the parts of the Universe: and therefore suffers not the Air to
contract it self, so as to leave an empty space between it self and the concave
of the Hemispheres, whereby it comes to pass, that the Air endeavoring to
contract it self, lays hold upon, and endeavors to contract and hold together
all parts whereunto it is contiguous, when no access of foreign Air is
admitted.

4. That the least admission of foreign Air, though through a Pin-hole, in the
Hemispheres, gradually gives a relaxation of the tension of the included Air,
which greedily sucks it in, and thereby is delivered gradually from its
tension, and lets go its hold of the contiguous Superficies, which is the
natural and necessary effect of that tension.

I cannot easily perceive how these Conclusions against the imaginary
Gravitation of the Air can be evaded.

If it should be said, that the reason why the Hemispheres cohere not when they
are hot, is, because the convexity likewise of the Hemispheres are also hot,
and so retund the Gravitation or Pressure of the Air upon them by their heat,
which is not so done when they are cold.

I answer 1. That though the unequal Superficies were admitted to be as hot as
could be endured, yet the Sphere of that Activity is not two foot in
circumference, which could never break the pressure of a column of Air of at
least seven Miles high, and near a thousand pound weight, according to the
Supposition. 2. Neither is the heat required to make such a disjunction of that
Extremity, as to make any such impression upon the Air; for if the Hemispheres
be made but blood warm after their cohesion, they will fall asunder.

3. But wholly to prevent this imagination, if the Hemispheres be cased over
with a flat or spherical Cover of Wood, Lead, or Brass, which may receive the
supposed Gravitation of the Air, yet the cohesion, while the air is hot within,
will not last; for it is the laxation or relaxation of the tension of the Air
within that, gives the separation, or easy separability of the Hemispheres.

CHAP. XIX.
Concerning the raising of the Water by Pumps or Syringes, and the Cause
thereof.
IN the two former Chapters I have considered the cohesion of polished Marbles,
and the Magdeburgh Hemispheres, both in truth resting upon Solutions somewhat
of the same nature. And therein I have as I think excluded the Gravitation of
the Air, or Atmosphere, or aereal Cylinders, from any contribution thereunto.

I have chosen in this Chapter to consider the Elevation of Water in Pumps and
Syringes, both which are in truth but the same Engine, though circumstantially
varied.

And although I shall herein have occasion to say something touching the
Gravitation of the Air, and shall in some measure evidence, that the Water is
not raised in these Engines by the weight of the Air, pressing upon the
restagnant Well or other vessel of Water, yet I shall not labor that, much, in
this disquisition, because enough has been said thereof before.

But my principal scope herein is to discover, even to sense, that there is no
such Elasticity in a separate portion of common Air as the Elaterists suppose,
whereby to salve the suspension of a cocolumn of twenty nine Inches of Mercury
in the Torricellian Experiment, when the same is pent up in a close vessel or
room, every where excluding the imaginary pressure of the Atmospherical
Cylinder; and consequently that the Solution of that Experiment, either by the
Weight or by the Spring of the Air, is a mistaken Solution, and has no reality
in it.

The raising of Water by common Pumps or Syringes (especially as it is this day
ordered, sometimes with double, sometimes with single Valves, to hinder the
regress of the Water) is so well known even to ordinary Plummers, that it needs
no accurate description.

But the reason of this Elevation of the Water is variously rendered, according
to the different hypotheses that men have entertained.

The ancient and common, and I think the true reason thereof, is this:

The lower end of the cavity of the Pump or Syringe being immersed below the
Superficies of the restagnant Water, there is a Cylinder of Air in the cavity
of the Pump or Syringe, between the Superficies of the Water and the bottom of
the Bucket and upper Valve of the Pump, or between the Superficies of the
Water, and the bottom of the Embolus of the Syringe closely penned up.

That by the Elevation of the Bucket in the Pump, or Embolus in the Syringe,
that portion of intermediate Air is under a tension, and draws vigorously upon
the Superficies of the restagnant Water, and that again upon the contiguous
Water, and so the tensed funiculus of the Air raises a funiculus of Water,
commensurate to the cavity of the Pump or Cylinder, which again by depression
of the Bucket rises through the Leather-valve that covers it, and by an
iterated elevation of the Bucket or Embolus draws up more, whereby there is a
continued supply of a funiculus aqueus, which is finally thrown out at the
orifice, or nose of the Pump.

That it is a certain truth, that Water is raised either by a pondus or
pressure, that is equivalent to the weight of the Water that is elevated, as in
the Engines where Forcers or pressures are used to raise Water; or else by an
attractive potentia equal to the weight of the Water drawn up, as in Pumps and
Syringes.

That consequently, the vis or potentia suctoria or attractiva, will raise such
a weight of Water as is less than this vis or potentia, (for whether the
Elevation of Water be by a vis deprimens as in pressing Engines, or vis suctoria
or attractiva as in Pumps or Syringes, or the preponderation of the potentia to
the weight of the Water) thus it sustains, imples, or attracts, and therefore
they are all reducible to the reason of the libra or Balance.

And on the other side, if the weight of the Water exceed the pondus or
potentia which must raise it, it cannot either draw, or impell, or keep it up
beyond an aequilibrium with that pondus or potentia impellens or attrahens.

And therefore if there be an excessive distance between the Superficies of the
restagnant Water, and the bottom of the Embolus or Bucket, suppose it 50 or 60
foot of perpendicular height, whereby the potentia attractiva is overmatched
with a pondus of Water more than its strength, it will not raise it to a due
height. For still as I said, where any weighty body is raised out of its place,
it must be by a greater weight, or at lest by a potentia, exceeding that weight
of the Body to be raised.

But the modern Philosophy tells us, that the raising of the Water in the Pump
or Syringe, is not by a vis attractiva or suctoria of the Bucket or Embolus,
but that it is forced up by the weight of a Cylinder of Air, commensurate to
the cavity of the Pump or Syringe.

And that the Elevation of the Pump or Embolus of the Syringe, attenuating the
Air enclosed in the cavity of the Pump or Syringe, and thereby disabled by its
laxity to resist the pressure of the external Cylinder of atmospherical Air,
the Water is driven up into the cavity of the Pump or Syringe.

And because a Cylinder of Mercury of twenty nine Inches and half, is by them
supposed to be of equal weight to the Cylinder of Air of like diameter,
reaching from the top of the Atmosphere unto the vessel of restagnant Mercury
in the Torricellian Experiment, and a Cylinder of Mercury of twenty nine Inches
and half high, countervails in weight a Cylinder of Water of like diameter of
about thirty three foot high, and consequently a Cylinder of the Atmosphere
counterpoiseth a Cylinder of Water of about thirty three foot high, therefore
the Water in a Pump will be raised but just to that height, viz. near thirty
three foot, and no higher, because such a column or Cylinder of Water is
counterpoised by an Atmospherical Cylinder of like diameter. Thus I think it is
rendered by Schottus in his Technica Curiosa, l.4.cap.8..4. and by the Excellent
Author of Hydrostatical Paradoxes, n.5. and by other learned men of this latter
age.

But under their favor I think this is not the true Solution of the instance
in hand, but the first is the true Solution thereof.

If the elevation of the Water in the Pump may be more considerably higher than
33 foot, certainly this latter Solution cannot serve. And though this possibly
has not been fully tried, and requires exact Engines to effect the Trial to the
uttermost; yet there are many that do experimentally affirm, that a Pump or
Syringe well ordered will raise Water above forty foot perpendicular height;
and if so, the counterpoise of the aereal Cylinder will not do the business.
But this I have not tried, I will therefore apply my self to what I have tried.

Fig. 22. I took therefore a great and strong globular glass Bottle, ABC,
holding five Quarts of Water, of about nine Inches Diameter, with a double
orifice, viz. one at A, wherein to fasten my Pump hereafter described, another
at B, to let in or pour out Water, to leave open or close, as I saw cause.

In A the neck of the Bottle I fastened a Laton Pump or Syringe, or about an
Inch and a half diameter, marked D, with a small Pipe about half an Inch
diameter; reaching near the bottom of the Glass, viz. E; an Embolus at G
reaching down near H, and a little crooked Pipe at H to drive out the Water by
the depression of the Embolus.

This Pump was fastened and strongly luted in the neck of the Glass with a
double Valve, one about A to receive the Water into the Pump, and to sustain it
from returning, by depressing the Embolus, another at K the top of the orifice,
to keep the Air from entering upon raising the Embolus.

So that now the Bottle was the Well, which I filled up with Water.

Therefore leaving open the orifice at B, whereby the Air had free access into
the Bottle, by lifting up and depressing the Embolus G the Water was freely and
easily without any difficulty drawn out at the orifice K, through the Valve
there placed, and so I emptied half the Bottle of Water, namely to I the
superior half, being full of free uncompressed and common Air; and the lower
half at I being full of Water.

The Pump being in this posture, I took a short piece of Cork, first boiled and
then dipped in melted Beeswax and Rosin with it, I closely luted up the orifice
at B, so that no air could possibly enter. And then I lifted up and depressed
the Embolus several times, so long 'till I could see the whole success of this
Trial.

First, the Embolus was raised, but not with equal facility, as it was done
when the orifice B was open.

The reason whereof is, because every elevation of the Embolus gave a violent
tension to the Air in the superior cavity of the Glass, which upon every
portion of Water drawn up must necessarily be expanded into a larger space to
supply the space left by the raised Water. So that the expansion of the Air was
not natural, or of its own accord, but by a violent attraction wrought upon it,
and tension of it.

Secondly, yet notwithstanding the exclusion of the Air, I did freely pump out
above a quart of Water, whereby the Water subsided an Inch and a half below I,
and consequently the Air expanded and dilated to so much more space than it had
before, viz. whereas the superior cavity of the Glass held by the Air was two
quarts and half, now it took up the room of three quarts and half, and somewhat
more.

So that here was a quart of Water raised up by the suction of the Embolus, and
yet no possible Gravitation of that imaginary atmospherical column to press or
drive it up; so that surely the ascent of the Water in the Pump is not by the
Balance, aequipondium, or preponderation of a column of the Atmosphere to the
column of Water raised in the cavity of the Pump, for here was no access for
any such column: whether the imaginary Elasticity of the included portion of
Air may be called in to help the matter, we shall see hereafter.

Thirdly, but when I had raised up this quart of Water, and emptied so much out
of my Bottle, all my iterated tractions and trusions of my Embolus could raise
not one drop more.

But all that was done by these repeared motions, was only the rarifying of the
Air included in the Pump, when the Embolus was lifted up, and condensing it
again as the Embolus was depressed, but no Water raised.

Now in this instance, the reason why a quart of water was raised, though the
orifice at B were stopped, was because the potentia suctoria or attractiva of
the Pump was strong enough to give a dilatation of the Air to a greater space
by a quart than it had before.

And the reason why it could raise no more, is this, namely, in as much as
every portion of Water raised out of the vessel, must of necessity leave a
space devoid of so much Water as is so raised up, and that derelicted space
must either be wholly vacant of any Body, which by the universal law of the
Universe is prohibited, or else the Air must expand it self to fill it. And in
as much as the Air having undergone as great an Expansion already (by the
evacuation of the first quart of Water) as this potentia or vis attractiva was
able to effect. The included Air thus expanded resists any further expansion
with an equal strength to the attractive power of the Pump, and so renders it
conamen irritum, to give it a larger expansion, and consequently no more Water
is raised.

But if a greater strength were applied, strong enough to master that
resistance, as if the Pump were longer, that it might give a stronger suction,
that might overmatch the resistance of the included Air against a higher degree
of tension; yea or if the superior Air, after this quart of Water was
evacuated, had a strong external heat applied to it, whereby it might be
capable of a larger expansion, the Water (while the Air was under this forcible
expansion) would be as easily raised by the Pump as at first. But this I durst
not try, for fear of breaking my Glass, or unluting of it.

Upon this consideration and trial it is manifest,

First, that the Gravitation or pressure of the external Air is not the cause
of raising the Water in the Pump; for here it is raised where there is no
Gravitation, the orifice at B being perfectly stopped.

Secondly, that the common Air has no such Elasticity, as the modern
Philosophy assigns to it; for here a portion of Air included in the Glass is of
the same texture with the common Air, and a portion of it, and yet evidently
there is no such Elasticity in it as is supposed.

And this appears, 1. because it is not expanded to one third part of greater
space than it had before, without a force offered to it, as above is shown. 2.
When it is expanded to a third part of space more than it had, it is so far
from a natural expansion of it self farther, that it refists the attractiva
potentia of the Pump to give any larger expansion. And 3. if it had yet a
natural expansive power without force or violence added to it, it would
certainly drive up the rest of the Water that remains, especially when the Air
in the Pump is rarefied or extended by the elevation of the Embolus, and yet no
Water follows it, in this instance, which yet it would do, if the Air had a
continuing Spring or Elasticity to drive it up.

It is true, that naturally all the spaces of this lower World (at lest) are
and must be filled with some body or other: and as one body moves or is moved
out of one space to another, some other body succeeds in that space that is so
left, and fills it. And the fluid Bodies of Air and Water, or some fluid bodily
substance, equivalent to either of them, are in respect of their fluidity
fitted more than other solider Bodies, to supply and make good the interstitia
of other Bodies; and if they be contiguous unto them, to slip into the spaces
deserted by their motion into other spaces, and accordingly will do it, if they
are not impeded by the resistance or interposition of other more stubborn and
untractable Bodies. And by this means upon the successive motions of Bodies,
there is maintained a successive and continual circulation in the motions,
especially of those Bodies that are fluid, and so more ready and apt for motion.

In the Instance of my Pump, suppose that the orifice at B be left open, and
the vessel or Bottle have a Gallon of Water in it, and there stands by it an
empty vessel, suppose M, that contains a Gallon of Air: if I pump out a Gallon
of Water out of the Pump into the vessel M, as the Pump is gradually emptied of
the Gallon of Water into M, the Water leaves its place in the Pump, and takes
up as much room in M, and the Air in M leaves as much space there, and takes it
up in the Pump, to which it has a free access; so that the two Elements change
their stations, and while they hold their natural texture, hold the same
extension of space, though not the same situation. And thus a circulation is
naturally consequential upon the motion esepecially of fluid Bodies; and
therefore when the Water leaves its place in the Pump, and dispossesseth the
Air in the vessel M, and the dispossessed Air gradually succeeds into the space
left by the Water, as fast as the Water leaves it, and takes up another room
equal to what it had before, though in another ubi; here is no Gravitation of
an Atmospherical column upon the orifice B, but only a natural motion and
succession of the like portion of Air into the place relicted by the Water, and
a natural desertion of that space which it before had in the vessel M, which it
cannot retain against the weightier and more prevalent Element of Water taking
it up. So that it is neither a Gravitation of the atmospherical Cylinder upon
the orifice B, nor any great Elasticity of the Air that drives up the Water,
but a natural circulation of the portion of Air into the space derelicted by
the Water; and the immission or insinuation of the Air into that Cavity, is the
Effect not the Cause of the recession of the Water.

And now to reduce all this long process to the thing I principally intended,
we are told by the late Philosophy, that the suspension of the Mercury at
twenty nine Inches height in the Torricellian Experiment, is caused by the
counterpoise of the weight of an external atmospherical Column, commensurate in
its crassitude and weight to the Mercurial Cylinder suspended in the Glass Tube.

And when it is replied, that the like suspension happens, if the Mercurial
Engine be placed in a close room, yea or in a Glass every way closed, that
admits not any such Mercurial column, but intercepts it and its pressure by its
closure every way. We are again told, that that little portion of Air included
within that room or Glass, has so potent an Elasticity, that it will as
effectually suspend the Mercury in the Tube, as that tall Atmospherical
Cylinder of at least seven Miles long. This I say seems to me utterly
incredible for these reasons:

1. The Air included in a close room or Glass, has only the advantage of its
imagined Elasticity, but not the advantage of the stupendous weight assigned by
this New Philosophy to the external aereal Cylinder.

The external Air has the same Elasticity attributed to it, as the Air
included in the close room or Glass, and also the supposed advantage of the
weight of the Cylinder of the Atmosphere besides.

If the bare Elasticity of enclosed Air be sufficient to suspend the Mercury at
twenty nine Inches and half, within the room or Glass; the same Elasticity in
the external Air, with the advantage of its weight, should suspend the Mercury
to fifty nine Inches high, which was never yet done.

2. If the Elatery of the Air cannot drive up a successive portion of Water of
half an Inch diameter into my Pump, without the attraction of the Embolus; nor
yet is that attraction also effectual to raise the Water, when it has expanded
the Air to about a fourth part of space more than is natural to it. It is
impossible that the Elasticity of the Air, included in a close room or Glass
Receiver, can drive and keep up a Cylinder of Mercury twenty nine Inches high,
which yet according to the amplitude of its diameter may weigh, two, four, or
ten pound.

I do therefore conclude upon the whole matter, that it seems to me, the new
hypothesis of the Weight and Elasticity of the Air, as it is delivered by the
late Philosophy, is an Ingenuous Invention, but wants Reality to support it
self, or to give a right and true Solution to the Phanomena wherereunto it is
applied.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The Introduction, containing the order of the ensuing Enquiries. fol.
I CHAP. II. The Explication of some Terms, that may be of use in the following
Inquiry. II CHAP. III. Concerning the Gravitation of Bodies; and first,
concerning the Gravitation of Fluids, in relation to Fluids of the same kind
and consistence: And therein also, first of the Gravitation of water upon
Water. 30 CHAP. IV. Concerning the Gravitation of the Air upon Air, or any
subjected Bodies in it. 47 CHAP. V. Concerning the Gravitation of heavier
Fluids upon those that are lighter. 88 CHAP. VI. Concerning the Pressure or
Gravitation of lighter Fluids, upon those that are specifically heavier. 93
CHAP. VII. Concerning the Space derelicted by the descent of the Mercury in the
Torricellian Experiment, and what it is not, or what it is that fills it. 117
CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Body supplying the derelicted Space in the top of
the Tube, and first what it is not. 122 CHAP. IX. Concerning the other
Supposition, namely, that this derelicted Space is filled with a Body ab intra.
131 CHAP. X. The Enquiry touching the Cause that keeps the Mercury suspended in
the Tube at twenty nine Inches, or thereabout; and first what is not the Cause
of this Suspension. 147 CHAP. XI. Concerning the supposition of the
aequipondium of a pillar of the Air, or Atmosphere, as the Cause sustaining the
Mercurial Cylinder. 152 CHAP. XII. Touching the Elatery or Spring of the Air.
178 CHAP. XIII. Certain Experiments, evincing that the common Air in its
ordinary consistence, has no, or no considerable Elasticity or Spring, without
an accidental or preternatural Compression. 195 CHAP. XIV. The consideration of
some Arguments for the weight and Elatery of the Air. 201 CHAP. XV. Concerning
the true Cause of the suspension of the Mercury at twenty nine Inches and half,
or thereabout, in the Torricellian Engine. 215 CHAP. XVI. Concerning the two
Suppositions that are necessary to maintain this Solution, viz. Natures
abhorrence of a vacuum, and the Attraction of tensible fluids, or other Bodies
when under a tension. 236 CHAP. XVII. Concerning the Cause of the Cohesion of
two polished Marbles. CHAP. XVIII. Concerning the Magdeburgh Hemispheres, and
their cohesion, and the reason thereof. 262 CHAP. XIX. Concerning the raising
of the water by Pumps or Syringes. 286
(...) printed for, and to be sold by William Shrowsbury, at the sign of the
Bible in Duck-lane.

AN Essay touching the Gravitation or Non-Gravitation of Fluid Bodies, and the
reasons thereof; in 8o.

Stereometrie, or the Art of Practical Gauging; showing in two Parts, 1.
Diverse facile and compendious ways for Gauging of Tuns and Brewers Vessels, of
all Forms and Figures, either in whole, or gradually from Inch to Inch, whether
the Tun or vessels Bases above and below be Homogeneal, or Heterogeneal,
parallel and alike situate or not. 2. The Gauging of any Wine, Brandy, or
Oyl-Cask; be the same assumed as Sphaeroidael, Parabolicael, Conical, or
Cylindrical; either full, or partly empty, and at any Position of the Cask, or
Altitude of contained Liquor; performed either by brief Calculation, or
Instrumental Operation.

Together with a Large Table of Area's of a Circles Segments, and other
necessary Tables, and their excellent Utilities and Improvements; with a
Copious and Methodical Index of the Whole; rendering the Work perspicuous and
intelligible to Mean Capacities. By John Smith, Philo-Accomptant: in 8o.

Franconis Burgersdicii Idea Philosophiae Naturalis, sive Methodus definitionum
and controversiarum Physicarum. Editio Novissima.

Huc accessit Idea Oeconomicae and Politicae Doctrinae, codem Auctore. Opus
Posthumum. 12o.

De antiqua Ecclesiae Britannicae Liberate, atque de legitima ejusdem
Ecclesiae exemptione a Romano Patriarchatu Diatribe per aliquot Theses diducta:
Autore I.B. SS. Theologiae Professore. 4o.

schematic diagrams

schematic diagrams


