A True RELATION OF THE Unjust Accusation Of Certain French Gentlemen, (Charged
with a Robbery, of which they were most Innocent) And the Proceedings upon it,
with their Trial and Acquittance in the Court of Kings Bench, in Easter Term
last.

Published by DENZELL LORD HOLLES, Partly for a further manifestation of their
Innocence, (of which, as he is informed, many do yet doubt) and partly for his
own Vindication, in regard of some Passages at that Trial, which seemed very
strongly to reflect upon him.

London, Printed by J. Darby, for Richard Chiswel, at the two Angels and Crown
in Little-Britain, 1671.

COnceiving my self under some necessity, not only to make known the Innocence
of a couple of young Gentlemen of the French Nation, whom a curiosity of seeing
other Countries besides their own had brought into England, and who, by a great
deal of Art and Malice, had been drawn into danger by a Robbery laid to their
charge, of which they were as free as the Child new born; And also to vindicate
my self of some blemish, which was endeavored to be cast upon me at the Trial
of those Gentlemen in the Kings Bench, as if something had been done by me, not
fair nor justifiable, in the carriage of that Business, and some harsh usage
which I received in Court: These considerations have induced me to make public
the whole Proceeding from the beginning to the end.

But by the way, let me answer one thing which may be objected, Why I have
staid so long to set out this Narrative, it being now almost a twelve month
since these transactions were, which gave the occasion for it? to which I say,
That it was still my desire, before I made it public in Print, to be
judicially cleared in my Reputation; and before I did apply my self to any
Higher Power either King or Parliament to be so cleared, to do my self first
that right, to declare the truth of all Passages, whereby the clearness of my
Proceedings might appear, I still being in the same capacity, and upon the same
level, as I was, when those indignities were put upon me, and when such a
disguise was put upon the whole business as the truth could not appear, that
was, to give a full and true account of all in an Ordinary Court of Justice,
which I would have done then in the Kings Bench, but could not be suffered, and
for which I knew I should have an opportunity, when those Gentlemen should
bring their Action against the Persons who had so falsely and maliciously
accused them, as they have since done in the Court of Common Pleas, and there I
did them and my self that right, to lay open the whole matter, with which the
Court and Jury were so well satisfied, that they had a Verdict for Four hundred
Pounds damages against them; and after that, I immediately made my Complaint
in the House of Lords for what concerned my self, where I have received that
Justice, which has abundantly satisfied me, (my Honor being the only thing
dear unto me, which before had been blemished, and was there cleared) and now I
come to present it all to the public view, and shall do it as succinctly as I
may, with all candor and sincerity.

These two Gentlemen, One, a youth of about 17 years of age, called Valentine
Simon Chevalier de Hoeville (that is, Knight of Hoeville, according to the
French style, he being destinated (it seems) by his Parents to be a Knight of
Malta, when they use to give them the Appellation of Knights, even while very
young before their going thither to take upon them the Vow and the Habit:) The
other, his Name is Adrian Lampriere Sr des Mezieres, young also, but nineteen
years old, and of a good Family in Normandy as well as the other, both of them
Neighbors to my Wife, and to her Estate in those parts. These two young Men,
younger Brothers, but with money in their Purses, came hither, not to rob upon
the Highway, but to see Fashions, and have seen One with a Witness not very
well to be liked by them: They landed at Ratcliff, the second or third of
November; and having a recommendation to lodge at Master Sedgewick's House, a
Barber, in the Strand, they came thither, and there they continued, till forced
to lie in a Prison against their Wills.

Though they were Neighbors, and their Parents of acquaintance and Friends to
my Wife, yet she heard not of them, till they were made to cry to her out of
the Goal of Hartford; They excused it afterward that they would not see her,
till they had put themselves into Black Clothes, as most wore at that time.
They kept in their Lodgings, and scarce ever went out, but to their Dinners and
Suppers at an Ordinary (as several Credible Witnesses made it out at their
Trial) from the day of their coming to London, until the Thursday sennight
after, which was the 11th of November. That day, they and three others of their
Countrymen (whom they had fallen acquainted with here) agreed to go see a
Merchant about Barnet, with whom they had some business; Missing of him, they
resolved to go see Hatfield House. One of their Company only spoke English,
whose Name was Beauuais, themselves not one word, and the other two as little.
For this Journey they hired Horses, in two or three places, from several
Persons, the best Horse not worth above three Pounds. These Horses were brought
to their Lodgings upon the Thursday Morning, their Landlord's Wife passing her
word for them. One of the Company had no Boots, a young Youth, whose Father is
a rich Merchant in Paris, his Name Boutandon; He lay in Long-Acre, and took
Horse there; And it is said, they had much ado to get him upon his Horse,
having scarce ever been upon one before, and Boots it is certain he had none at
all, nor they say never had any: And not a Pistol among all five. In this
Equipage they began their Voyage, how like to be Highway Men, let any man
judge, especially having no Language, nor no knowledge of the Country, or of
one foot of the way in it, and Horses that could scarce go out of a way when
they were in it. They came to Hatfield upon the Market Day, went into the
Market, saw Hatfield House, and coming back to their Inn, the Town did rise
upon them, and apprehended them for Thieves, that had robbed four Butchers,
whose names were Robert Simons, Robert Bellingham, Edward Lawrence, and Solomon
Grace, upon Totternol Hill in Bedfordshire the Monday before, being the eighth
of November, between three and four of the Clock in the Afternoon. Those
Butchers among the rest came, and viewed them, and having seen them, One or two
of them (as I have been told) were very doubtful of accusing them; Solomon
Grace by Name, saying (as one Murrel a Surgeon who did then reside in
Hatfield, and was present, has assured me) that he would not for the World
say, they were the men that did the Robbery: Only two of the Butchers said,
They thought they were them, and going into the Stable, said, They thought they
knew one of the Horses. They kept them there all the Thursday, trying to get
the Money from them which the Butchers had lost, about 27 pound, upon which
condition, they said they would let them go, and not carry them before a
Justice. But they refusing it, they then upon the Friday Morning carried them
before Sir Francis Butler: He examined them, and heard the Accusation of the
four Butchers, without giving them their Oath; And upon the bare saying of
three of them, One, that those men were like those he saw upon the Road, the
other two, that they did believe them to be those that robbed them: He made his
Mittimus, and sent them to the Goal at Hartford, whither they were compelled to
walk on foot: And when they came thither, were presently put into Irons, and
laid in a low damp Room, with scarce any light to it, no Bed, and only Straw to
lie upon; and so they lay from Friday the twelfth of November, till the Sunday
fortnight after, seventeen days, more like Dogs then Persons of any Quality:
And no body at London had known what had become of them, if that Murrel, whom I
named before, hearing them tell where they lodged in London, had not of himself
come and given notice at that House, That their Guests were in Hartford Goal.
The Examination and the Mittimus follow Verbatim.

The Examination of Solomon Grace, Drover; Robert Simmons, Robert Bellingham,
and Edward Lawrence, Butchers, all of the Parish of Edmondton in the County of
Middlesex, taken before me, One of the Justices of Peace for the County of
Hartford, upon the 12 th of November, 1669.
Solomon Grace says, That he riding on the Road near Totternol, saw five young
men afoot, with their Horses in their hands; he suspecting them, made haste
from them; and being got at a good distance, stayed to let his Horse drink, b^^
seeing them coming toward him, he galloped away, and heard one of them say,
Farewell old man; And looking about, saw them all turn back toward Totternol
Hill, which was about a mile distance from him; and says, That the Persons
apprehended are very like those he saw upon the Road.

Robert Simmons says, That on Monday, being the eighth of November, 1669.
about three or four of the Cl ck in the Afternoon, upon Totternol Hill, in the
Parish of Totternol, he was robbed, and had 27 pounds taken from him, and
believes the Persons now apprehended, are the men which robbed him.

Robert Bellingham, as to time and place, agrees with Robert Simmons, and
further says, That he and Robert Simmons, and Edward Lawrence, riding
together, espied five men coming toward them, which they judged to be Thieves,
and therefore putting Spurs to their Horses, thought to escape them by riding,
but two of them overtaking him, one of the two clapped a Pistol to his Breast;
they searched him, and finding no Money, they took his Bridle and his Girdle,
and the other three pursued Robert Simmons, And he verily believes that the
black man, which calls himself Adrian Lamperiere, is the man that pulled the
Bridle off his Horse.

Edward Lawrence says, He was in Company with Robert Simmons and Robert
Bellingham, on the forementioned day, time, and place, and saw the five men,
which they suspected to be Thieves, but being well horsed, escaped.

The Examination of Paul Bovey, Adrian Lamperier, John Boudandon, Valentine
Chivalier, and Guinet Chateuneuf, all French men, taken before me, One of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Hertford, upon the 12 th day
of November 1669.
Paul Bovey says, That he is a Servant to One of My Lord Chamberlains Sons,
Mr. Edward Montacute, but that he lodges at Mr. Munduglas his House, in George
Lane in Kings-street, Westminster. He says he came to Hatfield upon the 11th
of November 1669. with four of his Friends, to see the Earl of Salisburies
House, And that on Monday before, he and one of his Friends dined at the
Scottish Ordinary in Bedfordbury, and on Tuesday they all five dined in the
same place.

Adrian Lamperier says, That he came into England the second of this Instant,
and that he lodges at one Sedgwick's a Barbers, over against the Maypole in
the Strand.

John Boudandon says, he came into England the 15th of August last, and
lodges in Long-Acre, at a Semstress House over against the Castle; and that he
tradeth in Merchandise.

Valentine Chevalier lodges with Adrian Lamperier, and came into England with
him.

Guinet Chateauneuf lodges with Paul Bouey, which Monsieur Bouey hired all the
five Horses, upon which they rode to Hatfield. Sedgwick past his word for three
of the Horses, who lives in the Strand over against the May Pole; and all but
Bouey affirm, they were not out of London since they came thither, until the
forementioned 11th of November.

The Mittimus. To the Keeper of his Majesty's Gaol for the County of Hertford.
I Herewithall send you the Bodies of Paul Bouey, Adrian de Lamperier, John
Boutandon, Valentine Chevalier, and Guinet Chateauneuf, brought this day before
me, and charged with the Felonious taking away twenty seven pounds from Robert
Simmons of Edmondton, and rifling Robert Bellingham upon Totternol-hill, on the
8th day of this instant November, between three and four of the Clock in the
afternoon: These are therefore on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, to
command you to receive the forenamed Paul Bouey, Adrian Lamperier, John
Boutandon, Valentine Chevalier, and Guinet Chateauneuf, and them safely to keep
in your Jail until they shall be thence delivered by due Order of Law: hereof
fail not.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Hatfield-Woodhall this 12th of November 1669,
in the 21th year of his Majesty's Reign. Francis Boteler.

Mr. Sedgwick their Landlord presently sent his Son to Hertford to them, and
with him their Servant, whom they had left in London; And that Servant they
sent back, with a Letter to my Wife, to let her know who, and where they were:
with which she acquainted me upon the Monday-morning, I being at that time sick
in bed. Whereupon I sent for Sedgwick, who came to me immediately, and brought
with him the men of whom they had hired the Horses, and his Son, and (as I
remember) a Servant of his. He gave me an account of those Gentlemen, assuring
me they had not been out of London from the time of their coming thither, till
that Thursday; And that he believed them to be very honest men, they having
carried themselves very civilly in his House: And however, That he would take
his Oath, they had not committed any Robbery upon Monday the 8th of November,
for he knew they were all that day in London; which his Son and Servant
likewise affirmed; and the Men of whom the Horses were hired, said, they had
them but that Thursday. And he offered himself to be Bayl for them, but said he
could not possibly go thither to bayl them till the Wednesday; Upon which day I
sent one with him to join in the Bayl; They first went to Sir Francis Boteler,
the Justice that had committed them, told him who those Gentlemen were whom he
had committed; that they were persons known unto me so far, as that I would
answer for them, being very well assured that they were not guilty of that
Robbery, as having not stirred out of London all that day on which the Robbery
was done in Bedfordshire, at thirty miles distance from thence, nor had been
out of London from the time of their arrival thither out of France, till the
day before he committed them to Hertford-Gaol, which was three days after the
Robbery, when they went from London to see Hatfield-House; and that therefore I
had sent them to him, to be their Bayl: But all this would not prevail with Sir
Francis Boteler, who bade them go to some other Justice, saying, It was not fit
for him who had sent them to Prison, to take Bayl for them to let them out. He
was then desired, they might not lie in Irons: but he would not meddle with
that neither, saying, he left that to the Jailer, who knew how to keep them. So
they left him, and went to seek some other Justice at Hertford, And when they
came thither, they found a Letter there from Mr. Justice Morton, that then they
could not be bayled. The Letter was directed to the Jailer of Hertford as
follows.

SIR,
THere being Information given to my Lord Chief Justice and my self, that there
are five highway Robbers apprehended in Hertfordshire, and committed to the
Goal, I am desired by my Lord Chief Justice to require you to look carefully to
them, that they do not escape out of your Custody, and to iron them well: And
withal to write up unto Us by what Names they are committed to you, and what
their true Names are, if you have or can discover the same; because we are
informed, That they refuse to declare what their true Names are; And the Return
thereof you are to send by this Bearer, and to be very careful that they may
not escape, or be bayled without our special Order: And this we require you to
perform at your utmost peril.

Chancery Lane, Nov. 15. 1669. Postscript*

I pray you, That the Bearers hereof be admitted to view the Prisoners, and to
confer with them.




So Sedgwick, and he that went with him to bayl them, returned next day to
London, re infecta, brought me Copies of the Examination, Mittimus, and of
Judge Mortons Letter: With which I presently went to Serjeants-Inn to the
Judge, and discoursing the matter with him, made it appear they could not be
Thieves: so he said, they should be bayled, but that he must speak first with
the Chief Justice, because the Letter had been written by his advice, and he
would give me an account of it the next day in the Lords House: He came
accordingly, and then told me the Case was altered, since he had seen me, for
that the Butchers had now been with the Lord Chief Justice, and positively
charged them with the Robbery upon their Oaths, so as now they were not
baylable. I replied, I thought it strange, That first a Justice of Peace should
send Men to Prison without any Oath against them, of so much as Suspicion, keep
them so long in Irons, so hardly used; and after several days lying so, their
Accusers to be sent for to swear to their Accusation, when they had not done it
before; so to make good a posteriore, what upon their Commitment before was not
good. (For certainly their Imprisonment, and all the Duress they had suffered,
without an Accusation upon Oath, and to refuse bayling them, was unjust and
illegal:) And I said; the King should be acquainted with it: Which he was, and
the Chief Justice was sent for, and I commanded by his Majesty to attend at the
same time, which was the Monday after in the morning: When we came thither, the
Chief Justice telling the King they were Highway-men, and I affirming they were
not, and that I would undertake for them body for body: His Majesty said, they
should then be bayled, and commanded the Chief Justice accordingly to do it,
who said he would; but yet was it a whole week after, ere I could get them
brought to the King's Bench Bar to be bayled; For just that day sennight after,
upon the Monday, they were brought thither, and there I entered into a
Recognizance of Two thousand Pounds for their Appearance at the next Assizes at
Bedford: And all that week they had lain in Irons in their nasty Hole at
Hertford: Nay, I am credibly informed, That when they were brought to the
Side-Barr in Westminster Hall in the morning before the Court sat, the
Chief Justice was angry, because they had not Irons on; which was a very great
severity to poor young Gentlemen, strangers, whom the King had commanded to be
bayled, and whom (if I may say it without vanity) a Peer of the Realm had
undertaken for, in the Presence of his Majesty.

At Bedford Lent-Assizes they appeared, and were indicted, but their Trial was
by the King's Command removed by Certiorari into the King's Bench. And the
first day of Easter Term they appeared there: Whither I went not my self with
them, because the Smallpox was in my House, which made me keep within doors,
but I sent my Son, bade him do my service to my Lord Chief Justice, tell him
the occasion why I came not, and that he was there to perform what was to be
done for the bayling of those Gentlemen: Now it seems the use is upon such a
kind of Bayl, after an Indictment upon a Certiorari, to require four Persons to
answer for the Prisoner body for body: So my Son offered himself, and Mr.
Sedgwick the Landlord to these Gentlemen, (a Substantial Man, worth at least
two or three Thousand Pounds) and two other men, Frenchmen, but Housekeepers,
and that live in a good fashion, to be the Bayl: The Chief Justice asked those
two, what estate they had, and if they would swear, that all their Debts paid,
they were worth three hundred pounds, which they refusing to do, he put them
by, and would not accept of them for Bayl; which I am told is not usual to be
requied of such kind of Bayl, that undertake body for body for a Prisoners
being forthcoming.

Well bayled they were not, but to Prison they went, and there they continued
until their Trial upon Wednesday the 11th of May, at which I was present in
Court. That day they were brought to the Bar, and the four Butchers came,
their Accusers, and were sworn in Court, of whom three charged them with the
Robbery; And Solomon Grace was one of the three, who had refused to swear
against them, when they were first seized on at Hatfield, and afterward at
London when the Lord Chief Justice sent for him; And I am very certain that he
said afterward in my house in my hearing, and of several of my Servants, that
he had not sworn against them, nor would for all the world; (The occasion of
his coming to my house I shall hereafter relate:) The fourth man, Edward
Lawrence said, he saw the five Thieves at a distance, but he rode for it and
escaped, and could not say it was those five men at the Bar. A fifth man was
produced, one George Pettiford, who said that he rode in Company with Beauuais
within half a Mile of Totternel-Hill about two of the clock in the afternoon
that day that the Robbery was, but could not say any thing to the Robbery: The
Butchers said also, that two of the Horses which they rode upon, when they
robbed them, viz. that which Adrian Lampriere had, a Bay with a white face and
white feet, and that which Beauuais had, a Gray, were taken with them at
Hatfield; where, upon the Hue and Cry all the five men were apprehended.
Simmons said further, that Beauuais was the man, that took his Money from him:
And Bellingham said, that the black man, (who was Adrian Lampriere) when he
overtook him, held a Pistol to his Breast, and swore to him Dam-me what Money
have thou about thee? and then rifled him, and finding nothing, took his
Girdle, and pulled his bridle off his horses head. And the same Bellingham
some-while after being again asked and put to it, to repeat what Lampriere
said, and in what language he spoke, when he came to him; He then answered,
that he said Dam-me, and jabberd to him, but he knew not well what he said: So
would not stand to what he had positively said before of Lamprieres asking him,
what Money he had in his Purse: And I dare affirm that at that time Mr.
Lampriere could not have spoken so much English to have gotten thereby all the
Money in England; Of which One Pinson (that teaches strangers the English
tongue; whom he has since had to teach him) will take his Oath. This was the
Charge.

Then the Prisoners being required to answer to it, Mr. Lampriere began to give
an account of himself, what he was, and what had brought him into this Kingdom;
That he was a Gentleman, and came not hither to robb upon the Highway: That
his friends would rather wish him a thousand times dead, than to be branded
with such an Infamy; And so was going on, when the Chief Justice interrupted
him, and bad him speak particularly to the matters of his Charge; (And
certainly what he was saying was much to the purpose, to show in the first
place the Improbability of his being guilty of such a Fact, by being a
Gentleman, a stranger in this Country, and whose friends would detest him if he
had committed that Fact;) He then only named some Persons, and desired they
might be heard, to prove, that he could not be guilty of that Robbery, for that
he was in London all that Monday the 8th of November, when the Robbery was
committed upon Totternol-hill in Bedford shire.

And first, one Mr. Richard Compton, an ancient Gentleman, and (as I am
informed) a Justice of Peace in his Country, was produced, who said, That he
lodged in the same House with the two Gentlemen at the Bar, at Mr. Sedgewick's
the Barber, that he saw them there, and spoke with them the Saturday,
understanding French a little, and saw them and spoke with them the Monday,
which was the 8th of November, first in the morning, and then at two of the
clock in the afternoon, and again at five of the clock the same Evening: (so
then if he said true, it was impossible they should be that day Robbing at
Totternoll-hill; And a grave Person of that Quality affirming a thing in such a
solemn Assembly, in a Court of Justice is certainly more to be believed, then
those Butchers, even upon their Oaths, who as it appears cared no more to hang
men with taking a false Oath, then to have knocked one of their Calves in the
head, and accordingly it seems the Jury did believe him,) He said further, that
he saw them also the Wednesday, and thought he saw their Horses on Thursday,
which they rode on to Hatfield. The Chief Justice asked him, how he came to
take so good notice of his seeing them the Monday? he answered, that when he
heard they were taken as Highway-men, and to have done a Robbery such a day, he
had recollected his Memory, how he had seen them at times all that day in
London, and had set it down in a Paper, with the day of the Month, and pointing
to the two Gentlemen at the Bar, to show he meant them, the Chief Justice bad
him name them, He said, he knew not their Names, which the Chief Justice
presently laid hold on, and asked him, how then he could give such a Testimony
of them? he answered, that they had told him their names, but he had forgotten
them, and called them still only Monsieurs.

Next Thomas Doughty, an ancient man likewise, a Solicitor, was called: He
said, he saw those two Gentlemen in Mr. Sedgwick's house, Saturday the 6th of
November, and the Monday being the 8th at three of the clock in the afternoon
(just the hour of the Robbery) and saw them also there the Tuesday, and the
Wednesday; The Chief Justice asked him, how he came to take so much notice of
them? he answered, that he followed business for Mr. Sedgewick, and so had
occasion to come often to the house, where he saw them.

Then Mr. Sedgewick was heard, who said, That those two Gentlemen, viz. Mr.
Lampriere, and the Chevali er, came to his house the 2d of November, being then
newly arrived out of France, and recommended by some body, that had told them
there were some in it that spoke French; And that from the time of their coming
to London, till the Thursday sennight that they went to Hatfield, they had not
been out of his house above two hours at a time, and then only to their Dinners
and Suppers at an Ordinary in Swan-Alley: And that particularly upon Monday the
8th of November, they were in his house all the morning till about eleven a
clock, and then went out to dinner to the Ordinary, and came back about one or
two, and staid within till supper time, and then went to the Ordinary, and came
back after supper: The Chief Justice asked him, where they dined upon the
Sunday before, he said they dined with him at his house: And that the Tuesday
and Wednesday following they were within both forenoon and afternoon, only
going out to their meals: that Thursday they took horse at his door to go to
Barnet, with a resolution to see Hatfield-House before their return.

Mris Sedgwick (his Wife) said, that those two French-Gentlemen came to their
house upon the 2d day of November about ten of the clock in the forenoon,
brought thither by a Waterman, to whom (they having no English Money) she gave
a Crown for them: That they went out to dinner to the Ordinary, and afterward
came back, and lay upon their beds, and she saw them no more till the next day,
when she changed some French Gold for them; That from the 2d to the 11th of
November that they went to Barnet, they were not above two hours at a time out
of doors: That Mr. Beauuais went with them, because he spoke English: That they
said if they found not their Merchant at Barnet, they would go to Hatfield:
That she passed her word for their Horses; And not seeing them come home again
on Thursday, she much wondered at it, and on Friday in the evening one came to
tell them, they were in Hertford Gaol: That they sent Letters to the Lord
Holles, who knew them: That three of them took horse at their door about nine
or ten of the clock in the forenoon, and were to meet the two others in
Drury Lane: And that the horses were so bad, as they said it would be a shame
to be seen upon them.

I must note here that upon the naming of me, and mentioning the Letter, that
should be written to me, the Chief Justice seemed to be moved, and said some
thing which I did not well hear, whereupon I stood up, and said, My Lord, I
shall give you an account how I came to be concerned, and so began to tell,
That they were Gentlemen, Neighbors to my Wife in Normandy, who came over
hither to see the Country, and falling into this misfortune, writ a Letter to
my Wife to acquaint her with it, not to me, (which was a mistake in the
Witness;) And so was going on to relate what I knew of the business; But his
Lordship was pleased in a very angry peremptory manner to interrupt me, first
asking if I was to give Evidence, then bidding me forbear, and saying I must
not interrupt the Court. I replied, That I hoped it was not to interrupt the
Court; Nor to do them any wrong to inform them as as much as was possible of
all passages, that they might the better understand the whole truth of the
business: He answered again very angrily, My Lord, you wrong not the Court, but
you wrong your self: And it is not the first time you have been observed to
appear too much for strangers.

So I was snubb'd, and sat down again. But I must say, it was a language, I
had not been used to, nor I think any of my condition, that have the Honor to
serve the King in the quality I do of a Privy-Counseller.

Then Sedgwick the Son was called, who said he knew those two, viz. Mr.
Lampriere, and the Chevalier, That they came to lodge at their House, the 2d of
November, and their continued till the 11th. That the day before they went
their journey all five met at their shop; And that in the morning, three of them
(their two lodgers and Beauvais) took horse there, and said they should meet
the other two in their way, and so go to Barnet: That upon Monday the 8th of
November, he saw the two (the Chevalier and the other) at home about ten of the
clock, and again about two in the afternoon; And that they staid within till
the evening; And the same account he gives of them for Tuesday and Wednesday.

His Sister Mary Sedgwick confirms what was said of their assiduous and
constant being at home; Only adds this, that upon Monday morning the 8th she
carried up a Landress to them to their Chamber, and that the little man,
meaning the Chevalier, was in his bed about ten or eleven of the clock: And
that every day after until Thursday she saw them in her shop, she keeping a
Sempstress Shop.

Philip Lemmon a Poulterer says, That as he was watering his horse in the
White-Hart yard upon the Wednesday, Mr. Lampriere, the Chevalier, and Beauvais
coming by, Beauvais asked him, if he had any Horses to let? and he said, he had
but one: So they went, and he with them, to one Hooper, who had but one
neither, and asked 3 s. for his hire, and they proffered half a Crown: He said
that his Horse was a Bay, with a white face and four white feet, Hoopers was a
little Gray Nag, and that there was a Gray Mare besides hired of another man:
And said, That one Capt. Hill had hired his Horse on the Monday before to go to
Brickhill, and kept him till the Wednesday: It is to be noted, that this was
the Horse, which the Butchers swore, Lampriere had under him when he robbed
them, whereas it appears by this man's Testimony, that one Captain Hill had him
that day, and full two days after, for he brought him back to London but the
Wednesday, the day before these Gentlemen hired him.

Mary Hooper, Wife to him that let out one of the Horses, says, That she sent
the little Gray Nagg on Thursday morning to Mr. Sedgwick's house, And that on
the Wednesday before she saw those three Men with her Husband hiring that Horse
of him: And note, That this was the other Horse, which the Butchers swore that
Beauvais ridd upon when he robbed them; Whereas it appears, that none of them
had this Horse till three days after that Robbery, when they went to Hatfield,
nor was it Beauvais who had himthen, but Mr. Lampriere; so they swore falsely,
for it appears, neither he nor the Horse were there.

William Wood Master of the Victualling-house in Swan-Alley, witnessed, That
Mr. Lampriere and the Chevalier dined and supped at his House Monday the 8th of
November. The Chief Justice asked him, how he came to take notice, that they
were there just that day? He answered, That there was a Writing sealed between
two Persons at his House that day, and he had since looked upon the date of it,
and found it to be the 8th of November, and he very well remembered that those
two Gentlemen were then present. The Chief Justice then asked him, Where they
dined upon the Sunday? He said, at his House. Whereupon Mr. Sedgwick was
presently called, and asked again, where the Gentlemen dined on Sunday? and he
(as he had done before) said, at his House.

Of this the Chief Justice took notice, showing how the Witnesses contradicted
one another, which he said took off their whole Testimony (or some words to
that effect; And by the way let me say, that I would not be understood to take
upon me to repeat still the very Identical words that were spoken by any, but I
am very confident, that I do not vary a tittle from the sense of what every one
said.) The same Wood also testified that they had dined and supped at his house
the Tuesday, and the Wednesday following; So as it appears, they continued
still in London until the Thursday.

Then Charles Walrond came into the Court and confessed, that himself, Du-Val,
Ashenhurst, Cassels, and Mac-Guy were the five men that committed that Robbery
upon the Butchers at Totternol-Hill upon Monday the 8th of November; That they
robbed them about the middle of the Hill; That himself rode upon a Brown
Gelding. That it was Ashenhurst that took the Money from the Butcher, about 22
l. odd money: The Chief Justice then stopped him, and said, That he knew he would
say what ever he was bid to say; And then asked him, if he had been indicted
for this Robbery? he said, No; and the Chief Justice replied, Now Sirrah you
have confessed enough, and you shall be indicted, or you may be indicted, one of
the two I am sure he said, but which I will not positively affirm.

He had said in the account he gave, That one of the Butchers breaking from
them and galloping away, he followed him over some Plowed-Lands; and the
Butcher affirming it was Stubble he rode over, the Chief Justice made a great
matter of it, insinuating, as if Walrond had said false, and that he was not
there at all, but merely took this Robbery upon himself at my solicitation,
upon hope of his Pardon; yet another of the Butchers confessed there was both
Plowed-Land and Stubble: And what was it material which it was? It had been no
wonder, if neither could have told; and that both had been mistaken: For hardly
does either he that rides away from a Thief as fast as his Horse will carry
him, and sufficiently frighted withal, or the Thief that rides as fast after
him to overtake him, mind the Ground they ride over.

Then Sir George Charnock was called in to testify what Du-Val and Mac-Guy had
confessed concerning this Robbery: But first I must tell, how the Butchers (and
Bellingham chiefly) had a little before given Information, That they had been
sent for up to London by the Lord Holles his Warrant, and carried to Du Val at
Newgate, where Du-Val, Mac-Guy, and they were examined by two Men, who
pretended themselves to be Justices of Peace, and who after they had examined
Du-Val, carried him to Mac-Guy, but first went in themselves, and staid with
him half an hour, and when they came into the Room they took him aside again,
and spoke with him in private a good space, acquainting him (as Bellingham said
he conceived) with what Du-Val had confessed, and promising him his Pardon; and
that then Mac-Guy said the same things with Du-Val, and took the Robbery upon
him, as Du-Val had done before: I must note, that upon Bellingham's saying they
were sent for by me, I stood up and said, that it was done by the King's
express Command.

The Chief Justice asked, Who were those Justices, and what were their Names?
and used some expression to this sense, That those Justices deserved to be sent
to the Gaol themselves; And withal cast his looks upon me, and by his gesture
and countenance seemed to mark out me, as the Setter and Contriver of a foul
Practice, to send those Justices thither to make those condemned Persons own
the Robbery, and acquit the Frenchmen; So as all the standers-by took notice
of it, and looked upon me, as well as did the Judge; yet I sat still and would
not say any thing in the Court to vindicate my self, because I would not give
any interruption to their proceedings, as the Chief Justice had before told me
that I did, and I believed he might again have said the same. But truly if I
had done any unworthy thing even to have saved their lives, or had any design
of suborning, or in any unfitting way persuading any body to do or speak for
them, or had contributed any thing to the effecting of such a design* I should
abhor my self for it. And after I shall have gone through with all the
Witnesses, I shall then give an account, and a very true one, of all my
transactions in that business: And will now go on with the Testimony of Sir
Goarge Charnock.

He said, that himself and Mr. Andrew Blackwell Counselor at Law, and Mr.
William Sedgwick, and one of his Majesty's Messengers, were sent by me,
together with Bellingham and other the Prosecutors, to Du-Val to Newgate just
before his going to Execution: That they found him in a room, which was not
very dark, and yet had also a Candle in it, so as Du-Val, and the Butchers
mighteasily discern one another, and he asked them whether they knew one
another? Du-Val confessed that he and his Camerades had committed the Robbery
upon those men, and named Walrond, Ashenhurst, Cassels, and Mac-Guy to have
been those that were then with him at that Robbery; That Bellingham thereupon
swore, By God he was not the Person that Robbed them: And Du-Val upon that
said, Friend be cautious how you swear and prosecute Innocent Persons; for men
of your profession, Butchers, care not what you swear against any man; And
instanced in a Robbery in Surry committed by him, and others, upon some
Butchers, which they had charged peremptorily upon other persons that were
innocent. And then said further to Bellingham, You may remember it was I, by
the same token, that you fled from me over the Plowed-Lands, and my horse
tired, so, as I left following you, and walked back with my horse in my hand;
And Sir George Charnock said, that he then asked Bellingham what he said to
that, and that Bellingham was startled at it, and confessed it to be true, that
he did ride away from them toward Layton.

And so was going on with his Testimony, when the Chief Justice interrupted
him, and required him to answer a Question which he would propose, which was,
to know how long he had been with Mac-Guy before the Butchers saw him? To which
he answered, That he desired his Lordship he might first give a full account of
what Du-Val had confessed, and that then he would tell all that had passed with
Mac-Guy: But his Lordship would not suffer him, but said, Pray you Sir George
go on no further, but answer this Question. Whereupon he told him, that he was
a little while with Mac-Guy, but not alone, for Mr. Blackwell and young
Sedgwick were there as well as he, and that he asked Mac-Guy if he was one of
the Persons which had committed such a Robbery? and he denied it; whereupon he
sent for the Butchers into the room, and desired them to look upon Mac-Guy, and
see if they knew him; which they said they did not. The Chief Justice then
asked him, if he took not Mac-Guy aside the 2d time? he said he did, but Mr.
Blackwell and young Sedgwick still present, and that it was only to make him
discharge his Conscience and tell the truth, which he conceived it to be his
duty to do, and so was going on to relate all passages; But the Chief Justice
stopped him, and with much sharpness reproved him, saying, Sir George you have
gone too far, and have done too much already: here has been a foul
Contrivance, it would be examined by what Authority you have done it: And would
hear him no further, nor suffer him to read Du-Val and Mac-Guy's Examinations
which he had in his hand and showed unto him, notwithstanding that both Sir
George and my self had just before told him, that all had been done by the
Kings express command.

Then the Masters Mate of the Ship, John Burdick, who brought over the two
Gentlemen into England, was called: He said, that he took in those two
Gentlemen viz. Mr. Hoeville and Mr. Lampriere, and one Servant of theirs aboard
his Ship at Roven, upon the 27th of October; that he landed them at Ratcliff
upon the third of November; that they went into London that day, and came back
and lay that night on shore in Ratcliff, and the next day they went again to
London, and came no more; And he sent a Seaman along with them to carry their
things: The Chief Justice then asked him, if he was sure, that he landed them
the 3d of November? he answered Yes, for that he had set it down in writing and
had it ready in his hand to show. Then Sedgwick the Father was presently
called, and asked again, What day those two came to his house? he said (as
before) the second of November: And sharp Reflections were made upon this
faltering in his Testimony, as if the stress of the matter had lain in this,
Whether the second or third of November was the day of their landing? which no
man will say could signify any thing, to prove, whether or no they had been
robbing upon Totternol-hill the eighth.

And so ended the Trial of those two Gentlemen, Hoeville and Lampriere: Then
Paul Beauvais was called upon to answer for himself; And he desired only that
his Witnesses might be heard, to prove his being in London the day of the
Robbery.

And first Sir Steven Fox was called, who being in Court, affirmed upon his
Salvation, that he saw Beauvais at a French Play that very day from three of
the clock in the afternoon until seven; (Note, this was the very time of the
Robbery.) The Chief Justice asked him, How he came to take notice that it was
that very day? Of which Sir Stephen gave this account, That his Wife and
himself, and his Daughter, and a Gentlewoman that waited on his Daughter, were
that Monday at the French Play, and his Daughter sitting before him in the Box,
looked over into the Pit, and saw Beauvais there, and turned back to him,
saying, Father, Paul Beauvais is not gone into France, I see him here:
Whereupon he said he looked over also into the Pit, and did see him there; and
saw him also, and spoke to him at the end of the Play, about seven of the
Clock: He said also, That he was then to go into France to his Mother, and that
he thought him gone: And for his taking such particular notice of him, and his
being there that very day, Monday the eighth of November, (for that was asked
of him as well as of others) He gave this Reason, That hearing so presently
after, within four days, that Beauvais was taken with some others, and
committed to Hertford Gaol for a Robbery done that day, he easily recollected
himself and remembered his being that day at the French Play: and this upon his
Salvation he declared to be true.

His Wife the Lady Fox, and their Daughter, and the Waiting-Gentlewoman
confirmed all that Sir Stephen had said.

Then one Mac-Don (as I remember his name, who in Beauvais's Examination at
Hatfield is called Mr. Munduglas; but whether mistaken there or here, or in
both I know not) a Scotch-man, at whose house Beauvais lodged, was called, who
said that Beauvais, and Guinet the other Prisoner with him, were at his house
the said Monday, and after dinner they went into Holburn (as themselves said)
to a Barber there.

And that Barber he came and said, that they were at his house about two of the
clock in the afternoon that day, and that Guinet cut his (the said Barber's)
hair, and afterward that they went both of them from his house, and said they
would go to a Play.

I must not omit one passage more upon the Testimony given by a Woman (whose
name I have forgot) produced on the behalf of the Prisoners, she saying she had
upon the Wednesday hired out a Gray Mare to carry one of them to Hatfield, and
the Butchers having said that one of the Thieves that robbed them the Monday
before on Totternol-hill was upon a Gray Mare: the Chief Justice (to show the
color was the same, and that so it might be thought to be the same Mare) would
have the Woman repeat it again, and therefore asked her, What color her Gray
Mare was of? which having moved some laughter, he put it of with a jest,
mentioning the old saying, that the Gray Mare is the better Horse.

And so the Examination of Witnesses for the Prisoners ended; For the Judges
said, there was not Evidence against the other two Prisoners, viz. Guinet and
Boutandon, wherefore there was no need of hearing any more Witnesses on their
parts. And then calling the Jury, the Chief Justice applied himself to them,
and to the summing up of the Evidence, which had been given pro and con, for
the Prisoners and against them. In which to be short, I shall only say, that he
insisted much upon the contradictions which he said he had observed in the
Evidence brought on the Prisoners behalves, the Witnesses thwarting and
contradicting one another, which took off much from the Credit of their
Testimony, and that three men had positively charged them with that Robbery
upon their Oaths; Only he acknowledged something to have been said materially
by Sir Stephen Fox for the clearing of Beauvais, and so would have differenced
his case from that of the two young Gentlemen whom I had appeared for, and
bayled; and what ground there was for it, let any indifferent man judge, that
reads this Narrative: But so he left it to the Jury.

The Jury then went together from the Bar, and after some two hours stay
returned, and delivered in their Verdict, Not Guilty: Upon which Mr. Justice
Morton (as I am informed, for I was then gone out of the Court,) said to them,
Gentlemen you have done well; and if I had been of the Jury, I should have done
the same thing that you have done. And so the Trial ended.

And now I shall give an account what hand I had in taking the Confessions of
Du-Val and Mac-Guy, and likewise of Walrond. I was from the beginning as
certain, as I could be of any thing that I had not seen with my own eyes, that
the two French Gentlemen were most Innocent of the Robbery which was laid to
their charge: And I did verily believe, That Du-Val, who likewise was a
Frenchman (but spoke as good English as any natural-born Englishman) had done
the Feat, and that the Butchers might be deceived, taking one Frenchman for
another, and really think themselves in the right, accusing those they did, and
so be guilty of false swearing without knowing it: Wherefore when Du-Val was
apprehended, I did within a day or two after, take a Gentleman with me, (one
Mr. Hull of Dorsetshire) and went to Newgate to speak with him; and when I came
thither, I did send for him into the Hall, which was full of People as it could
hold, come out of curiosity it seems to see him, though I knew none of them
except Mr. Charles Bartue Brother to the Earl of Linsey, who with twenty more
heard all I said to Du-Val, and I doubt not but he will testify the truth of
what I here say, which is this, That when Du-Val came to me, I said this to
him, Mr. Du-Val, I am sorry that you have brought your self into this bad
condition, it has been your own fault; And the best Counsel I or any man can
give you, is, to make your Peace with God Almighty, and make way for his Mercy;
and one good help to it will be, to do all the good you can before you dye,
that is, by preventing Mischief as much as in you lies, discovering those
Persons who have joined with you in committing of Robberies, That they may be
apprehended, and rob no longer; and confessing the Robberies that have been
done by you, that Innocent Persons may not suffer for them: Then I asked him if
he had not done that Robbery at Totternol-Hill, for which some Countrymen of
his were questioned? He then stood still a good while, with his head down, and
his finger upon his mouth, musing, and said at last, That he was within three
miles of the place where those Frenchmen were apprehended, at the time of
their Apprehension. But I pressed him again to speak to the Robbery: And then he
denied it, and said he was not there: To which I replied but this, I have no
more to say to you; God forbid you should take it upon your self if you be not
guilty. This I will be deposed was the sum of all I said to him; And so I
came away, and thought no more of it, till two days before his Execution, that
one of the two French-Gentlemen came and told me, That now Du-Val had cleared
them, and confessed, That he and others had committed that Robbery; And I asked
him to whom he had confessed it; to an Englishman or a Frenchman? he said, to
an Englishman: I asked him then, if that Englishman would tell me so much? He
answered, that he thought he would, and that he would bring him to me; which I
desired might be the next morning: Accordingly he did bring him to me the next
morning, and that man did tell me, That Du-Val had confessed to him, That he
and four others, whom he named to him, had committed that Robbery at
Totternol-Hill; those four he said were Mac-Guy, Ashenhurst, Cassels, and
Walrond: I asked him, if Du-Val would declare so much to any other person that
should be sent to him? he answered, That he was confident he would, for he had
not revealed it to him in Confession; which made me believe him to be a Romish
Priest; but I took no notice of that, only said, That it would be worth the
while; and that perhaps I should use some means that his Examination should be
taken before he suffered.

It was upon a Councel-Day, and I was then going to Council, where I acquainted
the King with what had been told me that morning, and said besides, That I
thought it would be very well, if that the Butchers that had accused those
Frenchmen were sent for to be confronted with Du-Val before he dyed; things
might be set right, Innocent Persons might be freed, and the Butchers
themselves be disabused, That they should not, by mistaking one Frenchman for
another, persist in their false Oaths. His Majesty answered, I think it will
be very well, Let them be sent for, and accordingly bade me call Mr. Secretary
Trevor to him, who was in the Room, to whom He gave Order to send for the
Butchers. After the rising of the Council I returned home; And soon after one
of the Messengers of the Chamber came to me from Mr. Secretary to know the
place of the abode of those Butchers, Mr. Secretary having forgot it; And the
Messenger, after I had informed him of it, went his way.

That afternoon Sir George Charnock came to my House, (as he used to do many
times) and I told him what I heard that Du-Val had confessed, and what was done
upon it, and asked him, if he could be at leisure to go to Newgate to hear what
Du-Val and the Butchers would say one to another? He said he would.

And then considering whom I should join with him, I pitched upon Mr.
Blackwell, a Counselor at Law, who being an Acquaintance of Mr. Sedgwicks, and
using much to his House, had been with me once or twice for the business of
those two French-Gentlemen, I sent to him to desire him, that he would give
himself the trouble of that Employment, and he accepted of it. These two were
utterly unknown the one to the other, and had never seen one another before; so
it had been a very weak part in me to have together engaged them in a foul
Contrivance, nor is it likely they would have trusted one another to have
together undertaken it.

That night very late, as I was going to bed, one of my Servants came and told
me, That the Messeng er was come with the Butchers, and said that Mr. Secretary
had given him Order to bring them to me: Whereupon I sent for them all into my
Chamber, and asked them if they were the men that were robbed at
Totternol-Hill? They said they were; and I told them, That it seems it was
Du-Val that robbed them. Bellingham (who was the forward man) presently said,
No, he would swear it was those Frenchmen that were taken at Hatfield: I bad
him take heed how he did swear, for if it was not they, he would be forsworn;
but he stood to it, that they were the men: Then I asked the rest, what they
said to it? Simmons, who was the man robbed, was nothing so positive as
Bellingham; Lawrence said, he could not swear who it was, for he rode away
before they came so near as that he could discern them to know them again;
Solomon Grace, said these words, My Lord, I have not sworn against them, nor
will for the World; They used me well whoever they were, for I rode with them a
good way, and had fourscore pounds about me, and they meddled not with me, but
when they left me and rode back, they bade me Farewell. (Yet did this man at
their Trial swear as lustily as Bellingham himself; but how he came to do so,
let them give an account who persuaded him, and no question they will do it one
day.) I said only this to them, Well Friends, it is the King's Pleasure you
should see Du-Val, and he you, therefore if you will be here to morrow morning
betimes, I shall send some with you who shall bring you to him; And I bade my
Servants, who were in the Room, have them down to the Buttery and make them
drink, where discoursing again of the business, Solomon Grace, in the presence
of three or four of my Servants (who will be deposed of it) said again the same
thing that he had said to me in my Chamber, That he had not sworn against them,
nor would for the World. Bellingham still obstinate, and in such a rage, as my
Servants afterward told me, that he would taste neither Beer nor Wine.

In the morning, Sir George Charnock and Mr. Blackwell, and with them Mr.
Sedgwick's Son came to my House, where they met the Butchers and the Messenger,
and all together went to Newgate: and Sir George Charnock and his Company came
back at Noon, and gave me an account of their Negotiation, which was this; They
told me they were first with Du-Val and examined him, who had fully confessed
the Robbery, and told the Butchers of many particulars, which the Butchers
themselves had acknowledged true, yet would not be convinced; but that one of
them especially (which was Bellingham) still persisted, saying, That the other
men did the Robbery.

What Du-Val said, they had put down in Writing, and they three had signed it;
but Du-Val being presently to be carried out to Execution, they said, they had
not put him to sign it.

They afterward asked if Mac-Guy was still in Prison? and because Du-Val had
named him to have been one of the Company, they would examine him, and went up
to him; and first it seems they three went up by themselves (which yet I do
protest I knew not, till I heard it said at the Trial in the King's Bench,
though I do not understand that they did ill in so doing, to see what temper he
was in, being a condemned man, before they would bring the Butchers to him)
they do all three say, that they did not acquaint him with any of the
particulars that Du-Val had declared, till he had acknowledged himself an Actor
in the Robbery, confessed the whole business, and of himself told them many of
the same passages which Du-Val had told before, he not knowing what Du-Val had
said. It seems he was unwilling at the first to confess any thing, and said, he
did not know the Butchers: and they said the like that they knew not him; but
upon their pressing him a second time to discharge his Conscience, he then
confessed all, which they took in writing, and he put his hand to it. Both
their Confessions ( Du-Vals and his) I showed to his Majesty, and they are
inserted here Verbatim.

The Examination and Confession of Du-Val, Prisoner in Newgate, taken by Sir
George Charnock Knight, Mr. Andrew Blackwel, and William Sedgwick, immediately
before his Execution, being the 21th of January 1666/7, in the presence of
Solomon Grace, Robert Simmons, Robert Bellingham and Edward Lawrence, all of
the Parish of Edmondton in the County of Middlesex, Butchers; concerning a
Robbery committed on them at Totternol in the County of Bedford, by the
foresaid Du-Val, with Walrond, Ashenhurst, Cassels, and Mac-Guy.
When and where the said Du-Val confessed and said, That the said Robbery was
committed by him and his abovenamed Companions; and more particularly, That
Solomon Grace aforesaid being shown unto him, did ride with them about a mile,
till coming to two little Houses at the bottom of the Hill, they left the said
Solomon Grace watring his Horse, and returned up the Hill, where they met with
the other three Butchers, one whereof fled upon the Plowed-Lands, whom the said
Du-Val pursued upon a little gray Nag, but could not overtake him, because of
the weakness of his horse, which he was forced to lead in his hand afterward
at least the space of twelve-score: In the mean while Ashenhurst robbed Simmons
of twenty seven pounds, or thereabouts, part whereof was in odd money: And that
from the other nothing was taken, but a girdle, and the bridle pulled off his
Horses head: Which circumstances of the Action the aforesaid Simmons and
Bellingham did then acknowledge to be true. And he further confesses, That
after this Robbery committed as aforesaid, he did perceive one of the two
persons that were robbed, to ride hard toward Layton, which by the
acknowledgment of Bellingham was himself. And the said Du-Val at the time of
his Confession aforesaid did advise the aforementioned Butchers, to be cautious
how they prosecuted Innocent Persons; declaring, that men of their Trade did
not care how they swore against any man: For, a Robbery was committed by him on
some other Butchers, and they had peremptorily changed it upon another person.
And in the conclusion of his Confession he put on his Perriwig, affirming, that
he was present at the Robbery in the same Perriwig so tied up, and asked
Bellingham if he knew him now?

Signed by us, G. Charnock. Andr. Blackwell. William Sedgwick.


The Examination and Confession of Patrick Mac-Guy, Prisoner in Newgate, taken
by Sir George Charnock Knight, Mr. Andrew Blackwell Gent. and William Sedgwick
Citizen, the 21th of January 1669/70, concerning a Robbery committed by him,
with the aforesaid Du-Val, Walrond, Ashenhurst, and Cassels, in the Parish of
Totternol in the County of Bedford.
Patrick Mac-Guy confesses, and says, That he was with the aforesaid Du-Val,
Walrond, Ashenhurst and Cassels, at Totternol-Hill in the foresaid County,
where they met with three persons, one whereof they robbed of about twenty
seven pounds, of which twenty one pounds odd money was in a Wallet, which was
taken by Ashenhurst, and had in it about thirty or forty shillings in
Ninepences and Thirteen-pence-half-pennies: The other which he took out of his
pocket Ashenhurst never discovered. One man made his escape, and the other had
nothing taken from him. The time of the day, about three of the clock in the
afternoon. That Bellingham had a green Rugg upon his Saddle: which be the said
Bellingham confesses. Simmons likewise confesses, That there was odd money in
the sum, but remembers not the quantity; And that likewise in the Wallet there
was Twenty pounds odd money; and that above five pounds was taken out of his
pocket. Mac-Guy further declares, That an old man kept them company about a
mile to the foot of the Hill, where he watered his Horse; And that they bid him
Good Night old Man: Which Circumstance Solomon Grace and the other three
acknowledged to be true, they being acquainted with it when the said Grace came
to them. And the said Mac-Guy declared, he never was in other Robbery, but this
and my Lord Grandison's. He asked Bellingham if he did not remember, That he
told them, that he was a poor Grasier, and had no Money? And Bellingham at
first replied, No, he remembered no such thing; but recollecting himself, told
them, he said, he was a poor man, and had no money.

Signed by us, G. Charnock. Andr. Blackwell. William Sedgwick.

Signed, Patrick Magee.

I appeal now to every man's Conscience that shall read these Confessions, if it
can be believed, that any other, but these men that knew all these particulars,
could be guilty of this Robbery; and if it was possible that Sir George
Charnock should have put all this into Mac-Guy's mouth, who did not only say
the same things that Du-Val had said, but enlarged and confirmed them with many
other Circumstances, which the Butchers themselves confessed and acknowledged
to be true, and which Sir George Charnock could not know: As the Money taken,
to have been, some in a Wallet, some in Simmons Pocket, and that the broken
Money was part of that in the Wallet: This Du-Val had not specified, yet it is
a great Confirmation of what he had said: Then one man to escape, which was
Lawrence. That Bellingham had a green Rugg upon his Saddle, which Bellingham
could not deny, but acknowledged to be true. That Solomon Grace watering his
Horse at the foot of the Hill, they should say to him, Good night old man,
which Du-Val had not said: So to tell what Bellingham said to them, which he
acknowledged so far, as to confess, that he said, he was a poor man, and had no
Money, though not that he was a poor Grasier, as Mac-Guy had said: which was no
great mistake. Certainly none but they that were present and did the Fact,
could discover these particularities.

I shall now give an Account of my Transactions with Mr. Walrond, whom I
thought fit to examine, after I had seen what the other two had said: And
therefore went to the Gate House, and spoke with him there in the Kitchen,
where the Lady Broughton, (who has the keeping of the Prison) and the Turn-key
were present, and heard all I said to him; I asked him, if he knew any thing of
the Robbery committed such a day at Totternol-hil: Of which I desired him but to
tell me the truth?

His answer to me was this, My Lord, no body as yet has come against me to
accuse me, so I have not been indicted; And if I should accuse my self, I might
bring my self into trouble, and I have not yet my Pardon, which I hope I shall
obtain of the Kings Mercy.

I replied, Mr. Walrond, this I will promise you, that whatsoever you say to me
shall not rise in judgment against you, it shall do you no hurt I do assure
you; I desire but to know the truth: for some Persons are accused of that
Robbery, who I know are very Innocent: (And whether or no I told him so much,
as that Du-Val had confessed it, I do protest I do not remember, they may be
asked that were present, the Lady and the Turn-key (I have not spoken to them
since, nor will I) but I think I did not; however if I had, I know not that any
thing would have been amiss in it, if in general I had told him, that Du-Val
had confessed it:) His answer to me was, My Lord I will cast my self upon you
and tell you all, and then did confess to me the whole matter, and told me many
particulars. Then indeed I did say to him, that he had done well, and had told
me but what I knew before, for both Du-Val and Mac-Guy had confessed the same
things; And as to his Pardon I did again assure him, that it should be no
prejudice to it, happily it might be an advantage, for that I would endeavor
all I could to help it forward: He afterward at my desire put down in writing
what he had said; And I did move his Majesty for his Pardon, and got it passed
for him, which I did for two ends; One out of Charity, he had no Money to pay
for it, and he deserved it for the discovery which he had made of that knot of
Thieves Du-Val and his companions, some of whom were taken, and the knot
thereby broken by his means: the other end was, that he might be Rectus in
Curia, and appear a competent Witness, to discover the truth of that Robbery;
But he was so terrified at the Trial with being threatened and told he had now
confessed enough to be endicted for it, and perplexed with questions, that he
knew not almost what he said, and left an impression (I verily believe) with
most of the standers-by, that he was gained by me to take this Robbery upon
him, merely to save the French men at the Bar, himself not at all guilty of it.

But how undeservedly that could be imputed to me, let my greatest Enemy be
Judge, if this my Narrative be true, as I take the God of Truth to Witness,
that it is true, I mean for matter of Fact, and for what I relate here, as said
or done by me, and for my intention, that it was just and honest, without any
Trick or Design, and all above-board, merely to preserve Innocence, and that in
Strangers, that wanted Language, Friends, and all other support and help to
make their Innocence appear.

I have always heard, that the Judge should be of Counsel with the Prisoner;
And that is one reason given, why he needs no other Counsel, and that the Law
allows him none; For the Judge upon the Bench ought to help him with his advice
and direction, that he run not into any Inconvenience, by his ignorance of the
Law, and of the Forms of Proceeding, and to take care that he be not
circumvented and ruined by the Malice, Art, and Cunning of his Prosecutors, or
by the Weakness and Simplicity of such Witnesses, as are produced to justify
and clear his Innocence, who many times have not Wit nor Elocution to tell
their Tale so, as to make his Innocence and the Truth to appear. And certainly
it is the duty of a Judge, and Justice is as much concerned, to preserve and
deliver an Innocent Person, that is falsely accused and unjustly prosecuted, as
to condemn and punish one that is really Criminous; and that of the two is the
more acceptable, and well-pleasing both to God and Man.

These two Gentlemen were Strangers, that understood not the Language, either
what was said to them by their Judges, or against them by their Accusers, or
for them by their Witnesses; And they had an Interpreter given them, a young
Student that was there in Court, who did need an Interpreter himself: For no
body understood a word he said, scarce when he spoke English, he spoke so low
and unintelligibly, so as they were never the nearer to understand any thing
that passed, though so much concerning them, even their Lives; nor was there
any care taken that they should understand any thing, the Interpreter not once
bid to ask them a Question upon what was urged against them, to know what they
would say to it.

And commonly a Judge will call for the Examination taken upon the first
Commitment of a Felon, and begin there; But not a word of that, for that
Examination would not have been authentic, not being taken upon Oath, nor they
positively charged by those Butchers, who only said, One of them, That they
were like the Men whom he saw upon the Road; Simmons, That he believed they
were the Men that robbed him; And Bellingham himself no more but this, That he
verily believed Adrian Lampriere was the Man that pulled the Bridle off his
Horsehead: This was well known to be no sufficient ground for the Justice to
send them to Gaol, clap Irons upon them, and put them into a room without
light, with a little Straw to lie upon, more like Dogs, then Men, especially
Gentlemen and Strangers: Nay, the second Examination was not produced neither,
that which the Lord Chief Justice took himself four or five days after, when
he sent for those Butchers to London: For though two of them indeed had there
taken their Oaths, and charged them positively, yet Solomon Grace, who at this
Trial in the King's Bench swore as stoutly as any, would not swear then.

And another particular I observed, that the Butchers said in their Evidence,
That these men were taken upon the Hue and Cry at Hatfield; and it is very
usual for a Judge upon a Bench, when Felons are apprehended upon such a
Warrant, and brought to their Trial, to call for that Warrant, to see the
description there given of the Persons pursued and apprehended upon it, whether
or no it agrees with the Prisoners at the Bar, which gives a great light to
discover if they be the Men, and probably would have showed that these were
not; Nothing of this neither, but with what intention neglected, I judge not.

It is certain that the Prisoners were far from receiving any favor, the
younger of the Gentlemen, Mr. Hoeville, who understood not any thing of all was
done or said against him, and I believe not apprehending of what concernment it
was to him, out of a childish Innocence hid his face and smiled a little, to
see such a stir about him; The Chief Justice espied it, and fell upon him
severely for it, telling him he must not laugh there, and put the poor youth
past laughing, who yet understood not what he said, only saw he was angry.

The other Gentleman, Mr. Lampriere, when he was asked, What he had to say for
himself, to what the Butchers had laid to his charge (which yet was not
interpreted and made known to him, nor did he at all know what it was, and yet
was now to speak to it for his life) began in his Language in French, to give
some account of himself; The Chief Justice stopped him, and would not let him go
on, but bade him answer to the particulars, and yet took no care to let him
know what they were; which was a great disheartning to him. And usually when
any man, that is not known, is suspected of a crime and tried for it, the Judge
will in the first place inform himself what the man is, and whence, and of what
conversation of life, and learn all particulars that concern him, as much as is
possible; which will be a great leading to his judgment of him, and of the
matters that are brought against him; but here neither the Prisoner could be
permitted to give an account of himself, nor no body else must do it for him.

And I think there was as much reason now to proceed with Circumspection, and
to hear and examine, and well weigh all, for and against those Prisoners, as
for any that had been tried at that Bar of a great while; There were Persons of
Quality appeared in their behalfs, undertook largely for them; That they were
not Men to do such an Act, being of good Families in their own Country,
Strangers, newly arrived here to see this Country, no ways in need of Money,
bringing with them sufficient to defray the charge of their Travels, so most
unlikely they should begin here with Robbing upon the Highway: But further,
there were those of good Credit, that did affirm upon their Credits, some upon
their Salvation, and all of them ready to be deposed, that they could not be
guilty of that Fact, for that they saw them, and spoke to them here in London
that day, and in that instant of time, that the Robbery was committed above
thirty miles off in Bedfordshire; so there was an impossibility of their being
guilty of it. And who accused them? Three mean Fellows, of no very good lives
nor conversation; and they Butchers, of no commendable Occupation to have to do
with Men's Lives, either as Jurymen or Accusers; and one of these as bold an
impudent Fellow as ever I saw with my eyes, that is Bellingham: And more than
all this, it was well known, That even His Majesty himself had a strong
persuasion of their Innocence, and was desirous that all just Favor should be
showed unto them, and had Himself done all toward it depending upon Him, and
the rather because they were Strangers, who were newly come into his Kingdom,
and so had put themselves under his Protection; and his Majesty had well
considered the consequence, both as to the Reputation abroad of his Royal
Justice and Good Government, and likewise for the Safety and Freedom of of his
Subjects in Foreign Parts, who must have expected the same measure there.
Certainly, all this laid together, methinks should have made one cautious how
he entertained a prejudicate Opinion against them, and not to take advantage
upon any Mistake, especially in Circumstances not at all material, As whether
the Gentlemen landed and came to London the second, or the third of November?
Where they dined the Sunday before the day of the Robbery? Whether it was
Plowed-Land, or Stubble that the Butcher rode over, when he ran away from the
Thieves, and they followed? And because there was some disagreement in these
particulars, which signified nothing to prove them either Innocent or Guilty,
yet this was blown up to such a Magnitude of Contradiction, That the whole
Testimony of those Witnesses must be overthrown by it.

To say the truth, there was not the least color of Guilt upon them. Therefore
it is well, that their Trial received so fair an Issue, answerable to their
Innocence; and that they were at last delivered from the Unjust and Malicious
Prosecution of those Butchers: For had that Malice prevailed, and Innocence
been oppressed; and Strangers, who by the Law of Nations are to receive Favor
and Protection, in lieu thereof had found here* Injustice and undeserved Ruin,
What would have followed upon it? Our Government, and our Administration of
Justice would have been a Reproach and a Hissing to Foreign Nations, and
especially to our Neighbors of France, who would have hated and derided us for
it, and perhaps have made the next Englishman, that should come amongst them,
pay for this piece of Injustice showed to their Countrymen: And what evil more
might have ensued, how many unconcerned Innocent Persons have smarted for it,
no man knows. But this I know, That even these two Gentlemen, however they may
have seemed mean and despicable here, oppressed as they were, and persecuted in
a strange Country, and put to a vast Charge and Expense, have yet Friends and
Kindred in their own Country, who have courage enough to resent, and very
likely it is that they would have resented such an Injury done to their Kinsmen
here, and would have revenged it upon the next of the English whom they had
found in France; And as one Mischief brings on another, who can tell but it
might have brought on a National Quarrel at last? But God be thanked, there is
now no Cause to apprehend these ill Consequences; Justice has prevailed,
Innocence has found Protection, and all Machinations and Contrivances against
both Justice and Innocence, have been defeated, and the Parties wronged have
received some Reparation for the Injuries, which were then offered unto them.

For those Gentlemen have since brought their Action against the Butchers for
their Unjust and Malicious Prosecution of them, and have recovered Four Hundred
Pounds Damages in the Court of Common Pleas before the Lord Chief Justice
Vaughan: And I have made my Complaint to the House of Peers of the Lord
Chief Justice Keeling his (as I thought) unfitting Expressions and Carriage in
relation to me, particularly for laying to my Charge a foul Contrivance in the
carriage of this business, (as I then understood it, and I do believe all that
heard him when those words were uttered by him; but he has since denied that
he meant it of me, so I am satisfied:) And their Lordships have called him
before them, and after hearing us both, have adjudged him to make me a
Satisfaction, (which he has accordingly made) as is expressed in their Order
of Friday the 10th of March 1670, entered upon Record in their Journal Book,
with which I shall conclude.

The Record is as follows: Die Veneris, decimo Martii, 1670.
THis day the Lord Holles produced several Witnesses to be examined concerning
his Complaint (in his Petition) of several Indignities put upon him by the Lord
Chief-Iustice of the Court of King's Bench, at the Trial of some
French-Gentlemen in the said Court of King's Bench, who were there falsely
accused of a Robbery by four Butchers in Easter-Term last; After the hearing of
which Witnesses, the Lord Chief-Iustice made his defense, and denied, that he
intended any thing against the Lord Holles, when he spoke those words at the
said Trial, [ That it was a foul Contrivance etc.] as in the Petition is set
forth: To which Defense the Lord Holles made a short Reply, and then
voluntarily withdrew himself, and the Lord-Chief-Iustice withdrew himself also.
Upon which the House took the whole matter into serious consideration, and
ordered, That the Lord Chief-Iustice should be called to his place as a Judge,
and openly (in the presence of the Lord Holles) the Lord Keeper should let him
know, That this House is not satisfied with his carriage toward the Lord
Holles in this business, and therefore has Ordered, that he should make this
Acknowledgment, which is to be read by the Clerk, as follows, That he did not
mean it of the Lord Holles when he spoke those words, [That it was a foul
Contrivance] and that he is sorry that by his behavior or expressions he gave
any occasion to interpret those words otherwise; and asks the Pardon of this
House, and of the Lord Holles.

Then the Lord Chief-Iustice of the Court of King's Bench was called to his
place (the Lord Holles being also present) the Lord Keeper performed the
directions of the House, and the Lord Chief-Iustice read the Acknowledgment
abovesaid, only changing the style into the first person.

John Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.



And this being the true state of the whole Business, I do appeal to all
Mankind to judge, if there was any color of Truth in that Accusation of the
French-Gentlemen by these Butchers, if in the least degree they were deserving
such a Prosecution, and much less the thing aimed at by that Prosecution, the
taking away of their Lives; And if I, by endeavoring (as I did) their
Assistance and Preservation, deserved any blame either for the Matter or Manner
of it.

FINIS.

