USURY Explained; OR, Conscience Quieted in the Case OF Putting out Money AT
INTEREST.

By PHILOPENES.

LONDON: Printed by D. E. in Fetter-Lane. 1695/6.

ERRATA'S.
Page 10, l. 7. del. and, p. 13. l. 2. r. Prefixing. l. 22. r. Operation. p.
16. l. 7. r. Mutuare. l. 15. r. lend. l. 21. r. to Money, r. to Place, l. 25. r.
some truths, l. 16. r. truths I think, p. 27. l. 24. r. Aedil. p. 29. l. 9. r.
a person. p. 33. l. r. r. then. l. 10. r. Nota. l. 14. r. Vsura. l. 15. r.
Contractus. p. 35. l. 17. r. a fort. p. 37. l. 22. r. quaerat, sort minime. l.
29. r. Proventus. p. 37. l. 4. r. consists, p. 42. l. 25. r. Illation. p. 50.
l. 16. r. exclude. p. 51. l. 26. r. quintus. p. 52. l. 1. r. Partner, p. 53. l.
4. r. Bullarium, p. 55. l. 19. r. a hundred, p. 62. l. 12. r. should, p. 74. l.
13 r. sin of Usury, l. 25. r. an Actual. p. 76. l. 15. r. at a Reasonable p.
79. l. 6. r. borrower, accrues, p. 70. l. 21. r. debuerat, p. 75. l. 27. r.
Owner p. 102 l. 1022. 5. after 9th, dI: even

THE PRINTER TO THE Courteous Reader
GEntle Reader, in compliance with my Calling, I present thee with a small
Treatise, upon the Case of Putting out Money at Use, The Subject is of a Public
concern, and the Press is ordered to the Public good. Written Papers, are like
Spirits, appear to some, and not to others, and often Prove illusions. The
Public eye is the quickest and the surest in discerning good, from evil.

The Author who writ, what I now Print, is no farther Known to me, than by the
Name of Philopenes, a lover of Poverty, or a friend of the Poor. If he be, what
his name implies, The fitter he is, to discourse impartially a Point, in which
Reason alone can concern him; I hope he will not take it in evil Part, that I
set forth for some small Advantage, what for more than a year, has past through
several hands; That were to blame his own Judgment, in letting it be seen by so
many, or to give suspicion of some dark Design: by avoiding the Public.

If what he writes be True, it is one of those Truths, which ought not to be
concealed, nor hidden under the Bushel; that were envious. If erroneous, not to
secure Error by discovery, that were uncharitable. If he fears Truth may
displease some, he might as well desire to put out all light, as offensive to
weaker sights, unuseful to the Blind, and unacceptable to such, as wilfully
shut their Eyes.

The Book is but short, well if it be clear; short as it is, Divines, Lawyers,
and all concerned in Money; may find in it somewhat for their Turns. Be it what
it will, take it for what it is: The Print is only mine, and may be thine, too
at a small Charge, Farewell.

THE Author TO THE READER.
ZEal when Kindled by Divine Love, tempered with Humility, fed by the Spirit of
Meekness, and governed by Discretion cherishes Piety and Observance. Usurpation
of Rigor, carried on, with excesses of Fervor, Not according to Knowledge, Romans
the 10th. disquiets both. To make a Sin, of no Sin, is as irregular, as to make
no Sin, of a Sin. To declare unlawful, what consists with Conscience, breeds an
undervalue of the Declarer, no less than if he declare lawful, what Conscience
condemns.

Conscience censures nothing, but upon Evidence of Obligation; Prepossession of
Man's Liberty, is so good a title, that it cannot be overthrown, but by a
manifest Proof, of Gods restraining it. To allege a Command, for his not his,
is to impose upon God and Man, the worst of Presumptions.

Faith requires an Evidence of Credibility, in reference to what we are to
believe; and Part of that we are to believe, are the Rules of well and evil
Doing. Whence clearly ensues, a certainty must be had of those Rules; For where
a Rational Debate is admitted upon the whether, an Action be sinful, or no, so
as to leave it undecided, Possession of Liberty against Restraint, holds good
in Reason and Law, where Possession carries so great a Portion, that no man is
obliged to relinquish it, before evidence brought in against him for its
forfeiture, and sentence Pronounced in due form, by a Competent Judge. Without
this whoever disturbs, the quiet Possessor, is guilty of Violating the Peace.
This discourse I have in Occasions Promoted against Modern Pretended Reformers,
in Point of Religion, in the Present Case, I renew it.

A settled Practice, of Putting out of Money, has been long in Possession with
all Ranks and Qualities, such as take upon them to Reform it, must Produce
Evidence, and Sentence given by a Lawful Judge against it; whether any Verdict
has yet past to that Purpose, be your self the Arbitor, after a due Perusal, of
what I shall impartially set down, in this short Tract.

My Method is to Discourse the Matter in hand, as to the Laws of Nature,
Scripture, and Church. I wish my Endeavors may answer my Intentions, or at
least, that my Intentions, may justify my Endeavors, in Case they answer not
thy Expectation. Farewell.

THE CONTENTS.
PART. 1. AS to the Law of Nature. CHAP. 1. The Case Considered as to the
nature of Money. CHAP. 2. The Original Notion of Usury, with its Names. CHAP. 3.
The strict Definition of Usury. CHAP. 4. Assertions drawn from the said
Definition. CHAP. 5. Whether the Law of England Justify the Case. CHAP. 6.
Whether Money be capable of being Let. CHAP. 7. Of the Obligation of Lending.
CHAP. 8. Titles alleged by Divines for the Lawfulness of taking Interest.
CHAP. 9. Whether in some Case it stand with Law and Conscience, to take more
than the Current? CHAP. 10. Of the Bristol Bargain, Pawn-Brocage, and Interest
upon Interest.
PART. 2. As to Scripture. CHAP. 1. Usury Considered as to the Old Testament
CHAP. 2. The same Considered as to the New.
PART. 3. As to the Church. CHAP. 1. Testimonies of the Latin Fathers examined.
CHAP 2. Testimonies of the Greek. CHAP. 3. Authorities of Councils. CHAP. 4.
Authorities of Popes'
The Conclusion.
PART. I. As to the Law of Nature.
CHAP. I. The Case Considered as to the Nature of MONEY.
ARistotle defining Liberality, lib. 4. c. 1.
to be a Virtue moderating the Love of Money, and Prompting to spend, by the
dictates of Reason. Under the Name of Money, comprehends all things prized by
Money, as the standing Measure of their Worth. The present Discourse admits not
of so much Latitude, but confines it solely, to the being the Measure of
Valuation, and Price of Wares; so becoming the common Instrument of Sales and
Purchases, the Soul of Traffic, and the Life of Markets.

As to its Origin not over Noble, I find it to have been the Child of Want,
though since become the Parent of Abundance. When all other Creatures bearing
different Coins, issued out of the Mint, if I may be so bold to say, of
nothing: No Money appeared, which perchance may have been a Reason, why the
Serpent bribed our first Parents to Rebellion, not with Money, but Ambition, and
Pleasure.

All other Beings had God for their Creator, Money, as to its Form, was the
Creature of Man, and that only after his Fall, being multiplied upon Earth;
Divisions of Property then, entered the World, from whence sprung a Necessity
of Commerce; First, By Bartering one thing for another: In success of Time,
Trade improving, a Current Measure, for the Price of Things, was judged
requisite, and therefore settled by each Superior, in his Respective Dominion,
and admitted by Communities. So that, as the first intercourse of Trade, was
entertained by Exchange of one thing, for another, Money became the vicar, as it
were, of all things, And by consequence, was designed to be of no less Profit.
Otherwise the Exchange of other Commodities for Money, would have been unequal,
in giving what might Produce Gain for Money, which should afford None.

Such was the first Institution of Money, Rising by Degrees to that sway that
Rome it self, Sallust. in Jug.
with its grave stately Senate, would have been unsubdu'd, had a Purchaser, of
sufficient Wealth, appeared before it. This moves no small wonder in me, that
Money vulgarly should pass for barren, and unfruitful, seeing it renders to its
Owner, whatever Nature produces. For though of it self, or rather its matter
yield nothing; Yet by the Artificial Being it has from Man, it gives Profit at
least equal to other Productions of Art, affording Rent, for the use of them.
Nay brings in much greater increase, to the skilful Mannager.

The Mountebank in St. Austine, to raise expectation, took upon him to tell the
People, De Trin.
what was each ones wish and desire, Curiosity having gathered a Numerous
gaping Auditory, he acquits himself of his Promise, saying; They would all buy
cheap, and sell dear. This assuredly is the constant intent of such as expend,
to increase Money in its Use. For he that buys cheap, and selis dear, in what he
buys, ensures his Principal with Profit; so that to receive advantage for Money,
without sinking the Principal, is but a sequel of its being the Price of Wares.
On this account I guess, a Mony'd Man, is said to have a good Fund, from the
Latin Fundus a Farm, or a good Stock, in token of its Fruitfulness.

Of what Metal the first Money was, or whether of any, I were yet to learn, had
I hopes of a Master to Teach me. But the quality of the Matter, is indifferent
to the character it bears. This gives it its worth, and Men may bestow it upon
Leather, Lead or other Materials in lieu of Gold, and Silver.

Money methinks, has much of the nature of words, though not so frankly parted
with. Both are Man's Tenants at Will, both ordered to Interchange and
Communication, Words of thoughts, and Money of things, neither to be falsified,
but to be directed to the end, for which they were Framed, general Convenience,
and improvement. By a more or less Tendency, to this end, the good, or bad use,
of either is determined. Now to decide whether the putting out of Money at a
modest Rate, drive at that end, or no, who can judge better, than the whole of
a Nation.

But Usury intervenes Let him who advances so bold a Censure, Vouchsafe to
mind, how in Number He Is much outvoted, equaled at least in Wisdom, and
Probity by those, who teach and Practice it, as Lawful. These have opened the
law of Nature, Scripture, and Church, yet do not find it culpable; People find
convenience in a ready Circulation, Money otherwise would lie buried with dead
Trade, the generality would be the worse, and no particular the better. Neither
the nature of Money then, nor its final cause the Public good, do any ways
oppose the putting out of Money at Use, but promote it, as much as the exposing
other Goods, of which, Money is the Substitute. This might suffice, to the
quieting a well meaning Conscience, but a further discovery of the Nature of
Usury is expected from me, to which now I proceed.

CHAP. II. The Original Notion of Usury, with its NAMES.
REsolving lately upon the peformance of what, almost a year since, I had
engaged my Promise to the Instances of some Friends; it was my chance to fall
in at the Stationers, with two short Treatises of Usury; the one written by an
English Knight, Sir Robert Filmer, and Published by Sir Roger Twisden, with his
Addition of Preface; the other of a Reverend French Clergyman, Monsieur Du
Tertre; I found them as opposite in the Point, as if they would even in this,
have maintained the National Feud, had the one Known the other.

But Du Tertre's Rhetoric, takes its full Career against a Divine of his own
Country, who it seems in a Letter, had joined with our two Knights, in
upholding, that no Usury is Condemned by the Law of God, but such as exacts
upon the Poor. Du Tertre on the contrary seems to hold forth, that all Interest
taken for Money put Out, without sinking the Principal is Usury. Neither hits
the mark of Truth: the Knights fall short, and Du Tertre shoots over; to level
my aim better

I begin from the Name of Usury derived from the Latin Vsura. And this in
Property of speech imports Use. So that Usury in strictness of Terms, implies
no more, then the use of Money, in it self unblameable. How then did so foul a
Vice come by so fair a Name? You might as well enquire, why the Furies were
called Eumenides. I know in Greek its called (...). for the resemblance paying
Interest has, with the grief of Childbirth. In Hebrew its styled Neshec (...)
The Bite of a Dog, in Chaldaick Cabulia, an Undoing, yet by the Jews, it was
also named Tarbith an Increase. Ad Probri effugium, (In cap. 23. Deuteronomy.) says; a
Lapide uti a Latinis, honesto Nomine vocata est Vsura.

Wherefore my Inference is, That the gentle Name of Usury, must cover sore
Aggrievances, and heavy Extortions, as the Greek, the Hebrew, and Chaldaick,
give us to understand; but these are not to be found in our Case; This
therefore must be clear of Usury; a Monsterdetestable, even to Heathens, a
wonder it should be so familiarly entertained, and welcomed among Christians,
as is the Practice of Putting out Money, a Token of its different Nature, from
what those Names imply, which having premised; I shall now endeavor to Dive
after its Origin; Reason, and History, discovers it to me, for such as follows.

Upon the first Employing of Money, of which probably he had most, who had the
most to Sell, by Changing a Stock of Goods into a Stock of Coin, some
Engrossing the greater Share, put others in Necessity of Borrowing; then
Avarice in the Lenders, produced Oppressions, with other evil Arts, of unlawful
Gain, for the Use of what was, or ought to have been Lent, according to the
Law, of Natural Charity.

Such was the Proceeding, of the wealthier Romans, with the Commonalty, as is
to be seen in History, to the no small Disturbance of that only then Infant
Commonwealth, let one Example suffice. The horrid sight of a stout old Soldier,
scourged and gored with his own Blood for failure of Paying Interest, at the
Time prefixed, enraged the People to a furious Sedition. The like perhaps, may
have passed, among the Jews; We have a kind of Precedent. 4 King. Chap. 4.
Where the Widow to Elisha says: Ecce creditor venit ut collat duos filios ad
serviendum sibi. Behold the Creditor is come, to take away my two Sons, to
serve him. Exorbitant Rigor, for a Debt, which considering the Condition, of
the Widow, of a Poor Prophet, was not probably very great.

Usages so cruel, could not but excite a horror of Usurers, even in such, as by
the Law of Nature, governed themselves; Use-Mony therefore, was by the Romans
in the 12 Tables stinted to 12 per Cent. then to 6, after to 3; and finally in
the time of Gemutius Tribune, to remove all occasions of like Encroachments, a
Prohibition of Use-Mony was Published, in favor of the People. No less was put
in Execution by Agis, the Spartan, and not the Athenian General, as some have
it, and ordering all the Accompt-Books of Usurers, to be burnt, in the
Marketplace. Agesilaus applauding he had never seen a nobler Fire.

But the Prohibition among the Romans, soon grew out of Date, and though renewed
by Caesar, to ingratiate himself with the Commonalty: yet putting out Money at
Use, by Necessity was revived, in his Successor's Times, growing to the
extravagant Height, of Cent. per Cent. if you may believe Accursius, a Famous
Civilian, Cited by Sir Roger Twisden in his Preface. As for my Part, I question
not, but all Oppressions, Exactions, and Frauds, exercised in the putting out
Money, were included in Usury, which may have been the Cause, why in the Days of
Old, witness Cato, Thieves were Condemned to the Double, Usurers to the
Quadruple: To which Custom, Peradventure, the Saying, (of Zacheus might relate
( Luke 19.) Reddo quadruplum; you may see more in Covarruvias, lib. 3.
Variarum, c. 1. n. 5. of the aversion even Heathens had to Usury.

This to have been the true, and sole Notion, of Usury as Prohibited, was
Calvin's Opinion, with his Followers, amongst which our two Knights, allowing
all Usury, not rendered sinful by oppressing the Poor, but against Reason; It
being no less Usury, to take beyond what is due from any, for the Use of Money;
since Persons of Fortune, though never so wealthy, have Right to what is just. I
only infer, That a commodious Rate, in the common Judgment of all Parties, can
be no Usury; taking Usury, as hitherto described from its Origin, and expressed
by its Names. I come now, to its strict Definition.

CHAP. III. The Definition of VSVRY.
SIr Robert Filmer sportsin his first Paragraph, teazing Dr. Fenton, and in him
some others of the Church of England, for their Definition of Usury. I cannot
excuse the Dr. of some Confuseness. For where a word may signify differently,
to take away Equivocation, one should first distinguish, and then define. This
Method I shall observe with the ancient Divines.

These make a threefold Division of Usury. First it may be taken, for a Gain
which is Usurious. 2dly, For a Bargain upon such Gain. 3dly, For the Intention,
or Will of such a Bargain or Gain. The First is termed Actual Usury. The Second
is Usury expressed by Covenant. The Third is Usury purely Mental. The two
Latter derive their Malice, from the First, as being the Object of both, all
Promises or Intentions taking their Qualification, from the Action, Promised or
Intended; Wherefore refixing the Word Covenant or Will, to the Definition of
Actual Usury, all three will be Defined Thus.

Usury in the first Acceptance, is a Gain immediately for Lending, or for Money
Lent as Lent. Divines generally Agree in it. It Is said immediately for Lending
or as Lent. To exclude all other Titles of Lucre, as Gratitude, Friendship in
the Borrower, or other Considerations, hereafter to be specified. Gain
therefore is the Genus; by the Rest, Usury is differenced from other
Acquisitions. Hence of course follow the two other Definitions, viz. The Second
is a Covenant; the Third is a Will or Purpose of Gain purely for Lending.

Sir Robert opposes thus: Gain undoubtedly is a false Genus, for certainly,
Usury is a sin of Commission, and therefore an Action of Opperation. So that
Lucre or Gain, which is only a Passion or Product of Lending, cannot be the
Genus of it.

Answ. How far Sir Robert's Skill exceeded in Law, I know not, His Logic
certainly proves somewhat unfaithful to him. It Is granted then that Usury is a
Sin of Commission, and an Action of Operation, if it so please him. And so is
Gain for Lending. Neither is Gain, formally, and strictly speaking, the
immediate Product, of Lending, but of taking, and it includes Active and
Passive; Active, naming the Person Gaining, Passive, by naming the Interest
Gained; Gain then is an Acceptance of Interest, exclude the Acceptance, neither
Lending, nor Money, nor both together, will make up Gain. But not to be so
scrupulous in Philosophy. Grant Gain to be a Product of Lending, it may be as
well a Product of Selling, or Letting, why may not Gain then be drawn into a
Genus, in respect of the several ways of Gaining, of which Gain by Lending is
Usury?

He presses. Lending for Gain, is not Lending but Letting. Besides the Gain is
not for the Bare Act of Lending, but Using the thing Lent, that Men give Usury.

Answ. The instance being made in Dr. Fentons Words, If I may believe the
Knight, brings him in guilty, not only of Contradiction, which Sir Robert urges
upon him, but of a very gross Error in Morality. For if according to the Dr's
Definition, Usury is a Covenant of Lucre for Lending, and Lending for Lucre; be
Letting, a Covenant for Letting, by consequence is Usury. A Position unheard of.

To the Difficulty. Lending for Gain, is no Letting, but Lending; and Lending,
and Letting essentially differ, as will appear more hereafter. Lending admits
of no Recompense, by way of Justice. Letting does, I willingly yield to the
Addition, that Gain, is not for the bare act of Lending; but the Lending we
speak of, includes both Act and thing as affected by the Act of Lending. For
who Lends, and lends nothing? By Lending a thing, the Use of it is given, as it
is not in Letting, and for what is given, to require Gain, is Usury.

Toward the full Intelligence of the Definition, it will not be amiss, to open
the twofold Sense of the Word Lending, expressed in Latin by two Verbs
Mutuare, and Commodare, to Lend things, not to be consumed, in the Use, as a
Horse, or House, with an Obligation, that the same individually be restored is
what corresponds to the Latin Commodare, to lend things which are Spent, in the
Use; as Corn, Wine, and Money, with a tie of having as much restored, and of
equal Worth, though not the very self same, is what implies the Latin Mutare.

Between these two Lendings, this diversity intercedes. In the First; the
Lender disposes only of the Use, of what he lends, not to be consumed. In the
Second, Use being inseparable from Consumption, the Lender grants both Use and
Consumption of the thing. The First grounds an Action to the thing Lnet. The
Second grounds an Action to as much, and as good in the same kind. As to the
First, What may be Lent, may be Let, whether Money, or Goods, which perish in
the Use may be Let? shall be discussed. Plautus applies Locare, to let, Money,
and place ones Money, is the Common Expression.

But before I Proceed to examine this Point, I shall lay down some Truth, very
matterial, to the main? Truth I think not to be shaken, as being rooted in the
very Definition of Usury.

CHAP. IV. Positions drawn from the Definition of VSVRY.
FIrst. Gain, upon any Account, but Lending, is no Usury. The Proof. Usury is a
Gain, for a thing Lent as Lent. But Gain upon any account, but that of Lending,
is no Gain for a Thing lent as lent, therefore no Usury.

Secondly, Usury is a Sin against the Law of Nature. Thus S. Thomas, with the
rest of Divines. The Proof. A Lender by giving the Use of what he Lends, makes
the said Use no more his own, but to exact Payment, for what is no more ones
own, is an Injustice, visible by the Law of Nature; therefore to receive
Payment of what is Lent, as Lent, in which Usury consists is against the Law of
Nature; and therefore, as Such, it is reduced to Stealth, forbidden in the
Seventh Commandment.

Thirdly. Not only Extortion, or Exaction upon the Poor, is Usury. The Proof;
Increase for Money Lent, as Lent may be required of the Rich, and this is Usury;
but in this no Opression of the Poor; therefore Usury consists not only in
exacting upon the Poor, as our two Knights hold, and the Author of the Letter
impugned by Du Tertre, seem to affirm.

Fourthly, Whatever is not reducible to Stealth, and against the Law of Nature,
can be no Usury. This is but a sequel of the second Assertion. The Proof. If
all Usury he reducible to Stealth, and against the Law of Nature, nothing can
be Usury, which is not against the same Law, otherwise this Contradiction would
ensue, That all Usury is against the Law of Nature, and that some Usury is not;
now to make nearer our Case.

Fifthly, A Joint-Agreement in a Body Politic, for the Putting out of Money at
Use, cannot be against the Law of Nature. Proof. Such an Agreement would render
it no more Stealth, or Injurious to any. Volenti non fit injuria. It would
accord with the first Rule of Equity; Do as you would be done by; It cannot
therefore oppose the Law of Nature, being so conformable to it.

Conclusion. The said Agreement passed into Custom, or Law, for the taking
Interest for Money put out, makes it to be no Usury. The Proof. It makes it
neither to be Stealth, nor against the Law of Nature, but what is not against
the Law of Nature, or Stealth, is no Usury; therefore it makes it no Usury.

If in the Proof of any of these Truths, Fallacy imposes upon me, I shall be
grateful to the Discoverer. I am no stranger to the Virtue of Law, as to
Temporal Concerns; it is not only Lawful, but Conscience, to submit ones
private Judgment to the Public. Law regulates all Contracts as to Meum and
Tuum, in so much as Property or Domaine, by Divines, as well as Lawyers, is
defined with deference to Law. Property, they say, Is a Right in a thing,
extending its self to all Uses, and Dispositions of the said thing, not
forbidden by Law.

One may Object. It is not in the Power of any Legislative Authority, to make
Usury no Usury, or Stealth no more Stealth, and to take Interest for Money Put
out, is both Stealth, and Usury.

Answ. Though it be not within the Verge of Human Jurisdiction, to make Usury,
no Usury, or Stealth, no more Stealth; yet it lies in the compass of that
Power, and even of a Particular's Power, to prevent from being Usury, or
Stealth, what otherwise would be so, not by altering the Law of God, and
Nature, against Stealing and Usury, but by a voluntary Change, or Abatement of
Property and Right. For Example. One bestows a Parcel of Ground to be a Common,
for the Poor. Had the Poor turned in their Goods, before its being made Common,
they had been guilty of Trespass, and Stealth, which they incurr not, after the
Right of Common granted them. The Case, if I mistake not, is ours: If a Person
will freely give Five per Cent. and Security for the Principal, you may take
it, as his Gift, standing good in Law, without Usury. This is what the Nation
agrees to, including each Particular's Consent; Perhaps, in Recompense of the
Good, accruing to the general Ease, and public Profit; and Perchance, by way
of Penalty, for Prodigals and Spendals; so that what excluding this general
Consent and Accord, might have been Usury in Virtue of the said Agreement,
ceases to be such, For he that takes 5 per Cent. takes it as granted by Law and
Custom, for Money Put out; and not as Covenanted by himself, for Money as Lent,
Custom being Previous to the Putting out of Money, and including a general
Concurrence, which makes the Interest allowed spontaneous, and freely given.

Nor does this Procedure entrench upon any, but equally Provides for all, since
as a Person putting out Money, must Receive, so taking up, he pays as much. And
it often happens, that the same Person, who has Money out, is forced to take up,
Suppose then he pay as much as he receives, Where is the Gain? This Discourse,
not managed, as I find by others, I think fit to Promote by the following
Enquiry.

CHAP. V. Whether the Law of the Land render the taking 5 per Cent. safe in
Conscience?
EXception may be made against the Question, as grounded on a false
Supposition, and that we have no Positive Law for the Putting out Money at Use,
but that it is purely Permissive; That Law may even permit Usury, to avoid
greater Evils, as Divines affirm, yet not Justify it, as to Conscience.

Answ. That we have no Positive Statute Law, which as Sir Robert Filmer, page
92. informs us, varies as to the Case, it matters not; for it is enough we have
Law. But we have even Statute Law; for the Statutes against Interest for Loan,
may be understood of Interest for pure Lending; and not only may, but must be
so interpreted, all Gain not purely for Lending, being no Usury, as has been
made out from its Definition. Much more since the Constant Practice, as the
same Sir Robert tells us, of the Common Law of this Land, and also Chancery in
Point of Equity, does not only allow Interest, where there is a Contract for
it, but also gives it where there is none* What better Interpreter of
Statute Law, than Common Law and Equity?

This Practice becomes Law, according to the Decision. L. De quibus 32. ff. de
Legibus. Inveterata consuetudo, pro Lege non immerito Custoditur. An ancient
Custom is deservedly held for Law, and Lege 35. de Legibus sed and ea quae
longa consuetudine approbata sunt, and per annos plurimos observata, velut
tacita civium Conventio, non minus, quam ea quae scripta sunt servantur. But
also those things, which are approved by long Custom, and have been observed
for many Years, as a tacit Convention of the People, are no less to be observed
than Written Laws. Quid enim interest L. 72. ff. de Legibus. An suffragiis
Populus suam voluntatem declaret, an Rebus ipsis, and Factis. For what imports
it, whether the People declare their Wills by Suffrages or Deeds?

True it is, Where the Legislative Power lodges not in the People alone, as it
does not with us, the Kings Tacit consent, is a requisite, and in our Case we
have it more than Tacit, since the Courts which all act in his Name, adjudge
Interest to be paid; Now if practice is not only the best Interpreter of
written Law, but kept up for the space of some years, even prescribes against
Law, and its self often becomes Law, who can except justly against the Question
made, as being upon a false Supposal?

Neither can our Law be said, to be merely Permissive, for a Permissive Law,
grants no Action to an Usurer against the Borrower. But our Judges, Positively
uphold the Creditor, as to a Right he has by Law, to receive Interest; The Law
then must allow of that Right, Judges being Obliged, to decide according to
Law; Whence the Law appears to be Positive, and not purely Permissive; for were
it merely Permissive, it could give no Right, as is clear, to take Interest,
but only wink at it, whereas our Law, grants Procuration Money, to such, who
makes it their Business, to find, and Put out Money for others. And is not this
Positively to cooperate by the encouragement of Reward? The Law of the Nation
then is clearly Positive, for the Putting out Money at Use.

This Positive Law, I hold to be a plain Justification of the Practice, even as
to Conscience; It being to be Presumed, in favor of the Law, that it would not
Positively concur to what were unjust, were Usury; were against the Law of
Nature and God. This Presumption ought to stand good, until such time as the
iniquity of the Law be Evidenced, which has not yet been done.

To questin its Justice, betrays an Ignorance of what force Law is. It even
overrules and debars Natural Right, of Particulars, as in the Cases of
Prescriptions, Last Wills, and Minors, who though true Masters of their Estates
according to the Apostles Cum sit Dominus omnium, are hindered by Law to dispose
of them. What more Sacred and Binding than an Oath? Yet by the Law both of
Castile, and Portugal, all Obligations, Contracts and Conventions, appertaining
to the Temporal Court, if Sworn to, are made Void in Law, to the end Causes
appertaining to the Temporal, in virtue of an Oath, may not devolve to the
Spiritual Court, to the Prejudice and limitation of the Temporal Jurisdiction;
so the Council of Trent, to say nothing of Clandestine Marriages, ( Sess. 25.
c. 16. de Reg.) Annuls even an Oath of Renounciation, made two Months before
Profession. Evidence, of what force Law is, in Cases much harder than ours, in
which, all Parties making up the Legislative Power agree, as to a certain Rate,
for Money to be Put out, as Profitable to the Public, and a fit means to
prevent those Strifes and debates, which might arise from the Titles, Divines
generally allow of, for the taking Interest, viz. Emergent Damage, Lucre
ceasing, and Danger of Principal, which often vary, and are now more, now less.

Our Law then, stands upon good grounds, and makes good the ground its stands
on; It being a Tenent amongst Divines, that Law takes away doubt, it being in
Possesion of Command, Nay though probable Reason, but not evident, appear against
its uprightness, it still keeps its Post. ( Suares de Legibus lib. 1.)
Otherwise there being few Laws, against which some objection might not be
started, too much license in questioning them, would encourage to Noncompliance

So that in Answer to the Question, my Opinion is, ever vailing to better
Reason, that more Conscience, ought to be made of condemning the Putting out
Money, as Authorized by Law, than of Practicing it. For were its Lawfulness
doubtful, and not in so high a degree Probable, if not Evident; as both Reason
and Authority renders it, still Possession stands for Law. Wherefore Divines
hold it no wise requisite, That he that Puts out Money, either know the grounds
of the Law, or express the ways or Titles justifying it. But it suffices, he
intend to do what is Just, and no ways Offensive to God; As in Prudence he may
judge to be what Law, and constant Practice stand for.

This is the Decision of Bartolus. L. Quis fugitivus. apud Leonem de Aeadil.
Edict. of Navarrus, Binsfield, and Tiraquellius, viz. That a Contract in Use,
with Learned Men, of known Integrity, though in Law somewhat dubious, obscure,
and moving some apprehension of Usury, is not to be judged Usurious; What would
they have said to the Case, manifestly upheld by Law and Practice? I close this
Paragraph with this Syllogism of S. Tho. quod l. 9. Art 15. which may serve as
a Rule in this, and the like Cases. Illud quod vergit in Commune Periculum, non
est ab Ecclesia sustinendum, sed Ecclesia sustinet, ergo non est poriculum
Peccati Mortalis. That which inclines to a Common danger, is not to be born
with by the Church, but the Church bears with it, therefore no danger of Mortal
Sin. Therefore no Usury.

CHAP. VI. Whether Money be Capable of being LET.
THe Decision of this Question alone, might put an End to the present
Controversy; for if Money can be Let as other Movables, or Immoveables are,
like Interest may be received, it being for Letting, and not for Lending.

That Money is not capable of Letting, is commonly discoursed thus: Location or
Letting, is a Contract by which a Person's Goods or Tenements are granted for
Wages or Rent: So that what belongs to the Hirer, is the bare Use of what he
pays for, the thing Let still appertaining to him, who Letts it. But Money is
consumed in the Use, How then can it be Let to Use, which makes it away?

My Assertion is, That MONEY may be LET.

That it may be Let to other uses, than Spending, as for a Show, tending to
Preservation of Credit; and not to Cheat, as Sir Robert flurts at Catholich
Divines, or to be a Pledge, is owned by St! Tho. 2da 2dae, and by the Schools
in general, but denied by him, in order to Spending; By reason he supposes,
that Property of things consumed in the Use, is not distinct from the Use of
them, so that who has the Use, has Property of them too. The Hirer then having
the Use, has both; and therefore, is no more a Hirer, but a Proprietor, for the
Time he has the Use, so that Paying Consideration for it, He Will Pay for what is
his own, and the Lender receive Interest for what belongs to the Borrower; and
in this he places the Sin of Usury.

What the Holy Doctor supposes of the indistinction of Property and Use, in
things consumptible, since his time, has not only been questioned, but the
opposite goes for the more current among Divines, approved by no less then five
Popes, witness Lessius (De Just. lib. 2. c. 3. Dub 8. n. 38.) in this. (the now
more probable opinion.) I see no greater difficulty in letting Money, than
Letting a Horse, for the Hirer pays only for the Use, the Property still
remaining to the Letter.

But the Property of what; Since Money in the use Perishes, to him that lays it
out?

Ans. That is to say, Money is in the time it is used, and no longer, and for
that time the Owner letts it.

But that is almost Momentary.

Ans. Be it never so short, it is preferable, or at least, equivalent to the
longer use of a Horse, or House. This holds, speaking of the same Physical and
Individual Money, which in its uses Perishes not in it self, but to its Hirer.
Yet Morally it still remains, in the right the Creditor has to as much, it
remains in the Security for its Reimbursment, it may also remain in the effects
of using it, redounding to the Hirers Profit. So that the Letter retains the
Property, though not the Possession, of as much as the Hirer ows, and according
to Law, may dispose of it by Gift or Sale.

To the confirming what has been said, upon due Reflection you will discover,
little or no difference, between the Letting Money or a Horse. A Horse is let to
be restored the same, not absolutely, but conditionally, for if by the Hirers
fault it dies, he is only obliged, to make amends, to its full Worth. And though
the same be not returned, yet it cannot be denied that it was Let. The like
happens in Putting out Money; the Letter retains a Right either to the same, or
as much; for the Nature and Intention of Hirage, is to have a Horse proper for
the Turn; the being This, or that, is wholly indifferent; by reason it is the
Species, or Quality, which render things Valuable and Serviceable for Hirage,
and not the individuality.

In like manner the Letter being insured of having back a Horse, in all
respects as good as his own, ought to content himself as well, as with the
Right he has to his own. And what if one should Let a Horse, Conditioning to
have as good, if not his own back; I inquire, whether this would not be a true
Letting? Certainly it would. Why may not one there, in the same manner Put out
Money? For the Letter keeps a Right to have his Sum back, and one 20 l. in
Moral estimation, is the same with another 20. So that the Sum remains still
the Creditor's to be restored, as a Horse to the Lettor.

This seems to have been acknowledged by the Learned Cajetan, Verbo Vsura
exterior. Nov. fol. 578. Nota 2 do quodquia Lucrum Vsurarium est ex mutuo, ideo
siquis non mutuat sed accommodat seu locat, aut Vendit Pecuniam cum pacto
recipendi aliquid Plus, non est Usure, sed liciti sunt hujusmodi contractusque
dum modo Pacta fint moderata juxta qualitatem Temporis. Since Usurious Gain is
for Lending, therefore if a Person does not Lend, but Let, or Sells Money,
Bargaining for somewhat more, it is no Usury, but such Contracts are lawful, so
they be moderate, according to the quality of Times. Now our Law has struck up
a Bargain for all, to the easing each Particulars of that Trouble; It has also
Provided against all immoderate Gain, assigning a Set Interest now more, and
now less, Proportioned to the Condition of Times, to the exclusion of all
Exactions, and Extortions. and thus the Law renders the Putting out Money, no
Lending, and the Interest allowed, no Usury.

Whereby the way, I take notice of a Construction in Common Law, which Sir
Robert teaches us, of the Word Extortion and Exaction. They are thus
Distinguished, says He: Extortion is a Wrong, in taking more than is due.
Exaction is the taking of what is not due at all. This distinction, had it come
from a School Divine, would scarce have escaped Sir Robert's Censure, he is so
severe upon them; for my part, I should conceive, that the more that is due, is
not due at all; He then who takes more than is due, in that more he takes,
takes what is not due at all; and so Extortion in Substance, falls in with
Exaction. The Digression may serve at least, for the Promiscuous use, with Sir
Robert's leave, of the Words Extortion and Exaction whithout Cavil, upon a
Nicety scarce worth the Laws Notice.

CHAP. VII. Of the Obligation of Lending.
ON what has been said in the Preceding Chapter, an enquiry attends by Course,
concerning the Obligation of Lending, it being Manifest, that where the
Obligation of giving or lending Money ceases, it may be Let. To Assign the
bounds of this Obligation.

First. I reduce Dealings relating to Exchange of Property, either to Donation,
or Sale, in Contracts reducible to Buying and Selling, a just Profit is allowed
of, Acts appertaining to Donation, as such admit of no Gain, by way of Justice;
for such a Gain were Usury in taking Interest, for what Donation, has made no
more ones Own.

Now Lending, is as sort of Giving, as Letting, is of Selling, and one, and the
same thing, may be Let or Lent, or Given; Giving makes the Thing no more the
Donors, Lending makes a Thing, or at least, the use of a Thing, no more the
Lender's. For the space of the time it is Lent, so that, to require Payment for
what is given or Lent, as being another's, is Palpable Injustice, and Usury, as
has already been declared. In Letting, one Sells the use of what he Letts.

I Secondly Reflect, that as no man is Obliged to Prejudice himself, so where
Self-prejudice Intrudes not it self, the Law of Nature Obliges one Man to help
another, the Preservation of each, having a Reference to the Whole; and in this
Case arises an Obligation, of Supplying our Neighbors.

Thirdly. In extreme Necessity, no place for Lending. The Necessitous having a
Natural Right, to take what may relieve their present Want, all things in that
occasion becoming Common, and to Refuse a Person, in extreme Necessity, is a
sort of Theft, in retaining from him, what Necessity makes to be his own, and
no less Folly, in pretending to Lend, what in extreme Necessity is more
another's, then yours.

Fourthly. In Cases of great, though less urgent Necessity, than Extreme; the
Wealthy are bound, under Mortal sin, to Succor the Poor, out of what they have
Superfluous; in ordinary Necessities, they are Obliged under Venial; Yet in those
Cases, if Letting or Lending, will suffice their occasions, all Obligation of
giving ceases: This is generally the Doctrine of Divines.

Hence this Conclusion follows. The Obligation of Lending is Conditional. Thus
to be expressed. If a Person, will not by giving, by Selling, or Letting;
cannot relieve his poor Neighbor, by the Law of Nature, He Is bound to Lend out
of what He abounds with. And in that Case to exact Interest, is Usury
unjustifiable, by any Law whatsoever. The saying of St. Basil being most true,
upon the Text of the 14 Psalm. Qui Pecuniam suam non dedit ad Vsuram. He that
has not given his Money to Usury. Enim vero inhumanitas est maxima, Si is qui
egestate premitur, mutuum ad Vitae Subsidium qui erat; Dans vero minime
contentus, ex Miseri calamitate Provertus and opes excogitet. For certainly,
says the Saint: It is the greatest inhumanity, whilst one Borrows a Subsidy for
life, the Lender not content with the Principal, Devises Incomes, and Riches,
out of the Calamity, of one in Misery. In this Passage you have, in what,
according to the Sense of St. Basil, Usury consist.

In other Cases, containing no Obligation of Lending, Money may be Let, or Put
out, as Law and Custom allows. Since the Obligation of Lending, generally
speaking, extends no farther, than to small Sums, sufficient to Relieve
Pressing Necessity. Yet in case a Person freely Lends never so great a Sum, the
Law cannot allow him Consideration for it; for This were Usury, as has been
more than once repeated, and Proved, forbidden by the Law of Nature, and God;
to which Inferior Laws, to be Laws, must Conform.

Having proved what Occurred unto me, not so expressly Treated of in Schools,
toward the making out the Lawfulness of taking Interest, for Money Put out;
it is time I should produce, the Common Titles, Assigned by Divines, for the
Justification of it.

CHAP. VIII. The Common Title assigned by, DIVINES.
COnsidering the Nature of Things, which may be Let, I find in none, so many,
and so good Titles, for just Gain, as in the Letting of Money. A House for
Instance, stands Empty, of no Profit, or present use, to the Owner, apt to
decay, for want of Inhabiting; yet it may be Let, and Rent received for it.
Upon what Score? For the living in it? But that kept it in Repair; And is it
Just, the Inhabitant should pay for what he betters? It may be said, it is the
Tenant's Convenience, which deserves the Rent. The same with greater Reason,
may it not be said of Money?

But besides the Hirers Convenience, the inconveniences which attend the
Lettor, are yet more Considerable, by Reason, Money being the Price of Things,
Contingencies Daily, Produce occasions of Lucre, and the want of it, unforeseen
Damage. The depriving oneself of the Profit, which probably might be made, and
the Danger of undergoing Prejudices, are rateable, worth Recompense, and may be
Bargained for, Reason dictating as Just, to provide for Self indemnity. For
which Cause, as I suppose the Money taken upon those Accounts, is named
Interest; as behoving each one, to require it as Due.

One may interpose: These Titles have no Place in such as Hoard and Keep Money
idle in their Coffers.

A. An inconsiderate Objection. Whilst the Money lies in Coffers, the Difficulty
may be shut up with it. But every one has Right to open his Coffers and to
make Use of his Money, to his best Advantage; and this Right by Putting it out,
he makes it over to another. Besides in good Philosophy, Money being a pure
Medium, it is not coveted and loved for its own sake, but for the Service it
may be put to; as advantageous Purchases, Traffic, and the like, in order to
Profit; and in Cases of Suits, Sicknesses, imprisonments, and other too
frequent Accidents, in order to prevent the harm, the Want of Money in like
Misfortunes, would Occasion; of these Services he that puts out Money, deprives
himself, and that Deprivation deserves to be considered. Upon this ground runs
the Decision of S. Thomas, Opusc. de Vsuris, where treating of such as sell
dearer, because upon Trust, affirms it is Usury. Si tantum propter expectationem
solutionis fiat; That is, if it be for mere forbearance, but if it be to keep
himself harmless, that it neither may be Usury nor Injustice. But grant that
neither Cessation of Profit, nor Emergent Damage, be in the Case.

Still the Hazard of Principal is Constant and great. What a multiplicity of
false Dealers? Casualties frustrate the best Intentions, Securities of soundest
Appearance, prove often Litigeous, producing much Cost, Trouble and Care; the
exposing ones self to all this, Is it not estimable and worth its Value?

It may be said: All Lenders are exposed to these Inconveniences, for which
cause, they being essentially connex'd with Lending, either Use-Mony, upon such
Titles, as being for Lending is Usury; or those Titles, taking away the Nature
of Lending, Usury will become a mere Sound, and not a Word, as signifying
nothing.

Answ. It is granted that all Lenders, are more or less Subject to those
Inconveniences, but it is denied that they are Essential to Lending. For
Lending includes no more than the Act of Lending, the Use of what is Lent, and
futurity of Repayment; these possibly may consist without loss of Gain,
adventitious Damage, or Hazard of Principal, as a Lender presumes they will,
and ventures it. So that he retains no Title for Interest; This an Usurer heeds
not, but blinded by Avarice, even in that Case will have Profit, with the
Principal. A lender then, though he be exposed to Loss, it is because he will
lend, be it for Motives of Charity, so commended in Holy Writ, and he is to
expect his Interest from God; or be it out of Friendship, and he is repaid by
his own Judgment, that it becomes him so to do. But it were a bad illution to
say: he could not Bargain upon the score of those Dangers, and so doing, he had
been no more a Lender, and therefore no Usurer.

The Inference which was added, that Usury will become a mere Sound, and not so
much as a significant Term, ends in Air, and is of no Substance. Sir Roger
Twisden, and some others, make Usury a pure Invention of Churchmen, to bring
more Grist to their Mills, which were it true, they would not study to bring it
to nothing, as the Objection Pretends. But Divines according to Duty,
distinguish no Usury from Usury. To exact Interest for what was freely Lent
still remains Usury, independently of all Churchmen and Canons. To Let where
obliged to Lend, is Usury; taking above what Law allows, is Usury, at least
Presumptive; Continuation Money, too much in Practice, if some new Consideration
arise not, I hold to be Rank Usury, as received Purely for Lending; all other
Titles, being satisfied with the Interest, Taxed by Law.

Some not over-vers'd in these Matters, may require what I mean by
Continuation-Mony?

Answ. I mean too frequent a Practice of Usurers, their Custom is ever to have
Money at hand, to Supply such as shall Address unto them, First, They require so
much for Procuring the Money, then they Prefix a Set Time, for which they Let
it. Finally, The Term expired, they Demand what they think fit, for Continuing
it in the Borrower's Hands This Last I style Continuation Money, and hold to be
plain Usury.

Against these Titles from the Name of Usury, Du Tertre discourses it after
this Manner. A name is taken from the Nature of the Thing it is placed for, but
the Name which is given to Usury, is for taking Increase, for the Use of Money;
therefore Usury consists precisely in taking the said Interest. He promotes it
thus: General Idea's imprinted in the Minds of all Men, cannot be false but
Usury in the Idea of Scripture, Fathers, Philosophers, imports Interest for the
Use of Money, without Exception of emergent Damage, loss of Gain, or danger of
Principle; To receive Interest therefore for the Use of Money, even with those
Exceptions, is Usury.

Answ. I pass by the Major of his first Syllogism, though it be false, that Names
be taken from the Nature of things, except the Names given by Adam; for the
same thing in different Languages, is expressed by different Names, made
significant by the Will of Men. The Minor is denied; for one that buys Cheap,
receives Interest for the Use of his Money, and yet incurs no guilt of Usury.
The Consequence therefore is no better than the Premises.

To the Promotion of his Argument, the Major is granted, the Minor denied, and
so is the Consequence; his Major I Reassume and Retort it. General Idea's, Page
114. Imprinted in the Minds of all Men, cannot be false; but it is an Idea
drawn out in the Minds of all Men, by the Author of Nature, that Man may
provide against emergent Damage, loss of Gain, and danger of Principal, that he
may submit to the Agreement of his Nation, tending to the Common good,
therefore its Contradictory must be false.

He instances Usury by all is understood, for Interest taken for the Use of
Money. Vsura quae scilicet pro usu Pecuniae accipitur. Usury by Reason it is
taken for the Use of Money. Says the Law.

Answ. In Law the word Vsura has both a good and bad Sense; Interest taken for
the Use of Money Lent, is Usury; Interest for the Use of Money upon other
Accounts, is no Usury. And de Facto in his 7th Chap. He justifies several
Cases, in which Interest is taken for the Use of Money. It was a piece of
Oscitation in him, not to take Notice of Usury, as expressed in other
Languages; the Greek, the Hebrew, and Chaldaick, import more than Pure Interest
for the Use of Money, and could not be derived from the Latin Vsus.

But besides the aforesaid Titles;

This other way, Divines propose for the Justice of Putting out Money. One may
purchase a Pension, or Rent Charge affecting some Land; or Tenement, and it is
styled Real, or affecting only the Person, and it is named Personal. The
Contract is so to be drawn up, that by Repayment of the Principal, the
Obligation of giving the Pension, be cleared; or upon Releasing the Pension,
the Principal restored, both Parties Covenanting for Performance. As to the
Real, it is judged by most Divines to be no ways Usurious, by many, and of great
Credit, as to the Personal, Reason being much the same for both; so that
excluding all Usurious intentions, both Contracts are held safe in conscience.
Our Custom then may be said to involve a general Covenant of this Nature.

Whatever Statute therefore has been Enacted, against taking Interest for Loan,
can only be in force, in Cases of unlawful Gain; and we are beholden to
Divines, for finding out just ways of attaining to a Profit, which could not be
made by Usury, without sin. This is ingenuously confessed by Sir Robert Filmer,
though no Friend to Catholic Divines. But Reason, is ever Reason, come it from
who it will. His words are Page 124. It is no Sin to avoid a Statute by Lawful
means: If the Contract of Bargain, and Sale be in it self Lawful, why should it
be a Vice, and not a Virtue, thereby to avoid the Penalty of the Law, since
Laws are properly made, to force Men to avoid them, by Lawful means?

CHAP. IX. Whether in some Case, it stand with Law, and Conscience, to take
More than Five per. CENT.
THe ordinary Method of Putting out Money, having been discharged of the
Imputation of Usury; a Motion may be made, whether in some Case, one may not
improve his Money, to more than the Current Interest? That one may do it, by way
of Traffic is unquestionable. So that any man's of Gaining, more than Five per
Cent. justifiable, by the same Reasons, and Law, as Traffic is, cannot but be
Approved of, even if Putting out of Money.

My Conclusion is that, in some Case, the Gain of more then Five per Cent. is
Lawful.

The Case is of a Triple Contract, taught by most and ablest Divines. The first
is a Contract of Partnership. the second of Insuring the Principal. The Third
of Insuring the Interest, all three Maintained by Law, and Practiced upon
Exchanges, which certainly they would not be, were they against the Law of
Nature and Usurious.

Suppose then, that all Succeeding according to Expectation, by the first
Contract, each Partie's Gain in a Year, be Computed Thirty per Cent; Suppose by
the second, a Partner Insure his Principal, by giving Ten per Cent. Suppose
finally, that by a third, He seu for Ten more, the hopes he has of Gaining
Twenty; for hope of Gain is Valuable, and matter of Purchase, as appears in the
Buying the Cast Nett. Thus Acting, the said Partner, will have Right, to Ten
per Cent. and the Conclusion is made good.

In Sevil, as I am informed, no less than Twelve per Cent. is taken and given
by Merchants, and Du Tertre acknowledges, that Merchants of the Townhouse, of
Paris, and Exchange of Lions, pay each Term, which is Quarterly, two and a
half, Ammounting to Ten per Cent. in a Year. And questioning himself, what may
be said to it? He coldly Answers que pour L. ordinaire cet Interest est
Vsuraire. That for most part, such Interest is Usurious. So that of its own
Nature, it is not, for were it, of its own Nature, Usurious, it would always be
so, and not only ordinarily. But to return.

Divines agree in the Lawfulness of the Triple Contract, so it be made, with
distinct Persons, and not with a Partner. Some modern Rigorists, except against
it when made with the same. Their Reason is, that the Nature of the Contract of
Society, is to be such, that both Loss, and Profit, be equal to all Parties. L.
1. and Seq. p.and leg. 1. and Seq. c. pro socio. But the two latter Contracts
excludes, partaking in the Loss, therefore not to be made with a Partner.

Answ. At least the Point is gained, of its Lawfulness in some Case, of making
more than Five per Cent. To the difficulty of Contracting with the same
Partner, Divines answer, That by the Law it is only evinced, that in Virtue of
the sole Contract of Society, one cannot require from a Partner, to be insured,
but that it is no ways against the improving the said Contract, by Addition of
the two others.

I add, That the Person so contracting in Law, is not the same, but in this
Case, as in others, is equivalent to three, per fictionem Juris, as the
Civilians term it. In the First, he acts as a Partner, in the Second, as an
Insurer of the Prncipal, in the Third, as a Purchaser of the Hope of Gain,
which the Partner Sells him; so that in each he acts, as a several Person; and
why may not all this be performed by a Partner, as well as another? Since
Partnership, rather gives him the Preference, to the Gain in Prospect?

Against this, Du Tertre urges the Bull of Sixtus Quintus's Beginning.
Detestabilis Avaritia, where he condemns the Contracts of Society, in which the
loss of Principal remains not in him, who Puts out his Money, but is to be
restored him with Interest, in Case it Perish in the Partner's hands, without
any Profit accruing to him.

Answ. First in that Bull, such Contracts only are condemned, wherein by the
sole Contract of Society, or Covenants by Constraint involved in it, the whole
Danger of Principal, without any Consideration, is cast upon a Fellow-Partner,
without any Contract of Insuring, freely made, and agreed to by both Parties,
which Jure Communi hold good. See Bouoc. Disp. 394. Puncto Vnico. n. 46. citing
many as Molina, Salon, Nav. etc. and F. Tuccius, a Man of known Sactity and
Learning, in his Letter to Comitolus, witnesses plainly, that Sixtus Quintus,
being asked concerning this Bull, answered; That he only forbid the Conventions
usually joined to the Contract of Partnership, which are commonly condemned by
Classical Authors, not such as they thought just; And this Tuccius had from the
Cardinals, Toletus, and Sanctorius, who were Commissioned to draw up that
Prohibition.

Secondly, The Bull is of no force, where not received, as the same Bonac
observes, nor is it Accepted in Germany, France, Sicily, or Flanders. Less.
lib. 2. de Just. cap. 23. Dub. 13. and England may be added. But whether
received or no, it is decided by the Rota in Farinaecius Decis, 137, and 138.
And Coccius a Famous Canonist, Dean of the Rota, in a Rotal Decis, An. 1602.
concludes expressly, That the Bull comprehends only such Cases, as are Usurious
Jure Communi; which Decision you will find in Cherubinus, in the Compendium of
the Ballarium, Scholio primo ad Bullam 45. Sixti Quinti.

By these Allegations it appears, with how small Consideration, and much want
of Study, Du Tertre insists upon that Bull. It cannot but be very disagreeable
to Men of Sense and Reading, to hear some wordy, shallow Preachers, and lesser
Divines, condemn these common Methods of Palliated Usury. Let the best of them
uncloak it, by Proving that the Gain made in any of the ways hitherto
Rehearsed, and Authorized by the Public Good; By Civilians, by Canonists, and
Divines is purely for Lending, in which consists the Essence of Usury; or that
they are against the Law of Nature.

This is to be done to Evidence, for if it remains doubtful, Possession carries
it for Custom-and Law. And were it not a Tyrannizing over Souls, to send them
to Hell, more than God himself can do without Evidence for Usurers? Whole
Nations for Practicing of it, to Hell; Divines for Teaching it, to Hell;
Lawyers to Hell, for Abetting it, Judges for upholding, to Hell. But Practicing
what? Teaching what? Abetting what? Upholding what? What only they deemed an
Injury to None; a Convenience to All, suitable to the Law of Nature, and no
wise offensive to the Almighty: And for this to Hell? If this be a Zeal! It is
a Zeal no better than Injustice. What an embroilment of Consciences? What a
confusion of Restitutions to be made by the now Living, for their Ancestors,
and for the yet Living, by themselves, could the misapprehension of a few
Austere Fancies, without any I Say, not manifest, but even probabable Reason,
ground an Obligation of believing them? Were I furnished with Monsieur Du
Tertre's Oratory, How would it pleasure it self, with a breathing or two, upon
so fair a Course? But enough, if not too much of what is unnecessary, and with
the three following Enquiries, I close this first Part.

CHAP. X. Of the Bristol Bargain, Pawn Brocage, and Interest upon Interest.
FIrst Assertion. The Bristol-Bargain no Usury. The Reason is, That the Gain
made by it, is not for Lending, but a Real Purchase of an Annuity, to be paid
for a set Number of Years. And though the Interest by the Seller's Industry, may
come to more than Five or Six per Cent. this cannot make It Usury, otherwise
the Profit made by Selling and Buying, which in a Year, may exceed 20. would be
Usury, to the destruction of Traffic.

Second Assertion. The Bristol Bargain, as represented, is both Just and
Commendable.

The Bargain as proposed to me some 20 Years ago, is this; Five hundred Pounds
then running at Six per Cent. was given for an Annuity of T^^ hundred Pounds to
be Paid Yearly, the space of Seven Years. I then thought it safe, in
Conscience, and still do, the more that I hear, it is warranted by Law; For it
contains the requisite of Equality between the Price, and what is Bought, so that
it is guilty of no Injustice; It is not purely for Lending, so that it is free
from Usury. It Is true, the Purchaser by Putting out the hundred Pounds yearly
Paid him in, upon the expiring of Seven Years, Reimburses his Capital, and
comes to Gain 330 l. and somewhat more, but this, without the least Oppression
of the Seller, who, I suppose, takes the Principal, in order to make a
Purchase, or the Paying a Debt; and not able to pay in the Whole at once, is
eased by Paying in yearly, a Hundred, and the last Two hundred, paid in lieu of
Interest, falls short by Ten of the Current Interest at Six per Cent. So that
albeit the Purchaser may Gain a hundred and Twenty Pounds, above the Current
Interest, the Seller of the Annuity, gives less by Ten, and by consequence the
Bargain is commendable.

Third Assertion Pawn Brocage, not to be excused from Usury.

By Pawn-Brocage. I understand not, the taking a Pawn for Security, of ordinary
Interest, without Power, of Alienating the said Pawn; But in the Assertion I
mean the Practice, of taking more than the usual; and that Monthly, under
forfeiture of the Pawn, in Case of Failure. This I take to be Usury; my Reasons
are.

First, It is expressly against Law, so that that the general Agreement, which
justifies the Common way, of Putting out Money, is against Pawn-Brocage.

Secondly, The overplus a Pawn-broker takes, other Titles being fully
Recompense'd is presumed to be taken purely for Lending.

Thirdly. It Is the pressing Necessity of the Poorer sort, which Pawn-brokers
prey upon, Exacting no less, than Fifteen per Cent. and often more, to the
great Oppression, of their Poor Brethren, which is the very Notion of Usury,
delivered in Scripture.

Fourthly. Pawn-brokers are so Insured, of their Principal, by Pawn, that the
Title of it Danger, and Trouble in Recovering it, almost wholly Vanishes. But
Emergent Damage, and Cessation of Lucre, still remain.

Answ. Grant they do, which Brokers themselves know best, yet the Danger of
Principal, equaling both, and ceasing; either Pawn-brokers are bound to take,
but half Interest, upon those Considerations, or others may taken the Double,
for the Danger of the Prinicpal; But this would be Judged Extortion.
Pawne-brocage therefore, can be no better.

In favor of Prawn-Brocage, Presidents are taken from the Mounts, as they are
called of Piety, Erected in most Catholic Cities, and approved of by the Sea
Apostolic, as receiving something more than Current Interest, toward the
Maintenance of Ministers and other requisits to that Pious Work.

Answ. The Disparity is great. First its no good Consequence, from Public to
Private Authority, for were it, whatever the Public Acts, each Particular might
Persume to do, to a Confusion of Order, and Justice. For example, vindicative
Justice, as incumbent to the Public, is a Virtue, yet to good President, for a
private Man, to Revenge himself, This being reserved from him, as an
Incompetent judge. It does not follow then, that Pawn-brocage Practiced by
those Mounts, and Administered by the Public, may be put in use, by every
Particular, Avarice being as dangerous a Passion, and as blind as Revenge.

Secondly. Those Mounts, are to take no more than what is precisely Necessary to
uphold them, for Relief of the Poor, without making the least Gain to
themselves. Pawn-brokers aim at raising Fortunes.

Thirdly, It ensues that Pawn-brokers, are an agrievance to the Poor; whereas
those Mounts, are an ease from the Double, Treble, and more, which by Jews, and
Jewish Brokers, would be Exacted of them; They were named Mounts from the Bulk
of Money Levied by the Prince, Magistrate, or Charitable Coutributions of Piety
from the end they were Founded, the Relief of the Poor.

Fourthly. If after a year, which is the space given to redeem the Pawn, the
Pawn be Sold, Satisfaction being made for Principal and Interest, the Surplus
is to be restored to the Borrower. How well, this is performed, by Pawnbrokers,
let their Conscience tell. However, according to the Law of Nature, they ought
not to be their own Dealers, and take advantage from the Misery of the Poor.
For this Reason I apprehend Leo the 10th. with the Approbation of the Lateran
Council, held by his appointment, requires the Confirmation of the Sea
Apostolic, to the Erecting the said Mounts. On what Authority then can
Pawn-brokers rely, who not only Act without it, but consequently against it,
and our National Laws? So that Reason and Authority duly considered, our
Assertion holds.

Fourth, Assertion Interest upon Interest, as the words sound declares it self
Usury, they importing double Interest, for one and the same Principal, which is
Exaction.

But the Case may be stated thus, a years Interest for example of Twenty Pound
is due. Now in case of non Payment, and the Creditor demand new Interest, for
what is unpay'd, from the time it was due?

Answ. If the Creditor at the due time, demands not his Interest, but
voluntarily lets it run on, by way of for bearance, he can demand nothing, by
reason the forbearance, as being of his own free Will, invests the Nature of a
Gift, for which as such, nothing can be required, and so to take Interest, for
what still remains Interest, as never having been Converted, into a Principal,
would be Usury. But suppose the Creditor, in due time call for his Interest,
and by Agreement, with the Debtor, in place of receiving it, Converts it into a
Principal. I see no Usury in it, for as he may join an other Sum to the former,
so he may the Interest; and the Consideration to be had for it, cannot be said
to be Interest, upon Interest, but upon what was Interest, and is now become a
Principal.

What if the Debtor being called upon, refuse to Pay what is due?

Answ. The Case is the same. For from the time it is Challenged, the Debtor is
an unjust detainer of what would be a Principal, in the Creditor's hands, and
capable of improving; now the loss of the said Improvement, is to be made Good.

Wherefore the Civil Law distinguishes Usury of pure Gain, for Lending, and
Usury of Compensation. The first is ever forbidden, the second is allowed of
(L. Socium. ff. pro socio.) Where if a Partner defers to Pay in due time, his
fellow Partner, it is thus decided: Vsuras quoquae praestare debet, sed non
quasi Vsuras, sed quod socii Interest, Moram eam adhibuisse. He must also
PayVsury, not as Usury, but because it concerns a Partner, that he hsould not
suffer by Delay, and L. Usuras Cod. de Usuris. Cogitur Emptor qui in Solutionis
Mora est Vsuras insuper solvere Venditori. The Buyer who defers Payment, is to
Pay over and above, Interest to the Seller.

Notwithstanding what has been said, if we have any Peculiar Law, against
taking Interest for what was Interest; I Think it not safe in Conscience to
require it. Law being a Rule of Property and consequently just Gain. And there
may be just Reason for the Laws for bidding it. viz. to put a Stop to the Ruin
of Families which certainly attends such, as either cannot, or neglect to Pay
the first Interest. For the burden, of a new Payment coming upon them, will
render them less able to Pay the Second.

Having performed, I hope as far as Necessary, the first Part of my Task, in
clearing the Putting out Money at Use, from the foul Scandal of Usury, by
confronting it with the Law of Nature, as interpreted by Divines, and Lawyers,
I conclude with an Answer to the Complaint of Du Tertre: That if Diverse by
taking up Money, run themselves into Poverty; others by Putting out, forfeit
their Principal, it is the fault of Particulars, and no want of Provision in the
Law, which by moderating Interest, provides for the First against Extortion;
and allows to the Second, the Security they shall require. Casualties ought not
to be Rules, otherwise on the same Account, all Trades must Cease, since a
Profession which is one Man's Making, is often the Undoing of another. One by
taking up Money clears his Estate, and prevents great Mischiefs; or Recruits his
sinking Trade and Reputation; another Redoubles his Debts; the Fault is not in
taking up the Money, but in the Management.

PART. II. Of the Case as to Scripture.
CHAP. XI. VSVRY Considered as to the Old TESTAMENT.
THe Reverence and Compliance due to God's Word in Holy Writ, takes Place of
all Reasons and Authorities hitherto made use of; nor can any Human Law, or
Custom, though seemingly tending to the Public Welfare be of force, in
opposition to Divine Command. For, as Tertullian solidly Determins; Ad
exhibitionem operis Prior est Majestas Divinae Potestatis, Prior est Auctoritas
imperantis, quam utilitas servientis. The Majesty of Divine Power, the
Commanding Authority, precedes the Utility of him that serves. It is but
Rational therefore, that I should confer what has been said, with those Texts
of Scripture, in which Usury is condemned.

To the Explaining how far they relate to our Case.

The first Passage is, Exodus 22. v. 25. Si pecuniam mutuam etc. If thou lendst
Money to any of my people being poor, that dwells with thee, thou shall not
urge them, as an Exactor, nor oppress them with Vsuries. The Second is Levit.
cap. 25. v. 35. Si attenuatus, etc. If thy Brother be impoverished and weak of
hand, and thou receivest him as a Stranger, and sojourner, and he live with
thee, take no Usury. And Ver. 27. Thou shall not give him thy Money to Usury,
and an overplus of the Fruits, thou shall not exact of him. The third is Deuteronomy.
c. 23. v. 19. Non faeneraberis Fratri tuo, etc. Thou shall not lend to thy
Brother Money to Usury, nor Corn, nor any other thing, but to a Stranger. This
is whatever Moises has left in his Law touching Usury.

The two first places are but an Explanation of the Law of Nature, both
Conditional, and no absolute Command. The Condition is, If thou Lend, which
implies not so much as a Precept of Lending. But that is not all; the Condition
required to the guilt of Usury, as the Words lie, is not merely of Lending, but
lending to the Poor, and weak of hand, viz. not able to work; From them to take
more than was Lent, is Oppression, Prohibited under the Notion, Thou shall not
oppress them.

To the Poor, little suffices for their present Wants, and to require sole
Repayment of them, is more, than to take Interest for greater Sums from the
Sufficient. The Law therefore aims not the least at the Case we are in; for who
puts out Money to Poor and weak of hand? Few or None. And yet the Law condemns
only such of inhumanity as do, by stiling this Usury; Neshec, a Ravenous bite,
or the bite of a Dog. A name perfectly misbecoming the Practice of Putting out
Money, Profitable to all Parties concerned. And no wonder if Usury, as expressed
in Law, grounded so just a Detestation of it in holy Fathers, moving them to so
frequent, and vehement invectives against it. The Plainess of the Expression in
the Law, has encouraged some to fix all Usury upon the Oppression of the Poor,
and would incline me to do the same, did not Evidence of Reason, the Light and
Law of Nature, extends its Notion yet farther, to a Gain made purely for
Lending.

The third place in Deuteronomy, though somewhat varying in Words, contains no
more than the former. This I make out; First, from the Title, Occasion, and
scope of the Book. Secondly, from the Text it self.

The Title of the Book given by the Rabbis, is Misne, a Reiteration of the
Law, and by the Septuagint, Deuteronomium, Signifying a Second Law; not as
different from the former, Published on Mount Sina; but as being a Repetition
of it. See Theodoret. q. 1. in Deuteronomy. S. Austine. q. 49. S. Athanasius, In
Prologo Galeato.
in Synopsi. S. Jerome words it thus; Deuteronomium 2da Lex, and Evangelicae
Legis prefiguratio, nonne sic habet ea quae prima sunt, ut tamen nova sint
omnia de Veteribus? Deuteronomy Prefiguring the Evangelical Law, has it not
the first things after such a manner, that of Old, they seem new? And this by
Reason of the Different and statelier Tone, Moises takes in this Book; When
after 40 Years Travel, and glorious Atchievments, being upon his Departure for
a better Life. He, to a new People, their Progenitors being deceased, makes a
second Promulgation of the Law, but more Emphatically, to ratify the Covenant
between God and that People. By the Title therefore of the Book, it is Occasion
and Intent, the Law written in it, in Substance, varies nothing from it self,
given in the former.

This 2dly, is made out from the Text it self. For the Negative, Thou shall not
Lend to Usury, is no more than equivalent to the Conditional. If thou Lend,
thou shall not take Usury. And so it is coincident with the former. Whether this
Law were only Judicial, as the Knights will have it, proper to the Jews, or
Moral, extending it self to all Mankind; I examine not, but supposing it Moral,
yet it nothing affects the Case of Putting out Money, without Oppression, or
Injury.

The Law thus expounded, affords us in few words, a general and true
Construction to the many and vehement Expressions of the Prophets against
Usury. For the Prophets, though inspired to be the Preachers, and Interpreters of
the Law, yet they were no Givers of a new Law; Wherefore our Savior, Mat. 22.
puts a distinction between the Law and the Prophets; Usury therefore with them,
must signify no more than what is written in the words of the Law. According to
these, S. Basil glosses the 5th Verse of the 14th Psalm. And David in the 71
Ps-Verse 13. by the words, He shall spare the Poor and Needy, gives us the
Sense of the following Verse. From Usury and Iniquity, he shall redeem their
Souls; As Psalm. 54. he joins Usury with Guile.

Neither does the Place in Ezekiel. c. 18. much Exagerated to little purpose by du
Tertre, express any thing, not Mentioned in the Law, for that more or increase
there mentioned, and in other Places, is the same specified in the Law, for
Usury, forbidden under the Proper Name of Neshec. And the milder of Tarbith or
Increase, given it by the Jews, as was Remarked in the 2d. Chapter. An honest
Increase, and upon just Considerations, is no where blamed.

Christ indeed, to whom all Power was given, in Heaven and Earth, abrogating
the Ceremonial Law, and some Judicial of the Old Testament, might have
Established, a Peculiar as to the present Cafe, But his Divine Wisdom, left
things, as to that Point in the state they were; Declaring only when
questioned, by a Saucy Doctor, Matt. 22. That on Charity, the whole Law
depended, and the Prophets. So that if the Putting out Money, be no Aggrievance,
by consequence not against Charity; As to Law, and Prophets it rests Good.

CHAP. XII. VSVRY Considered, as to the New TESTAMENT.
THe single Text, making to the present Purpose, is Luke c. 6. v. 35. mutuum
date nihil inde sperantes. Lend, hoping nothing thereby. This passage, however
so much Insisted upon, gives little Assistance to such as are Averse to the
Putting out Money at use. Our Savior in that Chapter Intermixing many things of
Counsel, with others of Precept; Be pleased to peruse it. This saying, Divines
hold to be only of Counsel, and the Conjunction of Lending, with other Works,
which are not of Precept, Is no feeble Confirmation of it. Verse 29. It Is said:
Unto him that smites thee on the one cheek, offer also the other. And verse
30. Give to every man that asks. This lays no Obligation of Giving; no more
does the first of Lending.

Besides Reason dictates the Proposition to be capable of Restriction; For though
a Lender, be bound to hope no Increase by Lending, he may hope for a Requital
of Gratitude, Friendship, or a like return; This indeed as being of less
Perfection, than to hope it from God, we are Counseled to abstain from, by
hoping nothing from Man. Otherwise, why might not the unnam'd Contract, Do ut
Des. I give to be given to, as well hold Good, being Authorized by Christ in
the same Chapter if words be taken as Written; Give; and it shall be given to
you?

But no need of all this. This particle thereby Moderates and restrains the
Negative nothing; So that the words of Christ, as I Apprehend, contains both
Counsel and Precept, Counsels in the Affarmitive part; Lend, out of the Case of
Necessity; in Case of Necessity; Precept, and Prohibition in the Negative part,
hoping nothing thereby, viz. for Lending.

Three other Places, in the New Testament, present themselves. The first, Mat.
25. v. 27. in the Parable of the Talents. Thou oughtst therefore, says the
Lord, to the Idle Servant, to have put my Money to the Bankers, and then at my
coming, I should have received mine own, with Usury. The second is, Luke the
19. v. 23. Where the Noble Man, to the same Purpose utters himself. Wherefore
then gav'st not thou my Money into the Banks, that at my coming, I might have
required mine own with Usury?

My intent go's no farther than to show by these Parables, How the putting out
Money at Use, was Customary among the Jews; a Parable being: The application of
a well known thing, as the Putting out Money was; to aless known, as the Kingdom
of Heaven. The Parable moreover represents unto us a twofold Gain: the one of
Trade, the other by Putting out Money at Use. The omission of this, as obvious
and of less Trouble, as also less Profit, is reproached to the idle Servant;
Usury in that place, being taken in a good Sense, as Interpreters observe. It
having then been a Custom of the Jews, to put out Money, had it been Usury so to
do, expressly against Law; Christ so Zealous in the reform of other Disorders,
had never passed so great an one in silence.

The third place, Matthew. the 21th, and Jo. the 2. relating the Execution done
by our Savior upon the Bankers in the Temple, has scarce a shadow of
Difficulty; that Comportment of his, having proceeded from the abhorrence not
of Usury, but of the Profanation of the Temple, as appears from his Words; Make
not the House of my Father, a House of Trading.

St. Paul in his first to the Corinthians, Chap. 6. in the Number of the
excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven, specifies Thieves and Avaricious, but
makes no mention of the Putters out of Money; the true Son of Usury being
comprehended in Theft and Avarice. For Avarice is the Parent of Extortion,
Fraud, and other unlawful Dealings, and therefore Extortioners are named there.
For such is the violence of Avarice, where it reigns, that it murders all
thoughts of Charity, and breeds such a Passion for Lucre, that it catches at
all Means, Just, or Unjust; and one of its proper Effects, questionless is
Usury. A Disposition of this Nature, constitutes an habitual Usurer, its
Execution, and Actual.

More than this is not to be culled out of Scripture, as to the true Conception
of Usury, so frequently, and severely reproved by Holy Fathers; Out of whom
Monsieur Du Tertre has handed the choicest places to me. Wherefore, my next
work is, to give them their true Construction, that by Mistake, they may not
work upon the Weaker.

ART. III. Of the Case, as to Church. TESTIMONIES of Fathers, Councils, and
Popes, Answered.
CHAP. XIII. CITATIONS of the Latin Fathers.
AS beyond all Doubt, Holy Fathers were given to the Church for Interpreters of
the Divine Law, and true Sense of Scripture; so the Practice of the Church
interprets them; and is to be their final Rule, and Judge, as well as ours.
Some things are spoken by them Orator like, others Dogmatically. Dictates of
the first Nature, are no ways Obligatory; Sayings of the Second are yet no
farther binding than the Church accepts of them. I say not this, that I meet
with any one Quotation, that condemns the Common Practice, but only to give a
true Account, how far their Authority reaches. They generally run down Usury,
viz. Either taking Interest for Lending, or Extortion. And he that puts out his
Money at Reasonable Rate, cannot be said to receive merely for Lending, or to
Extort.

A regard also is to be had, to the Times and Circumstances, in which they
Writ; Money then Running at Cent. per Cent. and Heathenish Customs, of Exacting
upon the Poor, still being in Vogue. These Reasons might influence their Zeal.
and give Fire to their Vehement expressions; and though chief respect; is to be
had, to the Primitive Doctors of the Church, yet we are not to lose the Esteem,
due to those who according to the Apostle, God has placed in his Church, from
time to time, to Succeed them; nor ought they to be Slighted, with the
Lessening Character, of a few Casuists, as du Tertre makes bold to do. The
Casuists, are Devines, neither a few, but the greatest Part, and the Learned,
on which we ground our selves, as to the Case.

The Holy Father, most quoted, is St. Amb. in his Book upon Tobias. The Title
of his 14. Chap. is de Vsura Divina Lege Prohibita, Of Usury forbidden by the
Divine Law. There he thus defines. Quod cunque sorti accedit, Vsura est, quod
velis ei nomen imponas. Whatever accrues to the Principal, is Usury, call it as
you Please; and in the following Chapter Expounding that Passage of Deuteronomy. Non
Feneraberis Fratri tuo sed Alieno. Thou shall not Lend Money for Usury to thy
Brother, but to the Stranger, Quis erat, says he; Tunc Alienegena, nisi Amalec,
nisi Amorrhaeus, nisi Hostis? Ibi Vsuram exige, cui merito nocere desideras,
cui jure inferuntur Arma huic Legitime indicantur Vsura-.-Ab hoc Vsuram exige,
quem non sit Crimen occidere. -- Vbi Jus belli, ibi etiam Jus Vsurae. Who was
then the Stranger, but Amalec, but the Amorrhaeans, but an Enemy? From him who
justly thou desires to Harm, Exact Usury -- Take Usury from him, who it is not
a Crime to Kill -- Where there is Right to War, There, then is Right to Usury.
So far St Amb. after his Eloquent Manner, in a Transport of Zeal; For these
words of his, contain much Matter of Dispute; As for example; He restrains the
Word Stranger, to sole Enemies, which Argues not so strict a Discourse. Nor do
any as I know hold it Lawful to take Usury from an Enemy. But to Examine each
Particular of the Passage.

The First, whatever accrues to the Principal is Usury. Must either be
understood with St. Basil, of an Increase, Extorted upon the Poor, or as
Divines commonly do of an Increase, merely for Lending. Wherefore Lancelot, by
du Tertre, so Highly Commended. Lib. 4. of his Institutions. Titulo Sept. de
Vsuris. Thus defines Usury. Vsura est quidquid ultra sortem mutuatam
percipitur. Whatever is received above the Principal Lent, is Usury. Now that
this must be the Meaning of the Saint. I Prove it from the Title of the Chap.
which is of Usury, etc. But no Usury but in one of those two ways; therefore
the Increase the Saint speaks of, must be in one of the said ways. If the Place
be not thus Expounded, it fails of Truth. A free acknowledgement, made by the
Borrowers, accrue to the Principal, is it Ufury? And though in the Banks of Rome,
it be not in the power of him that Puts out his Money, to call it in at
Pleasure; yet it lying safe, and the Principal remaining still his, The
Interest accrues to the Principal; and will any one Presume to condemn the said
Mounts of Usury?

The second Place; may be retorted against the Alledger. The Usury S. Amb.
speaks of, is Paralleled to Killing, consequently to the greatest Blow, to be
given by an Enemy; such may be heavy Extortion, and Oppression of the Poor, or
a Treacherous Exacting Interest, for what was Lent; but nothing of this, in our
Case, Sustained by mutual Convenience. Suppose the Amalecites or Amorrhaeans,
had made some Consttiution amongst them, of giving Five or Six per Cent. for
the Benefit of Trade, and ease of the Indebted, who otherwise, would be exposed
to much greater Damages, and for other ends tending to the Public Good; would
the Jews, by placing Moneys in their Hands, have made a Bloody War upon them?
Would they have put them to Slaughter? Would they in the least have injured
them? Surely no. It is violent then, to enforce those sayings upon the Case
before us.

To S. Amb. Succeeds S. Jerome, in his Commentaries on the 18 Chap. of Ezekiel,
where having declared, That Usury is not only for Money, but also for other
Consumptible Goods; he exemplifies it in Seed time, in Corn; in which occasion,
one lends ten Bushels, to receive 15 at Harvest, and this by way of Charity.
The Saint thus insults their Usurious Hypocrisy. Respondeat enim nobis
breviter, Faenerator Misericors; utrum habenti dederit, an non habenti? Si
habenti utique dare non deberat, sed dedit quasi non habenti, ergo quare plus
exigit, quasi ab habente? Let the Merciful Usurer, answer us in short, whether
he gave to one, that has, or to one that has not? If to one that has, he ought
not to have given it, if to him that has not, Why exacts he more from him, as
from one that has?

St. Jerome's Ironical Challenge, given to an Usurer, reflects not upon the
Putting out Money, as is clear. By one that has, and one that has not, he means
Rich and Poor; as to Rich, no Occasion for Lending, as to Poor, they ought not
to be treated as Rich; This is the whole strength of the Dilemma, which seems
rather to allow taking Interest of the Rich, and not of the Poor; for could
Interest be received from neither; How would that Instance hold good? Or why
exacts he more from him, that has not, as if he were one that has? It also
deserves reflection; that the more exacted of the Poor, was no less than 50
per. Cent. or by such as thought themselves most Just, as the Saint expresses
it, 25. And this for Corn, which could have rendered its owner, who had it to
spare, no more, than the Market Price; whereas Money, is highly improvable. Let
some of our Country Usurers therefore, answer the 2d Part. With what
Conscience, do you exact the more, for what you lend, and that only from
Seed-Time, to Harvest of 50 or 25 per. Cent. from the Poor?

Again by the word Giving, he may mean Lending; This being a sort of Gift, and
then St. Jerome instances well, he ought not to have Lent, to one that has'
since the obligation of Lending, is grounded upon our Neighbor's Necessity.
And what does this concern us? For though there be no Occasion of Lending, there
may be just Cause of Putting out Money, and placing it with such as think it but
Reasonable to pay the Lawful Interest.

The 3d is S. Austine, upon the 36 Ps. Conc. 3. He writes in this Manner. Si
faeeneraveris homini id est Mutuam Pecuniam dederis, etc. If you lend Money to a
Man, from whom you hope to receive Increase, or more, than you gave him, be it
Corn, Oil, etc. You are an Usurer, to be disapproved, and not Praised: Mark
what the Usurer does, He will give less, to receive more.

A. S. Austine plainly tell us, what Usury is, and only confirms the Common
Definition; Usury, says he, is a Will of giving less to receive more; And that
you may not mistake, what he means by Giving, it is Lending, as the Preceding
words make out. If you Lend a Man, By S. Austin then is defined an Usurer, who
for Lending will have more, than he lent. And he who gainsays this, knows not
the nature of Usury.

These are the three Doctors, Monsieur Du Tertre, thought fit to select from
among the Latins, out of which a Place or two more, I have omitted for brevity
sake, as having their Answer in what has been said.

CHAP. XIV. AVTHO RITIES of Greek Fathers, Answered.
TO the three Latins, are joined three of the Greek Church, by Du Tertre,
concluding in S. Austin's words; Quomodo Verba Scripturae intellexerunt Sancti,
sic utique intelligenda sunt. Words of Scripture are to be understood, as the
Saints understood them. By Saints, S. Austine, without doubt means the
unanimous consent of Fathers, and not a few dubious Sentences.

I begin with the Author of the imperfect Work, Hom. 38. upon S. Matthew; Though
cited last, as Arguing closer than the other Two. To reflect upon the Author's
Guilt of Heresy in some Passages, I take to be little to the Purpose; but I
weigh his Reason. He enlarges himself, upon the Difference between Letting of
Lands, and Letting of Money. First. Quoniam Pecunia, non ad aliquem Vsum
disposita est, etc. Money is not ordered to any Use, as a Field, but only to be
the Price of Things, in Buying and Selling. Secondly, He that Hires a Piece of
Land, or House, has the Fruits of the Land, or Convenience of Lodging; so that
it is an Exchange of Gain for Gain. But if you retain your Money, it fruits you
nothing. Thirdly, Lands or Houses decay with Use, Money when it is Lent neither
Diminishes, nor Deteriorates.

Answ. Authority grounded upon Reason, go's no farther than the Ground it
builds upon; Wherefore, answering Reason, I satisfy Authority. To the first
it is granted, That the Use of Money, and a Field, much differ. Money of it self
produces nothing; a Field of its own Nature is fruitful; The Use of Money, is to
be the Price of things; the Use of a Field is not; yet in this they agree; That
as a Field gives Grass, or Corn by Tillage, so Money employed in Buying, or
Selling, yields Profit, and of the Right to this, he that Puts out Money
deprives himself. I further wish the Opposers would acquaint me with the
Products of a House, and other Artificial things, or even of Money, when Let
out only for Show, or to be a Pledge; as on those Accounts, S. Tho. allows it
may be 2da. 2dae. Qu. 78.

To the 2d. He that Hires Money, has the Profit, or at least the Right to Profit
by it; and so makes an Exchange of Gain for Gain. But Money by Keeping, affords
nothing.

What then? But it would by Spending. And before Spending, does it not enable
the Owner to profit by it, as Occasion serves? And is this Nothing? Has it not
more of Hardship, that another should have the whole Gain by Laying out ones
Money, than the Onwner should take part with him?

To the 3d. That House and Land decay with use it is answered, they decay more
without it; and though Money as to it self, do not deteriorate; yet a Principal
may perish wholly to the Creditor, but Land cannot; Besides, he that Puts out
his Money, is at least deprived of its Use, in order to Gain, which is
equivalent to a Decay, in House, or Land; And what does a Horse, or House yield
by Keeping unlett?

Greg. of Nyssa, in his 4th Hom. upon Ecclesiasticus, Elegantly delivers
himself in these Terms: Faenus qui aliud Latrocinium and Parricidium
nominaverit, etc. Whoever shall style Usury a second Robbery, or Murdering of
a Parent, will say no more than becomes. For what matters it whether you break
a House as a Thief, to seize another's Goods; or Assassinate a Man upon the
Road to take what he has; or whether by Necessity of Paying Vse-Mony, you get
what appertains not to you? God said to the living Creatures, be fruitful and
multiply. But the Brood of Gold, of what Matrimony does it come? What Mother
gave it Conception? etc.

Answ. Who sees not, how enormous the Usury must be, against which, S. Gregory
declares, with this Eloquent Flourish? But if no Murder of Parent, no Robbery,
no Assassination, be incident to the Putting out of Money, this cannot be the
Usury, at which he aims. A just Contract is the Matrimony, from which the Brood
of lawful Interest comes; public Convenience is its first Parent; whereas the
Usury against which he inveighs, was, (they are his Words;) Conceived by
Avarice, brought forth by Iniquity, Cruelty being the Midwife.

S. Chrysostom. Hom. 57. upon S. Matthew. appears much of the same mind; Quid
irrationabilius quam ut sine Agro, Pluvia, and Aratro seminare contendas? etc.
What more irrational, than to Sow without Land, Rain, or Plow? I give, and
grant, says the Usurer, Not to have and to Hold, but to have more Returned.

Answ. Granting it were a madness to Plow without Land, Rain, or Plow, as it
were, to Sow in the Air; yet I am of Opininon, that neither the Saint, nor any
other would deny; there are other ways of Just Gain, without Land, Rain, or
Tillage; whereof one is, the Putting out of Money at Use. In the words of the
Usurer: I give and grant, not to have and hold, but to have more Restored;
Usury is both exposed, and condemned; for in the Terms Giving and Granting, is
expressed an Usurer's Lending, in order to Receive more thereby; and that more,
was at the immoderate height of that Age.

I close this Chapter, Entreating only the Reader, to consider, whether these,
and like Allegations, are not equally against all Princes, Exchequers, and
Banks in Christendom, beginning from that at Rome, which ought to be a
President as to Conscience? For though such as place their Money in the Bank of
Rome, to take away even the Shadow of mere Lending, cannot call it in at
Pleasure, yet they may Sell the Pension, or Interest they duly Receive; and so
Reimburse themselves of their Principal, and there never being scarcity of
Buyers, it comes to be equivalent to the Power of Calling it in; Which being
so, I hope Du Tertre, and his Adherents, will grant Rome to be no less Versed
in Scripture, and the obliging Authority of Holy Fathers, than themselves; and
yet not so Presumptuous, as to run, and Act in opposition to the said
Authority. It remains now to discuss, whether it succeeds better with him, in
his Pretensions to Popes and Councils?

CHAP. XV. Of the AVTHORITIES of Councils.
THE Quotations taken out of the Decretals, and some Synods, make me suspect,
that either Du Tertre, understood them not, or mistook the Question. The cause
of this my Apprehension will appear, in the Examination of what he Produces.

I say not, says he, That the Council of Nice. Chap. 17. Forbad Usury to the
Clergy, each one Interpreting the Place, in his own Sense; But the Council of
Carthage has Prohibited the Clergy to Exact Interest of any Kind: c. 16.
Nullus Clericorum amplius recipiat, quam cuiquam commodaverit, Let none of the
Clergy receive from any one more than he Lent.

Answ. Much to the Purpose; to receive more than is Lent, and on the Score of
Lending is Usury, so that the Difinition of Usury, has the Councils Liking. Yet
what if the Council, should have forbid the Clergy to Putt out Money at Use, as
improper to their Calling; It nothing concerns the Layety nor questions its
Justice; but now it is in Practice with Clergy, as well as Layety. Wherefore
Doctor Gage's President of the English College at Doway, being Demanded by a
Person of Quality, of the Opinion of his Community, as to the Case, with great
Ingenuity Answered, they were Divided, for such as had Money to put out, thought
it Lawful, such as had none were against it.

What he brings out of an Epist. of St. Leo, to the Bishops of Campania, is
much of the same Strain, the Pope orders punishment for those, who Practice
Usury, and Strive to grow Rich by it. Qui usurariam exercent Pecuniam and
faenore volunt ditescere.

Ans. Had Du Tertre proved the Common Practice Usury; This and the Rest, might
have been Serviceable to him. But to suppose it to be Usury without Proof, and
then to Condemn it as Proved is not fair, but a sort of Juggle, to amuse the
unlearned with Quotations,

Gratian is Cited in the 2d. Part of his Decretals, Cause the 14. q. the 3. c.
4. who out of an Ancient Council of Agde, held the 6th Century, An. 506 Defines
Usury, Vsura est, etc. Usury is when more is Required than was given; as for
example, if you give 10s. and require more Back, or a Bushet of Corn, and Exact
somewhat above.

Ansu. Giving is taken there for Lending, and that to the Poor, as may be
gathered from the Smallness of the Sums; Besides in Reality, in our Case, one
receives no more, than he gives; for a yearly Improvement, being worth at least
Five per Cent. of this he is made Master, who receives the Principal. So that
even in Compliance with the Decision as it lies, no more is taken than given.

This is all, the Author could Pick, out of Ancient Councils, against which, he
Apprehending length of Custom had Prescribed, he passes to later Decisions. A
Transition which betrays, either Shallowness, or Prevarication, as to the Cause
he undertakes, since Custom is the best Interpreter of Law. Lib. 37. ff. de
Legibus Optima Legum Interpres est Consuetudo. Now Usury being against the Law
of God, no Custom can prescribe against the said Law, but it has Prescribed in
favor of the Common Practice, as he Apprehends; Therefore the Common Practice
can be no Usury, and if Custom of time Passed, could Prescribe against the
Ancient, why may not present Custom Prescribe against what he Quotes of Fresher
Date? For that both Clergy and Regulars, take up, and put out Money as Occasion
requires, it is too well Known now a days, to be denied.

Little or nothing therefore to his Purpose, being to be gathered out of
General Councils, DuTertre passes to Provincial Synods In that of Milan under
Pius Quartus, it is forbid to take Interest, upon any Account whatsoever
Yearly, for Money offered to be Paid in. In that of Mecklin in the time of Pius
Quintut. 1566. Du Tertre seems to Triumph, though of no General Obliging
Authority. Its Decree is, Synodus Statuit and ordinat ne quis Tutor, etc. The
Synod Decrees and Ordains that no Trustee or Guardian, under Pretense of
Increasing the Patrimony of their Pupils, Lend the said Pupills Money to receive
Yearly, a certain Lucre above the Principal, with Power of calling in the said
Principal, Declaring such Bargain to be Usurious and that against such Lenders
as Usurers, to be Proceeded to Punishment, as Prescribed by Canons.

Answ. The Synod of Milan Determining only as far as Cited by Du Tertre, in the
Case Money be offered to be Paid in, rather Allows, than Disallows Interest for
it, when not offered to be Paid in, or when it is Put out, according to the
Rule, Exceptio firmat Regulum in alijs; but the Synod in express Terms agrees
unto it, when Granted by Law, closing its Prohibition, Nisi quatenus jure
nominatim permittatur. In so much that Bonac, though a Milanese thought it not
worth his while, to take notice, of what no ways opposes his, and our Opinion.
Bail therefore the Learned compiler of Councils Tom. 2 do, Page 492. judges the
Council to be no ways in force against the Common Tenants; for were it, he
Rightly Instances, Cur ergo Bonacina, and alij Scriptores hujus Provencia,
Plures exhujasmodi Casibus licitos tutati sunt sine cujusqam offensione? Why
then has Bonacina, and other Writers of this Province, defended many of the
Cases Mentioned in the Council, without offense to any?

The Synod of Mecklin, in the sense D^ Tertre wrings it to, is not excepted of,
in the very Province, which only it could Oblige, as appears from constant
Practice. For my Part, I Guess the Decree strikes, at deceitful Trustees, and
Guardians, the word under Pretext Denotes as much. They commit Usury, in taking
Money for Lending; expressed twice in the Decree, they Cloak it under a Specious
Pretext, of the Orphan's Prosit, and it is no wonder if such Practices be
Condemned by the Synod. Setting aside this or a like Gloss; The Synod would
pass for Extravagantly Uncharitable, in forcing Orphans, to live from their
Infancy, upon the Principal, to the Beggaring them, when come to Age; Wherefore
even our Statute Laws, though Judged by some Dubious in the Point of Loan, allows
the Putting out Orphan's Money. On the other Part with what Conscience can a
Guardian expose his Pupil's Money, without securing the Principal, and Power of
calling it in?

Trustees therefore may put out their Pupil's Stock, so it be effectually for
their Profit, as it is done without reclaim either of Church, or Magistrate,
taking always such Methods, as may exclude not only the Intention, but all
appearance of Usury. Hence Lessius, not long aster this Synod, writing in that
same Diocese makes no mention of this Decree, but justifies the way of Putting
out Orphan's Money; and though, he thinks fit it should be forbid for the future.
I conceive, he added that Clause, for fear Ignorance might be an Occasion to
some of committing Usury, by taking Interest purely for Lending, which without
Usury, might have been bargained for, on other Accounts, and in due forms.

The Assemblies of Melun, Bordeaux, and Rheimes, are fully Answered, by what
has been said, and the Practice of all France, in Case of real Opposition,
Oversways in Authority, those few Particular Synods.

The Assembly of Melun, Du Tertre tells us: repeats the words of that of Milan,
concluding with the Saying of Christ, Lend hoping nothing thereby; the like
does that of Bourdeaux. The Council of Rheimes, of greater Authority, as being
approved by the Pope, clearly allows the Doctrine delivered hitherto of Usury,
In these Terms, Tit. de Faenore cum sacra litterae excludant eum a Divino
Tabernaculo, qui Pecuniam dederit ad Vsuram aperteque nuntient, ut mutuum
Demus, nihil inde sperantes: Quisquis praeter sortem Praecipuam ex mutuo
aliquid amplius exegerit, vel acceperit, cujuscunque generis illud sit modo
Pecunia estimari possit Vsurarius esse censeatur. Since the Holy Scripture,
excludes him from the Tabernacle, who gives his Money to Usury, and manifestly
declares, That we lend hoping nothing thereby; whoever shall Exact, or receive
above the Principal of what was Lent, of whatsoever kind it be, so it be worth
Money, let him be judged an Usurer. Remark well the Expression, For what was
Lent; there lies the Stress: But what Council, or Assembly ever say, That Money
Put out, as in our Case, is Money Lent?

CHAP. XV The AVTHORITIES of Popes.
ALexander the III. having condemned Usurers in the Councils of Tours and
Lateran; To the Case of the Archbishop of Genoa, proposing the Dealings of
some Merchants, who Sold dearer for retardment of Pay, writes thus: Licet
contractus hujusmodi, ex tali forma non possit censeri nomine Vsurarum, nihilo
minus tamen, venditores Peccatum incurrunt, cum cogitationes hominum,
omnipotenti Deo nequeant occultari.

Answ. What could be alleged less favorable, to Du Tertre's Purpose? For the
Pope seems to excuse from Usury, what Divines condemns for such; Though such
Contracts, says the Pope, as to their forms, be not to be held Usurious, yet
those that Sell after that Manner, sin; whereas Divines, affirm to be Usury, to
take any thing for pure Delay of Payment; the said Delay being essential to
Lending. The Pope's then Meaning I take to be, that such a Contract, cannot be
prosecuted in the exterior Court as Usurious; yet that such Dealers, for the
ordinary sin, by forcing those; who cannot give present Money, to pay for the
forbearance, which is plain Oppression, arguing an Usurious intention of Gain,
such to have been His Holinesses Meaning appears from the ensuing Clause: Since
the Thoughts of Men, cannot be hidden from the Omnipotent God; If this wise
Pope was so Cautious, as not to condemn for express Usury, Interest for pure
Forbearance; Would he approve the forwardness of some, no Popes, in condemning
of Usury, an Interest settled by common Agreement, or by Covenants, and Titles
thought just by Divines? One of these is the danger the Seller undergoes, of
losing both his Ware and Price, with the Trouble in recovering it, and that
Consideration on this score may be taken, is not only the Opinion of Iconnes
Martinez de Prado. Tom. 2. Theolog. Moralis, c. 27.. 2. Citing 16 more, but
before him of the Learned Sylvester, Master of the sacred Palace, and eight
others quoted by him, insisting on the Doctrine of their great Master, St. Tho.
Opusc. 73. c. 10. Si enim Venditor Rem suam, etc. If a Seller intends to sell
Dearer, not for the Time only, but for the Damage like to befall him, or to
redeem the Vexation, probably to be suffered, in Recovering his Debt, either by
Reason of the Malice, or Impotency of his Debtor; then he is excused from sin.

To Urban the III. three like Questions were Proposed. cap. Consuluit; Whether
those were to be looked upon as Usurers, who sold Dearer by reason of Staying
for their Money? Or those who tacitly intended it? Or finally those, who would
not Release the Buyer, without drawing Advantage on that Account? The Pope
declares them Usurers, as sinning against the Command. Lend, hoping nothing
thereby.

Answ. Voluntary Forbearance, is equivalent to Lending; and therefore the
Seller is no more obliged, to forbear, than to Lend; but in case he forbear, he
does as good as Lend, and in that Case sins against Christ's Precept. And this
is the full of the Pope's Answer: He makes no mention of any other Title, as
the Prejudice ensuing to a Tradesman, and hinderance of Gain for want of his
Money, or the danger of no Pay, or the Losing all; these are considerable, and
it is but just, the Buyer should make them good.

Leo the 10th. in the Lateran Council, having alleged Christ's Words. Lend
hoping nothing thereby: Concludes; Ea enim est Propria Vsurarum Interpretatio,
quando videlicet ex usu Rei quae non germinat, de nullo labor, nullo sumptu,
nullo periculo, Lucrum fetu conquiri stadetur. For this is the proper
Interpretation of Usuries, viz. When one Studies to Gain, and receive Profit
from things which are unfruitful, without Labor, without Expense, and without
Danger.

Answ. I should think the Author had made it his Employment to cull out places,
to the settling what he pretends to overthrow. The Pope in that Bull, silences
the Zeal of such, as impugned the Mounts of Piety, as Usurious, having premised
the Reasons invented by them; of those Reasons, one is contained in the Words,
which Du Tertre, either by oversight, or disingenuity, makes to be the Pope's.
Whereas His Holiness, having related the Arguments of such, as disapproved of
the Mounts of Piety, as Usurious, encourages the erecting of them, by granting
Indulgencies; And who shall either by word or writing, Preach or Dispute
against them, he makes liable to the Punishment of Excommunication. Latae
sententiae, nullo obstante Privilegio. That is, Ipso facto, to be incurred no
Privilege whatsoveer withstanding it. What greater evidence of this Pope's
Judgment of the invalidity of their Reasons, and amongst the rest of this
objected, which Du Tertre inconsiderately brings for the Pope's, though rejected
by His Holiness. But Du Tertre would appear some Body.

To answer Reason with Reason. That Money cannot fructify, has often been
denied, and is apparently untrue, in the Gain to be made in Purchasing good
Pennyworths; insomuch after all, Du Tertre himself, Page 134, and 135.
acknowledges that Saying to be verified only of Money Lent, which being no more
the Lender's, but the Borrowers, can yield nothing to the Lender; By reason,
Res fructificat Domino. The thing fruits to its Owner, and so far he is in the
Right; but seems not to reflect, that it may fructify before it is Lent, and
then to Bargain for what it may yield, is no Lending, nor Usury. Nor is it
without Labor, Expenses, and Danger, that Money is Let out. What Labor in
Getting it? In Preserving it? To omit lesser Cares and Troubles, in drawing up
Deeds, Counting? etc. The want of its Profit, Is it not a sort of Charges? The
danger of Damage, the Exposer of his Money, takes upon himself, which may happen
from frequent Casualties, for want of his Money, as in Accidents of Fire,
Sickness, Imprisonments, War, or the like; Is it not very Sensible? And where
is the Principal? And yet by confession of those very Divines, no Usury where
such Causes intervene.

But Greg. the 9th, even excludes even the Danger of Losing the Principal, from
being a good Title. Cap. Naviganti vel eunti ad Nundinas, etc. The Person
Lending a certain Sum of Money, to one that Puts to Sea, or go's to a Fair,
receiving somewhat above the Capital for taking upon himself the Danger, is to
be judged an Usurer.

Answ. How does this cohere with the Objection of the Precedent pretended
Authority? There it is required there be no danger; Here, even in case of
Danger, it is made Usury to take Interest. Bernartius cited by Laym. n. 13. de
Vsura. suspects a Mistake of Print, by the Omission of a Non. So that in the
place of is to be judged, ought to be read, is not to be judged. This is
clearly gathered from the Connection, as you may see there. If this like you
not, even take the words as they lie. He that Lends ventures the Danger of
Losing; so that to Bargain for that Danger, by way of Insurance, is either not
to Lend, or taking for the Danger of what is Lent, is Usury.

Innocent the 3d. Declares Usury to be against both Testaments.

Answ. We say it is also against the Law of Nature, and by its being so, we have
evinced, that the Putting out Money, as in Practice, is no Usury.

To make an end of tiring my Reader with these and like Citations; Custom, the
best interpreter of Authority, and the Definition of Usury, by which all Usury
must be tried, are fully sufficient, to solve whatever Objection. I have not
made it my Business to trace Du Tertre, step by step, he is ever upon the wing,
and rather flutters, than walks to amuse with the Noise of his Prones, where he
cannot convince with Reason, himself Presumptuous, inflicts that Character,
upon three Divines of Known Ability, Medicina, Lessius, Valentia, Page 138.
where he abuses his Reader, by imposing upon Lessius very grossly, as will
appear to the Examiner, from whence I guess, how he treats the others, which I
have not by me. To what purpose, Page 145. does he unite Opposits, as Lessius,
and Valentia, with the Author of the Letter he impugns? Is itany wise
astonishing, that Opposits should contradict one another? His inference, that
the Danger of the Principal is greater, when in the hands of the Poor;
therefore more may be taken from them, than of the Rich, is a pure Inference of
his own Brain, without Premises. Who commits any considerable Sums to the
Poor, and knows he not that Interest taxed by Law, cannot be exceeded; and that
this only increases, as the Sums putt out do, less for little Sums, and more
for greater? The Law therefore is favorable to the Poor, where the Danger of
the Principal is greater.

Who will not smile at the Man's Eloquent Simplicity, Page 144? Where after
pretensions to Universality, after having in one Leaf, no less than thrice
rallied up Fathers, Popes, and Councils, by way of Crowning all he tells you,
That many Learned Doctors of Sorbon, and of the Faculty of Divinity of Paris,
among which, were the most Illustrious Curats of that great City have Signed
the Common Sentiment of the Church in the Matter of Usury. I suppose in
Condemning the common Practice.

Answ. Was it their Signing that made it common? Or if common before, what need
of their Signing? They Signed then what was not common to all, and what he
would make common. But how? By the Signing of Many. He says, not by the Signing
of all; he says not of the greatest Part, the opposite then, might be as common,
as what they Signed. Many Doctors therefore, and they Doctors of the Sorbon
too; Many Curats, and they Curats of Paris too, with whole Towns, and Provinces
in France, practicing what he abusively styles Usury, are of poise enough, not
only to counter balance, but so outweigh the Authority of his many Doctors and
Curats, as to the common Sense of the Church. And the Bishops of France, Are
they to be slighted, because silent Lovers of Peace, and Enemies of Novelty?
Can they be thought to be less concerned for the good of Souls, or less knowing
than some Curats of Paris? And their Silence, is it not a loud rebuke, to his
Many? And the Divines of other Nations, Are they to pass for Shadows? With all
respect due to the Sorbon, be it said, o'ther Countries, have given, and daily
afford to the World, Men as Eminent for Learning; Why not then to be relied on,
as well as his Many? For which we have his bare Word. England alone has oftener
given Masters to the Sorbon, than the Sorbon to England.

Perchance Du Tertre might have insisted, as some of late have done, upon the
Propositions condemned by Innocent the 11th, Anno. 1679. I therefore set them
down, leaving to the Reader, to judge how far they affect our Case.

The 24th Proposition runs thus: Vsura non est, dum aliquid ultra sortem
exigitur, tanquam ex Benevolentia, and gratitudine debitum, sed tantum si
exigatur, tanquam debitum ex Justitia. It Is no Usury if something above the
Principal be exacted, as due by way of Benevolency, and Gratitude, but only as
exacted by way of Justice.

Answ. The Proposition is deservedly condemned, and condemns it self. For a
Benevolence, or spontaneous Act of Gratitude, cannot be said properly to be
Due, and therefore to Exact it as Due, is Injustice; and if for the Use of a
Principal Lent, it is Usury. To receive a Benevolence, or Gift by way of
Gratitude, is not condemned? Nay to Exact a Gift once made, is not even
Injustice, it being his, to whom it is given; now by the general Agreement this
Gift is made, antecedently to the Putting out Money, it may therefore be
required; Besides, the Proposition reaches none of the forementioned ways, or
Titles, for which Interest is Due, by way of Justice.

The 41. Proposition is: Cum Mutuata Pecunia sit Preciosior numeranda, and
nullus sit qui non Majoris faciat Pecuniam Presentem quam futuram, potest
Creditor aliquid ultra sortem a Mutuatario exigere, and eo titulo excusari.
Since Money Lent, is better than Money to be Paid, and that there is no Body,
who does not esteem Present Money, more than future, the Creditor upon that
Account, may require something above the Principal, from the Borrower, and so
be excused from Usury.

Answ. Condemnations being stricti Juris, fall upon Propositions Precisely as
they lie; Now this Proposition taken as it is worded, is both Scandalous and
false. For one that Lends, parts with present Money, upon future repayment, a
token they are equal, at least, in his esteem. Is he no Body? Besides,
difference of time, alters not the worth of Money Whence it ensues that to
ground a Title of receiving Interest, upon so clear an untruth, and Futurity of
repayment, essential to Lending, is to excuse taking Interest for Lending,
which is Scandalous, and therefore justly Condemned.

To the aforesaid Propositions, may be added the 47th. Among those Condemned by
Alex. the 7th. Licitum est mutuanti aliquid ultra sortem exigere si se Obliget
ad non repetendam. sortem usque ad certum Tempus. It Is Lawful for a Lender, to
Exact something above the Principal, provided he Oblige himself, not to call it
Back, for a Set time.

Answ. Who sees not, that such a Lender would have Interest, for a pure
Forbearance, which is Flat Usury, as we have often Affirmed, and follows from
its Definition. So that the Propositions Condemned by the late Popes, leave our
Case untouched. And no ways oppose what has been said for the Lawfulness, of
Putting out Money, considered as was Promised, as to the Law of Nature,
Scripture, and Church.

I should not have Concerned my Self in an Answer to Monsieur Du Tertre's Book,
long since Printed, and I Question not, but already Answered, by some of his
own Nation, had not his Genius passed the Seas, and appeared with no other
Weapons than his, to the Terror of Timorous Souls, and perplexing of
Consciences.

CHAP. XVII. The CONCLUSION.
TO Conclude as I Prefac'd. Having presented the Reader, according to Promise,
with what your Reformers, in the Point of Putting out Money, have to say to Us,
and we in Answer to them, let Him call a Jury, of his Impartial Thoughts, to
the Case of Putting out Money, and upon Evidence, brought in against it, let him
Condemn it, of Usury. But if no Evidence appears, Possession of its Innocence
still holds, Grounded in Agreement, and Custom, upheld by Judges, Justified by
Divines, upon several Titles, and generally Practiced. If Scripture, Church,
and Fathers in veighing against Usury, reflect not upon it, if the Law of
Nature disallows it not, let it be cleared at the Bar, of unbiased Reason.
Let the Practisers make Conscience, of Real Sins; let them of their Just Gains,
be Charitable to the Needy; let them hope no Increase for Lending, but from
God, yet at the same time; they are Rightly informed, they have no Obligation
of Prejudicing themselves, but a Duty to Improve Honestly the Talents God has
left with them, by Putting them out at an easy Rate. It is a ser vice they owe
to the Public, for which we are Born. Such as Scrupulise at it; let them much
more make Conscience of judging others. Let them be Careful, lest upon Surmises
of Usury, or rather under a false Pretext, they become Slaves of Avarice, make
their Coffers Temples, and Money their Idols; by so doing, they Clip the Common
Stock; so that the Share they have, goes no more, they cast Trade into a Deep
Consumption, by depriving it, of its Nourishment, and wholly Cross the design
of the General welfare of a Nation, Mantain'd by a Circulation of Money, as our
Bodies are, by a Circulation of Blood.

No less Zeal was shown, by some Preachers, and Divines, against the Mounts of
Piety, than since has been, by a few others, against Putting out of Money; When
the Pope Heading a Council, in regard of the Poor; and Common Necessities,
judged fit not only to Curb it, but when Transported either to Words, or
Writing, to Excomunicate it as a Disquiet to the Christian world, The Rule of
Law, Quod qui commodum sentit, onus quoque sentire debet, on which the Pope and
Council appear to ground themselves, is of no less Force in our Case: The Rule
is: That he who Partakes of a Convenience, ought also to share of the Burden
annexed to it. It is for Convenience Money is taken up, the Burden annexed to
it, is Interest, which for Just Considerations, the Law judges Reasonable. It
were a Piece of Signal Temerity, to Question the said Mounts of Piety, and if
the Common Practice have the same Reason, even with some advantage, were it not
too Venturesome, to Condemn it? Would not the Censure by Parity of Reason,
equally affect both? And were not this to forfeit, the Respect, and Submission
due to Popes, the Lateran Council, and Christendom in General? The ends of the
Mounts of Piety, is to relieve such as Necessity compels to take up Money at
exorbitant Rates; This also is Provided for, by the common Practice, tho not so
fully, it being not easy to find Money to take up; whereas the said Mounts are
ever ready to Supply; on which Account they are to be wished for in this Realm.
The Mounts of Piety, toward the Maintenance of Necessaries, receive somewhat
more, than Current Interest; with Current Interest alone, the common Practice
contents it self, the Mounts are secured of their Principal; the eommon
Practice for most part leaves it Hazardous. Is it the taking less? Is it the
Hazard that creats Usury? If not, How can that Guilt be charged upon the common
Practice, and not the Mounts of Piety? And to reflect upon them as Usurious,
Does it not betoken undutisulness, and more want of Charity, than provision of
true Zeal, more Temerity, than Prudence.

The simplicity of the Dove, is to be guided by the Prudence of the Serpento
Believe not every Spirit, (says St. John, 1 Epist. Chap. 4.) Too much Austerity
of Doctrine, favors more of Affectation, than Discretion, and drives oftener at
Libertinism, than true Reform, every one inclining to shake off the Yoke, who
rendered too heavy. Excess of Rigor is a kind of Usury, in that it extorts upon
Conscience to the Oppression of a weak Brother. The way to Heaven is narrow, we
ought not to streighten it more; nor to lay stumbling blocks in the way.

This was the Sense of the most Learned and Illustrious Order of St. Dominick,
in the Gloss upon the Prologue, to their Constitutions, Tex. 1.. 3. to those
Words, Cum Ordo Noster, etc. Declaramus, etc. Say they, We declare, That three
things Chiefly hinder the saving of Souls; of these, the Third is too much
Rigor, and Austerity in Counsels, and Opinions, or Men are so terrified with
them, as to neglect the Salvation of their Souls; wherefore Rigor and Severity,
are to be Relented, as much as may be, and Men are to be Treated with Benignity.

Yet nearer to our Purpose the great Son of so Wise, and Religious a Parent,
St. Tho. qudl. 9. Art. 15. In Corp Discourses it thus: Omnis Question, in qua de
Peccato Morali quaeritur, etc. It Is dangerous to decide a Question, treating of
a Mortal Sin; if no express Truth appears; by reason the Error, by which it is
apprehended to be mortal, what is not mortal, binds under Mortal. The express
Truth against the Common Practice, has not yet been discovered.

Du Tertre therefore, and those of his Humor, should have taken and Con'd the
Lesson, being of so high Importance, given them by the Renowned Chancellor,
John Gerson, lib. 4. de Vita spirituali. Littera. O. page 3. Doctores Theologo,
etc. Doctors of Divinity, must not easily conclude certain Actions, or
Omissions, to be mortal Sins; for by such Wilful, Rigid, Hard, and too strict
Assertions, Men are never drawn out of the Mire of Sin, but are plunged into
another, deeper, because more Desperate. To what Purpose then to render more
bitter, and heavy the Yoke of Christ, which is sweet, and the Burden which is
light?

This had been much to Du Tertre's Purpose, and perchance might have allayed
his too fervorous Rigor; when, Page 172. he pretends with a Scrap or two of a
holy Father, to block up the way to Heaven, and to exclude all Merchants, and
Tradesmen from Eternal Bliss. And i^ not this to endeavor to render Salvation
and God's Precepts Morally impossible? Or at least as impossible, as it is for
Human Society to be maintained without Merchandising and Commerce? Does it not
reflect upon Providence, as Establishing a Religion incoherent with all
Trading, so necessary co the Welfare and Preservation of Mankind? It is a
Peculiar Genius rules his Pen; Whether for love of Novelty, or to appear
somebody in the World, or out of mistaken. Zeal, to correct what needs no
Amendment, it is not for me to decide. As to my self, whatever I have writ in
Defense of the Common Practice, I shall entirely submit to better Reason, it is
my Duty so to do; and having done what I thought my Duty, to the quieting of
Conscience, in the Case of putting out Money, I end.

FINIS

