A FREE DISCOURSE Wherein the DOCTRINES Which make for TYRANNY Are Displayed.
The TITLE of our Rightful and Lawful King WILLIAM Vindicated. And the
unreasonableness and mischievous Tendency of the odious distinction of a King
de Facto, and de Jure, discovered.

By a Person of Honor.

Quo sis Africane alacrior ad tutandam Rempublicam, sic habeto, Omnibus qui
Patriam conservaverint, adjuverint, auxerint, certum esse in Coelo, ac
definitum locum, ubi beati sempiterno aevo fruantur.

Somn. Scip. e l. 6. Ciceronis de Republica. London: Printed for John Lawrence
at the Angel in the Poultrey, and Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. 1697.

A FREE DISCOURSE Wherein the DOCTRINES Which make for TYRANNY Are Displayed.
I HAVE never been Conscious to my self, that the Temptation of any base
Interest, or the Apprehension of any threatening Danger, could corrupt me to
betray, or force me to decline, that which I well knew to be the true Interest
of my King and Country; and therefore have I constantly looked upon those, that
made it their Business to break in upon the just Rights of the one, or the
other, as unhappy Contrivers to involve the Nation, in a consuming Debt to
Tyranny, or Confusion, which the People shall be sure to pay, out of their
Enjoyments in Life, Liberty, and Property.

Of Consequence therefore, I must with grating Affliction have observed, how
strenously this vile Design has been labored, from toward the latter end of
King Charles the 2d, to this present time. Under the screening shelter of that
Prince, Popery and Arbitrary Power were favored, and cherished with all the
Art and Industry, which Men of slavish Principles, and profligate Consciences,
could devise and apply, till the twin Monsters were thought arrived at that
fullness of prodigious Stature, as no longer to need his Life, for their
Concealment or Protection.

As a good Preparative for the Introduction of Arbitrary Power, in which are
all the hopes of Popery, pernicious Jovian.
Pamphlets were published, in which it was magisterially asserted, That the
Realm of England was such a complete Imperial Sovereignty, as wherein the King
had full, perfect, and entire Jurisdiction from God alone; and that his
Subjects ought rather to suffer Death wrongfully, than resist him. It was
speciously granted indeed, That there were Political Laws to secure the Rights
of the Subject: but it was stiffly maintained, That the Imperial Laws, which
ascertained the Rights of the Sovereign Prince, were superior to the
Political, and might and ought to determine when the Political Laws should be
observed, when not. As much as to say, The Rights of the Subject should be
secure from all Invasion, but that of their King. Well! that is worth something,
though the Clown in the Greek Epigram, would not have much valued it; For, said
he, a little irreverently indeed, but very plainly, and to the purpose, -- (...)
(...).
(...)
(...).


Hercules, that defends my Flock from the Wolf, has ever and anon, a fat Sheep
for Sacrifice, the Wolf has no more for prey. I lose on both sides; for it is
all one to me, whether the God has it roasted, or Isgrim raw.

The Judges, in King James's time, very leernedly stated, and decided the
Matter; pronouncing, That in Cases of Necessity, the King might dispense with
the Laws, and that he was Judge of the Necessity.

These Gentlemen seem to have had some Modesty, though no more Conscience than
the other; or, perhaps this little show of Modesty, was a cast of their Wit,
they made use of the Fowler's cunning, stalkt under shelter, to get a full
shoot at the Peoples Liberties, which was the Quarry they aimed at; and dead
they laid it, beshrew their hearts for their pains. But 'twas a sorry piece of
cunning, which would never have taken, but that the Game they shot, was
'tangled in a Net before.

Who sees not, that if the King may dispense with the Laws in Cases of
Necessity, and be Judge of the Necessity, he may dispense with them as often as
he pleases? wherefore his learned Sages of the Law might have spared their Wit,
and more ingenuously with open boldness, have asserted and declared like
Richard the 2d, That the King's Will was the Law. This is what the false
Coiners of the cheating distinction of Imperial and Political Laws, and the
corrupt Putters of Necessity-Cases [which makes the People's Slavery the one
thing necessary] would fain be at. But the Design is so wicked and odious, that
to own it in plain words, were the way to overthrow it: In truth, subtle
Distinctions, and Cases which have never happened, are like to make the most of
this bad Market. Thus all in the Land of Metaphysics, where every Period or
Page of famous School Divinity, harbors wild Notions of Religion, which cannot
be explained, and made intelligible, much less proved and ascertained by clear
Reason; the Sons of Science supernatural, the Mystic Adepti introduce them,
with proper Terms of Art, [Terms useless to any other purpose] and settle and
'stablish them for ever, [ i.e. as long as ever they can be settled and
establish'd] on the unexamin'd Foundation of perplexing Distinctions.

There were not wanting among the eminent Clergy, who, as if they would go a
length K. Richard never dreamed on, seemed to intimate, That the King's Will
was not only the Law, but the Religion of the Country too; and Passive
Obedience, the only wretched Portion of the unpeopled People; for then they
were no longer a People, but a plundered and enslaved Rabble, left only Tenants
at Will for their Lives, Liberties, and Properties. In such a wretched Case, it
would become the unpeopled People, to have always their Loins girt, Shoes on
their Feet, and Staves in their Hands; not like Israelites taking leave of
their hard Masters, and going to set up for themselves; but like the Shepherds
of Cremona, waiting for the terrible Sentence -- Veteres migrate coloni. Be
gone ye old English Race of strubborn Freeholders, never trouble your selves
how ye shall drive your Flocks, but leave such things behind you; haste, haste,
you have nothing to pack up, unless your old Wives, and young Children; haste,
and make room for naked Colonies of tres humble Monsieur Serviteurs, that shall
not dare to call their Wooden Shoes their own; but Soul and Body become all
Obedience, let [with Spiritual Curb, or Temporal Snaffle] Priest or Tyrant ride
them.

The design of changing our Legal, into an Arbitrary Government, was copied
from the French Original. In France it was laid in the Reign of Lewis the XI. and
took effect to the destruction of the Rights of the People, by destroying the
Power of Parliaments. The destruction of the Power of Parliaments was carried
on by very sober paces, by the most easy and modest Encroachments, that People
weary of their Liberties could have wished for. The King did not pretend to
raise Money, when he pleased, -- by himself, -- and without his Parliament; no,
-- good Prince, -- not He. All that he desired, was only to be permitted to
raise Money, -- now and then, -- upon occasion, -- in the Intervals of
Parliament; and not that neither, but in Cases of pure Necessity, when the
Safety of his good Subjects absolutely required it. And how could it be denied
him, who loved his People so well, to judge of Cases of Necessity. But the
Power of raising Money being once gone, the deluded People presently perceived,
that they had purchased their Slavery with it. For now all Power fell easily
into the Hands of the King. In vain it was to dispute with him any Civil Rights
not yet parted with by name, or even the public Profession of Religion. For
the Power of Raising Money is, in effect, the Power of doing all things; just
so is it with the Article of Infallibility, admit but that (...), that first
false Article, and you must stand with his Holiness for nothing, but believe
through thick and thin, in spite of Sense and Reason. Well! the French King
became, by the abovesaid Artifice, at perfect Liberty to be, or not be a
Tyrant, which he pleased. Let no one ask how he governed himself; for, did ever
Man grasp at the Power to do Mischief, without the purpose? If there have been
such mysterious Riddles of irregular Virtue, yet the French King's after Lewis
XI. were no instances of it. In them it plainly appeared how effectually the
temptation of unlimited Power works on Ambitious Nature. Ambitious Nature
seldom or never esteems any thing enough, if there be any thing at all out of
her Possession. It has not been enough for Lewis the XIV. to be the Law, but he
must be the Religion also of his Slaves. With a great many it was Argument
enough to be of the Religion he required, because it was his: while his
Spiritual Dragoons disputed more forcibly with those of a more backward Faith;
The Priests had stood altogether idle, and unconcerned in this Conversion, but
for the merit of that flattering Doctrine. A King is accountable to none but
God, but to make amends for their being less serviceable than the Military Men,
their unaccountable King shall be styled, the Vicegerent of God, nay the very
Image of the Most High, though they spoil the Argument in the First Chapter to
the Hebrews, for the Divinity of Christ. I wonder they do not maintain, That
their King is accountable to none but himself. For if he prescribes them their
Religion, as well as dictates their Law, he is their Idol God, as well as their
Royal Tyrant.

But, as I noted, Ambitious Nature never esteems any thing enough, when there
is yet something out of her possession, therefore Lewis the XIV. is for
advancing his Tyranny over his Neighbors also. To this purpose, his method has
long time been to corrupt the Courts of Princes by his Lovis d'Ors; to surprise
Un-armed Countries, and Ill-provided Forts, by breach of his Oaths: Thus his
Treachery has many Years purvey'd for his Cruelty, and his Cruelty shed
Torrents of Blood to quench the raging Thirst of his Ambition. He has plundered
the Monuments of the Dead, and the Altars of his own Gods, nor Fearing, nor
Reverencing one more than the other. He has broke his Leagues with Christian
Princes, as long as they would trust him; has kept them, something better
indeed, with the Turk, for it was his Interest, though the Turk is not his only
Allie, for he has the Devil, and the Pope beside.

What good understanding there is between him and the Pope, the World sees, and
he that will not grant him to be in League with the Foul Fiend also, must
believe that there is no Devil in Hell, or no Monkish Conjurer in France, to
bring those mighty Potentates together. Is there any difference between
Neighboring States? Lewis will interpose to settle it, and never leave 'till
he has settled, or made it wider. Is any Prince or Princess to be Married? He
proposes a Match for them, some Bastard Son, or Daughter of his own, well
pre-instructed what returns to make him, for their Preferment. Is there any
Candidate laboring for a Sovereign Bishopric, or Coadjutorship, who has very
little reason to support his pretenses? Lewis the Grand will serve his hopeless
interest, out of his own free mischievous Generosity. When he prospers, he
fights for the glory of his Majesty; When his Affairs are in some danger, he
labors only to extirpate Heresy; but in neither of these Cases, thinks it
improper to assist an Heretical Noble Revolter against his Catholic Lord and
Master. In sending abroad Ambassadors, he chooses Huguenot Ravigni for England,
a stout Toper for Germany, a bold Marquess for Rome, a grave Clergyman for
Spain. In short he makes himself all things for all, that he may confound all
Nations, and turn the World into a Wilderness.

This is the French Original, which some unhappy men among us have studiously
set themselves to Copy. Now in the First place God be praised, then due thanks
paid to King William our Deliverer, and every Noble Afferter of our English
Liberties in the Convention-Parliament, for that, the work of those unhappy
Copyers was disturbed, and so they could never finish their Piece; but they
gave us a plaguey sketch of it in the last Reign.

But there is another Original Draught of a Tyrant, set forth in that excellent
History of the Revolution in Sweden, wherein many particulars bear a perfect
resemblance of our Late Times, as to the great Transactions both in France and
England, which is not to be wondered at, but rather to be considered as a good
Evidence, that all Tyranny is alike; for though the Streams from the same
Fountain may run in several Ways, and Channels, yet they all tend to the same
Ocean of Blood.

After the Death of the Brave Steno, the Worthy Administratour of Sweden,
Christiern II. succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Denmark, and obtained the
Crown of Sweden by Conquest. This Prince was not more ambitious to make others
his Slaves, than he was, himself to become the Slave of Sigebrite, a Woman who
had neither the Charms of Youth, or Beauty to Captivate him. But this
notwithstanding, her Power was as great over him, as if she had seemed
intit'led to it, by all the Perfections, which Nature could have bestowed upon
her. It is hard to be imagined how an Old Dutch Woman could obtain this
absolute Dominion over a haughty Monarch, unless it were by persuading him to
assume the same over others. The Inhumane Polities of this She-Favourite were
extremely agreeable to the fierce and cruel Disposition of Christiern; He
looked upon the Ancient Liberties of his Subjects, as inconsistent with his
Royal Honor and Dignity; and she tempted him to sacrifice a whole Senate to
his Arbitrary Ambition. This, this was the pleasing Conjuration, that charmed
him, whose Nature was not so pardonably wicked, as to dote on Youth and Beauty;
The Tyrant received the Malicious Addresses of his furious Mistress, as
Testimonies of her passionate Fondness for him, and so gave her that dominion
over himself, which he resolved to have over the Swedes. He found the Pulse of
the Church beat as high as his own, they were even impatient to make their
King, their Tyrant, supposing that their share in the Ecclesiastical part would
be as Flourishing, as his in the Civil; and the violent Archbishop of Vpsal
fancied he should not be much the lesser Monarch of the two.

Christiern ill enough disposed of himself, and always animated to mischief by
his Hellish Erinnys, quickly came to a resolution of destroying all the
Senators and Principal Noblemen, that had been, or were like to be Enemies of
his Imperial Arbitrary Authority. To facilitate the fatal Execution, he put on
a better countenance, than the Withered Hagg his Spightful Favorite wore, no
cloud sat on his Royal Brow; but all was clear and calm there, proper as could
be to persuade them to trust, who once suspected him. With this show of
Gentleness and Affection then, he invites the Lords to a Magnificent Feast at
Sockholm, Two Days they were highly treated, and on the Third Massacred.

Yet was not the Imperial Tyrannick Thirst of Christiern satisfied, for the
Great Gustavus, with some few Illustrious Patriots escaped the Slaughter,
wherefore he sends fresh bloody Orders to his Troops, who presently put the
whole Town to the Sword, sparing none except the Old and Ugly, but them,
perhaps in Complement to Sigebrite. Nay so utterly averse did this Tyrant then
show himself to all Humanity, that when a Swedish Gentleman could not restrain
his Grief, beholding such a Scene of Horror, he had him fastened to a Gibbet,
and his Bowels torn forth, because of his tenderness and compassion.

This surprising Bloody Start from a King to a Tyrant, terrified the People so
extremely, that it disposed them to do their parts to free themselves from
their deplorable Condition. Slavery may be the misfortune of a People, but to
submit to it, can never be their Duty; And I much question whether in the like
Case, our Advocates of Imperial absolute Sovereignty would not have been of the
same mind with the Swedes; and not by their Passive Obedience have acknowledged
their ruin for their Religion. Well! in a short time, what the Swedes longed
for, a Deliverer appeared. He was the injured Gustavus Ericson, descended from
the Ancient Kings of Sweden, and Nephew to King Canutson. Christiern had now
not only Abdicated his Government, by his Tyranny, in the utter subversion of
the Laws, Rights, and Properties of the People, but being generally Hated,
Beaten, and Forsaken, he Consumated his Abdication by Flight, and Gustavus the
Generous Deliverer, was by a Convention of the Estates, with the Joy of the
People chosen King of Sweden, which he governed happily all the days of his
Life.

A Philosopher being asked, which was the most dangerous of all Beasts,
Answered, of Wild Ones, a Tyrant; of Tame Ones, a Flatterer* These Tame Ones
hunt the Game like Jacalls, and with their plaguey yelping excite, and guide the
Wild Ones to the Prey; and this they do, in hopes, that, when their Lawless
Masters are cloyed, they may satisfy their own Appetites with Relics of that
Destruction, in which they had been instrumental.

This Jacall yalping in England was never more Fierce, Eager, and Loud, than in
the Reign of King Charles II. and it was a proper time for the Enemies of
England, and the Protestant Religion, with the advantage of the shelter which
he gave them, to make preparation for the Triumphant Entrance of Popery and
Slavery. And at that time they did not neglect the opportunity, witness the
Dover Treaty; The Popish Plot discovered by Doctor Oats, and many a bantering
Sham, that could not be brought to pass upon the People; but then something
that could make its one way came on, Quo Warranto's like Bombs were thrown into
Corporations, which miserably destroyed their Ancient Charters; Dispensing
Judges were advanced; Proper Sheriffs chosen, and all unjust Arts used to
dispose things for the easier plundering the Nation of their Liberties,
Properties, and Religion. These unrighteous Proceedings would hardly have been
ventured on, but for the Countenance that was given them by the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, a Doctrine not revealed by Jesus Christ, nor recorded in his
Gospel, but stamped by latter Creation, under the protection of which, any King
may play the Christiern, or the Lewis safely, and without control. This
Creation stamped Doctrine grew in such Credit, and Esteem, that not a Man, who
did not give his Assent and Consent to the same, could be allowed to be a true
Son of the Church, scarcely to be a Christian.

The unlimited Power of a King having been so strenuously asserted, and so
sucessfully in the Proceedings of those Times, seemed to make the death of King
Charles very seasonable for the opening the Execution of the Grand Design, in a
barefaced Subversion of the Religion and Laws of England.

King James at his first coming to the Crown seemed to endeavor to take away
the Apprehension, and Terror that was justly imagined to fill the Minds of
People. And in his first Speech declared so much tenderness for them, and such
a respect for the preservation of their Liberties and Properties, that the
cajoled Parliament from an excess of Satisfaction, show, [I may safely say]
more Affection to him, than ever Parliament did to a Protestant Prince, and
gave Money, till he himself put a stop to the profuse and excessive Expressions
of their Satisfaction. It must be granted that the lives of some Professors are
not so bad as the consequences of their erroneous Opinions: And it was
charitably thought by the Parliament, that King James, though a Papist, would not
Govern so Arbitrary, as the encouraged Doctrines of the Age gave him leave; but
they quickly perceived their Error, and found to their Sorrow, that Popery, and
Arbitrary Power could no more be separated, than the double Monster that was
shown in London of two Brothers, one growing out of the side of the other, who
were so intimately conjoined, that the Life, Decay, or Death of the one was
equally the Concern, and Fate of the other. For now he began to put his
Imperial Laws in Execution, and by dispensing with, fairly abrogated all the
Political, which should have secured the Rights of the People, but alas! they
were betrayed into his hands, and he without Mercy dispatched them. To me it
seems almost impossible, but that the Spiritual Defenders of the Absolute Power
of an English King -- who delivered that Power to be Gospel, and the Slavish
Judges who declared it to be Law, should have deplored the Wounds they have
given to the Religion, and Laws of their Country, unless the hopes of a share
in the Spoils had prevailed above all honest Considerations, and unless they
had been themselves as ready to embrace the Popish Religion, as they had been
instrumental to set it up. Together with the first Exercise of an Arbitrary
Power, the Popish Religion began to appear on the Stage; and the Monks and
Friars entered to act in their proper Habits; Seminaries were set up in several
places, and Houses filled with those Religious Furies; Father Peter, a Jesuit
was made of the Privy Council, and reigned Chief Minister. Thus from the Spring
of Imperial [ i.e. Arbitrary] Power, an overflowing Deluge broke forth,
threatening miserable occasions for the Religious Exercise of that Fatal Duty,
Passive Obedience.

King James no sooner altered from what he seemed to be in his first Speech,
but the People altered from what they were. Their Satisfaction in their new
King vanished, and from the hopes of living happy Subjects under him, they sank
into the Apprehensions of becoming despised, and ear-boar'd Slaves. A general
Consternation fell upon the whole Body of the People; and even those Clergymen
that were the Tools to Subvert their own Religion, and the Civil Rights of
their Brethren, were afraid that themselves should feel the Thunder with which
they had armed their Tyrant. This brought them quickly to interpret away the
grammatical, plain, mischievous Sense of Passive Obedience; and as for the
Exercise of it, that they were so far from practicing [being above their own
Ordinances] that no honest Men were more forward to invite and join with a
Deliverer, than these Shifters.

The miserable Condition of England at that time, did not only move Compassion
in our Neighbors, but [as we have reason to believe] put them in mind, that
the Disease we labored under was catching; and if it was not timely repelled
by their Assistance, it would not be long before they lamented their own Fate.
They were therefore, for our, and for their own sakes, aiding and assisting to
our rightful and lawful King, the then Prince of Orange, whom God and his own
Virtue prompted to attempt our Deliverance.

The difficulties that threatened this attempt were great and discouraging, but
he, who was incapable of fear, despised the Dangers, Landed some Forces at
Torbay, and met a Success answerable to the justness of his Cause, and the
greatness of his Courage.

But before he set forward, to take off all Suspicions that might reasonably
arise, where an Army came, that might pretend to Conquer, as well as to
relieve, he put forth a glorious Declaration Proclaiming that his Expedition
was intended for no other end, but to have a Free and Lawful Parliament
Assembled, soon as possible, to secure to the whole Nation the free enjoyment
of their Laws, Rights, and Liberties, to preserve the Protestant Religion, and
cover such as would live peaceably under the Government, [as becomes good
Subjects] from all persecution on the account of Religion, Papists themselves
not excepted.

King James was now reduced, to that, wherein he seemed always to place his
greatest trust, an Army, [for the Preachers had forsook him, and their own
Slavish Doctrines sometime before] with the Army then he advanced to Salisbury,
but found that they were a part of injured English Men; seeing himself
therefore deserted by them, as well as by his Chaplains [who invested him with
his illegal Arbitrary Power,] and all the honest English; he left the Kingdom,
thus he did, as it were, Sign and Seal his own Abdication, which was grown as
full and perfect as obstinate Tyranny could make it; And as his Act and Deed
the Nation took it, then the Lords, and the Commons represented in their chosen
Trustees, settled the Crown and Royal Dignity on King William and Queen Mary,
the exercise of Regal Power, on their glorious Deliverer only. Thus did they
restore the Old Constitution of redem'd England in King, Lords, and Commons.

There was before the settlement of the Crown, ( Feb. 4. 1688.) a great
Conference between the Lords, and Commons, chiefly on two Particulars Voted by
the Commons.

1. That King James had Abdicated the Government.

2. That thereby the Throne became vacant.

The Lords insisted on altering the Word, Abdicated, and in the place thereof,
to insert Deserted. Also they were not willing to willing to admit those Words
-- The Throne is thereby become vacant. The exception against the Word
Abdicated was, that in the common acceptance of the Civil Law, it imports a
voluntary express Act of Renuntiation, which was not in this case, and did not
follow from the Premises.

To this the Commons answered, that the doing an Act inconsistent with the
being and end of a thing about which it is conversant, or which shall not
answer the end of that thing, but go quite contrary, That Act shall be
construed an Abdication, and formal Renunciation of that thing. This they
exemplified. Thus the Government is under a Trust, and any acting contrary to
that Trust, is a Renuntiation of that Trust, though it be not a Renuntiation
thereof by a formal Deed. For Act and Deed is as plain and full a Declaration,
as a Writing can be. He that acts contrary to a Trust is a Disclaimer of that
Trust, though he does not disclaim it by a formal Deed. From all this they drew
these just Consequences -- That King James having Acted contrary to his Trust,
had Abdicated his Government; and that having Abdicated it, the Throne is
thereby become Vacant.

But the Lords insisted, that the Throne could not be Vacant, because there was
an Heir, and that in a Successive Kingdom, an Abdication of the Government by a
Tyrannous breach of Trust, could be a forfeiture only as to that Person, who
Tyrannically breaking his Trust, does Abdicate the Government; but not as to
the next Heir, so as to put him by, and make the Government elective. Therefore
the Abdication of King James the II. could not prejudice the next Heir, and
then by consequence the Throne was not vacant.

The Commons upon this demanded, that the Lords would tell them, with whom the
Throne was filled.

The Lords only answered in general, that it was sufficient to know, that there
were Heirs to take by lineal Succession, though they did not, or could not
expressly name the particular Person, whose right it was to fill the Throne.
And therefore though they could not say who filled the Throne, yet they had
reason to conclude, it was not Vacant. The Commons then represented to the
Lords, that their Lordships would neither agree, that the Throne was Vacant,
nor say how it was full, and desired to know who was King, if King James was
not, or were they to be always in that doubtful Condition? For none could be
King James his Heir, during his Life, the Crown could not descend till his
Death.

The Lords replied, That though the King be not dead Naturally, yet if he is so
Civilly, the next of course ought to come in as by Hereditary Succession.

The Commons replied, That their Lordships held it a difficult thing, to go
upon the examination who is Heir, and demanded, if that was not clear, whether
they were always to remain under the difficulty. As for the Commons, they were
not concerned what Words were used, Fill up, Nominate, or Elect, 'Twas the
Thing they were to take care of, and 'twas high time it were done.

It was farther demanded of the Lords, whither, if there had been an Heir, to
whom the Crown had descended in the Line of Succession, and this Heir certainly
known, their Lordships would have assembled without his calling? Or would have
either administered the Government themselves, or advised the Prince of Orange
to take it upon him? A known Successor being in Possession of the Throne, this
would amount to High Treason, and such a one must be in Possession if the
Throne were not vacant. Their Lordships were pressed to consider that they had
concurred with the Commons in this Vote -- That it is inconsistent with our
Religion and our Laws to have a Papist to reign over us. Upon this it was asked,
Must not we come to an Election if the next Heir be a Papist? The concluding
Stroke was, That if their Lordships would not allow the Throne to be vacant,
nor name the Heir who filled it, the Nation would be left in in Confusion and
Distraction; but the Lords were not willing that should be left at their Doors,
therefore, after they return to their House, they sent a Message to the Commons
on Febr. 7. 1688. That they had agreed to the above said Votes of the Commons
without any Alteration.

I thought it necessary to the chief Purpose of this Discourse, to set down
some General Arguments of this Conference, which is to be seen at large in
Print, and is most worthy to be read by all that think it worth their while to
look into the Constitution of the English Government, and to understand the
Reason and Grounds of our late Settlement.

I would now demand of any one, that had not given double Security to the
Goddess of Error, by Swearing first to be always of his present Opinion; and
secondly, never to examine the Reasons of it; I would, I say, demand of any,
but such an overprejudic'd Man, by what other way, or means, the Nation could
have been justly settled, besides that way, and those means, by which the
Representatives of the People conventionally assembled did settle it.

The Commons came to a Vote, Jan. 28. 1688. That King James the Second, having
endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom, by breaking the
Original Contract between King and People; and by the advice of the Jesuits,
and other wicked Persons, having violated the Fundamental Laws, and having
withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, has abdicated the Government, and that
the Throne is thereby become vacant. And after a long Conference betwixt the
Lords and Commons, the Lords on Febr. the 7th, next following, sent a Message
to the Commons, to acquaint them, That they had agreed to the Vote sent them up
of the 28th of January, without any Alterations.

Here now was the whole Body of the Nation, the Lords by themselves, in their
own Persons, and the People by their Representatives, agreed, That King James
had Abdicated the Government, and that the Throne was vacant; by which it is
evident, that there was as great a necessity to provide a Supply, and that by
way of Election, as there was to have any Government at all; for if a People
without Government, and desirous to settle a Government, must not choose for
themselves, I would fain know who must? It is not to be expected that God
should miraculously interpose, and for any Enemies or Neighbors to
intermeddle, is against the Nature of the thing; because the end which the
People seek in Government, is to secure themselves against all that are, or may
be Enemies. It remains therefore, that they must choose for themselves, both
who shall govern them, and by what measures. The Lords indeed, in the great
Conference, spoke much of an Heir, and argued strenuously for his Rights; but
knew not who that Heir was, nor where to find him; and there is no being
governed by the Lord knows who, that is to be found the Lord knows where; or,
as old Maynard phras'd it, in the Clouds. If the Lords had known of any Heir,
they had not admitted a Vacancy; if the Votes of the Majority of the
Representatives of the People had not supplied the Vacancy by resetling the old
Constitution, or framing a new [which at that time they were at liberty to have
done] every one of them must have been left in a state of Nature, which it is
every Man's Interest to get out of as soon as he can: For though in a State of
Nature, no Man has a Lisence to do what he pleases, every one being under
obligation to the Dictates of Reason, which is the Law of Nature; yet, in that
State, no Man has the Advantage of more than his single Wit and Strength to do
himself Justice when he happens to be injured, which Inconvenience is the great
Motive that inclines Men to unite in Society, and put themselves under such
Form of Government as they like best.

When the Representatives of the People were convened to supply the Vacancy,
[after that King James had sufficiently published that he would have nothing to
do with the Government upon the Terms of the Constitution, and according to the
original Contract] the Condition of the Nation seemed to be the same, as when
the Original Contract was first made, the People choosing their Ruler, and
agreeing the Laws, by which he should rule them; which Original Right can never
be justly taken from them, until the Champions of the Imperial Laws of a
Tyrant, and the Preachers of Passive Obedience Slavery, can prove, that the
People were made for the Advantage of their Kingly Ruler, and not the Kingly
Ruler for their Advantage.

I know it has been affirmed, that breaking the Original Contract, is a
Language that has not been long in use, nor is known in any of our Law Books,
or Public Records; but is taken from some late Authors, and those none of the
best received. It Is strange with what confidence some Men by the help of a
little Artifice will advance the denial of Truths obvious and evident enough,
presuming, that at the same time, they shall by their Intimations and
Insinuations, establish their own wild, pernicious, and novel Notions. Imperial
Laws controuling the Political, Jure divino Tyranny, quiet Submission to
illegal Violence, commonly called Non-resistance, sometimes disguised under the
absurd Phrase of Passive Obedience, this without Controversy is barbarous
Language, no Man ever yet in our Law Books or Public Records could find either
name or thing. Of what antiquity these Doctrines may be in the Writings of some
Clergymen, is not material, for neither Christ, nor his Apostles, nor natural
Reason requires any Man quietly to submit to illegal Violence, and look upon a
Tyrant as the Ordinance of God. But yet there are among the Clergy some good
Men who abhor these unchristian and unnatural Doctrines, and none among them
that can bring themselves up to the Practice of the same; but even the
Apologists are now fain to trim the matter with loose general talk, and
softning Interpretations. But then the Sense of Original Contract runs through
all our Law Books, the unanswerable Mr. Johnson has cited so many, so clear
Testimonies of this, that I will only mention the Confession of an English
Monarch, King James I. who, though he uses not the Word Contract, yet he does a
Synonimous, if Paction signifies the same as Contract: In his Speech to the
Parliament 1603. he sets down the just Distinction between a King and a
Parliament: But in his Speech to them 1609. he has these Words: The King binds
himself by a double Oath to the Observation of the Fundamental Laws of his
Kingdom; tacitly, as by being King, and so bound to protect, as well the
People, as the Laws of his Kingdom; and expressly, by his Oath at his
Coronation: So as every just King, in a settled Kingdom, is bound to observe
that Paction made to his People by his Laws, in framing his Government
agreeable thereunto. But he that is most a stranger to our Law Books, may
easily be able to prove, that the beginnings of all Forms of Government could
not but proceed from the Choice or Consent of the People. It is true, God is
the Fountain of all Power, but he does not communicate it immediately to Man,
at least he has not done so in these later Ages; Nay, in the Designation of
Saul, and David, which is recorded to have been from God, it is remarkable that
after the Divine Unction, the People assembled, and by their Votes freely chose
them, and before the Peoples Choice they were not actually Kings of Israel. But
I will make short of this matter -- Original Contract there must have been
between King and People, wherever lawful Power is exercised by a King, because
Kings are not immediately chose of God: But such a thing, as a Power to do
mischief, which ought not to be resisted, never could be, because it is against
the Nature of God to give such a Power to any Man, and that which inclines
People to set up a King over them, restrains them from giving him such a Power.

If this be a Digression, I beg the Readers pardon, but I hope I have fully
proved that at the time of the Convention, [when it is confessed we were without
a settled Form of Government; so that the Lords of their own free Motion
addressed the Prince of Orange to take upon him the Administration for a while]
the Government could not have been settled otherways than it was settled, viz. by
the choice of the Community; and if they had not made so wise a Choice as they
did in the Person of King William; yet his Title would have been Lawful and
Rightful, because his Person was the free Choice of the Community at that time
when they had no King.

But notwithstanding this plain state of the Case, and, as I presume to think,
these unanswerable reasons, the Old Tyrannical Doctrine had still a spreading
root, and though the common Sense and Honesty of the Nation, long provoked, and
almost undone by it, was ready to check the encouragements formerly given it,
and blast its open growth, yet now it began to shoot forth its baneful branches
under the sheltring distinction of a King DE FACTO, and a King DE IVRE. Of all
the mischievous Doctrines, that ever were topt upon a Nation by holy
Priestcraft, none ever stood more in need of Shelter. The Doctrines of Popery
commit but slight depredations on the Liberties, and Properties of a People:
but by IMPERIAL LAWS controuling the Political, by quiet Submission to illegal
Violence, they are with a vengeance swept quite and clean away. Our comfort is,
that no Parliament Men can possibly believe, that the People have no right to
their Liberties, because the People choose Knights, and Burgesses to defend
their Liberties and Properties, and 'twere the most disingenuous injustice in
the World, for Gentlemen to accept such a Trust, if they are of opinion, that
the People are not rightfully possess's of their Liberties and Properties: No
Parliament Men can possibly believe, that King William is only a King DE FACTO,
because it were the most Infamous Self-contradiction to join with a King to
make Laws, in whom they did not own a right to give them a Sanction. Indeed
when I look back on the beginning of this King's Reign. I call to mind those
things, which somewhat amaze, and puzzle me. For who can take notice, without
some extraordinary emotion, that any of the King's Chief Councillors should
urge him not to insist on his Title DE IVRE, or that, when the owning him
rightful and lawful King was started, and proposed in the House of Commons, it
should be coldly received and rejected. For if the King shall not hold his
Title to be DE IURE, he must be an Enemy to his own quiet Possession, and if
the Commons shall not own him for their rightful and lawful King, they must
needs look upon themselves as Slaves, not Subjects, holding their Honors,
Estates, and Interests precariously. For my part I cannot but conceive, that
when the Lords and Commons in the Grand Convention, declared the Prince and
Princess of Orange, King and Queen of England, etc. and settled the full and
sole exercise of Regal Power on the Prince, they made him their Lawful and
Rightful King. They made him their Lawful and Rightful King, or they made him
nothing. Can any Man think or talk so absurdly, as that the Lords, and
Representatives of the People chose the Prince of Orange to the infamous honor
of an Usurper and a Tyrant, praying him to play the Tyrant, and Administer that
Government, which he had no right to meddle with? or that, at one and the same
time they owned King James his right to govern them, and would not admit him to
exercise that right? These are absurd Contradictions, which cannot consist with
the Honor and Wisdom of English Senators. But whatever any Enemy of our
Settlement may pretend was meant by the Convention, who made choice of the
Prince and Princess of Orange to be King and Queen of England, etc. and of the
Prince alone to exercise the Regal Power, this I am sure that the distinction
of a King DE IVRE, and a King DE FACTO, is ill-grounded, and mischievous.

1. It is ill-grounded. This distinction can be traced no higher than Edw. the
IV. and his first Parliament invented, and made use of it, not as a Salvo, for
the justification of any thing done by, and under the Kings of the House of
Lancaster, but in contra-distinction to a King DE IVRE, and that Parliament did
thereby denote that they held a King in Possession, to be a King falsely so
called only, and to have no right to the Allegiance of the People. But our
Ancient Common Lawyers, Bracton, Fortescue, etc. knew nothing of this
distinction. A DE FACTO KING OF ENGLAND, according to their sense of Words, is
as perfect Nonsense and Contradiction, as ever was made use of, to illustrate
the Romish Anti-evangelical Mysteries of Priestcraft. A KING DE FACTO is just
as much as a Rightful and Lawful Usurper, or a Mild and Gracious Tyrant. Our
honest Ancient Lawyers were not wont to flatter Ambitious Princes with such
odd, and wickedly devised Distinctions, at the expense of their Countries
Honor and Safety. A King, with them, was but of one sort, Viz. The Creature of
the Law, The Ordinance of the People. The King, says Bracton, has a Superior,
God, also the Law, by which he is made King. A King is made, and ordained, says
Fortescue, for the Defense, or Guardianship of the Laws of his Subjects, and of
their Bodies, and Goods, whereunto he receives power of his People.

Let Kings therefore [it is the monition of Bracton] temper their power by the
Law, which is the Bridle of Power. These Famous, and Learned Lawyers would
certainly have thought it very ridiculous, that the Title of a KING, should be
derived only from the Notion of a Fact; and the Exercise of his Kingship made
to consist in the Execution of the Imperial Law of his Will. Between such a
King as this, and a People, there can never be a good Understanding, but they
will be eternally at variance, for their Interests are distinct, and separate,
and cannot but often happen to be directly contrary to one another. I wish the
Clergy Advocates of Imperial Power, would but well weigh the reasoning of the
Reverend Mr. Hooker, a justly celebrated Writer, and I hope they will take his
Word, for more than a Ceremony. I will Transcribe a Passage, they that like it
not, let them answer it. He says, That for any Prince, or Potentate on Earth,
of what kind soever, to exercise Government, and not either by express
Commission immediately, and personally received from God, or else by the
Authority derived at first from the consent of the People, upon whom he imposes
Laws, is no better than mere Tyranny, for Laws they are not, which Poitical
Approbation has not made so, but, approbation they only give, who personally
declare their consent, or by others in their Names, by right originally derived
from them, as in Parliaments, etc.

But all of this Learned, Wise, and Good Man's order are not of his excellent
true Christian Spirit, some of them, among those that best understand this
matter, in spite of Reason, and common use of Speaking, will set themselves up
for such imperious Dictators of Words, that the word King must needs signify
an Absolute Monarch. But what if it should be admitted to signify so sometimes
in some Countries, yet this is plain and undeniable, it does not signify so
always, nor so at all, in England.

The bare Word or Title KING does not distinstly inform us, what Power belongs
to him, that must be known by examining the Constitution of the State, wherein
he presides. Perhaps some may object, that if a King has not an Absolute Power,
he is dignified with a name which does not belong to him. But this is like all
the rest, a positive stroke of Arbitrary Philosophy. Words signify as custom,
and common consent make them, there is nothing in the nature of Words
themselves, but that TYRANT might have signified a Just, a Gracious Prince, a
Father of his Country; and KING, a faithless cruel Tyrant, a Lewis, or a James.

The Gibberish of a KING DE FACTO, and the Cant of an IMPERIAL LAW, are of the
same nature and design, levelled at the two Northern, equal, and equally hated
Heresies, the Protestant Religion, and Monarchy limited by Law.

Mr. Johnson observing how long, and how troublesomely the Nation had been
haunted with the Word DE FACTO, out of pure kindness to his Countrymen tried to
lay the Goblin; but though he had exercised many a stubborn Devil in his time,
nay once not only rescued, and restored some possessed Creatures, but thrown
the very Devil himself into flames, yet has he not been able to lay this DE
FACTO Goblin. Perhaps I ought not to pretend to more powerful Charms than he,
however I will repeat the Exorcism, there may be something in that: And who
knows but it is toward daybreak with the Common People, if they once begin to
discern the Priestcraft, and Statecraft of the distinction, a little matter
will rid all King WILLIAM's Dominions of the Mischeivous Phantom.

The plain English of a KING DE FACTO is of, or from Fact, or Deed. A KING DE
FACTO must denote one, that by the means of some Fact, or Deed, is denominated
a KING. DE FACTO in contradistinction to DE IVRE implies an unrighteous
forcible, an illegal violent Act. A KING DE FACTO then is a false King, a wrong
King, a King who carries Usurpation, and Tyranny in his very Title. A King so
far removed from Rightful and Lawful, that he has not, no, not a right by Law,
unless the Law of his Sword; a King that has no right to govern the People, but
the People a very good one to take away his DE FACTOSHIP from him. But there is
nothing in this false, and dishonorable Title of a King DE FACTO, that can be
affixed to King WILLIAM, without the most impudent and malicious injustice: tho
more of it, than the Advocates of the late King are well aware of, really
agrees to their Abdicatour.

If they who administered the Coronation Oath to the late King left out the
Provision in the Ancient Oath, for the Peoples enjoying St. Edward's Laws, and
added a special clause in favor of the Clergy's, Canonical Privileges; if
they Clogged the promise of securing the Civil Rights of the Nation with a
Salvo for Kingly Prerogative, then we may safely say that the late King was no
more than a King DE FACTO from the very first, and all the Oaths that were made
to him, are of no Obligation, he not being the Person he was taken for. But
supposing that the late King did oblige himself by solemn Oath to Govern
according to Law, without any unrighteous Omission, Addition or Salvo; yet when
he notoriously violated that sacred Oath, by claiming an imperial arbitrary
Power, above and contrary to Law, and by exercising the same in very many, and
those the most dangerous Instances that could be, then he disclaimed all the
Legal Title he could ever be supposed to have had, though he continued indeed but
too long afterward a King De Facto, a King in Possession doing all the
despite he could to our Old English Constitution, and our Holy Reformed
Religion.

But this false and dishonorable Title of a King de facto [as I said just now]
cannot be affixed to King William without the most impudent and malicious
Injustice; for he came over upon the earnest Solicitation of Lords Spiritual
and Temporal and other Subjects of all Ranks, to deliver the Nation from Popery
and Slavery: To this purpose he declared himself in Words, the Truth of which
was clear enough from matter of fact, for the Forces he brought over with him
were proportioned to the Design of Relief and Assistance, not of Invasion and
Conquest. He took not on him the Administration of Affairs for a time, but at
the Request of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal assembled in the House of
Lords, and of those Parliament Men that had served in the Reign of Charles II.
being assembled in the House of Commons: and at the meeting of the Convention
he gave up that Trust, which had been committed to him but for a time, and and
left it to the Convention to lay such a Foundation for the Security of their
Religion, Laws and Liberties, as they themselves should think good. It was
never yet objected to him by his most inveterate Enemies, that by any Acts of
Force, or Arts of Corruption, he endeavored to work on the Members of either
House to labor his own Advancement: But that was the free Election of the
Majority, after long Debates and Consultations on other Expedients: He did not
lay violent hands on the Crown, but only accepted it when offered, and upon the
Conditions offered with it.

It is a Truth undeniably manifest, that King William did not purchase to
himself the Title of a King by any Fact of his own, save that by his Virtue and
his Merit he recommended himself to the Community, and their Choice it was that
made him King, that is the Fact and Deed he claims by, and it is the most
Righteous and Lawful that can be, without a Miracle, which I think the Jure
Divino Doctors do not pretend that we ought to wait for, that so we may have a
lawful King.

The Election of the Prince of Orange to supply the Vacancy of the Throne gives
him as Rightful and Lawful a Title, as the Election of any Community ever gave
to the first elected King. There Is nothing in the nature of a King De Facto,
but King William has shown his abhorrence of it; when he took the Oath,
together with the Crown offered him by the Scotch Commissioners, he demurred at
one dubious Expression, and called Witnesses that he did not intend by it to
oblige himself to be a Persecutor, as if he had said, He would not be obliged
by any means, to Govern in any Instances as a Tyrant, he would be no other than
a Legal King.

In short, if the Choice of a People, whose King has broke the Original
Contract, and will not govern by Law, but be the Law himself, or nothing; if
this Choice cannot create a Rightful and Lawful King, then the Fault must be in
the Office; but if the Office has no Fault in it, and it has none that I know
of, I am sure there is no Flaw in the present Possessor's Title. It is
impossible that every Member of the Community should be pleased with the
Settlement of the Crown: but if a Party think much to be concluded by the Votes
of the Majority, they ought to withdraw their Persons from this Kingdom thus
settled contrary to their likings, and seek out some Country where Government is
modeled more to their Mind: For while they stay here and question the Right of
King William, what do they but ridicule and reproach their own Act? In their
Supposition, that they have set up a King DE FACTO, and no more, they suppose
that they have given a Man Authority to play the Tyrant and do Mischief, they
suppose that they have made Slaves of themselves, and given away their
Liberties and Properties, they suppose they have done all that against their
own Interest, which they were angry that the late King attempted to do: They
will never vindicate their Honor, unless they renounce their Distinction,
which I have proved ill-grounded. I will next show the mischievous Consequences
of it.

The mischievous Consequences of it are these:

I. It lessens the Honor of the King. This Distinction was revived in the
first Infancy of our present Settlement, by some disappointed Persons, who,
when they found they could not serve their turns of the Prince of Orange, [whom
with humble Supplications they had called in to their rescue from Popery and
Slavery] nor prevent his Election to the Crown, presumed that they should take
from him, by Artifice, that which was confirmed upon him [maugre all their
Opposition] by Law.

It would have pleased them well, to have been screen'd from the Tyranny of
King James, and protected in their Tyranny over their Brethren; but missing
their point there, they thought they might safely restore the Divine Right to
their late King, who could no longer hurt them; and as for the new elected
Successor, who seemed not made to serve their Party-interest, before all things
else, he should be to them but as an Usurper, not have more than the empty Name
of a King. De Facto, and De Jure nicked this Contrivance to an hair, impaired
the Fame of their envied Deliverer, and gave them the ravishing Hopes of having
their old Master again upon their own Terms.

They could not have started, had they studied for it, a more mischievous
Reproach than this against their generous Deliverer; for thus they charged his
honest and well aimed Declarations with want of Truth and Sincerity, they robbed
his heroic Actions of their Civic Garland, they plundered his happy Successes
of much of the just Welcome and Esteem, which was due to them from every
freeborn Englishman.

Every dissatisfied Person that reviles the King's Honor with this illegal De
Facto Title, Assassinates his glorious Fame, and comes but little behind [if he
does not exceed nor equal] a Granvil, Friend or Perkins.

We have reason to believe that our glorious King William values his honorable
Fame more than his Life; his honorable Fame may last through many Ages, his Life
cannot; the Nation indeed is most concerned in his Life, Posterity in his Fame:
But we ought to be tender of the last, for they who hold him but a King De
Facto, appear by their common Discourses very tender even of the Fame of his
murderous Assassines, what little Stains a Brace of those Miscreants had
contracted, are thought to have been done away by a Triumvirate of Absolvers. I
should be glad to see that Affront to the Government reproved by other
Arguments, besides what our Reverend Teachers use. The Vncanonicalness and
Vnrubricalness of the bold Deed, not but that it might be Uncanonical and
Unrubrical too, for ought I know; but I will swear that the Public Absolution
of Traitors, who are not pretended to have declared their Sorrow for that
devilish Treason which brought them to the Gallows, no, not so much as in the
Ear of the Absolver, was a more impudent piece of Roguery, than ever was
committed by the Gown, in the Face of the Sun, with a Reverend Grace and
Solemnity. I am afraid I digress, but I hope I am within the Purlues of the
Forest.

It is the Distinction of De Facto and De Jure which I am to arraign, and I
charge it to be Mischievous, because it lessens the Honor of the King, it
draws King WILLIAM's Picture too like that of King James; there is Difference
enough, let but an ordinary Painter have the Shadowing it, between a Tyrant
that will not be limited by Law, and a Rightful King who pretends to no Power
but what the Law gives him. Between the sternness of the one awing the Poor
Scholars of Maudlin, and the Martial heat of the other forcing proud Boufflers
out of Namur.

It ought not to be forgot, that this DE FACTO injury to King WILLIAM's Honor,
is an instance of unparalleled ingratitude, for he ventured Life, and Fortunes
for the Deliverance of our enthralled Nation, and that, upon the humble
requests of the Chief of those very Men, who now requite him, with this Wicked,
Shameful, and Ungrateful Distinction.

One would think it was not politickly done of them, as it is plain, was not
done honestly; for, who would serve their interest another time, if this be
their way of Testifying their Sense of the Obligation? They are a Generation
difficult, and hard to be pleased, and possibly it were easier to teach them
their Duty, and make them Subscribe to RIGHTFUL AND LAWFUL KING, than to
gratify all their Pretensions, for, whether they know it or no, the honest
English Men, who were enough to carry it, for the Election of King WILLIAM to
supply the vacant Throne, are enough to defend his Right, and establish his
Throne, maugre all their restless endeavors to supplant him.

II. As their malevolent distinction lessens the honor of the King, so it
weakens the Government. Unto a King DE FACTO only, there is no esteem, no
Thanks, no Allegiance due. We may admire a difficult, and great Atchievment,
but it must be a Virtuous, Honest, and Beneficent, which wins our Esteem, and
Love; we must be the better for it, if it deserves our thanks, we must have
paid our thanks in giving the Hero the Right of a King or he can have no just
claim to our Allegiance.

Some Men teach, [and pretend the Authority of the Church of England for it,
but therein they wrong their holy Mother] that Allegiance is due to successful
Usurpers, and that Providence, together with success, grants them that
Authority, which the People ought to obey for Conscience sake.

When an unhappy interest withholds us from professing our assent to an
evident Truth, we are many times tempted to profess, and defend an evident and
shameful untruth: So it is in the case before us. The De facto Men refusing to
own the rightful, and lawful Title of King WILLIAM, are forced to say that
Allegiance is due to Usurpers, for well they know, should they pursue their
Principle as far as it would carry them, they could have no pretense at all to
his protection; besides, open and declared enmity against the Government under
King WILLIAM's Administration, was too much in all conscience to be endured.
Hence they found it requisite to labor to persuade the King, that they were
obliged to obey him, though he had no right to govern them. 'T was a strange
Paradox this, so very strange, that, had they not been endued with the uncommon
wit, and bouldness of guilding and varnishing it at the expense of the honor
of God Almighty, they had made bold with the honor of the King to very little
purpose.

But it is my business to wash off the guilt and varnish, and show the odd
Paradox naked, that no Conscientious weak mind be cheated thereby hereafter.

They would persuade the King, that they were obliged to obey him, though he had
no right to govern them. This is pretended, first to have been the Opinion of
some of the best Lawyers of former days, and Instance is offered in Sir Edw.
Coke, the Judges in Baggett's Case, the Lord Chief Justice Hales and the Lord
Chief Baron Bridgman. But the Lord Chief Justice Hales for what he says, quotes
Sir Ed. Coke only, against Sir Edw. Coke's Authority many things are obvious,
besides that it stands singly on Baggett's Case; the Parliament Roll recited in
that Case, is pointed directly against what Sir Edw. Coke is supposed to have
asserted; Lord Chief Baron Bridgman has said nothing in favor, but much
against the Paradox. For a fair and full illustration of these particulars, I
refer to the Review of Dr. Sherlock 's Case of Allegiance, Printed in the Year
1691.

As our Law is not chargeable with so foolish and unrighteous an injunction, as
that, which requires obedience to Kings in possession, Kings falsely so called,
who have no right to govern; so much less is it to be defended from the words
of Holy Scripture. But as it sometimes happens in other Cases, so in this,
where Men have the least reason for it, there they put the greatest trust.

There is not a Text in the Bible which commands Obedience to Tyrants or
Usurpers. The Scope of the places, and the evident reason of things all along
evinces, that the Kings, Magistrates, and other Superiors, whom we are
commanded to obey, have a lawful Authority to govern. Yet by artifice, and
dextrous shifting the Sails, our De facto Men hope to weather the point.

Their method is, to refer all events to the overruling disposals of
Providence; so as if Providence left nothing to the free will of Man.

Indeed if it were the positive Will of God, that Ambitious Men should grasp
Sceptres, and Arbitrarily Lord it over cheated or conquered People, then we
ought to obey Tyrants, and Usurpers for Conscience Sake, but then the Argument
would prove too much, for such Ambitious Men being the Ministers of God's
Providence, and executing only what he would have them, they ought not to be
called Tyrants and Usurpers, they have according to this reasoning, from
Providence, a lawful Tittle. But the Sophistry, in this way of arguing from
Providence, is plainly discovered, and refuted by distinguishing between the
Will, and the Permission of God Almighty. When those things, that ought to be
done and which are just and good, are done, then the Will of God is complied
with; when contrary things are done, then the Will of God is resisted, and
opposed, for as Dr. Sherlock has excellently observed, We are to learn our duty
from the law of God, not from his Providence; the Providence of God will never
justify any action which his Law forbids.

Let me add, nor can we, without the highest impiety, ascribe an unlawful
action, to his overruling influence; he does not so much as give leave to the
attempts of Ambitious Men, he is not pleased with Usurpation and Tyranny, and
therefore it is impossible for him to require, that Obedience be paid to
Usurpers and Tyrants.

God, for many wise Reasons, permits the Affairs of the World to go on, as they
are moved by the force of Natural Causes, thence it comes to pass; that Craft,
and Cruelty often prevail over Right, and Innocence: But God has not made the
misfortunes of honest Men their Duty; neither Reason, nor Revelation forecloses
them, from using the lawful means to free themselves from Oppression and
Slavery.

When the Calvinists are charged with making God the Author of Sin, they
commonly answer, that the Divine Decrees do indeed necessitate every Action,
taken materially, not formally; I acknowledge this Distinction, to be an empty
nominal distinction, not containing any sound reason to invalidate the heavy
charge brought against them; But however, it shows that the Men have some
modesty, for, whatever may be the Consequence of their Doctrines, which they
pretend not to see, they will not charge God so foolishly, as to say in direct
terms, that he is the Author of Sin; But the Defenders of the De facto Notion
applied to King WILLIAM, are not afraid to make God the Author of Usurpation.
They Blasphemously affirm, That Allegiance is due, not to legal Right only, but
to the Authority of God who sets up Kings, without any regard to legal Right,
or humane Laws.

If there be any Doctrine which more than another deserves to be called a
Doctrine of Devils, it must be this, which boldly flies in the Face of God
himself, and in downright terms proclaims, that the Judge of all the World does
wrong. The publishing and defending such Notions as this, naturally tends to
promote all flagitious and unjust attempts, and thereby to bring Confusion and
Ruin upon a Nation.

The Great God has a just Authority over all Men, for He made them; they ought
to obey him, for his commands are just, when he expostulates with Disobedient
Sinners, he appeals to them, whether his Laws are not reasonable. He gives none
but reasonable commands, but to obey Usurpers and Tyrants is not reasonable,
nor any command of his.

The success of Ambitious Usurpers is not promoted by any favorable assistance
from Heaven; but is only the consequence of the Wit, Vigor, and industry of
those Usurpers, the Almighty permiting, and leaving the course of things to the
force of Natural Causes. It is a most impious thought to imagine, that the
Righteous God should require us to be aiding, and assisting to wicked
Usurpations. It might as well be thought, that he should bid us disobey lawful
Powers, as bid us to obey Usurpers. In short, even the De facto Men themselves
have granted all this, in their Discourses of God and Providence, when they
have not had a By-cause to serve.

What I have now mentioned and censured, was all, which for some while, Envy
and Ingratitude against our Glorious Deliverer, and Rightful King, could
advance in behalf of that shameful Paradox -- which requires Allegiance to be
paid to a successful Usurper, a King DE FACTO, who has no right to govern.

But when it was observed, that neither our Law Books, nor Bibles, by all the
artful application of ill-affected Lawyers, and Priests, could be persuaded to
spread a sheltring Umbrage over that shameful Paradox of theirs, which the
denial of King WILLIAM's Right forced them to devise, some more refined
Phoilosophers, with a particular Court-like Address, thought to save its
Credit. The Throne (say they) being filled, [no matter how] we are protected by
it, and the benefit of Protection requires the reciprocal duty of Obedience. By
this one Argument, they would have us believe, that all Differences may be
compromiz'd, their Consciences saved, and the Government in no danger.

But by their Favor, though perhaps their Consciences may shift well enough,
come what will; yet I think the Government cannot be safely ventured upon their
gratitude, we have had so many Plots, and Traiterous Correspondencies of
Discontented Men, who were not only protected, but some of them trusted, and
honored; that there is no avoiding such a suspicious thought.

But to speak close to their Argument: They make possession of the Throne, though
obtained by bloody, and violent Mischiefs, the same thing as Protection; to an
Usurper's Administration they give the name of a Benefit, and to such a Violent
Benefit obtruded upon Men against their wills, they would have Obedience paid,
as Duty. More Absurdities cannot well be crowded into so few words. A violent
Possessour is like to give but an odd sort of Protection to them, who do not
uphold his violent Possession, as far as they are able; his dealing to all but
the Friends of his Usurpation will look more like Tyranny than Protection, and
must more properly be called an Injury than a Benefit.

A violent Possessor does, by his first unjust Violence a present great Injury,
to all them on whom he imposes his Yoke; and how should they expect any future
Benefit from him? For, by his Usurpation, they are deprived of all Right to
claim, or expect it by any Obligation of Laws, or claim of Justice; what they
shall chance to meet with of that kind, they must have from his unconfined Will
and arbitrary Power, which is a very Capricious and Fortuitous thing.

Are we obliged to obey a Prince, whom not our Law, but his own Might advanced
over us? Then it must be his Might that obliges us, and the Obedience which we
pay, is Obedience per Force, Obedience falsely so called, in truth, it is no
more Obedience than Possession is Protection, and Governing us whither we will
or no, a Benefit; true Obedience is from choice, and always paid for real and
valuable Considerations. The due Allegiance of Subjects is paid for the
Enjoyment of Life, Liberty and Property, defended by such Laws as the Subjects
have consented to, the Execution of which Laws is committed to his Trust, who
is by due Course of Law made their Governor, under what high Character or Title
soever.

He that is advanced to the Throne by due course of Law and Consent of the
People, becomes a King De Jure, a Rightful and Lawful King, and to him
Obedience is really due; for, from his legal Possession, we have a real and not
an imaginary Benefit under his Government; we have a Protection from certain
and known Laws, not from uncertain and unknown Will and Power.

From this plain and clear state of the Case it appears, That our refined
Philosophers in their neat Argument are guilty of a wilful or weak Mistake in
putting one Word for another, in calling violent Possession Protection, an
Injury, a Benefit, Suffering Obedience: Whether I should call it a wilful or
weak Mistake, I know not, for' it is not plain to me which they value most, their
Wit, or Honesty, but a manifest Mistake it is, and will not pass upon the
Nation, unless they who take such pains to dress things in Disguises, had that
Command in Rhetorical Sophistry which the old Declamators at Athens so valued
themselves upon, pretending to be able to make the worst Cause look well;
unless they could by artificial studied Words, and Strains of Wit, make the
People esteem it as great a Benefit to live in the Apprehension and Expectation
of being Slaves, as in the Condition of Subjects; unless they could by
wheedling Amusements, persuade them, that their Lives, Liberties and Properties
are as safe under uncontrouled and Arbitrary Power, as under a Power limited by
those Laws, which they themselves had a share in making.

In short, if this be good Reasoning, he that fills a Throne, though he has no
right to fill it, does, by filling it, give Protection to the People; and by
governing them without their Consent, bestows a Benefit upon them, in return
for which they are obliged to obey him: Then Thieves that break open a House,
and spare the Lives of the Family, may be said to give them Protection, and in
disposing the Goods at their own Pleasure, to bestow a Benefit on the true
Owners, and what the Owners suffer under such a Terror, may be called
Obedience: Nay, according to these Measures, the Man that is hanged may be said
to pay Obedience, and he that trusses him up, right or wrong, is his Ruler De
Facto.

The Preachers of Passive Obedience made it their Business to abuse the People
with a very pernicious false Doctrine, but they gave it a proper, agreeable,
and true Name; for, the plain signification of Passive Obedience is, Suffering,
Actual Suffering, Irremediable Suffering: With a bareface it teaches, that if
we receive no manner of Protection or Benefit by the Laws of the Land, but on
the contrary, are deprived of our Liberties and Properties, yet we must submit
and suffer: But the Authors of the Argument which I am reproving, are pleased
to call Suffering, Obedience; the one would enslave us by a confident belying
of Religion, the other by a subtle misuse of seeming Reason.

I have proved in General, that the distinction of a King De Jure and De Facto,
as applied to King William, weakens the Government. I will now exemplisy the
same in some Particulars.

I. They that do not believe King William to be their King De Jure, i. e. their
True and Lawful King, are not like to bear true Faith and Allegiance to him.
They have no Motive, no Temptation to induce them: If they bear true Faith and
Allegiance to a King, in their Opinion, an Usurper, they must contradict the
Principles which God and Nature have implanted in them, they must cross their
own present Inclinations without the Prospect of a future Advantage. It is as
much as ever our Preachers can do, to keep Men from indulging their present
Inclinations by the Hopes of a Recompense hereafter; but 'twould puzzle all
their Eloquence to persuade them to this, when the Instance is not a moral
Action fit to be done, nor any thing to be got by it.

The wonderful and unreasonable Confidence of those Jacobizing Authors, who
would persuade their Readers, that Allegiance ought to be paid to a King, whom
they believe to have no Right to require it, made me with a strict
Thoughtfulness consider, on what Bottom they could pretend to ground the
Obligation; but Bottom could I find none, save that from the Christian Precept
of loving Enemies, a merry Man might make a Jest on it. By the way, this most
difficult of Christian Precepts, had been recommended to the World before our
Blessed Master's Time, by wise Heathens, Grotius in his Book De Ver. Rel.
Christianae, quotes several, but no wise Heathen or Christian, ever explained
that Precept so far, as to exact the Payment of good Offices to an Enemy at the
Expense of the just Rights of a Friend, or Allegiance to an arbitrary King in
Possession, to the Wrong of the lawful King unhappily dispossessed: And I am
Opinion, that the Consideration of this, or a less justifiable cause moved a
good Doctor to mince the matter thus: It is our Duty to pray for the King in
Possession, while we take care to do it in such terms, as not to pray against
the dispossessed Prince. Which is as much as to say, We may pray that God would
do such a King some small Personal Kindnesses, or so; but not to discomfit his
Enemies, or establish his Throne, and this justifies my Position. That they who
do not believe King William to be their King De Jure, are not like to bear him
true Faith and Allegiance; we have but too long seen the Effects of the
Doctor's Caution, one while many were contented to pray for King William only
from the Desk in appointed Forms, they abstained from mentioning his Name in
the Pulpit; the most thought it enough in General Terms to pray God to be
Gracious to King William; not one of a hundred at this Day dares pronounce him
Rightful and Lawful King; they will, it is true, not grudge to call him the King
that God has set over them; but that is an oblique Reflection, for, the same is
their Phrase also for an Usurper.

The questioning King William's Title, was always the professed Cause of the
Refusal of Swearing to bear Faith and true Allegiance to him. Indeed the above
mentioned Doctor was pleased to tell the Nation, That he did not refuse the
Oaths out of any Fondness for the Government of King James, nor Zeal for his
Return: But I am confident he did not refuse them out of any Persuasion of the
Right of King William, nor Zeal for his Establishment; in Truth, his Refusal of
the Oaths, was a plain Declaration of his Sense against King William's Right;
but when he took the Oaths, then to insinuate that King William had no Legal
Right -- hic nigrae succus soliginis, haec est aerugo mera. Yet this Doctor is
a Saint, in Comparison with that Loyal Rector, who essayed to prove, that
notwithstanding his Oath to King William and Queen Mary, he had not put himself
out of a Capacity to perform what he swore to the late King: Which makes it
plain that they who are not persuaded of King William's Rightful Title, cannot
be willing to give him, no, not their Oaths, unless it be for the better
Opportunity to betray him. In short, I would sooner hope to find an Atheist,
zealous to promote the practice of Virtue and Piety, than that the Government
under King William should be rightly served, by those that are persuaded of the
Right of the late King.

When the late King sent Forces against the late Duke of Monmouth he was in the
right, not to put his trust in the County Troops, for he looked upon many of
them to have no opinion of his Title, but rather to think well of the cause of
the Invader.

It Is the ordinary Policy of every Tyrant to oppress his own People with
Mercenary Foreigners, or such Subjects of his own, as are Soldiers, who have
nothing but Fortune, and his Bounty to trust to; 'twere as foolish to go about
to suppress them by other Instruments, as it is wicked to oppress them at all.

Perhaps a hungry Lawyer may plead for his Fee against his Conscience, but a
lover of his Country will not be the Chief Justice of an Arbitrary Monarch.

II. They that do not believe King WILLIAM to be their Righful and Lawful King,
are bound in Conscience to endeavor to dispossess him.

I know there be some Casuists, who contend earnestly, that an Erroneous
Conscience does not oblige a Man to follow it; in proof of their Negative, they
muster many Zealous, and some Witty Pleadings, proper to amuse, and entertain
one sort of Readers, but no Man can be convinced by them. For God gave us
Conscience to be our Guide, and Nature will have us to follow it, whether in
the doing good or evil. I prove it by this plain Reason -- if we are not
obliged to obey an Erroneous Conscience, then we are not obliged to obey a
right and well persuaded Conscience, for the Erroneous Conscience thinks it
self in the right, as well as the Conscience that both thinks so, and is so. A
Man who is Erroneously persuaded in Moral Matters cannot but sin; he sins in
following his Erroneous Conscience, when it prompts him to an Immoral Action,
because by the Word of God, and Right Reason, he might have informed his
Conscience better: He sins most audaciously when he acts against his
Conscience, because he thinks it his Duty to obey it. Bishop Tailor teaches,
That it is a greater sin to do a good Action against our Conscience, than to do
an evil Action in obedience to it. The Example he brings answers exactly but to
one part of his Rule, but comes near the other, and leads to our purpose. Friar
Clement the Jacobine thinks Erroneously, that it is lawful to kill his King:
The poor Damosel Faucette thinks it unlawful to spit in the Church; but it
happened, that one day she did it against her Conscience; and the Friar one day
with his Conscience and a long Knife killed the King. If the Question be here
who sinned most, the disparity is next to infinite, the poor Woman was to be
chidden for doing against her Conscience, and the other to be hanged for doing
according to his. Thus say I, those Assasines deserve to be hanged who attempt
to kill, and those also who consult, and labor to disposses our Rightful and
Lawful King WILLIAM; but while with an Erroneous Conscience, they believe him
to be only King DE FACTO, i.e. a false King, but a real Usurper, I do not see
how they can avoid Treason, and the danger of the Gallows. Now, bless us! and
deliver us! Some Friends of the Party may say, from so barbarous Doctrine as
this. What! Hang Men for obeying their Consciences? and doing what in their
Circumstances they could not avoid. But to abate their Wonder, and let them
into the cruel Mystery, I reply, it is but a Just, Reasonable, and Necessary
Doctrine; for why should their Consciences disturb our Settlement, and endanger
the Life of our King. They should labor to inform their Consciences better, or
carry them to some other Country, where our Government, and the Life of our
King, may be as safe from the treacherous practices of their Consciences, as
their Consciences from the Just, and but too slow, Vengeance of the Government;
For, as Mr. Johnson told them long ago. He ought not to live under any
Government, who refuses to give it the customary and legal caution.

They shall put you out of the Synagogues, said Christ to his Apostles, yea the
time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think, that be does God good
service.

Friend, and Perkins, and their Fellow Assassines thought themselves obliged in
Conscience to take off King WILLIAM, because they looked upon him only as a
King DE FACTO, a mere Usurper: In Conscience they held themselves obliged to
endeavor the Restoration of the late King, because they looked on him as King
DE IVRE. And rather than not effect these Purposes they engage to promote a
French Invasion, which would have made bloody Work among us, but what cared
they for that, as long as it was to reinstate the right Heir. A more
Mischievous Distinction cannot be imagined than this of a King DE IVRE, and DE
FACTO, the former being applied to the late King, the latter to King WILLIAM;
but I will descend to some particular Instances.

This wicked Distinction, thus Mischievously applied, long encouraged
troublesome Commotions in Scotland, but more fatally delayed the Reduction of
Ireland. It famished some Thousands in Londonderry, kept a gallant Army from
Action One Summer for Six Weeks, that was, till the Season for Action was over;
so that the Victory of the next Year cost the King some of his own Blood, and
the Life of his brave General. It betrayed our Councils, and brought the French
Fleet into our Channel, prevented the pushing on our Successes, so that our
dishonor is not yet revenged, as it ought, and perhaps might be, it exposed
our Merchants, and ruined our Trade, it hatched many a Hellish Plot in Ireland,
in Flanders, in England, against the Life of King WILLIAM and Queen MART,
against the Liberties of this Nation, and the Lives of all honest Protestants,
it hindered the due Examination of discovered Plots, and rescued Traitors
convict, without obliging them to Confession.

This Wicked, and Mischievously applied distinction contrived the last Hellish
Conspiracy, laid it deep, and spread it wide, urged it on with a steady Zeal,
and unwearied Application under the Auspices of an exiled Tyrant, and at the
vast expense of his proud Protector, watched all opportunities to begin the
Bloody Execution; concealed it obstinately, pursued it after disappointments,
and we have reason to believe, that we are not got so far into the horrid
Secret, but they have their hopes to retrieve it. However, blessed be God, who
has brought so much of it to light, that we shall not perish -- that we shall
not perish, -- unless it be our own fault; -- if we please, -- the Sun may be
let in upon it, the Law may effectually spppress it, and then, -- and not till
then, we shall be safe, both we, and our King.

The undantedly honest Mr. Johnson, and one or two more, out of dry love to
their Country, some Years ago opposed this Wretched, Mischievous, and
Misapplied Distinction, with Learning, Wit, and Reason; but the Friends of the
late King James could endure that Opposition, and reply little, while they met
with no Penal Opposition from the Government: But when one or two of the
Conspirators, averse to so horrid a Villainy, as was in agitation among them,
revealed the design to the King, and the King laid it before the House of
Commons; of a sudden the Spirits of that Honorable Body, the Representatives
of the People of England, were roused from the confused Lethargy of a doubtful
Opinion, into a clear discerning Sense of the danger, into which the Sacred
Life of KING WILLIAM, and all the dearest Interest of all true Englishmen were
betrayed by the distinction of a King DE IVRE, and a King DE FACTO. Immediately
therefore to repair their Error, with a just warmth, they declared the right
of their King, that so they might on a stable Rock, build their own defense,
which had been vilely shaken by the rotten Foundation of an Usurper, daubed
over with the empty name only of a King. A very great Majority of that August
Assembly, presently cheerfully subscribed the Association, wherein, after they
Sincerely, and Solemnly Profess, Testify, and declare, That his present
Majesty King WILLIAM is Rightful, and Lawful King of these Realms; they
mutually promise and engage to stand by, and assist each other to the utmost of
their Power, in the support and defense of his Majesty's most Sacred Person,
and Government, against the late King James and his Adherents. Further they
oblige themselves, if the King should come to any violent and untimely death,
which God forbid, to revenge the same on his Enemies, and their Adherents,
Lastly, To support the Succession of the Crown according to an Act made in the
First Year of KING WILLIAM and QUEEN MARY.

The House of Lords also, moved by the same amazing occasion, as the Commons,
damned the Mischievous distinction DE FACTO, and DE IVRE, declaring that His
present Majesty King WILLIAM has A Right by Law to the Crown, which Words one
might be afraid of, but that their Lordships, ever Honorable, and Sincere,
took care to secure them from Exception, by the next Plain, Righteous and
Decretory Sentence, -- And that neither the late King James, nor the pretended
Prince of Wales, nor any other Person, has any right whatsoever to the same.

I cannot see wherein this Declaration comes short of that of the House of
Commons, for here the Lords determine, that King WILLIAM has a Right by Law to
the Crown, and such a Right by Law, that neither the late King, nor the
pretended Prince of Wales, nor any other Person has any Right whatsoever to
the same; then of Consequence, He has all the right to the Crown that can be,
all the right that ever Prince had, or can have. And is in their Lordships
Judgments, what the Commons have declared him, Viz. our Rightful and Lawful
King. I am glad the Houses are so well agreed. But alas! neither has their
happy Agreement, nor the following hearty and just Votes of the Commons carried
the Association of the Commons through the Kingdom, with that success as might
have been expected, and as was due to so well advised a Sanction for the
Public good. The reason of which disappointment I cannot imagine, for I hope,
that Commoner's Chaplain was not in the right, who openly told an Acquaintance,
that the Penalties enforcing the Association were only In terrorem. But as if
he had been able to give the Refusers Security, many stood off, and began to
frame Exceptions against it. To pass by the little Cavils, and impertient
Sarcasms, started by vain and unquiet Men, who are proud to tell the World with
what unfair Equivocation they swallowed the Oaths of Allegiance, and consonant
to that Scandalous Wickedness, will affix a sense of their own devising to the
Parliament Association, or else Associate in a cold empty Form of their own
drawing up; to pass by every thing of this nature, I shall only reflect on the
grand Exception, which is so common in the mouths of all the De facto Men. And
that is this -- They have as their bounden duty does require, that awful regard
for the Divine Prohibition of Revenge, that they can by no means agree to
oblige themselves to revenge the King's violent death upon his Treacherous
Enemies.

To this I have several things to reply.

1. Though with some Men the Blood of a King is so cheap that it may be spilt
like Water on the Ground, and they never trouble their hearts about it: Yet I
make no question, but were it the Blood but of an Archbishop of St. Andrew,
they would be very active to hunt the Murderers from their Coverts, and bring
them to condign Punishment. That these words may not be wrested, I do avow,
that it was a necessary piece of Justice, the Punishment of that Archbishop's
Murderers. But I argue a fortiori, how necessary then is it to punish Wicked
Regicides?

II. when a Noble Peer is impeached in Parliament for High Treason, the Lords
Spiritual pretend to a Right of Siting, and Voting among his Judges, so that
Clergymen are not willing to be wholly Sequestered from their share in legal
Revenges.

III. When the House of Commons declared, [upon the occasion of the Popish
Plot, discovered by Doctor Oats,] that if His Majesty, King Charles, that then
was, should come to any violent Death, [which they prayed God to prevent, though
[as it is thought,] they were not heard] they would revenge it to the utmost on
the Papists. None of this Clan of Non-Associators bawled against that Vote, as
unchristian; and yet I do not see, but King WILLIAM's Life is as precious, and
ought to be as dear to the Nation as ever King Charles's was; besides, I
persuade my self, that popish Assassines deserve not to be more severely
treated, than -- than any other Assassines.

IV. When any private Person unites with the House of Commons, to revenge the
Violent death of the King, [which God prevent,] he unites with the
Representatives of the Body of the People, for the just Execution of a legal
Revenge.

V. He that is not willing to do his part toward the bringing the Assassines
of the King to suffer the Law, may be justly suspected as an Abettor of the
Assassination, [if such a thing should happen, which God prevent] and if he be
treated accordingly, he is not worse treated, than the old Lady Lisle.

VI. In a state of Nature, every Man has a Right to preserve all his honest
Interests against the Injuries of others, and to punish such Injuries according
as he judges they deserve to be punished. In political Society every Man
resigns up this natural right to the Community, who entrust some chosen Man or
Men to govern them, by settled Laws made with their own Consent: Now if wicked
Assassines shall traitorously take off the chief Head or Heads that govern, and
so reduce the People to the unhappy Necessity of a new Choice, from whence may
arise infinite Mischiefs, by Reason of the Differences of ambitious Pretenders,
the People seem reduced to a state of Nature, and then every particular
individual Person has a Right to be revenged of the Assassines. It is true, the
English Government is Hereditary, and by Act of Parliament settled after the
Death or demise of King William, on the Princess Ann and the Heirs of her Body,
but then there is Danger that Jacobite Zeal may wade through more Blood to make a
clear Vacancy for a Royal Abdicator; and if so, there is Reason for every true
Englishman, by the Parliaments Association to denounce Vengeance against the
Assassines; but the single loss of King William alone by violent, sudden
Treachery, might chance to throw us into those Confusions, that it is just and
prudent to associate to be avenged of them, that shall tear that dear Interest
from us.

VII. Let who will refuse the Association, yet it is honestly and wisely done
of them who enter into it; for thereby they not only discharge the Duty which
they owe to the King; but also do that which has a powerful Influence to deter
execrable Assassines from attempting the desperate Villainy; for it is the hope
of Impunity that confirms the bold Nonjurers in their declared Enmity to King
William; the hope of Impunity that animates the sneaking perjured Jurors to
abide by their mischievous Distinction of a King De Facto and De Jure; the hope
of Impunity that hatches Conspiracies, and carries on Correspondencies with
France; and no doubt King-killers hereafter will be harder to be hired, because
that particular Villainy has the least hope of Mercy; to say no more, it is the
hope of Impunity that hardens a perverse Conscience, and makes so many
Non-associators.

VIII. It Is not indeed unwisely done of the Non-associators, that they may put
the best Color they can upon their Refusal, to pretend that they are
Christians, and cannot be revenged, no not upon their most mischievous Enemies;
but then it is easy to see through this Pretense; a wet Finger will fetch off the
false Varnish; for though they dare not for the World Associate to revenge the
violent Death of King William; yet they are well contented to give up Three
Nations to the Vengeance of the late King, who if ever he returns, [which God
of his Infinite Mercy, I beseech him, prevent] will return like the Evil Spirit
in the Gospel, with Seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, and the last
state of our Nation shall be worse than the first: For, as it is said by the
Apostle, It had been better never to have known the way of righteousness, than
having known, to depart therefrom: So it had been better for us never to have
been delivered from the Yoke of the late King's Tyranny, than to submit our
Necks to it again; if he hooks us under his Power a second time, it will be a
Mercy to dispatch us; he will hamper us so sufficiently, that our next
Deliverer must be that sure Conqueror, who makes the ill figure in Churches
with his Scythe and Hourglass.

IX. Among the rest of the Mischiefs whereof the De Jure and De Facto
distinction is the procuring Cause, set it down for one, That it keeps them who
falsely and maliciously apply it to King WILLIAM, from associating with their
Representatives in Parliament.

It comes into my Mind now, very opportunely, I think, That their Tyrant De
Jure, just upon his departure, [and the Words of departing Friends we know sink
deep into the Minds of good Christian People] advised his Loyal Officers and
Soldiers expressly, and all his other Well-wishers [not worth naming] tacitly,
not to expose themseves by resisting a foreign Enemy, and a poisoned Nation
[that was his Complement to Old England] but to keep themselves free from
Associations and such pernicious things. Our mischievous Distinguishers have
observed this Advice most exactly, they have not yet rashly ventured their
Carcasses in the Field against our King and Government. Their Treachery must
succeed before they try their Valor; and as for Associations, and such
pernicious things, they most religiously keep themselves pure and undefiled.

For another particular Instance of the Mischief caused by the wretched
Distinction, I might mention, That it encourages the Attempts of the French
King, to re-impose on us the late King James as his Deputy, [for that is the
most the late King in his vainest hopes can expect; nay, if it should rain
Crowns and Miracles on his Head, who may have more Faith to believe the latter,
than Strength to bear the former; he must govern by the imperious Dictates of
his Protectors Arbitrary Will, he must be but the prime Minister of a superior
Tyrant, nay, hardly that, for Lewis would not trust him but under French
Schoolmasters, and having first delivered up cautionary Towns.]

If King Lewis were not well assured that the mischievous Distinction was
suffered among us with impunity, he would not be at the Expense of a Livre to
make a Descent upon us, but rather be glad to secure his own Shoars, which
indeed is more than he can do now, Rebus sic stantibus. But that I may not on
this Head chance to touch on some things said before, I am content to dismiss
it with this bare mentioning, only let me take my leave of the De Facto Men
with one question upon the whole matter: Since they vex their Wits to serve the
Fury of a Prince whose Tyranny to other day themselves could not brook, let
them tell the World, Is Tyranny one of those Blessings whose value we can never
enough esteem till we begin to want it?

I make haste to conclude my Discourse, and therefore shall wholly pass by some
little Inconveniences caused by the Distinction of a King De Facto and De Jure,
such as that it hinders the late King's Devotions; if it were not for the vain
hope of returning to be revenged of a certain poisoned Nation; why, he might
retire to a Religious House, and spend the Remnant of his Life in Prayers, Mass
it early and late, for the Soul of his Elder Brother, or any of the unlucky
Assassines that the other day fell in his Cause, and might for ought he knows
drop into Purgatory notwithstanding their Absolution: Or if a Court is the
thing with which his Heart is ravished, he might even betake himself to his
Holy Father, the Blessed Pope's Holy Court, where he might be forgiven,
submitting to Penance, all the Improvidences and Cowardice in his frustrated
pious Attempt to Massacre a Nation or two of Heretics.

As a Corallary to the foregoing Discourse, take this -- The Impunity of them
who own King WILLIAM only as a King De Facto, discourages the Friends of the
Government, who own him, and believe him to be our Rightful and Lawful King. It
is true, a Man of steady Virtue will not be put by the Practice of those Duties
which serve the Interest of his Country, by any Neglects from the Government,
or Apprehensions of Danger likely to happen: But surely their Number, who have
wrought themselves up to such consummate Excellence, bears no Proportion,
either with their own Friends, who are but [more or less] well inclined, or
with their Enemies who are mischievously bent: Of the most of them that
sincerely believe King WILLIAM to be rightful and lawful King; I fear this is
the extent of their Praise: They are ready to defend the Government as far as
the Government is willing to defend it self and them; but cautiously do they
abstain from an overactive Zeal, which is not well accepted, for fear it should
be visited upon them and their Children in another Revolution. For my part, I
believe it as impossible for our late King James, to recover his forfeited and
abdicated Crowns, as for the intreaguing King of France to make himself Monarch
Universal: But the annual Succession, and thickning of Jacobite Plots, and the
last refusal of a Bill to be brought in, obliging certain persons to abjure
King James; convince me, that Men of good and bad Principles, have, the one
hoped for, the other suspected and feared such a new dismal Scene of Affairs.
And, for ought I know, the Establishment and Security of the Government under
King WILLIAM, may be owing more to what has been done against it, than to what
has been done for it. Perissem nisi perissem: I think it was the Saying of the
brave Themistocles, by which I suppose he designed to declare that it was his
Opinion, he had not arrived at that Height of Greatness, if he had not been
ruffled, opposed and banished; and I am very fully satisfied, that if it had
not been for this last devilish Invasion and Assassination-Plot, we had not in
haste declared King WILLIAM our Rightful and Lawful King, nor associated for
the Preservation of his Life, by threatening to revenge his violent Death.

There is a difference between those that were to have had their part in the
Assassination, and those that were concerned only in the Invasion. The
Assassines are not able to devise any the least color to take off from the
Heinousness of their intended Villainy. Perkins was a little ashamed of this
infamous Design; but as for the Promoters of the Invasion, their Treason was
but Consonant to their old mischievous Distinction of a King De Facto and De
Jure: Some of the Assassines have met their deserved Fate, but the simple
Invaders have hardly been scared; yet if they shall not be called to an Account
also [who bid fair for slaying Ten Thousands of the People, and so making up in
Numbers, a Sacrifice equal to that of their King] they will not only be
confirmed that they have distinguished well, but prompted more vigorously to
pursue the fatal end and purpose of their threatening Distinction. And this
indeed is enough and enough to cool the Zeal, and to discourage the Endeavors
of them that are otherwise very well disposed to serve the Interests of King
WILLIAM, their Country, and the Protestant Religion. Our King himself is not
capable of endangering his own just Rights, or the Safety of the People of
England, unless by his singular Mercy and Goodness, which like his fearless
Valor, knows no Bounds: as for the Representatives of the People, it may be
Reasonably presumed, they will at last provide, that the De Facto Jacobites
shall not have the Temptation of Impunity to attempt to subvert the Liberties
of the Nation, and to destroy the Lives of all that love their Liberties. They
have indeed, according to the Trust reposed in them, honestly endeavored and
advanced some Paces toward such a necessary Provision, by their Noble, Just,
and Righteous Association: But there remains a great deal more for them to do
still, lest what they have already done, be frustrated, and rendered all
together ineffectual; for their Association is no sooner drawn up, subscribed
by a great Majority, and the Session prorogued.

But Ante-Associations are formed against it by some of the Clergy, not indeed
in broad Words directly contrary, but in cold and empty Flourishes of their own
devising, and such borrowed Expressions as they imagine capable of an
interpretation, that will not utterly subvert their Distinction of a KING DE
FACTO, and DE IVRE, Which Distinction while it Reigns unpunished, KING WILLIAM
does not reign secure. Several of the Ante-Associations were drawn up so little
favoring the Title of His present MAJESTY, so little consulting the Security
of his Administration, that it was scandalously manifest, the Subscribers
associated only in lewd Hypocisy, to avoid the Envy of Non-associating, to sham
the Authority of the Nation with some deceitful Complements, but in Reality and
Truth, to preserve their dear Distinction. Such Associations therefore as
these, were rejected, as they well deserved, nor could all the Academic
Elegance bestowed upon them, help them through the officious Hands of Friends,
to his Majesty's gracious Acceptance: But these Gentlemen carried it highly, if
his Majesty would not accept such Association as they had drawn up, he should
have none at all from them. This being observed by other Persons of the same
Order, they wisely considered what Inconveniences might possibly happen from
not Associating at all, and therefore determined to comply, but resolved to
come off as cheap as they could. They would venture to Associate, but not with
their Parishoners in the Form prescribed by the House of Commons [except here
and there an honest Parson that had no Priestcraft in him] wherefore they
carefully abstain from declaring it to be their persuasion, that His present
Majesty King WILLIAM, is Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms; and as for
his Violent and untimely death, should it happen, which God prevent, they
oblige not themselves to revenge it upon his Enemies and their Adherents. But
let us see! What do they give us in the room of RIGHTFUL AND LAWFUL KING, and
instead of making it the utmost danger to kill him? Why? They borrow some words
from the Association of the House Lords, and insert the same among some empty
Flourishes of their own; upon which I note, that, although the Form of the
Association of the House of Lords, be in the Literal, Plain, and Obvious Sense,
and in the Sense by them intended, Truly, Just, and Highly Loyal, yet when
Clergymen, who are represented by the House of Commons, and not by the House
of Lords, shall Associate in the Language of the latter, and not of the former,
it is a manifest sign, that they dislike the Association of the House of
Commons, and that, though the Association of the Lords tends to the same Just,
Noble and Necessary Purposes, yet in their Opinion it may be interpreted to
signify something less. It cannot be imagined, that any of the Clergy should
decline the Association of the House of Commons, by whom they are represented,
if they were persuaded that the same was a Just, and Righteous Association; it
cannot be imagined that they should prefer the Phrase of the House of Lords, by
whom they are not represented, if they were firmly persuaded [as I declare my
self to be] that, that Phrase did come fully up, to the Sense of the House of
Commons, and could not possibly be interpreted to signify, with a Jacobite
abatement, something favorable to their mischievously applied distinction of a
King De Facto, and De Jure.

Now in this their Practice they do a great injury to both Houses, they
audaciously slight the one, and wickedly traduce the other. What reward so high
a Misdemeanour may deserve, I take not upon me to pronounce; but I hope I may
have leave to say, that these Clergy-Association-Separatists have not that
unquestionable fair pretense to His Majesty's Special Graces and Favors, as
the voluntary Subscribers of the Association of the House of Commons; indeed
they may, considering the Wonderful Generosity of the King, expect as much
Forgiveness as they shall need, and more Grace and Favor than they are
disposed to deserve: But it were a Presumption very like Impudence in them, to
hope that His Majesty King WILLIAM should prefer them before his best affected
Liege People, who Associate, [as is most Just and Proper, Fair and
Unexceptionable] with their Representatives in Parliament, Heartily, Sincerely,
and Solemnly Professing, Testifying and Declaring, that His Present Majesty
King WILLIAM is Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms, etc. And that they
will stand by one another, in revenging his untimely death, [which God prevent]
upon His Enemies and their Adherents.

It was a very sharp Reflection, and, I would very fain persuade my self, an
unjust one, that of Mr. Dryden, For Priests of all Religions are the same; but
it grieves my Soul to think, that so necessary an order of Men, Protestants, as
well as Papists, should be so generally given to oppose the Proceedings of the
State.

Old and Crazy is the Body, I cannot say, which I carry about with me, but
which is carried about for me; but yet, I am in hopes, that it will hold out,
till all His Majesty's Subjects represented by the Commons, be taught the
necessity of Subscribing the Association of the House of Commons; for, I well
remember, how before the end of their last Sessions, they set their own Members
a day to Subscribe it, or declare their Refusal; also the Names of Refusers
were required to be returned, from all or most Towns of the Kingdom; which was
setting and a distinguishing Mark upon them; and it is not reasonable to
suppose, that they will suffer their August Assembly, and Wise Councils to be
so contemptuously used, as they must be, if that Form of Association, which
their Wisdom judged absolutely necessary to save the Honor and Life of the
King; the Lives, Liberties, and Religion of the Subject, happen to be
disappointed by particular Forms of Association, devised by some Discontented
Ecclesiastics, who refuse to declare, that His present Majesty King WILLIAM is
Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms; and have so very little love for His
Person, that who as will may Assassinate him, for all them, with impunity. O
the Christianity of these Gentlemen! Whose Consciences will not serve them to
be aiding and assisting any just Orders of Legal Revenge! If this be
Christianity, commend me to the Manners, and Doctrine of Heathens. But why
should Christianity be reproached for their sakes? That Holy Institution
neither injures the Civil Rights of particular Persons, nor alters the Grand
Reason on which Political Societies, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths are founded,
and preserved. Salus populi the good of the People is the grand Reason on which
Political Societies are founded; the good of the People requires that Enormous
Wickednesses should not escape unpunished; he that has it in his power, but
will not contribute to the Legal Punishment of an Infamous Assassin, is wanting
in the duty which he owes to that Body Politic, whereof he is a Member, In
short, every Member of a Body Politic is in strict justice obliged to
endeavor, as far as in him lies, to bring to Legal Punishment the Bloody
Villain that shall murder the meanest of his Fellow Subjects; this is a duty,
which by the Fundamental Reason of Society is owning from every single Person
to the Public; how much more strongly does it oblige, if a brave Prince should
fall [which God forbid] by the Treacherous Cruelty of ungrateful Miscreants,
prompted by a disappointed Tyrant, and supported by a Faithless, Enchroaching
Foreign Enemy? It is a very odd thing, that any Men should pretend Conscience
for their forbearance of that action, which they are bound in duty to perform,
though they look no farther, than their being Members of a Body Politic. There
is no Government upon the face of the Earth, that will take them in upon other
conditions, than their agreeing to be revenged upon those Assassines, whose
desperate Malice shall wound the Public in so noble a part, as her Chief
Officer. And therefore we have good reason to hope, that since the Government
knows her boldest Enemies who [mindful of the Advice from Rochester] will not
Associate with us at all; and her No-friends who will not Associate in the form
of the House of Commons, since, I say, the Government knows them intus and
incute, fully, and thoroughly, [as she well may, after Seven long Years
troublesome experience] that she will now at last take the necessary security,
that security which Providence has so loudly, and so often proclaimed to be the
only necessary; by which not only the Government, but, by the blessing of God,
even the Enemies thereof may be brought to their right Wits, and saved from
cruel Tyranny, and foolish Superstition. This looks, some may object, as if I
wished, that the Association of the House of Commons might be imposed on the
Clergy. I might reply, if that really was my wish, I know no great harm which
would follow; but I rather choose with all softness to clear the purpose of my
Writing.

I remember to have read some Author, who vindicating the practice of the
Church, [which sometime had been,] in compelling Men to Conformity, when he was
ashamed to affirm in express terms, that violence might be offered to Men's
Consciences, in matters about Religious Worship; He gave this turn to the
matter -- they might lawfully be compelled to consider. I mean no more, as to
our Dissenting Associators. And I am persuaded, let the Government give them
but one good Argument able to move them to consider the matter, they will never
stand with their Representatives for the Phrase of RIGHTFUL AND LAWFUL KING,
no, nor the Word REVENGE neither, which when the Parliament threatened against
the King's Enemies, they never dreamed it would scare the Clergy.

For the ground of this my persuasion, I will tell the Reader a Story.

When Pope Paul the Vth. quarreled with the Venetians, the Imprisonment of a
brace of Ecclesiastic Villians was the least thing that troubled him. But the
great Offense was from Two Decrees, the First commanding that no more Churches
should be Erected within the City Precincts; the Second that no more Lands
should be alienated to the Ecclesiastics, without leave had from the Senate.
It seems the Senate were for Governing the Republic, by such Decrees, as they
judged necessary for the Public Good. The Pope Excommunicates the Duke and
Senate, lays their Dominions under his Interdict, the Jesuits Associating on
the side of his Holiness, obey the Interdict, and refuse to say Mass; for this,
the Senate banishes them, but the People Associating with the Senate, instead
of mutining for the Holy Fathers now ready to depart each Man with the Host at
his Neck, intimating that they and JESUS CHRIST were both taking their leave
together, bid them be gone with a vengeance. The Senate pursued their steaddy
Resolutions with an Order that all Ecclesiastics, who would not continue the
Celebration of Divine Service, should retire out of their Dominions; upon this,
many of the Holy Men, especially the Capuchins, had the Courage to make a noise
of departing, they intended to have gone out in Procession with the Sacrament,
but that the Senate forbid it; they actually did use all Arts to make the
People apprehend the sadness of their case, and that the being without Priests
was being without God in the World. One Morning therefore they celebrated Mass,
they eat up all their Gods, and concluded the Service without blessing the
People. But the Senate stood firm to their Order, and the People were quiet,
and content to take care of their own Souls, which so troubled these Holy
Fathers, that several altered their minds, and were content to stay and do
their Duties, most of the Capuchins in the Territories of Berscia and Bergamo
wisely considered that they could not live half so well without their Flock, as
their Flock without them; therefore when they saw they could not help it, they
associated with the Senate, and celebrated Divine Service as before,
notwithstanding the Pope's Interdict.

I will not say, That every thing in this Story, which relates to the Senate of
Venice and their Clergy, runs parallel with the Circumstances between the
Government, and our Clergy-dissenting-Associators; but if any one shall say,
that there is no manner of Resemblance between the one and the other, I must
beg his Pardon. What may or may not be fitly applied, the Reader shall freely
judge, I will not labor to prepossess him with my Notions; yet I will make
bold to affix one Note to the Story, and That Is this -- It was not with the
Popish Religion, nor its Ministers, that the Senate had a Difference; only this
they firmly resolved, that none should be Ministers of Religion for them, that
would not own, that the Senate had a Rightful and Lawful Authority to govern
the Republic by what Decrees they pleased, without asking leave of the Pope.

The Readers Trouble shall be over, when I have told him, it is not the Church
of England, nor Ministers of the Church of England, as such, that I have here
taxed; for I heartily and sincerely profess a profound Veneration to the Right
Reverend Fathers in God, my Lords, the Archbishops and Bishops that are as
faithful to his Majesty King WILLIAM, and the Interest of their Country, as
Paolo Sarpio Veneto, better known by the Name of Father Paul, was to the Senate
of Venice; I highly esteem and regard all the inferior Clergy, whose Honesty
and Loyalty keeps even Paces with the House of Commons, the Representatives of
the People of England, and equals them to those Venetian Ecclesiastics, who
preferred the Decrees of the Senate their Lawful Governors before the
Interdiction of their Holy, Meddling, Spiritual Father, the Pope.

POSTSCRIPT.
OF the Mischiefs which flow from the seditious Distinction of a King De Facto
and De Jure, there is no end; as often as I think of it, new Instances of its
Mischievousness occur to my mind: For might not a French Commissioner at a
Treaty of Peace, from hence take occasion to argue after this manner -- As it
was said in behalf of the Dutch, when they first refused the Bank of England's
Bills, Why should they take them, when the English among themselves would not?
So it may be said in behalf of the French King, Why should he own King William
for Rightful and Lawful King of England, etc. when so many of the Clergy,
enjoying their Tithes and Pulpits, and not a few of the Laity in public Office
and Employment will not?

Might not the Monsieur pursue the Raillery thus -- When the Government does
not think fit to impose the Lawfulness of King William's Title on the
Consciences of the Clergy, and all other Officers and Magistrates
commissionated by his Majesty, why should it be imposed on the Conscience of
the French King, who is none of King William's Subject, but a Crowned Head, as
well as himself? I know not what could be replied to this argumentative
Raillery, which mingles Reason and Reproach together, unless that English
Subjects of all Orders and Degrees should be better taught their Duty for the
future, and then the French King would stand with us for nothing -- When once
those wretched Inventions of Usurpation, Conquest and Desertion, Branches of
the De Facto Doctrine, are penally restrained, as by English Law they might and
ought to be; there is not a Clergyman of an hundred, but shall justify the
choice of the People and speak honorably of the Conventional Parliament;
there is not a Lay-Magistrate but shall know under whom, and for whom he was
created, and dare as well be -- as betray King William or his Country.

Let Clergymen and Laymen be compelled to Associate in the Form of the House
of Commons, to defend their Rightful and Lawful King William, and to revenge
his untimely Death, which God prevent, [and a very little compulsion will do,
for the most backward of them, are only a little Knavish, or so, not obstinate]
and there shall not be a Mercenary Villain found, that will be hired to lift up
a hand against him, not a Crowned, nor Decrown'd Head so foolishly wicked, as
to go about to hire them.

Note, That this should have been inserted among the Arguments, which are
offered against the Non-Associators, who scruple the word Revenge.

A Parliament-Association with the Royal Assent, is in all its Parts, as Legal,
as any other Parliamentary Act with the same Royal Assent; and if the Supreme
Authority of a Nation, may decree what sort of Punishment, they judge most
proper, to be inflicted on Thieves and Robbers, House-breakers and Murderers;
nothing hinders but that they may decree what Punishments they please, to be
inflicted on those Treacherous Assassines, that shall kill King William. And if
the Supreme Authority of a Nation may lawfully Authorize all and every Person
of the Nation to kill a mischievous Outlaw, where e're they find him; no
Reason can be given why they may not Authorize all and every Person of the
Nation to be revenged according to the utmost of their power, of the
Treacherous Assassines that shall kill King William. It is the interest of the
Nation that such Treacherous Assassines should not escape Vengeance, it is
therefore the prudence of the Parliament to Commission every particular Man
against them.

FINIS.
Some Books sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultery.
THE Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, Published by Mr. Matthew
Sylvester, Folio.

Mr. Lorrimers Apology for the Ministers, who Subscribed only to the Stating of
Truths and Errors in Mr. William's Book, in Answer to Mr. Trail's Letter. 4o

Mr. Lorrimer's Remarks upon Mr. Goodwin's Discourse of the Gospel. 4o

Dr. Burton's Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance, and seeking first the
Kingdom of God. Published with a Preface by Dr. John Tillotson, late
Archbishop of Canterbury. In 8o

Bishop Wilkin's Discourse of Prayer, and Preaching.

Mr. Adday's Stenographia: Or the Art of Short-Writing Completed, in a far
more Compendious way than any yet Extant, 8o

Mr. Addy's Shorthand Bible.

The London Dispensatory reduced to the Practice of the London Physicians;
wherein are contained the Medicines both Galenical and Chemical that are now in
use, those out of use omitted; and those in use, not in the Latin Copy, here
added. By John Peachey of the College of Physicians London. 12o

Atkin's English Grammar: Or the English Tongue reduced to Grammatical Rules,
Composed for the use of Schools. 8o

Cambridge Phrases for the use of Shools. 8o

The Dying Man's Assistant: Or, Short Instructions for those who are concerned
in the Preparing of Sick Persons for Death. Being also no less worthy the
Consideration of all Good Christians in time of Health. As showing the
Importance of an Early Preparation for their Latter End; with regard as well to
their Temporal, as Eternal State. 12o

Books sold by R. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
THE History of Religion. Written by a Person of Quality. 1694.

A Twofold Vindication of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and of the Author
of The History of Religion. The first part defending the said Author against
the Defamations of Mr. Fr. Atterbury's Sermon, and both those eminent Persons
against a Traitorous Libel, titled, The Charge of Socinianism against Dr.
Tillotson considered. In two Letters to the Honorable Sir R. H. The Second
containing Remarks on the said Sermon, and a Reply to the same Libel: Wherein
some Right is done to that great and good Man, Dr. Tillotson, in the Points of
the Original of Sacrifices, the Sacrifice of Christ, Future Punishments, etc.
and a Word in Defense of the Eminent Bishop of Salisbury. By another Hand. 1696.

Twelve Dissertations out of Monfieur Le Clerk's Genesis, Concerning I. The
Hebrew Tongue, II. The manner of Interpreting the Bible. III. The Author of the
Pentateuch. IV. The Temptation of Eve by the Serpent. V. The Flood. VI. The
Confusion of Languages. VII. The Original of Circumcision. VIII. The Divine
Appearances in the Old Testament. IX. The Subversion of Sodom. X. The Pillar of
Salt. XI. The coming of Shiloh. XII. The several obscure Texts in Genesis
Explained and illustrated. Done out of Latin by Mr. Brown. To To which is
added, a Dissertation concerning the Israelites Passage through the Red Sea. By
another Hand. 1696.


