THE CASE OF Edmund Heming. Who First set up the NEW LIGHTS IN THE CITY of
LONDON.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXIX.

THE CASE OF EDMUND HEMING, etc.
THAT through the great Pains and Industry of Edmund Heming, that excellent and
useful Invention of New Lights is brought to such Perfection, as has given
great Satisfaction in General to the Public. And he had not only the great
Trouble of Contriving, Making, Fixing, and Settling this Invention, but did also
run great Hazards of considerable Sums of Money expended therein, not knowing
what Encouragement it might meet with; and as all Inventions are most
Chargeable in their Infancy, so they meet with most Opposition, when they seem
to Prejudice some Private Interest. And although the Public does receive great
Benefit by this Projection, yet it had certainly miscarried, if great Care and
Diligence had not been used to prevent the unwearied Attempts of some Persons.
It is almost incredible to tell the many Troubles and Difficulties the said
Heming has gone through, (and indeed) altogether unnecessary to publish, but
upon this occasion, and thereby to show how unjust the said Heming has been
dealt with, by those that are concerned in Copartnership with him.

The first great Trouble to him, was occasioned by one Mr. Vernatti, who set up
the Glass Lights in Cornhill, and much Opposition was made by the Lord Mayor's
Officers; also the Company of Tallow-Chandlers, the Company of Tin-Men, and the
Company of Horners, infested him beyond Example; and there were many Hearings
(by Council) before the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen. And many Objections
those Companies did offer to the Court; sometimes alleging that if the said
Heming should be encouraged in the Invention, it would be destructive to their
particular Trades and Advantage, which indeed they only aimed at, without any
regard to the Benefit of the Public. All which Objections, the said Hemings
was obliged to Obviate, and did fully Answer, even to a clear Satisfaction.
That at the same time, he had all the Care and Management of all the New Lights
set up in London, and Places adjacent; and the looking after, and paying all
his Servants, and himself never went to Bed all the Winter, till Twelve or One
a Clock, and was constantly up again at Four or Five in the Morning, to Trim
and Order the Lights, not having at that time skilful hands inured to manage
them. And he was the more willing to do all this, lest some of his Servants
should be Bribed to neglect their Duty, by those that were inveterate Enemies
to the Invention, thereby to bring a disrepute upon the Lights, and so to Ruin
the Undertaking. And it is well known to many, that by being out at unseasonable
Hours, he got a Fit of Sickness, that it was not expected he could live; and
yet he was still obliged to do more than his strength would bear, by reason
none but himself knew how to manage the Affair.

Hereupon he obtained the Encouragement of the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, who were pleased to Issue out their Precepts to all the Wardmotes and
Gentlemen of the Quests in London, recommending the New Lights as worthy of
their Encouragement.

He did carry on this Invention almost two years before any came into
Copartnership with him, only one Mr. Samuel Hutchinson did Covenant with him,
to lay in for Stock, the Sum of 1000 l. when the said Heming first began, but
he never received one Penny of the said Mr. Hutchinson to this day; so that he
was obliged to go forward, or lose all the vast Charge and Expense he had been
at. That in the year 1686. he entered into Copartnership with Mr. John Bulteele,
Mr. Francis Alwyn, Mr. Haley Bishop, and Mr. John Reeves, and the said Parties
did Covenant to raise 640 l. as present Stock, to carry on the Undertaking; and
by Covenants they were obliged respectively to pay in their Proportions within
one Month after the Sealing thereof, or otherwise every of them did debar
himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, of any Right, Claim or
Interest in the said Invention; and such Share or Shares are to be disposed of
to those that run the Hazard of Stock upon the Interest, which was thought to
be a reasonable Covenant, for that otherwise any Person might omit putting in
of his Stock, and yet might come in when he pleased; so that all the Expense
and Hazard would in such Case lie upon one Person, or more, as it might happen;
and if the Invention miscarried, the others would lose nothing; but if any
profits did arise, they would certainly come in for their Shares.

The Stock to be laid in, being 640 l. for the present, viz. John Bulteele 100
l. in Glasses; Haly Bishop 20 l for his own 32th Part, and 20 l. more for a
certain Gentleman's 32th Part; and the same Gentleman laid in Stock 40 l. for
John Reeves, and Edmond Heming laid in 50 l. as Stock for the said Reeves; so
that it does appear, the said Heming has received but 80 l. in Money: (except
the 50 l. which he himself put in as Stock for the said Reeves) And he has
received no more Money upon account of Stock from any of his Partners to this
day, and yet has carried on this Affair from the year 1684, to the year 1688.
and maintained the Lights in good Repair and Reputation, according to his
Covenants, to the general Satisfaction of all that have agreed with him, and
never did reimburse himself one Farthing, for all the Moneys he has laid out
from the year 1684. to the latter end of 1687. or the beginning of 1688. and
then what Money he Received, was Gathered by his own Care and Pains, of such
Persons as he could get to pay toward the Lights, or for Lights sold to other
Parts of England. That he verily believes he has not used much above 200 l.
worth of Glass more, than for what he and Mr. Bulteele had paid ready Money to
Mr. Haley Bishop; and he is ready to pay his Money proportionable to his Share,
for what Glass more he has used; but the said Mr. Bishop has made greater
Quantities of Glass, than ever was bespoke, or will be used in three or four
years, tho he was to make no more than was necessary, or what he should have
Order for. That the said Heming came to the said Bishop's House, and there saw
the Glass, and told him a great deal of it was not made fit for his Purpose,
and the said Bishop did himself own it, when he heard the Reasons thereof; but
did desire the said Heming to take the whole Parcel, and use what he could, and
the rest was to be returned; all which will be made appear upon Oath; yet the
said Bishop has refused to receive back such Glass as the said Heming finds
not fit for his Purpose, and to discharge the Account of it. That the said
Bishop has been told, and knows very well, that the same Quantity of Glass,
and as good for that use, may be bought for 60 l. for which Mr. Bishop is paid
100 l. which is 40. per Cent. more than Common Profit; yet is the said Heming
willing to allow that extravagant Price for so much as he has already used,
but thinks himself not obliged to wrong himself and the Copartners of so much
Money, when it may be saved in dealing with another. So that it is plain, Mr.
Bishop never bought his 32th Part to get by that, but by the Glass he supposed
would be used in the Affair; for as a Copartner, every man is obliged to buy as
cheap as he can; and if a Partner deals in a Commodity, which the Invention
does use, he ought to sell as Cheap and Reasonable as another. But by this
means, Mr. Bishop only designs his own Interest, and not the good of the
Copartnership, but it is Ruin and Destruction; for his 32d Part will hereby gain
more Profit, than all the Shares besides; As for Instance, For every 100 l.
contracted, Mr. Bishop's Share is but 3 l. 6 s. 9 d. to pay toward it; and for
every 100 l. worth of Glass, his Dividend allowed is 36 l. 13 s. 9 d. more than
Common Profit. And this Discovery striking at his Interest, and finding himself
like to lose his overreaching Design, he contrives all ways imaginable to
disinable the said Heming, and to make him incapable of going on with his
Design, as will more apparently appear by his Fraudulent and Irregular Actions.
Mr. Alwyn having laid in no Stock, by his own Hand and Seal has cut himself
off of any Right, Claim or Interest, in the Invention. Mr. Reeves is under Age,
and his Guardian dead, so that only Bulteele, Bishop, and Heming, can Act. Some
time since, one Geary a Weaver in Old Street, came to the said Heming, and told
him he had bought Mr. Alwyn's Interest; to which was answered, That they could
not let him in; but if he had a good Title to the Interest, he might exhibit a
Bill in Chancery, and they could not hinder him; and the said Geary and others
concerned with him, told the said Heming, That if he would let them come in,
without any trouble, they would bear him harmless, and secure him from any
other Pretensions, or any damage that should happen by their coming in upon
those shares. Whereupon the said Heming did agree with them, and the
Copartnership was to be drawn to the content of each Person, and their Attorney
was to call for it to engross; but the Gentlemen had changed their Minds, and
would not suffer it to be drawn, till they had seen the Account; but Heming was
advised by Council, that he was not obliged to expose his Accounts to Persons
(as then) unconcerned, for by so doing, he should give them liberty of being on
or off as they pleased; and especially considering there was a Commission of
Bankrupt against Mr. Van-Beasler, who sold the Shares to Mr. Alwyn, of whom
Geary says he bought them; so that in such Case the Right lay in the Assigns
of the Creditors of Vanbeasler, they paying their Proportion of all Moneys laid
out upon Account of the Shares, with Interest, and such other Charges as shall
justly appear; otherwise it rightfully devolved to Heming, who indeed laid down
the Stock.

That the said Geary bought the Interest of Alwyn for 130 l. and that by an old
Debt too, which is indeed, worth 1000 l. and with good Management, and the
Improvements that may be made thereof, will pay all the Creditors of Mr.
Van-Beasler twenty Shillings in the Pound. After this, Mr. Geary, and those
concerned with him, presently apply themselves to Mr. Bishop, and Mr. Bulteele,
who readily complied and closed with them. But it must be confessed Mr.
Bulteele has several times solemnly declared, before diverse Persons, that he
knew nothing of those Scandalous Advertisements, put forth in the Gazette
against Heming, and it was done contrary to his Knowledge; so that it appears to
be chiefly contrived by Mr. Bishop, who has but one small Share, and Geary and
others, who have no Right at all in Law or Equity; and yet the said Geary has
styled himself in the Gazette, Numb. 2414. a Patentee with Mr Bishop,
insinuating that the said Heming has not any part therein; although it does
plainly appear, he is a Party in all the Leases that are made, and all Moneys
payable unto the said Heming, or his Receipts. And Geary has sent one up and
down the Town, to acquaint the Inhabitants, that the said Heming has nothing
to do in the Affair, and was no more but a Servant to them.

The said Copartners and others, have called upon Heming for an Account, and
made a great Clamor, as if they had entrusted him with great Sums of Money,
and could not get any Account from him; but it were much more reason to give in
their own Accounts first, for several Sums of Money which they have received
for Lights that the said Heming made and set up; and he does not doubt but Mr.
Bulteele has very near reimburst himself already by such Money received by
him. That although Mr. Bulteele and Mr. Bishop never gave any Account to him to
this day, yet Heming sent them an Account in September last, of all Moneys that
had been disbursed and received by him, to that time, and the Names of each
Person he received it of; which Account has since been shown to a Gentleman,
who they did agree should Audit it, and that they would pay Heming all such
Money as should be awarded due to him; but until Mr. Bishop and Mr. Bulteele
would enter into Bonds of Arbitration with Heming, to stand to such Award, the
Gentleman would not meddle; and nothing being done therein, Heming has no other
way left him, but to proceed against them in Chancery, to get his Money, which
does amount to 1100 l. and upwards, due to him, discounting all Money received
by him. So that upon the whole matter, it is easy to discern who has been the
greatest Sufferer for want of an Account.

Heming has raised and disbursed upon his own Credit, 1546 l. and upwartds,
besides Interest Money, and the Damage which he has suffered for want of the
Money of his Copartners to be laid in, proportionable to their Shares; and the
Invention must of necessity have perished, if the said Heming had not had good
Friends to stand by him, and been otherwise supported than by such Doughty
Copartners. Now could any honest thinking man believe, That the said Heming
could pay near 700 l. for Men's bare Wages, buy Oil, Iron-work, Tin-Plates,
Soder, Wire, Posts, Boards, Painting, Cotton, Working Tools for the Men, and
pay House-rent where they work, and all Fees to Council, and necessary Charges
spent in Defense against the Three Companies, and others; which Charge alone is
near as much Money as the said Heming ever received from his Partners, besides
his own necessary Pocket Expense relating to this Affair, which he has reason
to believe to be more than the other, and which he never yet charged. And although
the Copartners do very well know all this, and Mr. Bulteele lived in the said
Heming's House Three years, and saw the many Sums of Money he continually paid,
and what daily occasion there was for more Money, never receiving one Penny of
Profit or Advantage from the Invention, till the latter end of the Year 1687,
and the beginning of 1688. And yet the said Heming was obliged to raise Money
upon his own Credit, or the Invention had inevitably fallen, and come to
nothing.

That by Covenants of Copartnership, the said Heming is to be paid by the
Copartners, and to receive a Salary of 90 l. per Annum, for which there is 200
l. due to him, and unpaid, and of which they have not paid him one Penny. It
has been the unhappiness of the said Heming to have to do with a sort of
rapacious Men, that were in expectation of getting Money by the Invention,
before they had scarcely laid out any Money thereupon; and Wise Men have
thought and declared, That if the said Heming should be able to bring the
Invention two Years hence, to make good the Principal Money disbursed
thereupon, it would be a very great Accomplishment; and yet this he has done
beyond Expectation. And therefore let it be remembered with how little color or
pretense, they can charge Heming with running the Invention in debt; and
whether with much more reason it may not be justly charged upon Mr. Bishop
himself upon the Considerations before mentioned.

Thus Heming having brought the Invention to bear part of its own Charges, now
some by Force, and others without any Title, will forcible come in, whether he
will or no, and receive the Profits thereof, with which the said Heming ought
in the first place, to reimburse himself, and to pay all the just Debts
relating to the Copartnership; the Copartners being bound under their Hands and
Seals to stand by the said Heming, and to save him harmless from all Actions,
Suits, and Incident Charges and Expenses that shall arise upon account of the
Invention; and also to pay all just Debts with the said Heming, that shall
become due upon the same; and yet though the said Heming has sent several of
the Creditors to demand their Money of the said Copartners, they have sent them
back again, saying, Heming agreed with them, and they must sue him for the
Money. Nay, they have brought several Actions against him themselves; and by
their procurement and instigation, have made diverse Creditors, and others, to
do the same, on purpose to ruin him, if they can, and to destroy the whole
Invention; and they have been heard to say, If they could but lay him fast in
Goal, and so keep him under Confinement, they should force him to comply, and
be Masters of all themselves. Yet in all this they have hitherto failed, and he
goes on to set up his Lights in several Parts of the City, and Places adjacent,
for the Benefit of the Public, being the true end, for which the Patent was at
first granted.

They have indeed demanded a special Writing, wherein they are obliged to pay
all just Debts with the said Heming, and threatened if he would not deliver it
up, they would Gazette him; to which the Answer was easy, viz. That if they
could make it appear, that there was one Grain of Honesty or Justice in their
Demands, he would deliver them such Writings immediately; but till then, he was
resolved to keep it, and thinks he has very good reason so to do. It can be
proved, that at the very time, when the said Copartners did call on Heming for
his Account, they did forbid Ralph Grethorex then his Clerk, to deliver him his
Books; so that Grethorex's Account is not made up to this day; and when Heming
Arrested him for his Books and Money due to him, Mr. Geary and others Bailed
him out; all which plainly shows their Confederacy and Combination against
Heming, even to an utter Breach of the Copartnership it self. And moreover they
sent Grethorex to all the Houses in and about London, where Heming had placed
the Lights, and forbid each House to deliver them to Heming, or his Agents, on
purpose to alarm the Town, and to give People occasion to think that Heming was
either Run away, or had committed some base and dishonest Action, whereof he
could not justify himself, and with design to ruin his Credit; that the said
Heming did borrow 100 l. of a Gentleman, who sometimes after called for his
Money, who was thereupon brought to Mr. Bishop, who knew the Money was all
borrowed for the Service of the Copartnership; but the said Bishop would in no
wise be concerned therein; whereupon Heming did give the Creditor as much
Commodity into his hands, as would secure the Debt, till the said Heming could
otherwise raise Money to pay him; and upon this Score only, have they upbraided
Heming, and industriously spread it up and down the Town, that he has pawned
the Goods belonging to the Copartners.

Now after all this, these Gentlemen pretend great kindness to me, and offer to
lend me 4 or 500 l. more than my Disbursements are, upon Condition that I will
let them quietly into the Concern, and give them my Accounts; which I neither
can, or ought to do; for that I cannot believe they can ever have any kindness
for my Person, who have not only, so barbarously wounded me in my Reputation
with Lies and Slanders, that fly like the Arrows by Night; but have broken all
the Bonds and Covenants of our Copartnership, as appears by the Premises. I
could add much more, but I should tire my self and the Reader to go through
all; therefore I will only add this, that notwithstanding all the ill dealing I
have met with from my Copartners; yet by the Blessing of God, I do not despair
to be once more Master of this my Undertaking, and to retrieve the Reputation
it has lost by the ill Management of ignorant, unjust, and self-designing Men.

And whereas Geary and others, have unlawfully entered upon the Lighting of some
Parts of the City, and let Leases in Geary's Name, all such Leases are naught;
the said Geary having no Right in the Patent by the Assignment of Mr. Alwyn, as
he pretends: And the said Geary beginning to be aweary of his unjust
Undertaking, People refusing to Trust him with Oil, and other Materials, I do
take all possible Care I can, to supply the first Defect that they shall make
in Lighting, and go on to perform my Covenant, as by the Leases bound.

And whereas each Inhabitant has an equal Property with me, in all the Lights
placed up in the Street, for the Term of five years; you are therefore desired
to take care that no Person with what Pretension soever, take down any of the
Lights, except I come my self, or some of my Servants, that shall have my Hand
and Seal for so doing; who will take care the Lights be placed in such Houses
in your Streets, that they may be safe, and forth coming, and sit for your
Service for the ensuing Year.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF any Gentlemen or others, are willing to be accommodated with New Lights in
their Street, Houses, Stables, Yards, Lead-Mines, Tin*Mines, or Coal-Mines, or
for Coaches or Horses that Travel late at night, they may be furnished
therewith by Edmund Heming, living near the Still-yard in Thames street, who
made the first Lights that were set up in London, for the Use and Benefit of
the Public. And if any Gentleman has a desire to have his Coat of Arms, or
any other Fancy appear in the said Light, it shall be performed by the said
Heming, in a very Curious manner: And whereas the Partners of the said Heming
have caused a difference between themselves and him; and the said Partners, and
pretended Patentees, who are wholly ignorant, and were never Masters of the
Invention, have by themselves made several Lights in imitation of those Lights
first made and set up by the said Heming, much to the disparagement of the
Invention, many of them giving no better Light than the common Glass-Lights,
contrary to the express Words of the Patent for the great and durable Increase
of Light. You are therefore desired to take Notice, That such Lights are set up
contrary to the knowledge and direction of the said Heming, and are none of the
Right Make.

This Case as stated, will help the Gentlemen to be better Advic'd by Council,
and they then may know the truth of their Title.

FINIS.

