A SHORT VINDICATION OF Phil. Scot's Defense OF THE Scots Abdicating DARIEN:
BEING In Answer to the Challenge of the Author of the Defense of that
Settlement, to prove the Spanish Title to Darien, by Inheritance, Marriage,
Donation, Purchase, Reversion, Surrender, or Conquest. WITH A Prefatory Reply,
to the False and Scurrillous Aspersions, of the New Author of, The Just and
Modest Vindication, etc. And some Animadversions on the material Part of it,
relating to the Title of DARIEN.

Non qui multa sed qui multum dicit been dicit. LONDON: Printed in the Year,
1700.

THE PREFACE.
THE most genuine and best meant Designs of Man, being liable not only to
Misconstruction, but Reproach, it is the less surprising to meet with either of
these in the present Case, considering the small Proportion I bear to a
numerous Party, who are so far dipped in a Project, that notwithstanding a great
many of them by this Time begin to perceive the Error they have been led unto,
yet they will not disintangle themselves; and if any Person should take upon
him to unblind, them he must expect to have his Throat cut.

As my first Attempt in this Nature is not only censured Bold, but Impudent, by
the Managers of the Caledonian Project, so it has been attended with Menaces
enough, that I should not eat my Christmas Dinner. The friendly Advices I have
received of my sudden Fate don't in the least make my Pen stagger from
Vindicating what I have already offered to show the Impracticability of that
Project, for which although I am at present basely censured, by a resolute and
headstrong Party, yet, I doubt not of receiving the Approbation of the moderate
and judicious Part of that Nation before the Jubilee be over, my Theme being
both just, and well designed to the Proprietors of that Stock.

I could have wished that this gentle Author, who Effects so much Modesty,
Sense, and good Manners, had stood by his Text, and had taken more convincing
Ways of confuting what I have written on the Darien Subject: For, however
necessary h^ thinks it for his Argument to treat it and me with Reproach, yet
he will gain thereby but few Proselytes to his Opinion: And if he had employed
his Mathematical Head in disproving what I have offered in Defense of the
Abdication, with some of those Euclid Demonstrations, wherewith he would let us
know that he abounds, his slanderous and personal Reflections might be the
better credited: But as he has advanced nothing, either to justify the Conduct
of the Directors of that Company, or to disprove one Syllable of what is offered
against the Darien Project, except the Instance of Mr. Wafer, which he would
have the World take for granted to be a Lie, and make use of that to overthrow
my Faith; I hope that (if the whole Discourse does not carry Demonstration
enough along with it) it may stand firm till such Time as it is repealed by
Dint of Argument: And as for this Passage velating to Mr. Wafer, I shall
justify it before I proceed any further.

In the first Place, I desire that it may be taken as a Preliminary, that if.
Mr. Wafer had met with so egregious a Romance, and so nearly relating to him
publicly in Print, he ought in Justice, both to the Company and himself, to
have instantly detected it is Falsehoods. But although he lives very near the
Royal Exchange, and had the Perusal of the same Book the first Day it was
published (which is above Two Months ago) yet he has been so far from offering
to disprove it, that he has since expressed himself to Persons of unquestionable
Credit, that if he had known of my Intention, or had not thereby been
anticipated from Publishing his own Sentiments, he would have said a great Deal
more on that Subject.

I must needs own, that he was ignorant of my Design of Publishing that, or any
Thing else; but I must tell you, that about the same Time, he thought to have
obliged the Company to recompense him for his Disappointment, or to have
exposed them to the Public: And to confirm what I herein assert, it is very
well known to a great many in Town, that about Four Months ago, he presented a
Memorial to a certain Scots Person of Quality, containing every Syllable of
what I have wrote, as likewise some more which I design'dly left out, because
it particularized some Persons whom I had no Inclination to mention.

He was kept in Hopes of some Gratification, and I believe he might have been
easily compounded with, but what I have wrote from his own Mouth and Memorial,
I am so far from distrusting he will retract, or can be bribed to deny, that I
firmly believe he gave no Occasion to this Author, to make use of his Name to
impose thus upon the World: And to confirm me the more in this Belief, it is
not above Three Days since he came to my Lodging to acquaint me, that a Book
was newly published in Vindication of the Darien Settlement, but he had not
seen it; on which I asked, If any Persons had been with him from the Company,
to oblige him to pass from what he had said and wrote? to which he answered,
No. I showed him the Book and Passage in it, relating to him, which having
perused, he told me, That he was so far from passing from it, that he wondered
how that Author should be so confident, as to rely on what he should answer.

If this is not enough to justify that Passage relating to Wafer, by which our
Author submits the Truth of the Whole to be tried, I shall prove it, Viva voce,
if need be; and shall say no more to it here, but only show you the Evasion
which our Author makes use of in the 18 th Page of his Preface, to clear his
Party of that Imputation, To wit; Nor can any without the Renouncing of common
Sense, believe that the Gentlemen employed by the Company to confer and
transact with Mr. Wafer, could be guilty of such Weakness and Folly, as to
reveal and detect to him their Design upon Darien, in that the whole Success of
that Undertaking depended entirely upon it is being kept and preserved a Secret.
If our learned Author would not impute it to brutal Ignorance, to differ in any
Point from his Conception of Things, I might be allowed to detect the Weakness
or Innocence of this strong Argument; and would ask him, if at the Conference
between the same Gentlemen and Mr. Wafer, at Pontaks's, the Subject was not
Darien? I would likewise know whether the Collection of Guineas for him at that
Meeting was not to keep him from Disposing of himself till they acquainted the
Company with his Qualifications to serve them? As also, whether that Article in
the Contract, whereby he received 20 Guineas, was not toward Stopping the
Publishing of this Book for the Space of a Month, till the Company and he
should come to Terms for Suppressing it altogether? It Is evident enough, that
the Substance of that Book or Journal relates to nothing but Darien; as
likewise, that Wafer's Talent as to Projects lay no where else: Now how far
this Mathematical Argument of our Author will demonstrate Wafer to be a Fool,
and me a Liar, I submit it to Judgment. In the mean Time, it may be worthy of
Remark, that this Faction is not calculated for London or England, but for a
Country where Wafer is not to be seen and spoken with.

Believing what is already said on this Head to be sufficient to reinstate me
in my Credit, I shall return to the first Part of this Preface, where he throws
some Foul-mouthed Aspersions, not only on me, but likewise on his Majesty's
Ministers of State; how corrospondent that Style is with the Title of his Book,
let any Person judge, or if it is not fitter to be bound up with the Volumes of
the Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence, than left single for the more civil Casuists
of this Age to peruse.

I shall not take upon me to say any thing relating to that Minister, whom he
uses so scurrilously, believing, that if he thinks it worth his While, he will
do himself Right; yet I must take upon me to remark, that through the whole
Strain of his Calumnies and Invectives, it is not at him alone he points his
Thunder, but through the Sides of that State-Officer he wounds and bullies the
Rest (be of what Office or Quality they will) who will presume to act directly
or indirectly against the Darien Project; and if a Man dares be so bold, as to
whisper his Thoughts, either publicly or privately, in Opposition to it, he
must be mouthed at, and represented as an Enemy to one of His Majesty's
Kingdoms, and is not fit for the Office he bears; as also, that he must
remember the Fate of Archbishop Laud, and the Earl of Strafford. So God have
Mercy Old England.

As to that Part of his slandrous Story, wherein he insinuates, that large
Rewards have been bestowed on me by that Minister; I have Reason to believe,
that the Persons, whom he calls Friends, of those State-Councellors, are only
feigned by himself, to make the Story pass the more current: As for my self, I
must needs own, that when I came from Scotland, about Eighteen Years ago, I
brought but little Money with me, and what I have purchased since, has been in
Serving the King: But that I either received or expected any mercinary Reward
(as our Author impudently and maliciously insinuates) I must tell him, or
whoever else says so, that it is a Lie. To reproach me the more, he gives out,
that I was expelled the Navy for Crimes and Misdemeanors, which is likewise
false, for I was neither expelled or ever tainted with any base or mean Action:
The Reason of my Leaving that Service, is sufficiently known to be on the Score
of a Rancounter I had at Portsmouth, with the Commander of the Ship, where I
served. It Is true, the Cloud I was under for some Months afterward (being
unwilling to stand the Test of a Court Martial) induced me the easier to enter
into that Companies Service, under the Notion of going to the East Indies, and
which I was made tacitly to believe for a Twelvemonth afterward; but by what
has happened it was jumping out of the Drying Pan into the Fire: For after I
had served them in more Stations than one (with their Approbation) for the
Space of 26 Months, and proceeded in their private Expedition with Five or Six
Months Provisions to a Country where nothing was to be seen but Death, Ruin,
and the Spanish Mines, I having got my Belly full of the Project, obtained my
Discharge with an ample Certificate from the Council of the Collony: And although
I was Shipwrack'd the very next Day, coming out of their Harbour's Mouth, had
my Servant drowned, escaping very narrowly my self, besides the Loss of what I
had; when I came to England, I was obliged to go to Law with them in
Doctors-Commons for my Wages, where it cost me more than I recovered.

As for the Meanness of my Office and Parts, wherewith our Author upbraids me,
I shall not offer much on that Head, that signifying but little to the Subject
in debate; the less Force the Weakness or Meanness of my Argument carries with
it, it is the easier evinced, but as there is nothing appears, but slandrons
Aspersions to confute it, it will bear but tittle Weight with the judicious
Part of Mankind. The Obscurity of our Author, indeed, shades him from suitable
Returns to his Compliments; however, I must take the Liberty to remark that,
notwithstanding he would make us believe he is no Plagiary; yet the whole
System of his Discourse is easily discovered to be Mr. F -- rs, almost
Paragraph by Paragraph, only dressed up with a long-winded Proemium, a Chain of
innumerable Tautologies, Parentheses, and crabbed Abstrusities, designedly
calculated to Crambo the Reader out of his Senses; besides, a few French and
Civilian Authorities, the Latter of which he might have kept in his Pocket,
'till once the Spanish Title to Darien had been fairly confuted: He has,
indeed, left out some of the sowrest Parts of the Original Book, which
reslected on his Majesty, and the English Government, but he retains such
Portions of the same Venom, that notwithstanding his affected Mannerliness,
and Decency, he cannot forbear spurting it out in several Places, nor from
pointing it plainly and diametrically at the Councils, and Government of
England. The Threats, indeed, are Airy, and so the less worthy of Regard; yet
they may be looked upon from one who sits under the Nose of the same
Government, to be fraughted with much more Presumption, than what is offered in
the Defense of the Scots Abdicating Darien, to a Company of Merchants.

But that I may vindicate that Defense from any National Aspersions, which
those Gentlemen, who are bigoted to the Darien Project, load it with, and who
would squeeze that sour Part from the Managers of the Company, to whom it was
plainly directed, and apply it to the Body of the Nation; to clear my self of
this general Imputation, I must refer the Reader to the 6th Page of its Epistle
Dedicatory, where I particularly caution it to prevent sinistrous
Interpretations. In the next place, I must detect the base and unfair Methods,
which the Author of, The just and modest Vindication uses to wrest, and
pervert what I have said in the Paragraphs, which he cites in his Preface to
the Reader. The first is Page 2. where he tells you, That I have assumed the
Impudence of asserting, that the Motives on which the Proclamations were
emitted in the English West India Plantations, forbidding the Supplying,
Relieving, and Assisting the Scots at Darien, or in any Parts of America, where
they should settle, was because the Government of England would not be
accessory to an Act, which the World might judge to be Felonious. Now, that the
Reader may judge of this mannerly Gentleman's Integrity, I shall rehearse the
Paragraph as I wrote it, where there is neither any mention made of the English
Proclamations, much less of the English Government's forbidding, to assist or
supply the Scots in any Part of America, to wit, Defense of the Scots
Abdicating, Page 4. Epist. Ded. If you were thus persuaded (directing it to the
Managers of the Company) to run headlong on a blind Project, at which the
Trading Part of the World stands amazed; the India Companies of England and
Holland laugh at in their Sleeve, and the rest of Mankind admire, that People
in their right Senses should be guilty of, and if the same should miscarry by
your own ill Management (to say no worse on it) it is not fair you should snarle
at your Neighbors, who have no other Hand in your Misfortune, than that they
would not be accessory to any Act which the World might judge Felonious, and
wherein they could not join without engaging themselves in an unreasonable War,
and in the End to assist you with Weapons to break their own Heads. But that I
may likewise rehearse the Paragraph, where I had Occasion to mention the
English Proclamation or Prohibition. See the Page 156. Laying aside the Spanish
Complaint, and admit the Scotch Company to have a Legal Title to their
Settlement, was it not reasonable, that the Government of England having met
with the clandestine Declarations, which the Scotch Collony had spread all over
the West Indies, inviting them over to Darien, should take suitable Measures to
prevent the ill Consequences of the same, and retain their own Subjects: The
Declarations are notorious, and must be penned by some Person belonging to the
Company or Collony, and I presume the Opposite Proclamation or Prohibition was
penned by some English Man, who had some Interest in the English Plantations.
Now whether our Author usbers in his just and modest Vindication, fairly and
honestly, I submit it to Judgment, or whether I may not justly retort upon
himself, again, that slanderous Aspersion relation to Wafer, in the 18th Page
of his Preface, viz. That through the Fellows appearing a Liar, or uncandid in
one Case, his Testimony should not be received in any other whatsoever.

Nay in the same Breath, he backs it with such another Perversion (although not
quite so malicious) and vents his Choler thus, citing the 7th Page of the
Epistle Dedicatory, That I should have taken the Boldness to add, in Terms that
are most slanderous, as well as defamatory, that their Attempt of Planting on
the Isthmus, was their Settling a Colony in another Man's Dominions, unless by
Virtue of their Presbyterian Tenet (of Dominions being founded in Grace) the
Scots, who are the Presumptive Elect, pretend a Divine Right to the Goods of
the Wicked, and so take upon them to cloth the Seven Counselors of their
Colony, with such another Commission as God gave the Hebrews, when they
departed out of Egypt. The Injustice which this Gentleman does me, and the
little Servicoe he does his Cause, is very apparent; for I don't say, that the
Scots are the Presumptive Elect (there being no such Word mentioned) nor do I
think it. Some Species of Men, indeed, in that Nation are conceited with that
Opinion of themselves, but there are several Persons of Worth who will not
assume that Title; neither do I direct that Dedication to them, but to
Directors of the Scots Affrican Company, of whom that Sept, who were the
Occasion of the chief Mismanagement, are of this vain Kidney. As for Harris,
whom our Author cites irreverently in the same Paragraph, I know him, but D --
l is such a Stranger to me, that I protest, there is none of my Acquaintance I
can think of, whose Name begins and ends with those Letters: But that must be
placed to the other false Notions he. runs on.

Our Author thinks fit to cite only one Passage more of, The Defense of the
Scots Abd. page 16. That just as the Scots Companies Books were opened at
Amsterdam, for receiving Subscriptions to their Capital Stock, the Dutch East
and West India Companies run open-mouthed to the Lords of Amsterdam, showing
what was hatching by the Scotch Commissioners in their City, to ruin the Trade
of the United Provinces. The Gentleman thinks fit to own this to be true,
designing to make Two necessary Uses of it; the first is calculated for the
Proprietors of the Scots Affrican Stock, as the Printing and Reprinting of the
House of Commons Address to the King, of the Year 1696, at Edinburgh, was to
insinuate the Vastness of the Project, and the Riches that were to be acquired
by it, when such Foreign People opposed it: But that none of those may be
deceived by the Use he makes of that Paragraph, I must acquaint them in short,
that if those Dutch Men had known the Scotch Companies Project to be on Darien,
I dare say, they would not have taken such Mensures to oppose them. The other
Use our Author makes of this is, to sow some malicious Seeds of distrust among
the People of England, and to calumniate His Majesty and his Councils, as if
those were altogether calculated for a Dutch Interest. This Mathematical
Politician, both here and every where else, when he has occasion to discharge
his Gall on His Majesty and his Government, shreuds his Aspersions under a
Religious and Well-meaning Cant, as if they were the Apprehensions and Designs
of other People, and not of himself.

This modest Author excuses himself from replying any Thing to the
Argument-part of what has been offered against the Darien Project, it being
fully obviated and anticipated by this Book of his, which he says was
antecedently written on that Subject: How far this is true, let any Man (who
will have the Patience, or punish himself, to read it) determine. It Is pity
that it should have lain so long in Embrio, and not seen the Light, till now
most People are confirmed of an adverse Opinion of the Project, not because it
is like to enrich that Company and Nation, but because there is a great Deal of
good Money squandered away, which might have been better employed. Neither can
that Judicious part of Mankind (to whom he recommends his Book) find any more
in it of Substance than what is already, and less barbarously expressed in the
Original, which this eternal Parentheser has only Paraphrased upon, with a
Pedantick Accumulation of Synonimous Words and Repetitions, and has no ways
mended it; unless he thinks it a strong Way of Arguing, to brawl a Man out of
his Reason; which, in my Opinion, suits better with Billingsgate, than the Aula.

But to proceed on the Vindication of my defending the Scots Abdicating Darien,
I must tell you, that the Motives which pushed me on to it, were quite
different from those of this modest Author, or some more particular Persons,
who, besides the Noise themselves make, may rather encourage than endeavor to
crush the Clamours of others, it being a Topic warranted by Precedents,
whereby Money has been got, and may still, if it be well managed, although
perhaps, little of it may come to the Share of the Subscribers.

Any impartial or unprejudiced Reader, who has perused that Defense, may see
that it runs in three different Strains; the first is in Vindicating the
Justice of His Majesty and Councils from the oblique and express Calumnies, in
the Defense of the Scots Settlemen at Darien, which my Duty obliged me to as a
Subject, and so long a Servant of His Majesty and the English Nation, that what
Bread I have eat these 18 Years has been theirs, save my Caledonian Allowance,
during that Service, and my Trip to Darien. And if in that Part of it, which
points at the Errata's of that Author (where he sets up his Royal Beacons for
King William to mind, and be aware of) I have offered anything inconsistent
with the Celebrated Histories of Scotland, or have not worded it with more
Advantage to the Scots than the English Historians relate it, I leave it to
Judgment.

The second Strain of it runs on the Procedure of the Company, their
Mismanagement of that great Act they are invested with, as also of the Money of
the several Proprietors wherewith they were entrusted, and of their sending so
many worthy Gentlemen, and other brave Fellows on so dark an Errand, unprovided
of either the Necessaries for their Subsistence, or Credit to purchase any; and
of neglecting them in so Foreign and desolate a Country. I have said no more in
this than what is notorious, and if I have deviated in any particular, those
Gentlemen who left the Collony at first, and the rest who have quitted it
since, are at liberty to confute me. As for my own Share, I lost what I had in
their Service; when I came home, I was obliged to sue them for what was my due;
and when at the Request of some Persons of Quality, I gave a candid Relation of
the Collony, their Affairs, and the Improbability of their holding of it; the
Managers in Scotland not only used Means to stifle my Credit, but baffled and
misrepresented me here, and when any adverse News came at any time, relating to
Caledonian, it was crushed and laid on my Back, as the malicious Author of it.
I thank God I am the Subject of a Nation, where I breath free Air, and may say,
that I have been ill used by that Company, and am not under the petty Tyranny
of some Gentlemen, where I must not mutter a Groan, although my Oppression were
greater, but in a Country where it is no Crime to detect the Errors of as great
Societies, and Persons when they act amiss.

The Third and Last Strain of that Defense, hints at the Impracticability of
the Darien Project, showing the little Encouragement the Company has to
prosecute a Title to a Colony there, and the small Advantages they can reap by
it, either to themselves or Nation, though they were firmly possessed of it. If the
Respect I bear to the Welfare of that Nation, and particular Friendship I owe
to several Proprietors of the Stock, had not more Influence on me than my Pique
at such Directors of the Company, as were the Occasion of the Mismanagement, I
should have held my Pen, and wrote nothing on this Part of the Subjest; but by
reason I know what Pains have been taken to lead and retain a great Number of
People in this Mistake, I was resolved to detect it. It Is true, I did not
insist much on it, thinking it unnecessary on the Account of their Colonies
quitting the Place; but since what has been offered already on that Head has
not any Influence, I shall offer some few Things more to their Consideration,
by way of Answer to the Original Author's Challenge to prove the Spanish Title
to Darien, either by Inheritance, Marriage, Donation, Purchase, Reversion,
Surrender, Possession or Conquect. I shall offer nothing dogmatically, nor
pretend to know all the Spanish Pretensions to it, so that what I offer on this
Head, is, Salvo jure cujuslibit Hispani, or any other Person who will take this
Task upon him. If the Gentlemen of the Company will not listen to Reason, let
them go on and prosper; they may perhaps find it true, after they have thrown
some more good Money after bad. I must only whisper the just and modest Author
in the Ear, that those Persons, whether of the English or Dutch Interest, who
listen, and make least Opposition to the Darien Project, are not the best
Friends to the Scots Affrican Company; they perhaps see the Event of it, and
will but smile to see the remaining Part of the Stock shipped off for Darien.

Defense of the Scots Settlement at Darien, Page 4. he begins to disprove the
Spanish Title to the Province of Darien, and tells you; It is evident, that the
Spaniards cannot pretend a Title to that Country, by Inheritance, Marriage, or
the Donation of Prince and People, etc.

It being the easiest Part of an Argument to deny, but not to prove a Negative,
it is to be presumed, that what he has to advance on this Head, is the
Authority of the Colonies Journal, which came home last March: At the same
time, it is to be believed, as a Preliminary, that the Company designed to
invest the same Place of Darien before any Person of the Colony either saw that
Country, or could pen the Journal. If the Company depended on Buccaneer's
Stories (the Actions and Writings of such being equally regarded by political
Bodies) their Foundation was sandy and lame, and such Evidences will scarce be
admitted, in this Case, in the Courts of any Kingdom or State.

It Is sufficiently known to all Europe, that the Spaniard has been near 200
Years Master of so much of the Continent of America, as passes commonly by the
Names of Mexico and Peru, which are Two Tracts of Land several Thousand Miles
extent, both on the South and North Seas: Those Two vast Countries are joined
by a Neck of Land called the Isthmus of Darien (which is about 60 or 70 Leagues
long, and about 20 broad in the narrowest Part from Sea to Sea) which Province,
he may be said as much to inherit and possess as any other Portion of Land, of
that Extent, in either Mexico or Peru; or rather more, by Reason his most
important and strongest Cities in America, are on this very Isthmus, to wit,
New Panama, St. Maris, with several smaller Garrisons on the South Side, and
Porto-bello, Chagre, Nombre de dios, Conception, etc. on the North-side;
besides Carthagena adjoining to the East End of the Isthmus. It cannot be
expected, that the Spaniard can have a Fort and Garrison on every Hill, or in
every Creek of his American Dominions, nor that he should extirpate the whole
Race of the Indians in this Province of Darien, more than he does in his
others. It Is evident, that the Spaniards are more numerous on this Isthmus and
the Parts adjoining, than on four Times so much Ground, in either Mexico or
Peru, and where never hitherto disturbed or interrupted in their Possession of
it, but by Pirates, Buccaneers and Privateers, except in the Time of a declared
War, when their Towns in Flanders and old Spain were equally liable to Attacks.

This Isthmus is of that Importance to the Spaniards, that it will not admit of
a Doubt amongst reasonable and uninteressed Men, but that they should take as
much Pains to be Masters of it, and retain the same, as either Mexico or Peru,
by Reason it is the Thorough-fair and Road by which all their Treasure and
Riches from the South Sea are conveyed over to their Galleons and Flota's, on
the North Sea, and so to Europe. It Is very odd, that this Gentleman should
allow the Spaniards to cut off 40 Millions of Indians in the Reign of Charles
the 5th to make Way for their Colonies, and to neglect this Neck of Land which
joins them, and which is the Terminus and Receptacle of the Whole, and without
which most of their Collonies on the South Sea are not worth Sixpence to Old
Spain. A Man's Reason will give him that it was as easy, and of more
Importance to clear the Province of Darien of 40 Hundred Indians, as the other
Parts of America of 40 Millions; and if they could sweep off so many at first
Entrance into that Country, it may be reasonably allowed that they have had
time enough to clear this Province of such a small Number of Enemies. The
Supposition of the Spaniards neglecting this Isthmus of Darien, is as
improbable and ridiculous, as if the incorporated Inhabitants of London should
have made themselves Masters of the City and Borough of Southwark, and have
neglected to subject the Bridge to their Dominion or Charter: Nay, the Simile
in Proportion is of more Weight and Importance on the Spanish side, than this
is on the City's, although there was no other way of communicating with the other
side of the Thames, than this of the Bridge.

It Is evident, that those Spanish Cities and Forts are scattered over the
Isthmus, being on the middle, and at both ends of it, and that they have an
interrupted Communication with one another. If the Darien Indians were not in
Subjection, or if they were in War with the Spaniards (as this Gentleman would
make us believe) why might they not with the Half of those 50000 Men (which
page 5. he has picked out of Ringrose the Buccanier's Dream) intercept the
Spanish Treasure, and carry it to the Scotch Collony, if they were not able to
beat them out of their Forts? It Is very well known, that the Spaniards are so
very secure on that Isthmus, that they transport their Treasure over Land from
Panama to Porto-bello by common Carriers, and when any of their Asses or Mules
set up on the Road, they are so little apprehensive of the Indians, that they
leave their Loads of Silver where they fall, till such time as they or some
others return that way again.

He tells us, p. 9. that the Spanish Dominions are limited at both Ends of tho
Isthmus, exclusive by a blind Story of the Rivers Chepo and Congo, and asserts,
that Nombre de dios is the Spanish Boundary, at one end of the Isthmus, on the
North-side, and that Panama and St. Maria are the Eastern and Western Bounds on
the South Side (by which he would take off between 30 and 40 Leagues from the
Length of the The Author of the just and modest Vind. p. 48. makes the Length
of his Isthmus but 17 Leagues; for he says, that the Scotch Fort and Harbor
lies between 8 or 9 Leagues from the River, or Gulf of Darien on one side, and
Conception River on the other. He tells you like wise in the same Page, that
Boats can pass on either of these Rivers to the South Sea, which is as true and
possible as to go by Water up to the Top of the Momment.
Isthmus) if he will re-examine the Map, he will flad that not only Nombre de
dios, but likewise Porto-bello, Chagre and Conception, are much about the
middle of the Isthmus on the North-side, and that New Panama on the Southside
is in the Cod of the Bay, and opposite to Porto-bello; as likewise that Old
Panama and St. Maria on the same side, are further to the Eastward, and right
opposite to Fort St. Andrew, in Caledonia.

Travelers ought to be gifted with a good Memory, for although he will not allow
the Spaniard to be entitled to an Inch of Ground on his Isthmus, yet he forgets
himself and betrays his Cause, for p. 76. he owns that a Party of Ten Spaniards
lived on Golden By mistake called the Isle of Pines, in the Def.of the Scots
Abdicar.
Island (which is within 5 Miles of Fort St. Andrew, and looks into the
Caledonian Harbor) till they were cut off by Capt. Ambrosio. He tells you,
indeed, that it was done by Consent, and Combination of the Darien Princes, who
had only given them a Toleration to live there, and were their Tenants durante
been placito; but there is no more Authority for this Assertion, than that
Aristotle's Dixit.

The Ground where this Fact was committed, was in the Districht of Capt.
Andrews, who owned himself to be a Spanish Captain, and which our Author
indirectly confesses, page 75. as likewise, that this Murder was committed but
Two Months before the Scotch Collony settled there. The Collonies Journal
acknowledges, that Capt. * Andrews and Capt. Dignified by our last Author with
the mysterious Names of Caiques, to smoother that of Captain, and imply as much
Majesty as in that of Zaar.
* Ambrosio were Enemies on the Score, that the former would not break with the
Spaniard, whereas if this Story of our Caledonian Author be true, of that
Murders being committed by Consent, and Combination of the Darien Princes, it
should be taken for granted, that Capt. Andrews was as much an Enemy to Spain
as Ambrosio, or rather more, because the Murder was committed in his Ground.

But it is more liable to belief, that those Ten Spaniards who were posted on
Golden Island (which is not above a Quarter of a Mile from the main Land) could
think themselves in no greater Danger than so many English in some Mountanous
part of Ireland, where a Rapparee Party could with the same Ease cut their
Throats. Our Author acknowledges, that they were posted there for a Look-out,
to give Notice of any Vessels that appeared on that Coast; and it may be the
easier credited, that the Spaniards employed that Island or Promontory for that
Use, by reason the Author of, The Just and Modest Vindicat. of the Darien
Settlement, innocently tells you, that the Spaniards call that Island by the
Name of Guarda, (in his 48 th Page) which of it self implies the Use which the
Spaniards (not newly, but of a long Date) have made of it.

After all, I must tell, that Capt. Andrews had no Hand in this Murder, but
Ambrosio, who came with his Gang from his Habitation (which is above 40 Miles
distant) and treacherously surpised them. Neither is it to be imagined, that
the Spaniards (who are very Wary and Politic) can be thought to be guilty of
such Weakness, as to expose so small a Party amongst Indians, their Native
Enemies, but rather that they thought that Party secure enough in a Country
which was under their Obedience.

So much I have offered to demonstrate the Spanish Inheritance: As for their
Title by Marriage, it is evident enough, that the King of Spain has more
Subjects born of Indian (besides Moorish) Mothers in America, than he has of
Spanish in Europe: Nay, if it were not for the Liberty which is given the
Spaniards to marry with the Indians and Moors, it were impossible they could
plant and inhabit that vast Continent; and it is well enough known, that this
Progeny of the Spaniard is of most use in defending those Countries, and
retaining them under the Obedience and Subjection of Spain.

As for the Donation of Prince or People, I don't pretend to know the Spanish
American Archives and Registers, more than our Author can prove the Contrary. I
presume the Spaniards have more to show for their Investiture, than the
Caledonian Council has brought home with them. Only this I can be positive in,
that these Dariens acknowledge, that they have had no Head or Emperor of their
own Nation, for above these 150 Years, which may be reckoned to be about the
Date of the Spaniards Settling there; and if I am not mistaken, the Colonies
Journal (although cautiously enough calculated) acknowledges the same.

As for Conquest (he says in the same Paragraph, Page 4.) It Is ridiculous to
allege it, since the Dariens are in actual Possession of their Liberty, and
were never subdued, nor received any Spanish Garrison or Governor amongst
them. The last Author who paraphraseth on him, asserts likewise that those
Captains are all sovereign and independent Princes, but coming closser to the
Text, tells us, from Purffendorf and the Civilians, Page 73. (making the
Supposition of their being conquered:) That per solam Viminjustam, non posse
alicui Jus quaeri, etc. and from Grotius; That Actus imperii invasoris quos
excercet nullam Vim habere possant ex ipsius Jure, quod nullum est. By both
these Authorities, this modest Author may as Legally claim a Right to all the
Spanish Towns and Dominions, as to his Peninsula, wherein Fort St. Andrew
stands, if he can but set his Foot there, and persuade the Indians to revolt;
since he so plainly says, that the Spaniards made an unjust Invasion and
Conquest over the American Princes and Kingdoms, which no ways obliges them to
pay Fealty, or continue in their Obedience longer than they find it in their
Power to free themselves from the Yoke. He fouls Paper enough in Preaching up
this Doctrine, although it had been Time enough Seven Years hence, when the
Caledonians had surer Footing on the Isthmus: But although those Civilians allow
him such Liberty of Conscience, yet he will find some prevailing Arguments in
the Treaties between the King of Great Britain and Spain to curb him, which
out-balances his Civilian Authorities. So that we must agree to suffer the King
of Spain to be Conqueror and Master of those Parts of America, especially where
he has Cities, Forts, Garrisons and Mines.

But to return to the original Author, who says, that it is ridiculous to
allege any such Title to Darien, where the Natives are in actual Possession of
their Liberty. He is either Brazen-faced, else he has forgot that St. Maria,
Tubaconti, Old and New Panama, Nombre de dios, Portobello, Conception, etc. are
scattered over that very Isthmus, if I should say nothing of Guarda or Golden
Island it self, where those Spaniards resided. It Is well enough known, the
Spaniards have Mines in several Parts of that Isthmus, and some not above 12
Leagues from the Collony, without any Guard, save the Overseers and other
Necessary Assistants to keep the Negro's to Work.

I cannot understand how those Dariens can be said to enjoy their Liberty, where
there are so many Cities, Forts and Garrisons to curb them. It Is very
unaccountable, that his Warlike Prince, called Ambrosio, should live so
occultly, as not to have a Path to his Royal Palace, but that from the Capital
Port of his Kingdom a Man must wade Eleven Times through the same River, up to
the Middle, and brush through Thickets, whose Twigs have not been cut nor
pruned since the Creation, before he can come to his Wigwam City, although it is
not above an Hour's Journey, if the Road were beat and even. Ambrosio and Diego
have indeed pissed in the Pumpdale, and both live obscurely with, may be, 30 or
40 in their several Gangs, whom a Dozen of Men with Fire Arms would soon
reduce, if it were possible to ferret them out.

As for Wafer and Dampier whom our Author adduces, Page 4. for his Evidences,
neither of these pretend to know Diego or Ambrosio, Dampter having only crossed
the Isthmus, and Wafer staid not above Three Months there, with his Lacenta,
with whom after he had sojourned till his Leg was well, crossed the Country,
and took Water at La-Sounds Key, which lies amongst the Samballa's, and about
20 Leagues to the North-West of the Caledonian Collony: And if Wafer says, that
the Spaniards have no Command over the Indians on the North-side of the
Isthmus, a little beyond Porto-bello, I have no occasion to disprove him, since
he does not deny, that the Spaniards Command on the South Side, and likewise on
this side of Porto-bello, where New Caledonia lies. See p. 4. Of the Def. of
the Scots Settlement. Our Author either sums up his Evidence wrong, else he
trusts to the slight Enquiry of his Readers.

In the Two next Paragraphs he cites the same Evidences, and tells you a Tale
of a Cock and a Bull, how Batt. Sharp in the Year, 1680, landed at Golden
Island, Christened one of those Indian Captains, Emperor, and his Eldest Son,
King Golden Cape, and having joined those Darien Princes (of their own
Creation) took St. Maria, attempted Panama, and made Prize of several Spanish
Ships on the South Sea, and how afterward when he came to be tried for those
Pyracies in England, the The Author of, The just and modest Vindicat. as good
as gives Wafer the Lie here; for p. 90. he says, the Darien Captains always
ruled within themselves, and never had any other Indian Sovereign.
Emperor of Darien's Commission cleared him.

It Is evident by the Concession of the Indians themselves, and by the Collonies
Journal, that there has been no Indian Monarch or Emperor in that Country for
an Age or two by past; in the next place, if Batt's Jury had any great
Inclination to hang him, they might have inquired further into the Emperor, or
his Secretary who wrote the Commission: I dare say, that an English Pen both
worded and signed it; for in my Travels in that Country, I could meet with
neither Prince nor Clergyman that knew a Letter of the Book. I want to know who
Commanded as Generallissimo at the Taking of St. Maria, and the Spanish Prizes
at Sea, and when those Princes served on board, who was Captain, and who Cook?
It seems the Darien Empire was very low at the Landing of Capt. Sharp, when he
and his 330 Men could give such Life, and do such Feats against the Spaniards
on that Isthmus, when Basil Ringrose, one of the same Crew, his Darien King
could do so little with his 50000 Men, to revenge the Rape of his Royal
Daughter. It Is pity the Jury did not oblige Mr. Sharp to produce his Discharge,
or Certificate from that Emperor: But let the Pitcher go never so often to the
Well, it will be sure to come home cracked some time or other; so this poor
Sojour or Sailor of Fortune has not the same Luck every where, for none of
those Commissions would serve his turn about 16 Months ago at the Island of St.
Thomas, where he was doomed to die in a Halter for one of the like Enterprises,
and had nothing else to trust to than the K. of Denmark's Mercy.

Our Author to confirm all, says in the same Paragraph, Page 5. This is the
more remarkable, because those very Princes or their Successors are now in
League with the Scots, and have joyfully received them into their Country. I
answer to this, I refer my self to the 58 and 59 Page Of the Def. of the Scots
Abd. where Captain Andreas (whom both of us agree on, to be the supposed
Emperors Successor) tells the tragical Story of their joining those Buccaneers
and Privateers, and how they suffered for the same, after these had got the
Spanish Plunder (which was their Errand) and left them exposed to the Spanish
Fury.

As for Ambrosio and Diego's Willingness to receive the Scotch Colony amongst
them, it may be reasonably believed, because those are outlaws and never expect
to be pardoned, the Former for the Murder of those Spaniards on Golden Island,
and the other for Attacking Three Priests in their Cell or Chapel, and
Murdering of them, and Robbing the Alter of it is Furniture; whereof, Diego's
Son brought the Sacerdotal Vestments and Challice to the Scotch Colony, and
sold the same to Captain Frazer, for little or nothing. Those Outlaws will not
only be glad of the Scots, Witness Diego's admitting Cap. Long in the Rupert
Prize to settle in his Plantation, in the Gulf of Darien, about the same time
the Scots settled.
but of the Dutch, French, Danes, nay Jews or Turks, if they thought any of
these, or all of them could protect and shelter them from Justice. Nay, they
are so little able to make any Opposition, that I could engage to be one of 20
Men to go over that Isthmus over their Bellies, providing the Spaniards would
wink at it.

In the next Paragraph, Page 6. Then as to any Claim, by Virtue of Possession
the Spaniards have not the least Ground of a Plea, all they can allege on this
Head is, that they were once admitted by the Consent of Capt. Diego, another of
the Darien Princes, to work on some Gold Mines within 15 Leagues of the Scotch
Settlement; but it is plain, that this makes nothing for their Purpose, that
Prince admitting them not as Proprietors, but as Laborers, and when they broke
the Conditions on which they were admitted, VIZ. To allow the Dariens such and
such Shares of the Product they were expelled again by Force, etc.

Our Author having composed a handsome Story of Diego (whose Kingdom is the 3d
from the Collony) shuffles in Mr. Wafer for Evidence, whereas he owns himself,
that he never saw such a Man as Capt. Diego; and as for his Lacenta, that
Prince is such a Stranger to the Indians of the Scots Acquaintance, that although
some Pains was taken to enquire after him, yet he could not be heard of; but
there being 17 or 18 Years between Wafer's and the Scots sojourning in that
Country, Lacenta in the time might probably be choked with some of the Spanish
Hemp amongst the other Princes, whom the Privatiers and Buccaniers deserted,
and left to care of themselves.

This mighty Story of Diego is so ill coined, that it would make a Man sick to
trace it. He owns those Spanish Mines to be within 15 Leagues of the Collony (1
say 12) and Diego is the Third Captain, or Zaar, from the Collony toward St.
Maria (as appears, p. 79 and 80) Andreas the Companies Landlord being the
First, Poussigo the Clergyman (as our Author dignifies him) the Second;
whereby it may be easily conceived what a powerful and large Government Diego
can have to hire the Spaniards as Laborers; and after these Spaniards had
spent some Years in opening those Mines, and bringing them to Perfection, they
should be expelled when King Diego took Snuff. This Strength of Diego is so
very incoherent with the late Action which happened in January last, when 26
Spaniards being ordered from St. Maria to march over the Isthmus in order to
view the Scots, came through Diego's Ground, where, if the Indians had been
their open Enemies, so small a Party would scarce have ventured; yet Diego's
Men were so unable to oppose them, that they took upon them to pilot them to a
convenient Place, where they might view the Scots, and in the mean time some of
Diego's Men came to the Government of Pedro (the Defunct Andreas his Successor)
and so to the Collony with the News; on which Mr. Montgomry, with a Detachment
of a 100 Men, were piloted by them to the Spot where the Spaniards lay.

In this very Action Four Things are remarkable, 1. The Weakness of Diego's and
Pedro's Forces, who were not able to cut off the Heads of such a Handful, but
that they must come to the Collony for Assistance. 2. The Confidence which the
Spaniards put in the Indians of Diego and Pedro. 3. The Scotch Party leaving
their Collony, and going with the Indians, with a Design to attack those 26
Spaniards, who were lying some Leagues off on the Bank of a small River, and
who finding themselves betrayed by those Indians, fired upon them, and so
retreated to their next Garrison of Tubaconti. 4. That this being the only
Fight between the Scots and Spaniards, the Breach of Peace was founded on it,
and Letters of Mark and Reprisal granted by the Collony to Pilkinton and Sands,
Masters of Jamaica Sloops.

The Story of Diego's beating the Spaniards from the Gold Mines tells very
ackwardly (our Author imputing this Rupture to the Spaniards beating and
male-treating Diego's People, when they came to ask their Shares) but to wave
the Improbability of this Story, and admit it for a Truth; it is to be presumed,
that when Diego fell upon those Spaniards and slew them, he did not allow them
time to blow up those Mines, or fill them up with Rubbish, that they might not
be serviceable to him or his Friends afterward; and it might have been
reasonably expected, that Diego should either have made a Present of those
Mines to the Scotch Collony (for House-warming) or at least have suffered them
to dig up some of the Gold to buy Provisions, and keep them from starving, that
thereby they might have been the more enabled to assist them against the
Spaniards, and restore them to their Ancient Liberty, besides, leading them a
nearer Way to the Kingdom of Heaven, than that which the Spaniards cut out for
them.

The Gentlement of the Collony were very modest (as he tells you in the 78 and
79 page.) When they were informed by some French A pretty safe Name for two
noted, French Pirates, and a Molletoo, all Natives of Martineco, who were
obliged to live among the Indians, by reason they were stable to be hanged on
any Christian Ground, whereon they could be caught.
Refugees, that with a 100 Men they could be Masters of some Gold and Silver
Mines belonging to the Spaniard, but they were so gifted with the Grace of
Self-denial, that they would not listen to it, till once the Spaniard offered
some Hostility. We now find that this, which our Author would have to be the
Hostile Act, was committed in January; but it is to be admired that the Collony
should only send Sloops out to pilfer a few Fisher-mens Canou's, and Houses at
Teleu, near Carthagena, and not have spared the foresaid 100 Men to reduce the
Spanish Mines to their Subjection; or if they were afraid to offend the Span.
by Land, they had not sent a few of their number. to their Frd. and Ally Diego's
Gold Mines, where there was no Danger to be apprehended of the Spaniards
looking that Prince in the Face; and not have laid in Fort St. Andrew making
Childrens Shoes after the War was thus begun from January to June, and at last
be forced to quit the glorious Project for want of Provisions, when at the same
time they were tantaliz'd with Vessels loaded with good Food on one side of
them, and Mines full of Gold on the other for want of Grace to attack them. I
wish our Author would revise those Paragraphs in the 5th and 6th Pages, as also
in the 78 and 79th, and see if the Stories are of a piece, or if they will hold
water.

I am rather inclined to believe that the Spaniard is more Master than Servant
amongst the Indians, and likewise, that he does not easily part with any Place
he once gets into his Possession, especially Gold Mines: It Is very rare to hear
of the Spaniard's being beaten off by the Indians, and it is more improbable on
this small Tract of Ground, called the Isthmus of Darien, where his Cities,
Forts, Garrisons and Mines are so closely planted, and where if he wanted any
Assistance, he can sooner have Supplies brought thither, than to any other Part
of New Spain.

When the Buccaniers and Privatiers were at the strongest (mustering about
1300) and surpised St. Maria, and some other Places on the South Sea, neither
they nor the Indians durst venture too keep them above a Week or Ten Days,
being jealous of the Spaniards rallying with new Umbro's, and attacking them
again; but having robbed and destroyed what they could, sculk'd away to some
new Place (may be 1 or 200 Leagues distant) and always left the Indians of of
the last Place, if any joined them, to capitulate for themselves. If they
fought under those Indian Princes to recover their Country for them, it might
reasonably be expected, that they should left them possessed of such Places as
they recovered out of the Spaniards Hands, but there is nothing like this in all
the Buccaniers Chronicl.

To be short, if you will take my Word, I Will tell you, that this Story of Diego's
beating the Spaniards from their Mines is so far a Mistake, that the Spaniards
were at work on them when the Scots landed there, having only an Intendant,
with 50 Spaniards to oversee 500 Negro's, who wrought them; neither did they
desert those Mines notwithstanding the Neighborhood of the Scots, though perhaps
they might reinforce their Guards. And notwithstanding Mr. Montgomrie was so
near them with that select Party of 100 Men, and and those Three Indian Princes
to stand by him, yet he did not think it expedient to disturb them, but
stisfy'd himself with Redpith's famous Captain, Dan Domingo de la rada. As for
the Testimony which our Author would draw Wafer in for here; he neither knows
any thing of Diego, nor of those Priests, these being murdered many Years after
his leaving that Country.

Our Author proceeds thus to the 7th Page, where he tells us, that the
aforesaid pretended Titles being fully confuted, the Spaniards can lay no Claim
to Darien, but what they plead from the Pope's general Grant of America, etc.
How ridiculous it is to urge the Pope's Grant amongst Protestants, and how
precarious it is amongst Papists themselves, but admitting it to be enough to
justify their Title, it is easy to prove that the Spaniards have forfeited
all the Right they can claim by Virtue of that Grant.

His Buccanier Evidences are laid aside for some time, there being no room for
them here, wherefore he tells us such another Tale in a Tub of the Bishop of
Chiapa, who it seems, was Testy with his Sovereign Lord the King of Spain,
because that Prince did not answer the End of the Pope's Grant, but minded more
the Treasure than Souls of the Americans, and railed at him for not Restoring
to the Executors of those dead Indians, whatever he or his Instruments had
taken from them, and pleads Queen Issobella's Request for the same, when she
was on her Deathbed, etc.

That I may not waste too much Paper in answering those Three or Four
Paragraphs, take this in short, that the Bishop of Chiapa had not the same
Sense of Money in his Age, as the Missioners or Propoganda fide Gentlemen have
in ours, else he had made less Noise. If the General Assembly should fraught
their Disciples with never so strict Instructions, to establish the Kirk
Discipline, yet if Praedicant Paterson should form an Anabaptist Government
there, the Company would scarce think their Title to that Country thereby
forfeited. Our Author somewhere else in his Politics thinks it expedient for
the speedier destroying of Antichrist, to seize on his Pouch or Purse: It was
reasonable the Spaniard should make use of the same Maxim, and imitate Moses
after his descending from the Mount, in taking away the Golden Calf from his
Brethren, and such Instruments of Idolatry.

But if the Spaniard has been guilty of all our Author lays to his Charge, and
has not answered the End of the Pope's Donation, pray whether is the Pope or
the Scotch Company judge of it? If the Pope thinks fit to revoke the Spanish
Charter, it is time enough then for the Company to take the Charge of the
American Souls upon them; but as he has done nothing like this as yet, but on
the contrary has granted a large Subsidy on the American Church to support it,
the Company may appear officious in meddling with his Holiness's Business, and
give the World too much reason to believe that their Design is not only to
expel the Spaniard out of Darien, but likewise out of Mexico and Peru, under
this Religious Pretext. I want to know whether Paterson's and the Companies
Project was to take the Cure of the American Souls, or Treasure upon them? If
the former, then 1048 Levites and two Soldiers, had been fitter Missioners to
Darien, than two Preachers and 1048 such Lay Elders; and instead of 2 or 3000
Buchaniers Pieces, Pistols, Daggers, and Drums proportionable; they ought to
have followed the Instructions annexed to the Original Commission of, ite and
pradicate, and gone without Staff or Scrip.

Although our Author by the strain of his Pen, shows that he has been a
considerable time from Home, yet he betrays something now and then, to confirm
us, that good store of the Kirk Milk lurks still in the recesses of his Nose;
for he is not satisfied with beating the Spaniards out of The just and modest
Author of the Vindicat. page 84, and 85, admits the Spaniards Title to be valid
to his American Possessious. But in other Places where he is Angry, he curs
them off again with a struck of the sabe Pen.
America with his Religious Cant, but must stick to the good Old Way of
Murdering his Adversaries Reputation, that by once rendering him Odious, he may
muster the whole Kennel of Curs to bark him out of Town. In the 7th, 8th, and
9th Pages, he Whines in the same Strain as the Hypocrites in the Gospel did,
when they had a devouring Design on Widows Houses.

But to return to the Subject in Debate, since our Author after all his
Railing, is such a Hero as to admit the Pope's Donation to be so valid as to
give the Spaniard some Claim to America, I Will be quits with him in Civility,
and pass from the Pope's Donation altogether, and stick to the Spanish
Possession; which they have had not only of Mexico and Peru in Geneal, but of
the Province of Darian in Particular, by Prescription of a great many Years;
where their several Towns, Forts, Garrisons and Mines, are sufficient Evidences
of it; and besides these Legal Infestments, can bring 50 of those Darien
Indians under their Banner, to one that will appear against them, to justify
their Right of Dominion. All this being duly considered, I cannot see where the
Audacious Affront lies that is offered to His Britanick Majesty, by the
Catholic King, who only asserts his Right, and says, That some Scots in the
time of Peace, without any Injury Offered, have Invaded the Heart of his
Spanish Dominions: It Is very unaccountable, that this Choleric Gentleman
should take his Catholic Majesty by the Nose, for saying, That the Church
stands in the Churchyard.

So much then for the Spanish Title to Darien, by Inheritance, Marriage,
Donation, Possession and Conquest; as for the Purchase and Surrender, I was not
Witness to those Transactions; but Reason will allow these to follow in Course,
if the others be good. As for Reversion, I cannot well comprehend our Author's
Meaning; for it cannot be said, That the Spaniard has either Quitted, or
Mortgaged that Province to the Indians, since he remains still on the Spot, and
in Possession of it, and in all appearance is like to do after we are Dead.

If what I have offered in Answer to this Anthor's Challenge, will serve to
demonstrate the Spaniard's Right to that Isthmus; there will be no more
occasion for Puffendorf nor Hugo Grotius; so that the only Standard we are left
to walk by, is the Treaties of Peace between Spain and England, which both
these Authors, the Defender and Vindicator of the Darien Settlement, can
neither wrest nor squeeze any thing from to serve their Turn: After they have
said all they can think of on that Head, they tell you, Def. of the Scots
Settlement page 11.
That all that can be inferred from those Treaties, is, that they are a Mutual
Security for the peaceable Possession of what each Crown Possessed, and no more.
The Spaniards desire no more benefit of these Treaties, than what those Authors
herein allow them. It Is evident enough, That by those Treaties, His Majesty got
considerably from the Spaniard, to wit, Not only a Title to the Island of
Jamaica, which was taken from the Spaniard during the Exile of Charles II. but
likewise a full Right to all the Colonies in America, his Subjects were then
possessed of. And if those Treaties were no Fence to the Spaniard in America, I
don't know what should oblige him to make such large Gifts, and renounce his
Title to Place wwhich some time or other he might be in a condition to Recover.
If the Subjects of Great Britain, may when they please, Seat themselves on
Darien, or elsewhere on the Spanish Coast, then the Spaniard has no Benefit by
those Treaties: But I am rather apt to believe, (as our Author has hit it) That
they were made for a Mutual Security of what oach Crown possessed, and no more.

What our Authors would squeeze from those Treaties, is, That neither Party is
excluded from enlarging his Dominions in America upon Wastes, Def. of the Scots
Settlement page 11.
or by consent of the Natives in fuch Places, as have never yet been possessed by
Spain, or Great Britain. Although there is nothing expressed so in those Treaties,
and if I should yield them this Gloss they set on them, yet I cannot see how the
Caledonian Settlement can take any place here, because Dominion cannot properly
be enlarged before there be a Footing; and when those Treaties were concluded,
there was no word of a Caledonian Colony.

The Caribdee Islands cannot well be enlarged, but if the English or French
have not Room enough on them, they may remove to such Neighboring Ones as are
not the Property of another Prince in Alliance with their Sovereigns. As for
the English and French Colonies on the main Land, they may enlarge their
Dominions far enough round them, if they will, and the Spaniard never quarrel
with them, so long as they don't come within the Tropicks, and meddle with his
Noli me tangere.

As for Dr. Cox and the Creolians, who settled and removed in the Bay of
Campechy, they were in the Right, in Forming, such Flying-Camps, for when any
of them were caught by the Spaniard, they paid for it, and had their Mends in
their own Hands: And the Author of the just and modest Vindic. p. 168, is as
good as satisfied as to that Part of it, although he does not approve of the
Judgment of his Majesty, the Lords Justices, and the English Council, who being
addressed by some English Merchants for a Patent to settle on the same Isthmus
of Darien, some Time before the Scotch Company had got the Project, refused it
on the Score of its being contrary to the Treaties of Peace. He would
insinuate, that the King, etc. refused it for other Reasons: But if our Author
will look back and enquire a little further, he will find, that Sr. Tho.
Muddiford, Governor of Jamaica proposed the same in the Reign of Charles the
2d. and it being canvass'd at Court, and the Legality of it examined, it was
refused on no other State-Reasons than its being contrary to the Treaties
between their Britannick and Catholic Majesty's; but our Author being
dexterous, never wants a Hole to creep out at, by Insinuating, that his
Majesty's and the Lords Justices refusing the English Subjects that Patent, was
not on the Account of its Injustice, but upon Motives of State, which is as
much to say, that it was not Time to disoblige his Catholic Majesty.

As for their Instances of the independent Sovereignties in Europe and Africa,
which are enclosed with other Princes Dominions, the Cases are no ways
parallel, so long as the Spaniards are Masters of all the fortified Places and
Towns on the Isthmus, and the Indians scarce of a Wigwam they can call their
own. And as for the King of Def. of the Scots Settlement, p. 13.
Darien' s inviting the Buccaniers to assist him to retake his Country. Although
the King were not Fictitious yet by this innocent Story our Author concedes,
that he had lost his Country to the Spaniards, when he wanted Assistance to
recover it out of their Hands: At this Rate the Scotch Company may not only
elbow the Spaniards out of Darien, but likewise out of Mexico and Peru, since
in the same Page he means as much by declaring the Indians the natural Lords of
Darien, and the Spaniards only Tyrannical Usurpers. But to dive a little
further into the Probability of this Story, I want to know where that People,
called Buccaniers lived, whom the King of Darien invited to his Assistance, or
when they joined him and recovered some of those Spanish Towns, they did not
leave him in Possession of them? It Is more reasonable to believe, that that
Kind of Vermin which feeds on the Spanish Spoil, went to the Isthmus on the
Account of its Communication with the South Sea, and the Passage by which the
Spanish Riches are transported to the Galleons on the North Side, and persuaded
those poor Indians to revolt, and pilot them to such Places where they thought
to get Booty, which is the more probable, by reason these Indians paid dear for
it always when the Buccaniers deserted them.

As for Capt. Saukins his sending a Letter to the Governor of Panama, wherein
he justified his Proceedings, and asserted this imaginary King of Darien to be
natural Lord of Panama; I know that old Buccaneer so very well, that I believe
it to be true, if Saukins had carried the Message himself, he might perhaps
have got a suitable Answer.

As in the Def. of Scots Abdicat. I declined Answering the fiery Ejaculations
of the first Author, either by offering any Thing against the Legality of the
Octroy it self, or the Interest of the Scots Nation in applying themselves to
Poreign Trade, believing the former to be great and well designed, for the
Advantage and Prosperity of the Country in general, and that the latter is so
just, that I yield both the Theme and Doctrine of the just and modest
Vindicator to be good so far as it relates thereto; so I still shun meddling
with any Passages, either in the First or Second Author that relates to the
separate Interest of the Two Nations, but ftick close to the Darien Title which
is the main Subject in Debate, and as the Original Author cites. Page 3. from
Dr. Saffold -- Sublata causa tollitur Effectus, if the Spanish Title to that
Isihmus be found to be good; Then the Cause of the Complaint ceases; and the
Company ought to apply themselves to that which will turn to Account, and not
run on Measures to imbroil not only the Isle of Great Britain, but perhaps all
Europe in a new War. If the thinking Part of Mankind will but reflect on the
Steps that have been made to Darien, to wit, in sending their Ships and Men to
so foreign a Country which was so liable to be disputed, and that with Six
Months Provisions, 2. The Companies Neglect in Supplying them with more. And
Lastly, The Dispersing such Declarations clandestinly over the West India
Islands and Plantations (which of Neceslity must meet with Opposition) to
invite People thence to settle on Darien; they will find that there have been
some private Wheels in this Machin that have brought it to the State wherein it
now is, to say no more on it.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF I have treated the last Caledonias Author with more Civility than he
merits, it is because these Sheets were finished and in the Press before I was
sire that Fergason was the just and modest Man, till now his Looks sticking in
the several Booksellers Hands obliges him to disperse them about Gratis, as the
other Quack-bills, and so gives me the Opportunity of being fully confirmed in
the Matter. His Employment and Morals are so notorions already, that any thing
I should say of him would add but little to his Infamy, and would be so much
loft on him. Wherefore, in reply to those Scurrilities he falsely asperses me
with, I shall only put him in mind, that his Pot had not boiled so well, if he
had not been better paid for his Shuffling, Plotting and Tricking, than I have
for what I have justly offered in Vindication of His Majesty's Proceedings, and
to unblind a great Number of well-meaning Persons, who are industriously led
into this Mistake, by some particular Gentlemen behind the Curtain, who possess
them with a Notion, that the Mismanagement and Miscarriage of their Affairs was
not occasioned by the Directors of that Company, but by the Government of the
English Nation: And how far this will appear to be true, when it comes to be
either calmly or warmly canvas'd, Time will discover: The greatest Prospect
that I have of any Reward at present is the Daggers and Pistols, wherewith I am
daily threatened, and nightly waylaid; against which Dr. Ferguson in all his
Machinations was always sure to fence himself. Trade being very dead of late,
he is resolved to play at small Game rather than stand out; but although the
conceited Polltician shades himself under the Skreen of Patria sua, to
calumniate the Government of that Hospitium, whose Bread he has so long eat,
and wherewith has been so pampered; it is neither out of Friendship to the
Company, Nation, or Kirk, (the last of which he plainly enough demonstrates, p.
205, and 206.) but to blow the Coal of Sedition, set Great Britain in a Flame,
and bring his own Marks to bear; which may be the easier conceived by minding
of what Sect and Kindney those Gentlemen are, who espouse the Darien Interest
with the most Heat. To flab the Knave in Newgate, were but to encourage the old
Sinner in his Trade, and put him in a Way to get Money; whereas giving him his
Mittimus, and sending hith home to his own Country, to drive the Trade there,
and giving him leave freely to make what he can of this Text, would be the most
mortifying and suitable Punishment that could be inflicted on him.

FINIS.

