GREAT NEVVS FROM THE West Indies;

Sent in a Letter to a Merchant of LONDON.

November the 28th. 1687. This may be Printed R. M.

LODON: Printed for H. Wallis, 1687.

GREAT NEWS EROM THE WEST INDIES.
SIR,
THE Charge laid on me in the last Letter, dated the 24th. of August, of
Communicating whatever might Occur worth taking Notice off, occasioned this
trouble: I now give you a Relation that connot but be surprising to such as
have not yet seen the Wonders of the Deep, tho it must be confessed things of
this Nature do not altogether so much affect one that has formerly made so long
an Abode amongst us as you have done, yet this may serve to revive the memory
of those Wonders you have often seen, and furnish you with something New to
Entertain your Friends.

The story I am to tell you, is at the taking Two prodigious Monsters on the
Coasts of Mountserrat where I now am, the first of these I assisted at the
taking, which was after this manner; About Six in the Morning we discovered
something to Wind-ward move like the Wrack of a great Ship, in which Opinion we
were the more confirmed through the last Nights being very Stormy and
Tempestuous, some of our Fishers endeavored to get off with their Boats, but
could not, the Sea breaking so on the shore; about Eight of the Clock he came
so near us as to be perceived to be a living Creature, which put us into the
greatest consternation imaginable, there being not one of us that had ever seen
any Sea Monster half so large, (though our New Worlds abounds in the Production
of various kinds) between Twelve and One of the Clock, the Sea threw him with
that violence on the shore, that he was unable to get back again, but by
beating the Sand about with his Fins, and making such an hedeous Noise, that
our Women and Children fled to the Churches for Protection, and other Places of
security, But after that he had wearied himself with his violent beating and
throwing the Sand about, we took Courage, and assailed him on every side, and
in less than half an Hour became absolute Masters of this mighty Creature, whom
I shall thus describe.

His shape is not much different from that dreadful Sea Monster so well known
by the Name of the Sea Monster, his length is about 22 Foot long, and of a
Proportionable Bigness, his Back full of Prickles like an Hedgehog, the Skin
extreme hard, rugged and uneven, his Head flat, and his Mouth extreme wide,
with many sharp Teeth, and two of 'em Crocked like a Wild-Boars, it has Eight
Fins, with a Forked Tail, and above the Eye two long Black Horns, his flesh is
very Soft, but not one of us being so hardy as to Taste it, I can give you no
Account, that deters us from it; is, because the Flesh of the Sea Monster is
absolute Poison, (causing strange Vomitings and Swoonings, and proves Mortal,
if not prevented by a good Dose of Mithridate, or some other Antidote,) which
this in all things but his Bigness exactly Resembles; so that here we conclude
him to be an overgrown Sea Monster.

The other Monster I am to describe is a Sea-Vnicorn, that was likewise cast
ashore as he pursued his Prey, of whom I am also an Occular Witness; He is
about Eighteen Foot long, and in compass as big as a Barrel, having Eight great
Fins like the Ends of Galley-Oars, two of which are placed near the Gills, and
the other six at the sides of his Belly at equal distances, they are of a
Grenish shining Color; All the uper part of the Body is covered with great
Scales, of a Red and Blew Color, intermixed with Spangles of Silver, the Scales
under the Belly are Yellow, the Tail Forked, the Head somewhat Bigger than that
of a Horse, the lower part of his Body covered with a dark hard Skin, he has a
very straight Horn Issuing out of his Head, about Nine Foot and a half in
length, Taper to the very Point; Toward the Head it is sixteen Inches about,
wreatched almost to the point, it is naturally pollished of a shining Black,
marked with sundry small white and yellow strokes, and of such solidy, that
it is difficult with a sharp File to get a little small Powder from it, it has
no Ears standing up, but two spacious Gills, as the other Fishes, the Eyes are
about the bigness of an Hens Egg, the Ball which is of a Sky Color Enameled
with yellow, and beneath it another as clear as Crystal; The Mouth is wide
enough, with several extreme sharp Teeth; the Tongue proporitionable, covered
with a rough Red Skin; The Meat of him is exceeding good when Boiled, and
differs not much in Taste from Fresh Cod.

Before this Sea Monster could be Mastered several of the Assalants received
considerable damages, for he used his Horn with that nimbleness and dextenty;
and made such desperate Thursts, as sufficiently demonstrated him to be a
Creature of great strength and Courage when in his own Element.

Thus Sir have I Related in the best Method I could, what has so lately
happened among us, begging Pardon in being so Tedious in Describing.

I rest, your much Obliged Servant, F. H.
Mountserrat. November, 2d. 1687.
FINIS.

