The Reverend Dr. Anthony Horneck.



SEVERAL SERMONS UPON The Fifth of St. Matthew; Being part of Christ's Sermon
on the Mount. By ANTHONY HORNECK, D. D. Late Preacher at the Savoy. The First
Volume. To which is added, The LIFE of the Author, by Richard Lord Bishop of
Bath and Wells.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. School.

The LIFE of the Reverend Anthony Horneck* D. D.
THIS excellent Man was born Anno 1641.
at Baccharacht, So call'ed, as some think, from Bacchi ara. Vid. Misson's
Trav. Tom. 1. Let.6.
, in the Lower Palatinate, a Town from whence we receive a Wine that from the
place bears the same Name amongst us. His Father was Recorder or Secretary of
that place; a very strict Protestant, and a Person of great Reputation. The
Doctor was also bred up in the same Profession from the beginning: He never was
of the Church of Rome, as has been falsely reported of him. His Father devoted
him for the holy Ministry from the womb, and was not wanting to give him such
an Education as might fit him for that Sacred Office. He was first sent to
Heidelbergh, where he applied himself with great diligence to the study of
Divinity, under the direction and care of the very learned Dr. Spanheim, who is
now the primary Professor of the University of Leyden.

He had, it appears, a great desire to come over into England; I cannot tell
what it was that moved him: `tis certain his Father inclined not to it. However
to England he came, not without his Father's consent. He was about 19 years of
age when he first came over. he was then very eminent not only for his
Learning, but for his great Piety also. He who taught him the English Tongue,
does profess, that he never saw a young man so exemplary for Piety as this
young man was.

He was entered into Queen's College in Oxford, Dec. 24. 1663. and was in very
great esteem there with Dr. Barlow, then Provost of that House, and since
Bishop of Lincoln, who valued him highly for his great Learning, and more
particularly for his good skill in the Eastern Languages. He was, by his
favor, made Chaplain of the said College soon after his Entrance. He was
incorporated Master of Arts from the University of Wittembergh, Dec. 21. 1663.
It was not long after this, that he was made Vicar of Allhallows in Oxford,
which is in the gift of Lincoln College. There he continued a most constant and
painful Preacher about two years.

Thence he removed into the Family of the Duke of Albemarle An. 1665.
, and was received there as a Tutor to his Son, the then Lord Torrington, and
since Duke of Albemarle. He was now in a fair way to Preferment, had he been
forward in seeking it. The Duke did indeed bestow upon him a Living in the
Diocese of Exeter The Rectory of Doulton in Devonshire.
, and did also procure him a Prebend in that Church from Dr. Sparrow, then Lord
Bishop there. I shall have occasion afterward to give an account of his parting
with them. I am now on that part of the Doctors Life which I know the least of;
I doubt not but he did well every where, and agreeably to his holy Profession.

He did, before he married, go over into Germany An 1669.
, to see his Friends, where he preached with great acceptance, and was
entertained with great respect at the Court of one of the German Princes,
Charles Lodowick Elector Palatine.
, who showed him a very particular kindness.

After his Return he was chosen Preacher at the Savoy An 1671.
, where he continued about 26 years, till he died. That place deserves not the
name of a Preferment: The maintenance is small, and, upon the matter,
precarious. And whatever it was to him at his first taking of it, when there
were persons of considerable quality inhabiting there, who were very kind to
him; yet afterward, when his Family increased, and his necessities were
greater, it could not be called a competent maintenance. But whatever it was
first or last, he could not be persuaded to keep his Living in Devonshire with
it: nor could he ever be prevailed with afterward (whatever offers were made
to him) to accept of any Living to hold in conjunction with it. He was
irreconcilable to Pluralities, and to Non-residence, and would upon occasion
declare his abhorrence of them with some considerable warmth.

He was of the opinion, in this matter, of Bernard Gilpin, the famous Preacher
and Saint of the North, of whom the Bishop of Chichester, who wrote his life,
gives the following account. Mr. Gilpin was about to travel beyond the Seas,
and to study there: He was at that time possessed of a Living, a Cure of Souls;
Bishop Tunstall persuades him to keep his Living for his better support; Mr.
Gilpin refuses so to do, and resigns it. He tells the Bishop, that he had
left his Parsonage upon necessity, because be could not keep it in his hands
with any peace of Conscience. And when the Bishop offered him a Dispensation to
hold it, Mr. Gilpin replied, The Devil will not be restrained with any bonds of
dispensation from laboring in mine absence the destruction of my people
committed to my charge: And I fear that when God shall call me to account of my
Stewardship, it will not serve my turn to make answer, that I was dispensed
withal, whilst the Devil made havoc of my Flock. Mr. Gilpin was after this,
and whilst he continued beyond the Seas, pressed to accept of a Living: But he
tells the Bishop, in his Letter to him, his mind in these words: I am fully
resolved, so long as I live, never to burden my Conscience in this case, nor to
keep a Living in my own charge with condition to live from it. He adds
afterward, Though any other should teach and preach for me as constantly and
industriously as ever St. Augustine did, yet cannot I think my self discharged
by another man's pains taking. But if yet I should be persuaded thus to offer
violence to my Conscience, upon condition to remain either here, or in any
other University, my disquiet of Conscience would never permit me to profit in
my study.

He was a very great blessing to the Inhabitants of the Savoy, and indeed to
the City. He constantly resided among them, though he had no House belonging to
his Place. He hired an House, and was constant in the discharge of the Duties
of his Place. He preached with great vehemence and ardor, with mighty force and
conviction. He spoke the sense of his Soul, and entered into the Hearts of his
People. He soon convinced his Auditors that he was in great earnest, and that
he had a mighty sense of the worth of Souls, and of the vast importance of
those Truths which he delivered to them.

His Auditors were convinced that he was a Man of God, and sent by him for the
good of Souls. He used great freedom of Speech, and instead of using enticing
Words of human Wisdom, he spoke like his Master with great Conviction and
Authority.

His Fame grew exceedingly, and very many were his constant Auditors, some of
the highest Rank and Quality, and a very great number of very devout and pious
Persons. A vast Crowd there was that followed him, and such a collection of
most devout and conformable Persons as were hardly to be found elsewhere; it
was no easy matter to get through the Crowd to the Pulpit.

He administered the Holy Communion on the first Sunday of every Month, and
preached a Preparation-Sermon on the Friday preceding. He did it also on the
great Festivals. He administered it twice on a day, in the Morning at eight a
Clock, and at the usual time after the Morning Sermon. The number of the
Communicants held a great proportion to that of his Auditors, and their
Devotion was very exemplary. The number was so great at both times, that it
will hardly be believed by those Clergymen who have been confined to the
Country, and have seen the small number of those who attend upon this holy
Service. So great was the number, that there was need of great help of
Clergymen to assist in the delivering of the Bread and Wine; and with such
assistance it was very late before the Congregation could be dismissed. I will
add, that I do not remember that I did ever behold so great numbers, and so
great signs of Devotion, and a due sense and profound reverence, becoming this
great act of divine Worship, in my whole life. The Doctor took indefatigable
pains on these occasions, but he was encouraged to do so from the great success
his Labors met withal.

He was not only very diligent in Preaching and Administering the Holy
Sacrament, but in all other parts of his Duty.

He took great pains in Catechizing and instructing the Youth, in visiting the
sick, and directing and satisfying the doubtful and scrupulous, and
encouraging all good beginnings, and promoting worthy designs, and provoking
those he conversed with to love and good works.

He took great pains also in his own Family. He spent very much time with his
Family in constant Prayers Morning and Night, in Reading the Holy Scriptures,
Singing of Psalms, in holy Conferences, and all the Duties incumbent upon him
as the Master of a Family. No Weariness, no weighty Business abroad, excused
him from the discharge of these Duties. Nor did he perform them slightly and
perfunctorily, but spent very much time in them; he was very assiduous, very
earnest and vehement, and showed a very great concern and ardor therein. He
would rise early in a Morning to these Exercises, and not spare his pains even
after the very great and wearisom labors of the day.

Nor did he forbear his Studies and Closet-Devotions. He spent much time there.
It appears by a Diary found since his Death, and which he kept for a long time,
that he called himself to an account every Night for the Words, and Actions,
and Conversation of the Day past; and perhaps few men living were more strict
and severe than he was in this matter. If he had done any good that day, he
gave God the praise of it before he slept. And few men that lived passed fewer
days (if he passed any such) without doing good. But when any Words or Thoughts
escaped, which he judged to have wanted due care, he animadverted upon himself
in a severe manner, before he went to rest. He was one of the kindest men to
others that ever lived, and one of the severest to himself. He needed no
Confessor to call him to account, or to enjoin him any Penance. He did not
spare revenge upon himself, who could most easily forgive his Enemies, and
wanted no compassion for the greatest Criminals. He kept a continual watch over
his own Soul, and strictly watched over its actings, and tendencies, and was
therefore very fit to watch over those who were committed to his Charge.

Besides the constant care that was upon him from his Parish, his Family, his
Closet and Studies, he employed himself in doing good to those who were more
remote. He encouraged Piety wherever he came, and particularly in the younger
sort. He had the care of several Societies of Young Men, whom he directed and
encouraged. And because this matter has been mis-understood, and that to my
certain knowledge, there was an attempt, since this Revolution, to blacken the
Doctor on this account, I shall represent the matter just as it was.

Certain it is that there were some Societies of religious and devout Young Men
under the Doctor's Government and Inspection. But whether the Doctor did move
these Young Men at first to enter into such Societies, or whether they first
applied to him, and he only gave them Rules to govern themselves by, I am not
able to determine. Thus much is certain, that he gave them Rules, and they were
these that follow.

I. That all that entered into such a Society should resolve upon an holy and
serious Life.

II. That no person shall be admitted into this Society till he arrive at the
age of Sixteen, and has been first confirmed by the Bishop, and solemnly taken
on himself his Baptismal Vow.

III. That they choose a Minister of the Church of England to direct them.

IV. That they shall not be allowed in their meetings to discourse of any
controverted point of Divinity.

V. Neither shall they discourse of the Government of Church or State*

VI. That in their meetings they use no Prayers but those of the Church, such
as the Litany and Collects, and other prescribed Prayers; but still they shall
not use any that peculiarly belongs to the Minister, as the Absolution.

VII. That the Minister whom they choose shall direct what practical Divinity
shall be read at these meetings.

VIII. That they may have liberty, after Prayer and Reading, to sing a Psalm.

IX. That after all is done, if there be time left, they may discourse each
other about their spiritual concerns; but this shall not be a standing
Exercise, which any shall be obliged to attend unto.

X. That one day in the Week be appointed for this meeting, for such as cannot
come on the Lord's Day; and that he that absents himself without cause shall
pay three Pence to the Box.

XI. Every time they meet, everyone shall give six Pence to the Box.

XII. That on a certain day in the year, viz. Whitsun-Tuesday, two Stewards
shall be chosen, and a moderate Dinner provided, and a Sermon preached, and the
Money distributed (necessary Charges deducted) to the Poor.

XIII. A Book shall be bought, in which these Orders shall be written.

XIV. None shall be admitted into this Society without the consent of the
Minister who presides over it; and no Apprentice shall be capable of being
chosen.

XV. That if any Case of Conscience arise, it shall be brought before the
Minister.

XVI. If any Member think fit to leave the Society, he shall pay five Shillings
to the Stock.

XVII. The major part of the Society to conclude the rest.

XVIII. The following Rules are more especially to be commended to the Members
of this Society, viz. To love one another: When reviled, not to revile again:
To speak evil of no man: To wrong no man: To pray, if possible, seven times a
day: To keep close to the Church of England: To transact all things peaceably
and gently: To be helpful to each other: To use themselves to holy Thoughts in
their coming in and going out: To examine themselves every night: To give every
one their due: To obey Superiors both Spiritual and Temporal.

This is the substance of what the Doctor directed on this occasion. I did many
years ago lay these things before a very great and worthy Prelate, (who is now
living) to whom I thought it was highly fit that they should be communicated. I
advised with him upon the whole matter. And the occasion was this: There was a
certain number of Young Men* who were desirous to make such a Society, and to
be concluded by these Orders. They applied to a Minister in London to take upon
him the Inspection and Care of them. I was concerned for that Minister, and
thereupon laid the whole case before that Prelate. He was clearly of opinion
that the Young Men were not to be discouraged, and that it was best to take
care of them, and secure that zeal which they expressed, in the right Channel;
he was well contented to leave them to the care and management of a Minister of
the Church of England. Upon which encouragement they were admitted. That time
in which this Prelate was consulted, was not over favorable to any kind of
Religious Meetings. And yet the Doctor had the hard measure to be censured very
severely, even since this happy Revolution, upon this account. Endeavors were
used to beget an ill opinion of him in the late Archbishop, and in others, But
upon due Information, the Archbishop was entirely satisfied, and was a true
Friend to the Doctor to the last.

The Doctor had so much business generally upon his hands, that he had hardly
time to eat his Meat. He was often sent for to sick and dying People,
frequently consulted by those who were doubtful and scrupuious, and addressed
to with Cases of Conscience, and sometimes with Cases that were very
extraordinary. He was also beyond all measure followed by the Poor and Needy,
by them that wanted Money, or wanted his favor to procure them some Boon or
other. He was extremely prone to do good Offices; this was well known, and it
fared with him accordingly.

But in the late Reign his labor was much increased. Great endeavors were
used to introduce Popery, and to delude the poor People. No man was more stout
and diligent than the Doctor at that time. He preached most vigorously against
that corrupt Doctrine, prepared his Auditors against the day of trial, and was
prepared (I doubt not) for Martyrdom himself. It Is very well known that he
declined no labor, shunned no Conference with the Popish Priests, omitted not
what was in his power to do to stemm the Tide. There are those living, of the
greatest figure and character, who very well know the truth of this matter.

But thanks be to God, the fear of Popery vanished upon his present Majesty's
coming to the Crown. But then the Doctor had another trial. His Maintenance at
the Savoy was but small, and in great measure precarious. And yet was that all
his Preferment, excepting a Prebend of the Church of Exeter of but 20 l. per
annum, without any Corpse belonging to it. But it was really much less than
that, Charges deducted. This was all his Preferment at that time, and for some
considerable time after. He had not any house to live in, but what he hired at
a considerable rate. He had himself, a Wife, and four Children to maintain; and
his Children so far grown, that they required now a more chargeable Maintenance
than formerly. His Maintenance was very little. Those who formerly contributed
withdrew their kindness, because he submitted to the present Government. He
lost very considerably that way. This I had from his own Mouth. But yet I
cannot say he complained of it. I confess I neheard him complain but once, and
that was a little before his last Sickness, and then he complained that he
wanted Money to give to the Poor. The Poor did in great numbers resort to him
at that time; he gave of his own little a very great proportion, and perhaps
something more than might seem consistent with what was owing to his own
Family. But he had a generous Soul, and knew not how to deny him that asked.
The words of our Savior, Give to every one that asks thee, made a great
impression upon his Mind: I found upon discourse with him, that he was so very
much under the power of those words, that he thought he could hardly be at
liberty even from a common Beggar: And sometime I have taken occasion to
discourse him on that subject; but I shall not trouble the Reader with any
thing farther in that matter.

In these mean circumstances he continued for several years after the late
Revolution. But he went on in his labors, and cheerfully pursued the great end
of his Ministry, and the purpose for which he was sent into the World. It
pleased God to raise up a friend who concerned himself on his behalf. It was
the Lord Admiral Russel, now the Right Honorable the Earl of Orford. He,
before he went to Sea, went to the Queen to take leave of her Majesty, and when
he was with her, begged of her that she would be pleased to bestow some
Preferment on Dr. Horneck. The Queen told him that she could not at present
think of any way of preferring the Doctor, and with this answer the Admiral was
dismissed. Sometime after this, the Queen told what had passed on this occasion
to the late Archbishop. She added withal, that she was concerned, lest the
Admiral should think her too unconcerned on the Doctor's behalf, and advised
with him what was to be done for the Doctor's advantage, and satisfaction of
the Admiral. The Archbishop advised the Queen to promise him the next Prebend
of Westminster that should happen to become void. This the Queen did, and lived
to make her word good in the year 1693. The late Archbishop upon notice that
the Prebend was void, introduced the Doctor to the Queen, and he was made
Prebendary of that Church. I had this relation from the late Archbishop. And I
mention that noble Lord, who spoke to the Queen on the Doctor's behalf, with
all the honor imaginable. Indeed that noble Family, the Duke of Bedford, and
his noble Relatives, had a great kindness for the Doctor, and it ought not to
be forgotten in this place. I have often heard the Doctor mention them with
respect.

He was now in easier circumstances, and provided of an House, and at a small
distance from his People, of whom he took the very same care which he did
before. He preached very constantly among them, and discharged other
Ministerial duties as before. He kept in his hands some part of the House he
formerly lived in, and was constantly there a day or two in a Week, (besides
his other occasional times) on purpose to attend upon those poor, and
afflicted, and scrupulous People that resorted thither for help and advice. He
did very often stay all night in that place, that he might be in a readiness to
assist those that expected him there.

His Prebend of Exeter lying at a great distance from him, he expressed an
inclination to resign it, and he did so the next year. The present Bishop of
Bath and Wells had a small Prebend which that year became void, little better
as to the annual Rent than that of Exeter, but then it had a Corpse of some
value, and two lives were gone. It required no Residence, and if it had, it was
much nearer to him than Exeter. The Bishop made him an offer of it, hoping that
he might receive some Fine for the better support of his Family. He was
admitted to it upon Sept. 28. 1694. He enjoyed it to the day of his death, but
I fear he made no advantage of it, his charges considered; or if he did, it was
very small. He was offered indeed a Fine, and (considering his small income) a
considerable Sum, but yet not above one half of the real value. 'Twas
supposed, I presume, that he would have greedily laid hold of the present
advantage and gain, (as too many have done) without considering what was decent
and becoming, with respect to the Church and to his Successor. But they that
thought so were deceived in their Man. He generously refused the offer, and
left the Lives to be filled up by his Successor. But it having a Vicarage
annexed in his gift, he went and preached to the People, and gave out good
Rules in his Visitation, for the good of the Souls in the Peculiar under his
Jurisdiction. In this Journey of his, he happened to meet with the Lessee of
the Corpse, from whom alone he might expect a Fine. Instead of minding his own
gain, and addressing to the Lessee with art and complaisance, in order to make
a wordly advantage, he plainly reproved the Lessee of Immorality; which others
were prone enough to spread abroud, but perhaps no other had the courage to
reprove. He chose rather to lose his Fine (as he did) than omit his Duty.

Upon this occasion I cannot but add, that he had in great measure the Spirit
and Courage of John the Baptist. He durst reprove a great Man; and perhaps that
man lived not that was more conscientious in this matter. I very well knew a
great Man, and Peer of the Realm, from whom he had just expectations of
Preferment; but this was so far from stopping his Mouth, that he reproved him
to his Face; and that too in a matter that few men besides would have
adventured on. He missed of his Preferment indeed, but saved his own Soul. He
could not fawn or flatter, cringe and comply, for his own gain and worldly
advantage.

Upon this consideration, his Acquaintance and Friendship were very desirable
by every good man, that would be better. He would in him be very sure of a
Friend that would not suffer sin upon him. I may say of him what Pliny Plin. l.
1. ep. 12.
says of Corellius Rufus, whose death he laments, amisi vitae meae testem, etc.
I have lost a faithful witness of my Life; and may add, what he said upon that
occasion to his Friend Calvisius, Vereor ne negligentius vivam, i. e. I am
afraid (says he) lest for the time to come I should live more carelessly.
Certain I am, that his Friends and Familiars have a great loss upon this
account. They have lost a great Pattern of Virtue, and a very faithful Monitor
and Reprover of Vice and Folly.

A faithful Reprover is a very great help in our Christian Course. He is to be
valued above the greatest treasure. He that would be safe (says one of the
Ancients) must have a faithful Friend, or a bitter Enemy, that he may fly from
Vice by the Monitions of the one, or Invectives of the other. We need one of
these to set us right. We read that the Grandees of Japan do each of them
maintain in their several houses one or two persons, whose office and business
is to observe the actions of their Masters, and freely to admonish them when
they do any thing imprudently or wickedly Varen. descript. Japon.
. It Is worthy of our imitation, and highly expedient. Great men are followed
and corrupted by Flatterers; they have but few Friends who have Courage and
Honesty enough to tell them of their faults.

But this may be thought too great a Digression; I therefore return to give a
farther account of this excellent Man. He was now in better circumstances as to
the world, than he had been, but not less diligent and laborious. He went on in
his Master's work with most unwearied labor, and spent his whole time and
strength in it. And it was his delight and his choice. Indeed those who were
about him thought he did more than he was able long to bear. He grew soon after
this very infirm and sickly. He fell into dangerous fits of the Stone The
learned W. Sclater used to call this Distemper, to which he himself was much
subject, Studiosorum flagellum.
, made very little, and that a bloody Water. He walked with difficulty, and
could hardly bear a Coach. I have often told him, that he could not long
continue under the labor which he underwent; and I plainly saw that he
declined, and would do so more and more, unless he did remit his very great
labors. I convinced him abundantly of the truth of what I observed of him. He
was sensible of it, and seemed very inclinable to retire from the multiplicity
of business with which he was almost overwhelmed. He went on in his accustomed
labors to Christmas, 1696. Then his work increased upon him, and whereas other
men's labors are then intermitted, his were augmented. For at that time he had
more frequent Communions, besides an incredible number of Applications from
poor People, who then expect relief and assistance; which gave him great
diversion and trouble, He nevertheless went through all this labor and
trouble, with as great cheerfulness as was possible. But not long after I found
a plain alteration in him for the worse. On the 23d of January I was much
concerned for him. He was to preach the next day at the Savoy, and I was of
opinion that it was not safe for him to do it. I was very earnest with him to
spare himself that day, but could not prevail. He preached there, and it was
the last Sermon that he preached. In the Evening I found him (to my great
sorrow) in great disorder. From that time his illness increased upon him. His
Urine upon the matter totally stopped; he was in pain, and greatly indisposed
all that Week. And yet when I asked him (which I frequently did) if he were not
in great pain, all the answer that I could get from him was, that the pain he
felt was tolerable. There was nothing wanting that could be thought of toward
giving him ease. The ablest Physicians were consulted, and they consulted and
advised upon his case, and attended him with great diligence and tenderness,
but without success. On Sunday Morning, January 31st, he was worse than ever he
had been, insomuch that those about him thought him dying about eleven in the
Morning. I was then at Westminster-Abbey, and was sent for out of the Church to
pray with him. I found him very sensible. I asked him, if he were sensible that
he was dying, he replied that he was. I asked him if he were also resigned, and
willing to die, he replied very readily, that he was willing to die. I asked
him if he had considered the words, Heb. II. 14, 15; and whether or not he
found himself delivered from all the slavish fear of death, he replied very
quick, looking up to Heaven, that he was delivered from that fear. He was in an
excellent frame, and joined with the Prayers which the Church appoints on such
occasions, with great expressions of Devotion, Sometime after this, I found him
delirous, and not long after speechless. After some few hours Groans he
expired, viz. at Eight a Clock that Evening, being then about the 56th year of
his Age Before this last Illness, of which he died, he fell (in the year 1678)
into along and languishing Sickness, occasioned through his indefatigable
Application to the Duties and Functions of his Ministry. It brought him well
nigh to his Grave. The good Man ascribed his Recovery, under God, to the tender
Care of his virtuous Wife, with whom he always lived in great Concord and
Union, and to the Prayers of pious People put up to Heaven on his behalf; as
appears from some devout Meditations which he composed on that Subject, and
which have been found since his Decease among his Papers. In Thanksgiving to
God for his Preservation at that time, which he himself looked on as next to
miraculous, he kept a Day Monthly in his Family ever after, and preached yearly
a Commemoration. Sermon to his beloved Congregation at the Savoy, wherein he
rehearsed God's Mereies to him, and excited others to hope and trust in him in
the like Extremities. He also distributed largely to the Poor upon that Day.
This was his constant Method* to treasure up God's Providence to him, and to
sanctify and improve them not only to his own Use, but to the Use and Benefit
of others.
.

His Body was opened, and it appeared quickly what was the cause of his Death.
Both his Ureters were stopped: One of them was stopped as a Bottle with a Cork,
with a Stone that entered the top of the Ureter with a sharp end, the upper
part of which was thick and much too big to enter any farther: The other was
stopped also with Stones, of much less firmness and consistence than the other.

His Body was interred on Feb. 4. in the Abbey Church of Westminster, with
great Solemnity, and a vast number of Attendants. Several of the Lords the
Bishops, very many of the most eminent Clergy about the City, and an incredible
number of other Persons, were present on that occasion. And it must be said
that the Church of Westminster showed the great kindness they had for him, by
the great care they took of his very decent and solemn Interment.

Before I proceed any farther, I shall reflect upon his undaunted Courage when
Death looked him in the face. It Is certain that there were a great many
considerations that might have disposed him to desire a longer life at that
time. I well knew his circumstances, and those of his Family, and how desirable
his life was upon many accounts. But yet this pious man was not only willing to
die, but was entirely delivered from the fear of it, and did with great
cheatfulness and alacrity receive the tidings and sentence of Death.

St. Hierom Hieron. vit. Hilarion.
tells that Hilarion, just when he was expiring, spoke these words, Egredere,
quid times? Egredere anima mea, quid dubitas? Septuaginta prope annis servisti
Christo, and mortem times? i. e. Go out, O my Soul, why do thou fear? Why
do thou doubt? Thou have served Christ near seventy years, and art thou
afraid to dye? There was, it seems, some fear and some doubt in Hilarion. This
Servant of God was, by his Grace, delivered entirely from all such fear or
doubt. I say, by the Grace of God he was delivered, and special Grace it was.
Very good Persons, when they come to die, have their doubts, and their great
fears too. It is an easy thing to discourse wisely and Philosophically of the
Contempt of Death; but they which do so, have not the same Presence of Mind
when Death looks them in the face. We have a famous story to this purpose,
concerning the Father of Clinias, who was wont to despise Death in his Health,
and was in great dread of it when it drew near to him, as Plato relates it
Platon Axiochus.
.

It must be confessed, that this good Man had taken the right course to be
freed from the fear of Death, by leading a very painful and laborious, a very
useful and charitable, a very devout and pious Life.

His Life was very painful and laborious. Few men ever took the Pains which he
did. He was mortified to all worldly Pleasures, and sensual Satisfactions, and
used himself to great Labors and most exemplary Diligence. There is nothing
renders us more afraid to die, than a soft and voluptuous Life. Oh Death, how
bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives in rest in his
possessions? Ecclus. XLI. 1. We have an example of this in Agag. He came
delicately, and was pinguissimus and tremens Vulg. lat. in locum.
, i. e. very fat and trembling; and no wonder then that he should com^^^in of
the bitterness of death: For so certainly he does, however our Interpreters
come to render his words. Death must be bitter where voluptuousness makes life
sweet.

His Life was also very useful and very charitable. Multitudes they were that
received relief and advantage by him. And there is a particular promise to such
men, that God will strengthen them upon the bed of languishing, and make their
bed in their sickness, Psalm. XLI. 3. Our Savior wou^d have his followers pray,
that their flight might not be in the Winter, or on the Sabbath. One of the
Fathers Theophylact. on Matthew. 24.
accommodates the words to my present purpose. Happy is that man that does not,
when he leaves this World, lead an unfruitful life, nor yet an idle one. The
Winter is the barren time of the year, and the Sabbath was a time, not of
Labor, but of Rest.

His Life was also very devout and pious, of which more afterward. I mention
only in this place, his very devout and frequent receiving the Holy Communion,
which is a great Preparative to a comfortable Death. I will repeat the Doctor's
own Words, which many years ago fell from him to his hearers at the Savoy, and
which were verified in him many years after. A worthy receiving of the Lord's
Supper (says he) is the best preparative for death. Crucific. Jesus, p. 557.
No man can die uncomfortably, that makes it his business, as often as he comes
to this Table, to receive worthily. Death cannot hurt him, etc. for by his
worthy receiving, he has laid up a good foundation for the time to come, etc.

I shall now more particularly give the Character of this excellent Person, and
the kindness I had for him shall not prevail with me to exceed in his
commendation.

First, I shall begin with his Religion and Piety toward God, of which he was
a very conspicuous Example. His Religion had its full power and force upon him,
it transformed him into the image and likeness of God. It has always been
esteemed safe advice, imitare eum quem colimus, i. e. to imitate him whom we
worship. On this account some of the Heathens excused their vices, because
their Poets, and men of the Stage, represented their Gods as having practiced
the same things. He worshipped the true and living God, the holy and merciful,
the God of truth and righteousness, and not only the greatest and most
powerful, but the best of Beings. He was a follower of God, and his Divine
Image was fairly stamped and impressed upon his Soul. He imitated God in those
two things which one of the Ancients tells us will make us like God, viz.
speaking truth, and bestowing benefits. A man of greater simplicity and
veracity I never knew; and there are multitudes that will witness that he went
about doing good. He did vow in his Baptism to renounce the Devil, the World,
and Flesh. Some men go no farther. All their Religion comes from the Font. This
good Man performed his Vow, he cast out of himself the Evil One, and renounced
all his Works, overcame the World in the noblest sense, and subdued and
mortified all the sinful desires of the flesh. He was a Conqueror, and more
than Conqueror. He devoted himself entirely, and without reservation, to the
service of his God. It was not only his business, but his choice and delight,
his meat and drink. I need not say that he was much in Prayers and Fastings, in
Meditation and heavenly Discourse, very frequent in devout Communions, in
reading and hearing the Word, in watchings and great austerities. He wisely
considered that these were the means, and not the end of Religion; that these
are not godliness, but only helps, and the way to it. He arrived at the end of
these things. He had an ardent love of God, a great Faith in him, and was
resigned to his Will: He had an unspeakable Zeal for his Honor, a profound
regard to his Word, and to his Worship, and to all that had the nearest
relation to him, or did most partake of his image and likeness. He was a Man
after God's own heart. He lived under a most grateful sense of his Mercies, he
was governed by his fear, and had a lively sense of God's special Care and
Providence. He had that sense of God's Mercy in giving us his Son to die for
us, that it was observed of him, that when he discoursed of that Argument, he
used no measure, no bounds, or limits of his Discourse. His heart was so
affected with that Argument, that he could not put a stop to himself. Jesus was
his Lord and Master, and he had his Life and Example always before him, and
conformed himself to it in the whole Tenor and Course of his Life. His
Religion was unaffected and substantial, it was genuine and primitive, and so
great a pattern he was, that he might have passed for a Saint, even in the
first and best times of Christianity.

He was of the Church of England, and a most true Son of that Church, and gave
the greatest proofs of it. Far was he from the Innovations of the Roman Church
on the one hand, and from Enthusiasm on the other. His Writings are a
sufficient proof of this. I very well know that when the Church of England has
been traduced and disparaged, he has not forborne to make so vigorous a
Defense, that he lost a very great Man's friendship by it, and felt the Effects
of it afterward by the loss of a considerable worldly advantage, which he
would otherwise have stood very fair for. He showed his Zeal for the Church of
England, when she was in greatest danger from many Enemies, especially from the
Church of Rome: At that time, when some were so wicked as to change their
profession, and others so tame as to sit still, and not to concern themselves
when the Enemies were at the Gates; (for there were too many, that professed to
be Sons of this Church, and do so still, who were overawed, and durst not
appear with that Courage which God and all good Men might justly have expected
from them) then did this good Man bestir himself, and lifted up his Voice like
a Trumpet, and undauntedly defended the Church, when she most needed it. God be
praised there were others who did so likewise, with great vigor and
resolution, and great hazard of their liberty and worldly Comforts. And many of
these had the hard hap to be traduced by their lukewarm Brethren, who cry up
the Church, as if these were not the genuine Sons of this Church. It has not
been for the advantage of the Church, that those Men have been decried as not
genuine Churchmen, who have done her the greatest service; on the other hand,
some vaunt themselves to be such, who have never been any support to their
Mother in her greatest distress. There are some of these who are like the
Images we see in many Churches, that are so placed in that bending Posture, as
if they bore upon their Shoulders the weight of the Building, whereas in truth
they are only the fancy of the Architect, and bear no weight at all. The Doctor
believed the Doctrine of this Church, obeyed her Injunctions, and conformed to
her Constitutions: Headmonished and diligently instructed his Charge, kept
Multitudes in her Communion, and lived up to her holy Rules, and was ready to
sacrifice all that was dear to him in the World to promote the true Interest of
this Church. He would not indeed take the Cure of Souls, and then put them out
to nurse to some cheap and negligent Curate; receive the profits, and leave
another man to take the pains: He would not take a Vicarage, and swear
residence before his Ordinary, and afterward refuse to reside, on pretense of
some privilege or exempt Jurisdiction, etc. as very many have done. But a
Churchman he was notwithstanding. Indeed the best of men have been
misrepresented. And there are a Number of the most useless men, that yet in
all places are crying up the Church of England, but have little regard to her
holy Rules. I knew two men of the same Faculty, in the same neighborhood. They
were in their profession very eminent. One of these had the Name of a Church of
England man, the other of a Fanatic. And yet it is well known that the first
very rarely (if at all) came to the Church or Communion, the other was a great
frequenter of both.

The Doctor was a man of very good Learning. He had very goods kill in
Languages. He had addicted himself to the Arabic from his younger time; and
retained it in good measure to the last. He had great skill in the Hebrew
likewise, nor was his skill limited to the Biblical Hebrew only, (in which he
was a great Master) but he was seen in the Rabbinical also. He was a most
diligent Reader of the Holy Scriptures in that Language in which they were
originally written. Sacras literas tractavit indefesso studio. This Dr.
Spanheim says of him in his youth; viz. that he was indefatigable in the Study
of the Holy Scriptures. He adds that he was then one of an elevated wit, of a
mind that was cheerful, and covetous of making substantial proficiency: And
also that he gave a Specimen of it about the year 1659, (when he was very
young) by a public defending a Dissertation concerning the Vow of Jephtah,
touching the sacrificing his Daughter. This upon his own request and motion he
publicly defended with great presence of mind. He had very good skill in
Ecclesiastical History, in Controversial Divinity, and Casuistical also.
Perhaps few men in his time were more frequently applied to with Cases of
Conscience than the Doctor was. As he had vast numbers of these applications,
so many times the Cases were very rare, and surprising, and such as are but
very seldom to be met with. He would often relate the Case to me, and tell me
what his opinion was, and how he delivered it. I do solemnly declare that I
neve heard him deliver his opinion, but I was entirely satisfied with it. And I
did think him as valuable for this skill, as for any other whatsoever. He was a
very constant Preacher. He was very affectionate and lively in his Preaching,
plain and pathetical; he spoke from his own, and pierced the hearts of his
hearers. I will not in this place speak of his Writings, I may have occasion to
mention them afterward. I shall only say here, that there is a great strain of
Piety and Devotion in them, and they are very instructive to the well-disposed
Readers. He had great correspondencies with learned Men beyond the Seas, and
was often visited by them, and this preserved in him that readiness which he
had in speaking the Latin Tongue with considerable ease and freedom.

As for his Pastoral care and diligence, he was a great Example. He was a
pattern to those of the Holy Ministry, whom they might securely follow. He well
understood not only the Dignity, but the Duty and Charge of his Holy Function.
He had a mighty sense of the worth of Souls, and of the great care that is to
be had of them. Hence it proceeded that he was irreconcilable to Pluralities,
and Non-residence: Hence it was that he labored indefatigably Night and Day:
Hence it was that he was so very painful a Preacher, so very hard a Student:
Hence it was that he was so very diligent in Catechizing the youth, in visiting
the sick, and in all the parts of his holy Office. His heart was wholly set
upon gaining Souls to God. In this work he labored incessantly. And those who
were thus disposed among the Clergy, he honored greatly, and served them to
his power. A considerable number of such Ministers were well known to him, and
some among them that were not well provided for. These upon occasion, he
recommended to Cures and Employments, as he had opportunity offered him from
Persons of Quality, who did many times apply to the Doctor on these occasions.
And happy were they who took this course, they might securely rest upon his
Recommendation. No man was ever more faithful in this trust; I know not but I
may say, no man was more happy than the Doctor in this matter. I have tried him
several times, and was not deceived. Had I been Patron of many Livings, I could
securely have relied upon his Wisdom and Fidelity in disposing them all. He
went by a true measure. He looked on a Living (as we call it) as a Cure, rather
than a Benefice. He valued the Flock more than the Fleece, and consequently
preferred those who did the same. On this very account, the Death of the Doctor
was a loss unspeakable; and I reckon my self a very great loser upon this
account. When he was alive, if I wanted a Parish-Minister, a Curate, a Master
of a School, or Chaplain, etc. I was secure, that by him I might be well
supplied. His Recommendation weighed more with me than many Hands, than Seals,
and ample Forms and Testimonials from great Names and Societies of Men. I well
knew that nothing could bribe him to commend that Person to a place of trust,
whom he did not know to be fit for it. I heartily wish his Example in this were
followed. Nor do I think that what I said last is any Digression, when I speak
of his Pastoral care. For his care in recommending those only whom he knew to
be fit, was an effect of it. It cannot be that he who will commend any person
to holy Orders, or the cure of Souls, should have a due sense of the Pastoral
care. And I heartily wish that the Clergy would be very cautious whom they
recommend for Orders, or for Institution; and that College-Testimonials were
given with greater care than they have been.

I add, that he had a very great zeal for Reformation. This will be no
Commendation of him to the lukewarm, and formal Christians: Nay it will render
him less in the eyes of some men, who mightily cry up the Church. And therefore
I must explain my self in this matter, lest I be mis-understood, and the Memory
of the Doctor suffer upon this account.

When I say that he was zealous for Reformation, I do not mean that he was for
reforming or altering the Laws. For though he did not think the Laws immutable,
yet did he not plead for the changing them. He was well satisfied in the Laws
of Church and State, and was not for Innovations. He was no Enemy to the
Constitution.

The Reformation which he was for, was such a one as might be consistent with
the Law, and indeed was the end of the Law it self. He was very much for a
Reformation usque ad legem; and it will be very strange that any considering
Man should be against such a Reformation as this; it is certain that he that is
so, is against the Law at the same time. He was for Reformation of Manners, and
a strict regard to the Discipline and holy Constitutions of the Church. He
lamented the Profaneness and Disorders which had broken in among us, and
threatened our Ruin. He endeavored to keep up the Life and Spirit of Religion;
and perhaps, considering his private Capacity, he did as much this way as any
man that lived in his time. He never needed any Dispensation himself, and could
not without great grief of heart, see the best Laws trampled upon by worldly
and ungodly Men, or defeated and eluded by the craft and artifices of others. I
need make no apology for him, that he was against Non-residence and
Pluralities, that he was for frequent Communions, and for a strict care in
Catechzing the Youth. All this is agreeable to the Sense of our Church. And his
great Zeal against all profaneness and immorality cannot be blamed, because he
was zealously affected in a good matter.

For his Justice to all mankind, he was a great pattern. He gave all men their
due, in the greatest latitude of that word. He did not only pay his debts, and
discharge his trust, but paid all due honor and respect to worth and virtue,
wherever he found it. Nothing could render him partial. No friendship, no
power, no interest whatever could turn him aside, or so much as set a false
biass upon him.

His Charity was Divine, and a mighty imitation of the love of God and of
Christ. He sought not his own, but with great industry pursued the good of
others. There are multitudes alive that have received great relief and comfort
from him. He did not spend his time in court and caress, in visiting great
Persons, and hunting after Preferment or Applause. He went about doing good.
And in this he was indefatigable. His heart was set upon it, and this made him
despise tbe difficulty which lay in his way. Wherever he went, this was his
business and design. His Charity was large, and diffusive. It extended to the
Bodies, the Estates, and Souls of Men. He fed and taught; He instructed and
comforted, and relieved those who wanted help. I cannot but apply to him what
Libanius Sophista Socrat. Apolog.
said of Socrates, in his Apology for him. Thus he pleads for him to the
Athenians his Citizens. Ye men of Athers, (says he in his Declamation) save and
preserve (...), i. e. a sincere Friend, a kind Man, a good Counselor, a
righteous Citizen! He could not lead an Army, but he knew how to reprove, etc.
Your laws and suffrages are of great value, and Socrates is of no small price,
who watches those who transgress, reproves the injurious, that discharges
this public Office for the City. How many, think ye, that once neglected to
educate their Children, by his means took that care upon them? How many that
quarrelled with their brethren, did he reclaim? How many that abused their
parents, did he bring to do them reverence? They feared the reproofs of
Socrates more than the Courts of Justice. They knew they could buy off an
Accuser there; but they that did amiss could not escape his reproofs, nor bribe
him to be silent. So it was; this holy Man was a great Blessing to the Public,
and more especially to the City, where he reproved the transgressors,
encouraged the virtuous, directed the scrupulous, and relieved the indigent.
Libanius goes on, and represents what Strangers and Foreigners would say when
Socrates was dead, and what Discourses they should be entertained with, who
should come to Athens to fee the man, and coming too late for that, should
visit his Tomb. One, says he, shall say to another, pointing at the place, Here
he discoursed of Fortitude, and there of Sobriety, and in yonder place of
Justice: Here is the place, where he run down Prodicus; and there, where he was
too hard for Protagoras: In another, he overcame Eleius, and Leontinus. I am
very sure it may be said of this holy Man, The places may be shown where he was
doing good; where he taught, and where he relieved; where he entered the lists
with Papists, and where, with the other Enemies of the Church; where he
instructed the Youth, and where he encouraged and directed the younger
Christians, and where he exhorted the elder. There are those who can point to
the places, and truly say: Here is the Family whom he relieved, and here live
the poor Widows whom he provided for; Here is the place where he preached, and
where he persuaded his Auditors to frequent Communion, and brought vast
Multitudes of Men and Women to constant attendance on that holy Ordinance! The
truth is, if the particulars were enumerated, (I say the particulars of his
Charity) they alone would make a Volume.

One piece of Charity deserves to be remembered to his honor, and that was his
telling Men of their faults, not only publicly, but privately too. His
reproofs may well be reckoned among his Charities. I may truly say of him, as
Libanius does of Socrates, (...), i. e. He made those better whom he did bite.
He bit and healed at once. There was no gall, no venom in him. It all proceeded
from unfeigned Charity to the Souls of Men. He could not suffer sin upon his
Brother. He had the zeal of John Baptist, and durst and did admonish, and
reprove the greatest. Of which matter I could say more than I think is
convenient for me to be particular in. In truth he had the Spirit of the
Ancient Prophets, and of the Holy Confessors of the Primitive Church. A Man
that conversed with him much, would be sure to hear of it if he did amiss. He
was far from slander and detraction, from that lingua tertia, as it is called
among the Hebrews, which does three mischiefs at once, viz. to the speaker, to
the hearer, and to the slandered. There is that speaks like the piercings of
a sword, but the tongue of the wise is health, Prove. XII. 18. He had the
perfect mastery of this member, and used it to the benefit of his Brother. I
never knew any Man living that was more stout than this good man in reproving
Vice, and in appearing for the Truth; never any Man that was farther removed
from flattery and dawbing.

He was a Friend of a thousand. He made little show, and was sparing in his
profession of kindness. But when he had occasion to serve his friend, he was
very industrious to do it, and did not think much of pains and labor therein.
There are multitudes now alive that can attest this.

He was temperate to the greatest degree, I had almost said to a fault. I have
often feared that, considering his great and constant labors, he hardly gave
himself that refreshment which was fit. He drank very little Wine at any time,
and in the latter part of his Life he did upon the matter wholly forbear it. He
had been moratum ventrem, as Seneca phraseth it, a Stomach that was well
nurtured, not nice or curious; it received the meanest Provision contentedly.
After the fatigue and labor of the day, he would sup with an Apple or two,
with a little Bread, and small Ale or Milk-Water. This he would receive with
great thankfulness to God, and great cheerfulness among his Domestics. He was
very thankful to God for a Morsel of Bread, and received the meanest Provision
with the greatest expressions of Gratitude. And yet when he entertained his
Friends, he did it liberally. He was always least concerned for himself in
these things. He very much denied himself, but to others he was liberal and
open-handed; and rather than the Poor should want Bread, he would fast himself.
He led an Ascetick Life, kept under his Body, and with great industry advanced
in Holiness, and a Life that was spiritual and heavenly.

For his Contempt of this lower World he has given sufficient proof. He
despised both the sides or appearances of it, I mean the Smiles and Frowns of
it. It is well known, that when he lived with the Duke of Albemarle, he might
very easily have made his Fortunes, as we usually express it. Had he made his
Court, he could not have failed. But instead of that, he minded his charge, and
the duty of his place. He minded the heavenly Kingdom, and the doing good to
Souls. He would often speak very contemptibly of Riches, and declare that the
whole design of the Christian Doctrine tended to bring contempt upon Wealth and
great Plenty. He was of opinion, that Riches were (as a great man has it)
impedimenta virtutis, i. e. the impediments of virtue; and that a man could
never arrive to any great pitch of virtue, but he must be, aut pauper, aut
pauperi similis, i. e. either poor, or like him that is poor, as Seneca has it.

He likewise despised the Frowns of the World. He met with sore afflictions.
The loss of a considerable part of his worldly estate at once, I reckon the
least of them. I do not remember that ever I heard him once complain, but have
often heard him give solemn thanks to God for his goodness. Some of his Friends
would sometimes speak their Resentment before him, because he was not better
preferred. But he would never side with them; he diverted the discourse, or
stopped it, by saying, I shall never want.

He was a most humble and heavenly Christian; of great patience and resignation
to the will of God; a most mortified man to the World, and to all the Glory and
Pageantry of it. He led an innocent and inoffensive, and a most useful Life.
He spent his hours well, and lived many years in a preparation for Death and
Judgment.

One thing must not be forgotten, and that was his great Meekness under
Obloquies and Reproaches, his great exemplariness in forgiving Enemies.

It may perhaps be supposed that he had no Enemies, and it will easily be
granted, that he could deserve none. But they do not know this world, that
think innocence and usefulness will protect any man against Malice, Envy, and
Ill Will. Nulla unquam magna gloria sine magna fuit invidia, Worthy actions
will always be followed with Envy. It Is by Julius Celsus Jul. Celsus de vit. J.
Caesaris.
reported, that when Alcibiades asked counsel of Socrates, what course he
should take to avoid Envy, Socrates replied, vive ut Thersites, i. e. live like
Thersites. Had he lived a soft and trifling life, he might have avoided it
easily: But he did his duty with great exactness, and that was the occasion of
Envy. The old Monk, that was asked by a young one how he might pass easily and
quietly through the world, told him, as one rule, that he should fungi officio
taliter qualiter, i. e. That he should not be exact in doing his duty, but do
it (as we say) so, so. The Doctor could not live like Thersites, he could not
do his Masters work negligently, and as this drew many followers and admirers
after him, so it did Envy also. The truth of the case is this. His exemplary
Life was a standing reproach upon those who were negligent, and always trudging
after Preferment and Wealth. That some of the worst should endeavor to blacken
him, has nothing strange in it at all. This I am very certain of, that the
Clergy of the greatest name, and the most conspicuous for Virtue and good
Learning, had a very great opinion of him.

He forgave his Enemies, and I could never find him in the least disturbed on
that account.

He wrote several Books which he published; a Catalogue of them will follow the
close of these Papers. He left also many excellent Sermons in MSS. upon the
most weighty Subjects; particularly upon our Blessed Savior's Sermon on the
Mount, one Volume of which is herewith Printed; the rest will be set forth with
all convenient speed; and likewise several others, as these find encouragement;
viz. upon the Parable of the Ten Virgins; the Parable of Dives and Lazarus;
several Sacramental Discourses, etc. For those which are already published,
they are well known. There is a great vein of Piety and Devotion which runs
through them. They savor of the primitive Simplicity and Zeal, and are well
fitted to make men better. They are weak men that are much taken with
Flourishes and tall Metaphors, with quaint and picquant strokes of wit. His
Discourses are all medicinal and healing, and fitted to make the Reader serious
and devout. That Food is best which is nourishing, and that Physic which cures
and restores. This good man had no greater aim than to do good.

I will say of him, as Pliny did of Virginius Rufus, Tanti viri mortalitas
magis finita est quam vita, i. e. His Mortality is ended rather than his Life.
He lives and will live for ever; and now that he is withdrawn out of our sight,
he will more than ever continue in the Remembrance and Discourses of Men.

His Friends have erected a Monument to his Memory in the Abbey-Church of
Westminster. The Reverend Mr. Philip Fall, a Friend of the Doctor, has added
the Inscriptions following. He might have enlarged this excellent Man's
Character further, had he not been confined by the Figure and Dimensions of the
Table.

The Inscription on the Tombstone is as follows.

Sub hoc Marmore, venerandi Sepulchri indice, novissimum Domini Adventum
praestolantur Mortales Exuviae ANTONII HORNECK, S. Th. P. Caetera, Viator,
disce ex vicina Tabella.

(...)

The Inscription on the Monument is this.

Aeternae Memoriae ANTONII HORNECK, S. Theologiae Professoris, Regiae Majestati
a Sacris, He commenced Doctor at Cambridge, in the Year 1681. This is mentioned
here, it having thro'inadvertency been omitted in its proper place.
Hujus Ecclesiae Canonici, Viri inter primos docti and eruditi: Sed qui
potissimum Flagrantissimo in Deum zelo and religione; Vitae Sanctimonia; Morum
gravitate; Humanitatis officiis in singulos, egenos praesertim and aegrotantes,
sedulo impensis; Sacris Concionibus, apud S. MARIAM LE SAVOY, per XXVI plus
minus annorum curriculum, indesinenter and indefesse ad populum habitis;
Scriptis, priscorum soeclorum pietatem, and Asceticam severitatem, mire
redolentibus, atque per ora hominum passim volitantibus; Long lateque
inclaruit, ac ingentem sibi apud bonos omnes famam comparavit.

Maximis, quos in exequendo munere exantlaverat, fractus laboribus, in
Nephritidem incidit; lethalique calculo visceribus pertinaciter adhaerescente,
candidissimam animam coelo reddidit; Pride. Calend. Feb.

Anno Salutis MDCXCVI, Aetatis suae LVI.

Viro optimo, majora merito, hoc qualecunque amoris and observantiae
Monimentum, Amici, M M. P P.

ao

A Catalogue of Books writ by the Reverend Dr. Anthony Horneck.
I. THE Great Law of Consideration, in 8o. II. The Best Exercise, in 8o. III.
The Exercises of Prayer, in 12o. IV. Delight and Judgment; or a Prospect of the
great Day of Judgment, in 12o. V. The Fire of the Altar. Upon the Sacrament, in
12o. VI. The Crucified Jesus, in 8o. VII. The first Fruits of Reason. VIII. A
Letter to a Lady Revolted to the Church of Rome, in 12o. IX. Questions and
Answers concerning the two Religions; viz. That of the Church of England, and
that of the Church of Rome. X. A Postscript to Dr. Glanvil, being an Account of
Witches in Germany. XI. An Answer to the Soldiers Question, What shall we do?
XII. Some single Sermons upon several Occasions. XIII. Fifteen Sermons upon the
fifth Chapter of St. Matthew, Vol. I. in 8o.
ERRATA.
Page 16. lin. ult. for contented to leave, r. contented so to leave. P. 19. l.
18. for ne, r. never, P. 34. l. penult. for imitare, r. imitari.

The TEXTS of the Sermons in this Volume.
SERMON I. St. Matthew V. verse 1, And seeing the Multitudes, he went up into a
Mountain: and when he was set, his Disciples came unto him, page 1 SERMON II.
Verse 2, And he opened his Mouth, and taught them saying; p. 26 SERMON III.
Verse 3, Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs in the Kingdom of Heaven,
p. 48 SERMON IV. Verse 4, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted, p. 93 SERMON V. Verse 5, Blessed are the Meek, for they shall
inherit the Earth, p. 121 SERMON VI. Verse 6, Blessed are they which do hunger
and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled, p. 147 SERMON VII.
Verse 7, Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy p. 174 SERMON
VIII. Verse 8, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, p. 203
SERMON IX. Verse 9, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God, p. 242 SERMON X. Verse 10, Blessed are they which are
persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, p. 290
SERMON XI. Verse 11, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, p. 329 SERMON
XII. Verse 12, Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in
Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets that were before you, p. 354 SERMON
XIII. Verse 13, Ye are the Salt of the Earth, but if the Salt have lost its
Savor, wherewith shall it be salted? etc. p. 378 SERMON XIV. Verse 14, Ye are
the Light of the World, p. 402 SERMON XV. Verse 14, A City set upon a Hill
cannot be hid, p. 426
SERMONS ON THE Fifth of St. Matthew.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 1. And seeing the Multitudes he went up into a
Mountain, and when he was set, his Disciples came unto him.
I intend, with God's Assistance, to explain to you Christ's famous Sermon on
the Mount, contained in the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Chapters of St. Matthew's
Gospel. A great Work, and which will take up much time; some years may be to
dispatch it in; and whether I shall live to finish it, he alone knows, in whose
hand our time is; but a Work, I am sure, exceeding profitable and useful for
all, that name the Name of Christ, and are desirous to know whether they belong
to that Master, whose Name they bear, and whose Patronage they crave.

And I choose to begin the Exposition of this celebrated Discourse of our
Savior at this time, because of the common Account, which says, this Sermon
was delivered, the second Year of Christ's Ministry, about this time of the
Year, the middle of May.

This Sermon may justly be called the Pandects of Christianity, the most
complete Body of practical Divinity, and the most perfect System of the Duties
we owe to God, and Man. It contains not only all that is good and sound in Moral
Philosophy, but a great deal more, and gives the best Directions for perfecting
of humane Nature, and how a Man may come up to emulate the Life of Angels: And
yet, this does not make the particular Lessons here laid down unpracticable, or
impossible to be performed; so far from it, that the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
everlasting Enjoyment of God, is denied to those who refuse to live up to these
Canons, Matthew. V. 20. and VII. 24, 25, 26. which shows, the Life prescribed
here is attainable, the Duties practicable, the Neglect inexcusable, and the
Performance possible; it being contrary to the infinite Goodness, and
Righteousness of God, to require things for which he gives no Power, or
Capacity.

So that he, who aims at a Happiness greater, and higher than the present World
affords, sees here the Steps he is to make, and the Way he is to walk in.

By this Sermon, the Christian World will be judged in the last Day, and by the
Particulars of it, we all must either stand or fall.

All that is necessary to Salvation is plainly delivered here, and lies within
the narrow Compass of three Chapters; so that no Man (if his Reason be sound)
can pretend either want of time to read them, or want of Memory to remember
them; for in less than half an Hour's time, the whole Duty of a Christian may
be surveyed, and there is no Man scarce of so weak a Memory, but does and may
remember a great deal more, than is contained in this Sermon: in the handling
of which, we shall meet with great Variety of Subjects; and though heretofore I
have occasionally treated of some of them, picking here and there a Flower, yet
I shall not upon that Account forbear to consider those Passages over again;
not only because I judge it profitable for my Auditory to do so, but because
the Method and Manner of handling them, will be different from the former, and
besides, several material things, which God's Spirit, and Study, and Time, and
a riper Judgment may suggest, will be added to the former Observations.

I begin with the Preliminaries of this admirable Sermon; a Sermon preached by
the Great Savior of the World, delivered by the Son of God, and published by
him, in whom are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, even by him, who
could not be mistaken in the Law he gave, or in the Sanction of it, who knew
very well what with the Assistance of his Grace we are able to do, what the
neglect of so solemn a Message does deserve, and how great the Encouragements
are, that are here given to those who have the boldness to force their way
through the impediments of this present World, into Eternal Glory.

The Words, I have read to you, are purely historical, and show what was the
occasion of the ensuing Sermon; for seeing the Multitudes, he went up into a
Mountain, and when he was set, his Disciples came unto him.

This is the Introduction or Preface to the following Discourse: And because I
am loath to leave any thing untouched, that is material in these three
Chapters: I shall,

I. Endeavor to reconcile the different relations of the Evangelists,
concerning this Sermon of our Savior.

II. Enquire, what the Multitudes were that appeared here.

III. Why Christ ascended into a Mountain to teach the People.

IV. What his sitting down does import.

V. What, and who the Disciples were that came unto him.

I. To reconcile the different relations of the Evangelists concerning this
Sermon (for St. Luke chapter VI. 12. seems to contradict St. Matthew,) you must
know,

1. That the Evangelists, St. John excepted, who seems to be more accurate, do
not always concern themselves in declaring the exact Order of time, when every
thing was spoke, or done, but content themselves with amassing, or collecting
the Matters of Fact, the substantial Parts of Christ's Discourses, his
Miracles, and his Actions, without being very curious about every Minute
circumstance, or order, or method; for their business was not to make men
Chronologers, but Christians. This is the reason, why one brings in a Discourse
of Christ, after such a remarkable Passage, another before it, which is
suitable enough to their Design; which was to give us an Account of the
Treasure, no matter in what order the Jewels lie. And accordingly St. Luke sets
down the Delivery of this Sermon, or the Substance of it after the miraculous
Cure wrought upon the Man who had the withered Hand, Luke VI. 12. but St.
Matthew chooses to speak of it before he mentions the Miracle; not that one
says, it was done before, and the other after, that would be a contradiction.
Only one thinks fit to take notice of it before he records the Miracle; the
other thinks it convenient to record the Miracle first, and then the Sermon.

2. The Agreement of the Evangelists appears chiefly in this, that none denies,
what the other says; One mentions a Circumstance, which another leaves out,
but though all do not mention the same, yet none denies the thing. To apply
this to the Sermon before us, St. Luke chapter VI. 12. says, Christ went up into
the Mountain to pray, which St. Matthew takes no notice of; yet his silence is
no denial of that Circumstance, St. Luke adds, That going up into the Mountain,
he chose Twelve Disciples, which might very well be, though St. Matthew says
nothing of it in this Chapter. Both these Evangelists agree, That Christ went
up into a Mountain; one indeed seems to affirm, that he delivered this Sermon
on the Mount, the other after he came down from the Mount. Both are in the
right, especially if we say, that he delivered this Sermon on the Mount at
large, and when he came down, by way of Summary, or Epitome, for the easier
remembrance of his Hearers; for indeed St. Luke's relation is nothing but a
Summary of this Sermon. And we know, it is customary with the Evangelists, not
only for one, to set down the very Words of Christ, for the other, the Sense;
but also, for one to repeat such a Discourse in its full Scope and Latitude,
and for another to give us only the Heads of it. But, II. What were the
Multitudes that appeared here? and why did they come? St Matthew chapter IV. 25.
tells us, They were great Multitudes of People from Galilee, and Decapolis,
from Jerusalem, and from Judaea, and from beyond Jordan; and so says St. Luke
chapter VI. 17. who adds, That some came from the Coasts of Tire, and Sidon.

1. It was a mixed Multitude, some good, some bad, some well inclined, others
averse from Seriousness, some whom mere Curiosity brought hither, others whom a
Sense of another World encouraged to come; and this is what we may say of all
Multitudes, that press into our Churches at this Day; some are of Gallio's
Mind, and care for none of these things, only, come for fashion's sake; others
of Lydia's Temper, whose Hearts God opens, to attend to the things spoken by
his Messengers. Some with Festus make themselves merry with the Preacher's
Discourse, and Expressions; others like Agrippa are almost persuaded to be
Christians, but very few prove true Converts.

2. The end for which they came was partly to hear, and partly to be healed, as
we find, Luke VI. 17. Though in hearing it was with them, as with the Seed in
the Parable; Some fell by the Way-side, some in stony ground, some among
thorns, some in a good natured soil, as it is Matthew. XIII. yet hearing was
their end; and I wonder not to find them ambitious to hear this wonderful
Person, who to his Doctrine joined the Testimony of Heaven, which is Miracles.
Had all Judaea believed him to be the Messiah, where one ran after him,
Thousands and Millions would have come to hear him; however the greater part
took him for a Prophet, mighty in Word, and Deed, and inspired, and one that
had more than ordinary converse with God, and this was Temptation enough to
hear him. They had for many Years heard the insipid Discourses of the Scribes,
and Pharisees, and were even tired with their superstitious Niceties, and
Traditions, and Ceremonies, and pressing the cleansing of the outside of the
Cup, and Platter. But here was a Person, that spoke to the Heart, and with
Authority, and things solid and great, and weighty, without design, or
interest, or affectation of applause, and there appeared in his Discourses
something more than humane, even a Divine Light and Power, which made them
leave their Work, and Employments to hear him.

Another reason of their coming was to be cured of their Diseases, and
Infirmities. Though Christ's curing Gratis, without Fee, or Money, might be a
Temptation to many of the poorer sort to make use of him; yet to others, his
miraculous Way of chasing away Distempers, with a Word and By-way of Command,
and healing Diseases, which mocked all the Attempts of Surgeons, and
Physicians, might be the greater Motive. Christ's curing Distempers of the
Body, was in order to heal their distempered Souls.

To set up for a Physician only, had been too mean an Employ, and therefore we
must suppose, that his Charity to their outward, was in order to conferr a
greater Charity on their inward Man; and their acknowledgment of his Power and
Goodness was to lead them to a holy Obedience to his Precepts, and particularly
to Repentance, and Reformation of Life; and though it is probable, few came with
that intent, I mean, to have their Souls freed from the Corruptions they had no
Sense of; yet being come, many found by blessed Experience, strange Cures
wrought upon their Consciences, and went away not only sound in Body, but with
a lively Sense of their Duty: The outward Cure astonished them into
consideration of their ways, and they thought they could do no less in
Gratitude, than become Subjects to his Will, who had conquered their Diseases.
Christ's Touch went farther than their Bodies, and their Souls felt the Power
of it, as much as their Flesh; and he that felt his Distemper departing, found
at the same time, that his love to sin stole away, and a new love succeeded, a
fervent love to God, and his Holy Precepts. But,

III. The next thing, that occurs in this Historical Part, is Christ's going up
into the Mount; St. Jerome takes notice, that some weak Brethren of his time
took this Mount to be the Mount of Olives; others believe it to have been a
Mountain distant about three Miles from Capernaum. But the Scripture gives the
Mount no Name, and therefore they only speak their Guesses, that are not
content with these general Notices. There is a Mountain at this Day in Judaea,
they say, which is called Christ's Mount; and the Friars that get Money by
showing Ancient Monuments, will needs have it to be the Mountain spoken of in
the Text, and for Confirmation of their Story, pretend to show the very Stone
on which Christ sat when he delivered the ensuing Precepts, but there is no
Credit to be given to such Reports, nor indeed is it material to know what
Mountain it was. The reasons why he ascended into a Mountain will be more to
the purpose, and they are briefly these.

1. It was to imitate the Eternal Father, that at diverse times, and in diverse
manners spoke to the Fathers of old. He gave his Law to the Jewish People on
Mount Sinai, Exodus XIX. II. The Son being to give a Law to the Christian World,
begins the Promulgation of it on a Mountain too, and in doing so, discovered
his Divine Authority; and it was an Item, that the same God, that spoke on
Mount Sinai, spoke in this Mountain too; only here lay the difference; the Law
on Mount Sinai was published in the Midst of Thunder and Lightning, for which
reason we find it called a Fiery Law, Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 2. The Law of the Gospel
was delivered in a sweet and still Voice, to represent the Nature and Temper of
it, to express the Calmness of Mind, the secret Satisfaction, the spiritual Joy
it causes, and the Rest it leads to, both Temporal and Eternal.

2. He thought fit to deliver this comprehensive Sermon on a Mountain, to show
the Sublimity and Grandeur of his Doctrine and Precepts, that the Law he
intended to give transcended the Laws of all Nations in the World in
wholsomeness and excellency; that the Laws, which had hitherto governed
Mankind, were low, creeping things, to what he was going to publish, and what
an Excellent, and Heroic Spirit, Obedience to his Precepts would give to his
true Followers, raise them above the World, make them despise sublunary
Vanities, advance them above the common level of Philosophical Virtues, and fit
them for dwelling at last on the everlasting Hills, on the Mount where God is
seen, and will be seen to Eternal Ages, even the Kingdom, that fades not away.
But,

I must go on, and take notice of another Circumstance here mentioned, and that
is

IV. Christ's sitting down on the Mount. Even this Posture has some Mystery in
it: For,

1. In doing so, Christ asserted the Greatness and Majesty of his Person, even
in sitting down to speak, while the Multitude, and the Disciples stood round
about him. This may be called an Early Act of his Royalty, as Kings do sit,
while their Subjects of all sorts and degrees stand about them. Sitting among
the Jews was a Posture denoting liberty, and freedom from slavery, which was
the reason why the Synagogue changed the Posture of standing at the Passover, a
Posture, or sign of Servitude, into sitting, or leaning; and with very good
reason might Christ sit down here, when he taught the People; whose business it
was to proclaim liberty to the Captives, to free the World from the bondage of
sin, and to rescue them from the Tyranny of the Devil. But,

2. In sitting down to teach, we may add, Christ imitated the Jewish Custom
which was, that the Teachers sat, and the Hearers stood: Unto this St. Luke
alludes, Chapter IV. 20. where speaking of Christ teaching in the Synagogue, he
says, He closed the Book, and gave it again to the Minister, and sat down, and
the Eyes of all that were in the Synagogue, were fastened upon him. In these
Synagogues, which were in the Nature of our Parish-Churches, there was a Seat,
whereon the Teacher sat, and the Auditors stood at his Feet, which gave
occasion to that proverbial Phrase, That such a one had been brought up at the
Feet of such a Teacher, as St. Paul says of himself, That he had been brought
up at the Feet of Gamaliel, Acts XXII. 3. And of this Nature was the other
Expression, the Jews made use of, viz. To wallow, or roll in the Dust of such a
Master's Feet; whereby they noted the Humility, that the Auditour ought to show
to him that teaches him. But,

V. One circumstance more must here be considered, and this relates to the
Disciples that came unto him. The following Sermon being directed to them, it
concerns us to know who these Disciples were. And,

1. They were the Twelve Apostles, who are called so by way of Eminency, as
being the Chief, the principal Disciples of Christ, by whose Life and Doctrine
men were to conclude, and learn the Nature of Christ's Kingdom. The word
Disciple (...), Talmid in the Hebrew, (...), Mathetes in the Greek, is one that
is taught by another, and puts himself under his Tuition, and Discipline,
following his Doctrine, and way of living. And so did the Holy Apostles, with
respect to Christ, and though Judas proved a Devil, and an Apostate afterward;
yet at first, without all peradventure, he showed the same Zeal that the rest
did, and was true to his Master's interest: These Twelve Christ chose as
Patriarchs of the Christian Commonwealth, in imitation of the Twelve Sons of
Jacob, which were the Pillars, and Foundation of the Jewish Republic, and
these Apostles trod exactly in their Master's Steps (the Son of Perdition
excepted) and therefore called Disciples.

2. Not only these Twelve, who were Christ's Domestics were called so, but all
such of the Multitude, that believed in the Great Jesus, and took him for the
Messiah, or Savior of the World; for to such also, the Name of Disciples is
given, Luke VI. 13. Acts IX. 26. Acts XI. 26. John VI. So that all, that have
given their Names to Christ Jesus, resigned themselves to the Rules of his
Discipline, and profess his Religion, are concerned in this Sermon; Every one
that names the Name of Christ: The Lessons here given reach all such, whether
high or low, whether Princes, or Subjects, whether rich or poor, whether
Nobles, or Peasants. Christ in the following Sermon lays down one way for all,
nor must any Man be so foolish, as to hope to be excused from the Obligation of
the following Commands, upon the Account of his Rank, and Condition; and as
impossible as the Practice of some of the following Precepts, particularly that
of forbearing private Revenge, doing good to them that hate them, etc. may seem
to Gentlemen, and Persons of Quality; yet Christ considered Men here not as
Gentlemen, or Noblemen, but as Christians; if Christians, they must be his
Servants; if Servants, they must do what their Master bids them do; if not, the
bare Name will never save them.

Inferences.
1. Christ seeing the Multitudes, and touched with compassion to their Souls,
went up into a Mountain to teach them. A Man in whom the Spirit of Christ is,
cannot but be touched with the same compassion to behold the great Numbers of
People, that go astray from the way to Salvation: Ah! how many Thousands do we
see ride Post to everlasting Misery! It Is true, all the Rhetoric in the World
cannot make them believe so much; but so it is, and if without such and such
Qualifications, there is no inheriting the Kingdom of God, what must we think
of so many Millions, who never have so much, as a sad, or melancholy Thought
about these Qualifications; and is not this making haste to be miserable? And
can a Man, that has a Sense of the Veracity of God in the Gospel, behold such
Numbers without being grieved, or concerned, or venting some charitable Wishes,
that he might be instrumental in their Reformation? But as I said, to do so, a
Man must have the Spirit of Christ; to be touched with the Temporal
Misfortunes, and Calamities of Men; a Man needs no more, than common and
natural Pity. So the Persian Monarch fell a weeping, when from a Hill he beheld
his well disciplined Army, to think, that in less than a hundred Years, all
these brave Men would be dead, and gone; but to be touched with the everlasting
Misery of Men's immortal Souls, there must be an Illumination from above, and
the Spirit of Christ, and a deep Consideration, that must affect the Heart with
a profound Sense of it. A Soul taken up with the World, and the Pleasures of
it, is unconcerned, who perishes, or who is saved.

But he that understands what Salvasion means, and labors hard after it
himself, and understands, that the threatenings of the Gospel are no Bug-bears,
but very real things; cannot but spend many a sad Thought about a concern of
that consequence. And, oh! that there were such a Heart; not only in all the
Ministers of the Gospel, but in other private Men, even in you all, and that in
your actual Endeavors to reclaim your wicked Neighbors; you might discover
the concern you have for their spiritual and everlasting Welfare! If the World
did not grow better under this Attempt, your own Souls however would grow in
Grace, and in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost.

2. The Multitude came to hear Christ, so do you at this Day. It Is true, you
cannot hear Christ in Person, but you hear him in his Messengers, of whom he
has said; He that hears you, hears me: Take heed therefore, how you hear;
Faith comes by hearing; but if you hear, and for all that hearing believe not,
your hearing will aggravate your Condemnation. It Is true, you do believe, but
it is after the common Rate. By believing, I mean, obeying, which is the true
Scripture Notion of believing how you are to hear; the Blessed Virgin has
taught you by her Example; for hearing the wonderful things spoken of her Son,
it is said, she kept them, and pondered them in her heart, Luke II. 19. This is
true hearing, to ponder in our Minds what we hear, to ponder the reasonableness
of the things which are spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, to ponder the
consequences of them; and what will become of us if we neglect things of that
importance, and to rouse our selves into to suitable Actions? Actions, that may
bear witness of our deep Sense of our danger, and that we are really concerned
about our everlasting State; and that our resolutions are strong, and
invincible, to secure God's Love. Such men as they hear, so they shall see in
the City of our God. They hear of very glorious things in the Mansions Christ
is gone to prepare for all his true Disciples, and their Eyes shall see them,
and they shall see more than their Ears did hear, and look so long upon the
charming Objects, till their sight is turned into Ravishment and Ecstasy.

3. The Multitude came to Christ to be healed. So do you at this day come to
the Ministers of the Gospel, I hope, with the same intent. It Is true, we cannot
cure the Dropsy, and Stone, and Gout, and Strangury, and such other Diseases
of the Body. But we can cure Diseases in your Souls which are very like the
Distempers, I just now spoke of; the Tympany of Pride, the Fever of Lust, the
Dropsy of Covetousness, the Leprosy of Sensuality, the Consumption of Envy,
and the Stone in the Heart, etc. When, I say, we can cure all these, the
meaning is not by our own strength and power, but by prescribing such Remedies
and Medicines; which if you will but take you will recover infallibly.
Infallible Medicines, I know, are matter of sport among Men; but here we may
talk (for we have God on our side) of infallible Remedies very seriously.
Cicero wonders, since Man consists of Soul and Body, that the Cure of the Body
should be so industriously sought after, and admired; insomuch, that they are
not ashamed to referr Aesculapius into the Number of the Gods, but few or none
touble their Heads about curing their Souls; but the Wonder will soon cease, if
we consider that Men feel the Diseases of their Bodies, but have no sense of
the Distempers of their Souls; and indeed, how should they feel them when they
cover their sins with Names of Virtue, and Titles of Innocence; their Luxury,
by generosity; their being ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, by modesty; their
breaking their most solemn Vows and Promises, by weakness and infirmity; their
notorious mispending their time, and extravagance in their Speeches, Dresses,
and Behavior, by Christian liberty; their Covetousness, by discretion, etc. To
be cured of your Sins, which are the Diseases of your Souls, the first thing to
be done, is to take off the Vizour from them, to abjure the false Glosses, and
to renounce the soft Interpretations, you put upon them. And yet after all one
cannot but wonder, that at this time of day there should be so many Souls sick.
Is there no Balm in Gilead? Are there no Physicians there? Yes, yes; There is
Balm in Gilead, there are Physicians, and very faithful ones. But, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem! How often would I have gathered thy Children, as a Hen
does gather her Chickens, and you would not. Ay! that is the dreadful Cause,
why so many of you are sick, and sick to death, and find no cure. There are
excellent Medicines given, there are admirable Remedies prescribed, but like
untowardly Patients you will not make use of the Physic that is administered to
you, and thus you perish, and thus you are undone. But,

4. St. Luke takes notice, that when Christ intended to deliver this Sermon, he
was a whole Night before engaged in Prayer to God. Surely this was to teach us
not to attempt or begin any thing of Concernment without Prayer. This is to be
observed both in rellgious and civil matters. Even before you go to Prayer,
send up some short Ejaculations in your mind to God, to give you Hearts to
pray, and Power and Wisdom, to offer to him the desires of your Hearts. Before
you read a Chapter in the Bible, beg of God to enlighten your Minds, and to
work upon your Wills, that you may cheerfully do what he requires of you in his
Word, and to bestow spiritual Wisdom upon you, that you may understand what you
read. Before you go to Church beg of him to give you attentive Minds, sober
Thoughts, and a great sense of his Presence in the Assembly of the Saints.
Before you begin a religious Fast, beg of him to quicken your Hearts, to raise
your Devotion, to assist you with humble thoughts, and to accept of your
Humiliation, and teach you to perform it so, that it may be acceptable in his
sight: This Rule is to be observed in all other religious Exercises; and not
only there, but in the civil Concerns of your Lives. Custom has made it
fashionable before you eat, and drink. Let Religion, and Conscience oblige you
to use it, in, and before all your other lawful worldly Concerns: Before you
go about your lawful business, let it be your earnest Prayer to God to bless
you with Success, if it be for his Glory, and your own good, and withal to
furnish you with that even Temper of Mind, that your obtaining your Desires may
not swell, or lift you up, nor your miscarying in your Attempts deject, or
despirit you. This is the way to sanctify all your Actions, and to preserve
the Spirit of Religion: For want of this spiritual Wisdom, you fall too often
into great Anxieties of Mind, and very disorderly Passions, when you miss of
your prey. Prayer will quiet your Spirits. This is conversing with God; and
while a great and glorious God is the Object of our Thoughts, we are armed
against immoderate Sorrow; can triumph over Losses; find comfort in our
Disappointments; learn to despise the World, and encourage our selves to set
our Affections on the things which are above.

SERMON II.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 2. And he opened his Mouth, and taught them, saying.
HAving resolved upon an Explication of Christ's Sermon on the Mount, and begun
already with the first Verse; I proceed this Day to the second, which is part
of the Evangelist's Preface or Introduction; and though this Passage as well,
as the preceding, is purely Historical, yet it affords very useful Lessons
and Instructions: Of this I have already given a Specimen or Proof in the
first, and do not doubt but I shall make good the Assertion in the Exposition
of the second. And he opened his Mouth, and taught them, saying.

For the understanding of which Expression you must know, that this Phrase
opening the Mouth, is used in Scriprure, when the Orator or Speaker intends to
speak something great, and weighty, and of mighty Importance. To this purpose
it is, that when David was going to rehearse the wonderful Works and
Providence of God toward the Children of Israel, he thus begins. Give ear, O
my People, to my Law; and incline your Ears to the word of my Mouth. I will
open my Mouth in a Parable, Ps. LXXVIII. 1, 2. so Ps. XLIX. 1, 2, 3, 4. Hear
this all ye People, give ear all ye Inhabitants of the World: Both low and
high, rich and poor together. My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the
meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. I will incline mine Ear to a
Parable, I will open my dark saying upon the Harp.

So that this word, and he opened his Mouth, bespeaks the Attention of all
considerate Men, and imports that the Lord of Preachers is going to publish
things of the greast Consequence, things of that Concernment, that a Soul that
has any Sense of a future Salvation, is bound to listen to the particulars,
and not to do it is as much as our life is worth.

To be sure, the Son of God would not spend his sacred Breath in vain: There
never dropped any thing from his Mouth but what was grave, and serious; and being
to teach the whole World, as it were, the way to Bliss; we may suppose, that
matters relating to that Bliss are things of greater Concernment, than all the
Intrigues of Achitophel, or any Politician in the World.

And therefore it will be neither unsuitable to Christ's design in this Sermon,
nor any way injurious to the Context, or Connection of these Words, with the
following; To take notice here,

That Matters relating to the Bliss and Happiness of men's Souls, are matters
of the greatest weight and moment. For, of these Christ is going to speak here
in the following Discourse; and in order thereunto, it is said, And he opened
his Mouth; which, as it has been already hinted, imports uttering things of
more than ordinary Consequence.

To be happy, is that which most men seem to endeavor after; for this the
Soldier takes the Field, and the Merchant plows the Sea; for this the
Husbandman dresses his Ground, and the Artificer sits up late, and rises early,
and puts himself into a sweat; for this the Man of an Estate applies himself to
variety of Sports, and others run out into monstrous Sins and Vices. According
as Men fancy happiness, one in one thing, another in another, so they follow
hard after it, and pursue it with very great Eagerness.

Thus all desire to be happy, though the greater part mistake Pebbles for
Pearls, and the Meat which perishes for that which endures to everlasting
Life. And yet all this does not make true Happiness a matter of fancy only; for
though the generality act as if it were so, yet it is not; and there are
certain Laws, and measures of real Happiness, which like the Laws of the Medes
and Persians, alter not: Men's mistaking the true Object of their Happiness,
shows indeed their Nature is corrupted, and their Understandings vitiated; but
is no Argument, that there is no true standard of solid Happiness, no more than
a blind Man's missing of the Mark, proves there is none to shoot at.

Nothing can be called true Bliss with respect to Man, but what makes the Soul
happy; for that being the great Agent, that moves, and orders, and rules, and
actuates the Body, it must needs be infinitely nobler than the Body; and
consequently, if the nobler Part be destitute of its proper Happiness, all the
other Felicity the Body shares in, must be nothing but show and vanish.

This Happiness peculiar to the Soul, cannot possibly consist in living, or in
having and enjoying Life; for Plants, and Trees, and Herbs do that, as well as
the most Godlike, and Angelical Spirits; nor can it consist in smelling, or
tasting, or seeing, or hearing, or feeling, agreeable Objects, or in eating and
drinking, or in gratifying a sensual Appetite; for that Brutes can do as well
as we, nay better. The Soul as it does surmount all vegetable, and sensitive
Creatures in dignity and excellency, so its Bliss must necessarily exceed
theirs, and it must be a Bliss that is adaequate, and suitable to her Nature,
which being rational, it must necessarily follow, that the happiness of the
Soul consists in living up to the Dictates, and Principles of right Reason.

But because Reason through the Fall of Adam, is become dull and dim-fighted,
and has lost much of its Beauty and Splendor, God has thought fit by the
Revelation of his Will, and Word, to polish and brighten these Principles, that
we might not mistake in this reasonable Service; and Christ particularly in
this Sermon on the Mount, has set Reason on its Throne again, and specified
the true Principles of it, showing how and in what manner we are to live up to
these Principles.

In this consists the happiness of the Soul, while it sojourns in this World;
and this fits and qualifies her for a greater, more lasting, and more glorious
Happiness hereafter.

And that matter relating to this Bliss and Happiness of the Soul, are matters
of the greatest moment and consequence, will appear from the following
Particulars.

1. Name me any one Concern in the whole World that is so great, or of that
Moment. The Prosperity of a Kingdom is a great Concern, but you cannot reap
half the Comfort, and satisfaction from that Prosperity, which you can do from
the Bliss and Happiness of your Souls. The welfare of a Family is a great
Concern, but the bliss of your Souls is much greater; for the want of the
former may be sweetened by Arguments, but the want of the other cannot be
excused, or qualified by all the Logic in the World. Health is a great
Concern, but the bliss of your Souls is greater; the former makes you robust,
and fit to bear Burdens, but the latter enables you to conquer Sin, to
overcome Temptations, and to vanquish Lusts, and vain Desires. A livelihood or
competency in the World is a great Concern, but the bliss of your Souls is
greater. The former indeed may give you credit, and reputation among your
Neighbors; but the other is a motive to God and his holy Angels, to respect
and honor you. A good Name is a great Concern, but the bliss of your Souls is
greater; for if you be deprived of the former, you are still in a capacity of
being loved of God, and enjoying the light of his Favor, but wanting the
other; God can have no kind thoughts, no favorable inclinations toward you.

2. Matters which concern the bliss and happiness of your Souls relate to
Eternity, and therefore must needs be the weightiest Concern; whatever is in
this World fades, perishes, and dies. Nothing is firm, or stable, or permanent;
and therefore, what lasts but for a few moments, cannot be comparable in
Excellency to that which lasts for ever. The happiness we speak of has indeed
a beginning, but knows no ending; it is a Bliss which does not fade with your
Death, nor expire when the Breath goes out of your Nostrils; but a happiness
which as the end of your days, qualifies you for the embraces of Angels, and
these deliver you into the Arms, and Care, and Protection of an Omnipotent God,
who will love you with an everlasting Love; and, whereas your Comforts here
were in the Nature of dim-burning Candles, he will increase that shine into a
light equal to that of the Sun, and the light of that Sun he will multiply
seven times, and make it as the light of the seven days in the first Creation.
The things which are seen are all Temporal, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. IV. 18.
but the things which are not seen, and such are our Souls, and the Bliss they
are designed for, they are Etergal; and then it is soon decided which are the
weightiest Concerns, the Temporal or Eternal.

3. The very Heathen have looked upon the things belonging to the Bliss of
their Souls, as things of the greatest moment. It is enough to astonish the
considerate Reader, what Pagans and Infidels have done for their Bliss, more
than they would have done for Father and Mother, for Brethren and Sisters, for
Wife and Children, for Women and Concubines. It Is granted, that with all this,
they have retained their customary Sins, and Vices; yet the Punishments and
Acts of Justice, and Revenge, or Cruelty rather, they have sometimes inflicted
upon themselves, Punishments they would not have undergone for the dearest
Friends they had, sufficiently show in what esteem the things belonging to the
Bliss of their Souls were with them. Time was when they sacrificed their
dearest Children unto Moloch, and caused their Sons and Daughters to pass
through the Fire to the Honor of that God, or Devil: And at this day in Japan
and China, some starving themselves to Death, others shutting themselves up in
Caves and Dens, and receiving Air through some hollow Canes or Pipes; others
charging themselves with heavy Iron-Chains, others putting themselves to most
uneasy and tormenting Postures, and continuing in them a considerable time,
and all this for the Bliss of their Souls; is an Argument, that they look upon
the Concerns relating to the Bliss of their Souls, as Concerns of the greatest
weight and moment.

4. The wisest Men in all Ages have thought so: Who wiser than Solomon? He has
God's own Testimony, that none was so wise before him, and none should be so
wise after him. It Is true, in his Old Age be played the fool, but while his
Wisdom was vigorous, and in its Prime and Glory, he was fully persuaded that
these Concerns were of the greatest Importance, and made it his business to
draw others into the same Belief; and what is the Book of Proverbs, and the
other of Ecclesiastes, but a Demonstration of this Truth. Nay, men of all
Conditions have been of this Judgment, how different soever in other matters.
If Divines and Preachers of the Word only, had spread this Doctrine, the
profaner Sort would have imagined that it was Interest, which made us cry up
these Concerns, as the weightiest of all; but men of diverse Callings,
Employments, and Professions have judged so; David a King, Sergius Paulus a
Governor of a Province, Cornelius a Captain, the Soldiers that addressed
themselves to John the Baptist, Zenas a Lawyer, Luke a Physician, Lydia a
Purple-seller, Simon a Tanner, Stephanas a Jaylour, Aquila and Priscilla
Tent-makers, Zachaeus a Publican, Nicodemus a Ruler, Joseph a Rich man, Lazarus
a Beggar; and when Men of various Professions do all concur in this Assertion,
their Testimony deserves to be valued.

5. Even wicked Men either in some great Affliction, or upon their Deathbeds,
do look upon the things belonging to the Bliss of their Souls as the greatest;
and their Testimony is the more considerable, because it is pressed and forced
out of them as it were. Take them in their natural bent and inclination, or in
their Prosperity, they profess nothing less than this, but at such times by a
secret instinct, or strong impulse which they are not able to conquer, they are
compelled to acknowledge so much. A wicked Man ordinarily is a professed Enemy
of this Truth, viz. that the Concerns relating to the Bliss of his Soul are of
any great importance, for he labors hard, and does what he can to ruin the
Happiness of his Soul; but upon a Sickbed or Deathbed, sometimes he is not
able to smother this Truth; and now you hear him cry out, O how have I hated
Instruction! how has my Heart despised Reproof! O that I had obeyed the Voice
of my Teachers! O that I had inclined mine Ear to instruction! O wretched Man,
that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! Now he would give
all he is worth for the Bliss of his Soul. This was the Sense of Manasseh, when
the Iron entered into his Soul. This was the Judgment of the Prodigal, when he
was denied so much as the Husks that the Swine did feed on; this is the
Sentiment of thousands, and thousands, whose Eyes do not open till approaching
Death does clear them, and the Testimony of an Enemy is sometimes very
considerable. But,

6. What matter is it what Men think. God surely cannot be mistaken, and he is
entirely of this mind: For what shall it profit a Man, if he gain the whole
World and lose his own Soul, or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul,
says Christ, Matthew. XVI. 24. a known place, a place most Children can repeat,
a place often quoted in Sermons; but where are the Persons that are concerned
at it, I mean concerned like Men that are in danger of losing so great a
Treasure? When a Man is in danger of losing an Estate, or a few Acres of Land,
or his good Name, or his Goods: How pensive, how melancholy does he grow! His
mirth all flies away, and how does he storm and fret, and rage sometime! This
very Man many times is in danger of losing his Soul, yet he is merry and
cheerful, and sings and dances, and one would think nothing ails him.
Notwithstanding all this, the Foundation of God stands sure; and God having
affirmed, and pronounced, that the gain of the whole World cannot
counterballance the loss of one Soul: The matters relating to the Bliss and
Happiness of our Souls, must needs be the greatest and weightiest Concerns
imaginable.

I might easily enlarge upon this Subject, but it is needless. Your
understandings are commonly better than your Wills and Affections; and being
sensible that it is a greater and nobler Work to prevail with the latter, than
to convince the former; give me leave to turn these Assertions into a serious
Expostulation.

1. Are the things belonging to the Bliss and Happiness of your Souls the
greatest Concerns of all; how is it that they are minded no more than they are?
How are they the greatest when they are regarded least of all? How the
weightiest when a Trifle is preferred before them? What does it signify to
confess so much when your Actions give your Mouths the lie? And do not you
expose your selves to the laughter of all judicious Men, when your Practices do
so manifestly contradict your Profession? How will you answer this Argument in
the last Day? How can you hope to come off, when the Judge shall argue with you
from this Topic? Did you really look upon the Concerns relating to the Bliss
of your Souls, as the greatest, how could you be so indifferent as to knowing
whether your Souls are in a State of Bliss, or not? How could you forbear
examining your selves by the Rules laid down by Christ in this Sermon, whether
Happiness is like to be the Portion of your Souls at last, or not? Can it be
safe to take it for granted, that your Souls are in a blessed State, when a
mistake in this matter is the most dangerous thing in the World? What
satisfaction can it be to you to believe at random, that all is well, when that
very Confidence is an Argument that the Foundation is rotten, and unsound? If
you do in good earnest believe these Concerns to be of the greatest importance,
I will tell you what the Effects will be, and to avoid Prolixity, I shall only
name them.

1. Your thoughts will be much employed about them, you will certainly find
time to think of them, and all the little Excuses, that you have a Trade and
Business, and a Family to look after will be laid aside, for all this you may
do in a moderate way, and yet make these weighty Concerns the frequent Objects
of your serious Thoughts. What? Are these the greatest Concerns and does it not
deserve one sober reflection, have I Soul that is immortal? Is this Soul
capable of being either happy or miserable? Is there a way to make it happy?
What is that way? Where shall I find it? If God has revealed it in his word,
is it not worth enquiring or searching into it? etc.

2. In your lawful Callings and Employments, you will be very cautious of
doing any thing that shall hurt or spoil, or prejudice the Bliss and Happiness
of your Souls, as all sins against Knowledge, and all wilful sins will
certainly do.

3. You will take care that the Briars and Thorns of the World, I mean, the
Riches, the Cares, the Pleasures of this Life do not choke your Care and
Solicitude about this Bliss of your Souls, and to this end you will avoid
burthening your selves with overmuch Business, which will engross your Care,
and Thoughts, and Time, and drown the other.

4. You will not content your selves with general Notions of this Bliss, but
you will go deeper, and descend to particulars, and examine the special
Ingredients that must make your Souls truly happy, and which are described in
this admirable Sermon of our Savior, and take them into consideration.

5. You will pray hard, and with fervor, and importunity to be strengthened
from above, in order to a cheerful Performance of the Rules specified in this
Sermon.

6. If at any time you find that you grow dull and lazy in the conscientious
observance, and performance of these particulars, you will rouse your selves by
fresh Arguments into your first love; and if at any time surpised by a strong
Temptation, you neglect any Lesson enjoined here, you will chide and check, and
force your selves into a more vigorous watchfulness and diligence.

7. You will not neglect the proper means, whereby this Bliss of your Souls
must be promoted, one of which is the frequent and conscientious use of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; for here you see how dear your Souls were to
the Son of God, what he did for them to make them happy, how he laid down his
Life to procure their Life and Bliss, and can there be a greater motive to
prosecute the Bliss of your immortal Souls?

These will certainly be the effects of your Belief, i. e. if from your Heart
you believe, that the Concerns relating to the Bliss and Happiness of your
Souls, are the greatest and weightiest Concerns; if these effects appear not,
it is plain, you do not look upon these Concerns as things of the greatest
importance, and consequently you are unfit for the Kingdom of God.

2. As Christ opened his mouth and taught the People; so the Ministers of the
Gospel after their Great Master's Example, are to read and learn their Duty,
for they are sent by Christ to supply his place on Earth to the end of the
World. Teaching is their Business, not only with their Lips, but with their
Lives. Their lives must be visible Comments upon the word they publish; and as
one said, they must be like Gideon's Soldiers, carry Trumpets of sound
Doctrine in one Hand, and Lamps of good Lives in the other. A Minister whose
Life contradicts his Preaching, is one of the worst Men in the World, and makes
himself Twofold more the Child of Hell than his Hearers, that imitate his ill
Example; and if there be one place hotter than another in the burning Lake,
that will be his Portion.

As Christ taught his Hearers nothing but what was grave and solid, and
weighty, so the Ministers of the Word must feed their Auditors with solid
Food, not with Trifles, or Legends, or dry insipid Stuff, but with things that
may make them wise unto Salvation.

This Phrase, opening the mouth, is sometimes used in Scripture, for speaking
with boldness and courage in the Name of the Lord, as Ephesians. VI. 19. Pray for
me, that I may open my mouth boldly; So the Ministers of the Word must not be
meally-mouth'd, but Cry aloud, and spare not, lift up their Voices like
Trumpets, and show the People of God their Transgressions and the House of
Jacob their Sins, Isa. LVIII. 1. There is no dallying with the sins of Men, no
complementing their Souls with flattering and enticing Words. Their Sores must
be rubbed, and Salt and Vinegar thrown into their Wounds where it is so that
gentler means will do no good: Nor must we fear the anger, or displeasure of
Men, for we have a greater Master to please, who will bring forth our
Righteousness as the light, and our Judgment as the Noonday; nay, and make our
very Enemies to be at peace with us; however, if he does not, there is huge
comfort in the discharge of a good Conscience, to which purpose Christ bids his
Messengers, or Ministers rejoice when they are reviled, and despightfully used;
and accordingly of the Apostles we read, That they departed from the Council
rejoicing, because they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of the
Lord Jesus, Acts V. 41.

3. As it is our Office to teach you, so it is your Duty to be taught; I say,
to be taught not to quarrel with our Admonitions, to show your selves
tractable, to suffer the Word of exhortation, and to admit the good Seed we
sow, into a good and honest Heart. It Is true, you are not to be believe every
Spirit, but to try the Spirits, whether they be of God, 1 John V. 1.

But then, when you have tried our Doctrines and find them agreeable to the
Word of the living God, there is no Tergiversation to be used, but our words
must be received, as if God himself spoke to you; for we press no other things
upon you, than God has commanded you in the Scriptures. These Scriptures you
have in your Hands, and with the Beraeans you are exhorted to search whether
things are so, as we represent them.

What a sad thing is it in Popery; not one of the common People, not a Layman
dares bring a Bible to Church with him; if he does, he is no good Catholic;
nay, in some Countries in danger of being burnt for a Heretic. A good
Catholic must have no Bible, must not read it, must not meddle with it, it is a
dangerous Book, he must not look into it, for fear he should learn Heresy
there; or rather, for fear he should discover how he has been deluded by the
Priests, and taught for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

See here the mighty advantages the Reformation has brought to you: You can
come to Church with your Bibles under your Arms, and have not only leave, but
are entreated to compare what we say with the Oracles of God, to satisfy your
selves of the Truth of what we deliver, and to believe your own Eyes. But then,
as I said, having found that our Exhortations and Doctrines are according to
the Law, and to the Testimony; let it not be said of you, as it was of
Ezekiel's Hearers, Ezekiel. XXXIII. 31. They came and sat before the Prophet, they
heard his words, but they would not do them; with their Mouths they showed much
love, but their hearts went after Covetousness. What a happiness does that
Minister enjoy, that can say of his Disciples, as St. Paul of the
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3. We are bound to give thanks to God always for
you, as it is meet, because your Faith grows exceedingly, and the Charity of
you all toward each other abounds. I conclude with St. Paul's Admonition, Heb.
XIII. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do
it with Joy, and not with Grief; for that is unprofitable for you.

SERMON III.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 3. Blessed are the Poor in spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven.
HAving done with the Historical, and Circumstantial Part of this Sermon,
contained in the First and Second Verses; we go on to the Doctrinal. And here a
very glorious Scene opens; a Scene of admirable Truths, of Truths which are
Paradoxes, to persons who rise no higher than the Animal life, perfect
Mysteries, which the Princes of this World know not, which the Great understand
not, and which the sensual part of Mankind are ready to laugh at, and which
none but a thinking or thoughtfull Person can admire.

As the inspired David, or whoever was the Collectour of the Psalms, begins
that Volume with the way to Bliss, so our Savior begins his Sermon with the
same Subject. Indeed, this was his peculiar Province, and of the weighty and
momentous Errands he was sent upon, this was one, to teach Men the true way to
Bliss endless and eternal. Moses had done it before, the Prophets had attempted
the like, Philosophers had made some Essays of that kind, but their Notions
were imperfect, and they had no distinct notices of all the materials necessary
and convenient for that excellent Structure; and there was a Providence in it,
because the fuller Revelation of God's Will was reserved to the coming of the
Messiah, or the Son of God: And it is remarkable that Christ in his Directions,
how to attain to solid Bliss runs counter to the World; and such as are
commonly counted the most wretched and miserable, are here pronounced blessed.
It Is like some that were by when Christ delivered this Sermon, expected he
should have begun in another strain, such as Blessed are the Rich, and the Men
whose Barns are large, and who have much Goods laid up for many Years, who have
Money at command, can eat what they list, and drink what they please, whose
Lands bring forth plentifully, and whose Presses run over, who are courted and
respected by all that know them, whether great or low, and are in a capacity of
denying themselves in nothing that their fond Appetite craves. But my thoughts
are not as your thoughts, says God: He takes other Measures, and therefore
Blessedness is here ascribed to Persons, where a Man would least imagine or
expect to find it, even to the poor in Spirit. Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Three things do here very naturally offer themselves to our Consideration.

I. Who the poor in Spirit are, or what poverty in Spirit is.

II. In what sense the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs, and belongs to them. And,

III. How their Title to this Kingdom makes them blessed.

I. What poverty in Spirit is. And here negatively, it is not,

1. A bare outward Poverty, or being destitute of the Necessaries and
Conveniences of this Life; not a Poverty in Purse, not a worldly Poverty, not
a State of Beggary. We do not deny but Poverty has great advantages, with
respect to being good, and the poor Man is more expedite in his Journey to
Heaven; for he has none of those Clogs, none of those Briars and Thorns, which
too often hinder the Richer sort of Men from discerning or prosecuting their
everlasting Happiness. This diverse of the Heathen Philosophers saw, Vid. Grot
in Loc.
who therefore spoke a Thousand pretty things concerning Poverty; what a help
it was to Virtue, what a means to become truly wise, what an Advantage to
arrive to solid goodness? Nay, some went so far as to abandon their Riches, and
throw their Gold and Silver into the Sea, that they might be more at leisure to
improve their Minds, and to enrich their better Part.

And indeed, Our Savior seems very much to favor this Condition; and there
are so many things spoken against Riches, and rich Men in the Gospel, as are
enough to make Men that enjoy any Plenty or Prosperity afraid, for fear their
Reward should be with Men, who have their Portion in this Life; and it is to be
noted, that Christ says a very great thing concerning this state of Poverty. To
the Poor the Gospel is preached, and this he reckons among the Miracles he
wrought to prove himself the promised Messiah, or Redeemet of the World. It is
Matthew. XI. 5. The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel
preached unto them.

The poor! It must be confessed our Savior did not go to Court, nor did he
associate himself much with Rich men, except they were of a better Temper than
ordinary, and he seemed to be the poor Men's Preacher, as if he thought the
Rich were not capable of receiving his stricter Discipline, and as if the Poor
were the most likely Persons to espouse his severer Doctrines. Carnal reason
would have thought, that when Christ appeared first on the Stage of the World,
he should have made his first Addresses to the Grandees of Judaea, and Men of
Estate and Fortune: But no, his Converse was chiefly with poor Fishermen, and
the needy Multitude; and here lay the Miracle, and the Reason of it we may
guess at, viz. to show, that the Poor are in a greater Capacity of listening to
his Oracles, than the Rich, who have so many things to divert them from the way
to Eternal Bliss; so much Business and Pleasure to mind here on Earth, that
they are not at leisure to think of Heaven.

And yet, notwithstanding all this, a bare outward Poverty does not entitle a
Man to the Kingdom of Heaven.

It Is a great help to Seriousness, if sanctified and improved; and the want of
Comforts here on Earth, be made a motive to seek them in Heaven; but the bare
outward want does not make Men happy; for we see too often, that the poorer Men
are, the wickeder they are, and their outward want makes them more daring in
Impiety; and surely, this can be no qualification for Eternal Bliss.

The Punctilio's of State, which the Richer sort of Men think themselves
obliged to observe, the Luxury they are apt to run into, the pampering of their
Bodies, their pride in Clothes and external Habits, their sinful compliances
with Persons of their Rank and Quality, their Care to increase their Riches, to
get an Estate suitable to the figure they make in the World, their ambition,
oppressions, and domineering over the meaner sort, and their study to keep up
their Credit with the Great and Potent, all which too often are very powerful
imediments in the Richer sort to be truly wise to Salvation; These the poor Man
is freed from, nor has he so great an Account to give, there being but little
given him, and consequently, is in a greater Capacity, and possibility of being
wise, and good, and happy; but his bare outward Poverty will not do the Work,
and therefore is not intended here. Nor,

2. A vowed voluntary Poverty. This some Champions of the Church of Rome
contend for, as if their Monastic vows were commended here. Even a Poverty
whereby Men and Women do voluntarily renounce their Estates and Riches, and
bestow them either upon their Relations, or the Poor, or the Church; and
thereupon entering into a Monastery, or Nunnery, Vow perpetual Poverty,
Chastity, and blind Obedience; and this they make a piece of Evangelical
perfection, which all Men are not obliged to, but such as some Persons do
voluntarily undertake to increase their own Merits, and sometime to merit for
others too.

But certainly this cannot be the sense here; for the Poverty here mentioned,
is represented as a Duty incumbent upon all Men, and without which a Christian
will certainly miss of a future Bliss; for thus says Christ in the Conclusion
of this Sermon; Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, him
will I liken to a foolish Man, that built his House upon the Sand, and when the
Rain descended, etc.

We make do doubt of it, but that God is pleased with Self-denials in our
Estates and Fortunes, if well-grounded, and proceeding upon very good
Principles, and we believe that such free Willofferings are very acceptable to
him, and by his special Grace and Favor, may increase a Man's glory and
felicity in another World. A Man that has a thousand Pound a Year, and
resolves to live upon two or three Hundred, and to consecrate the rest to pious
Uses; or whatever a man's Income is, greater or lesser, if he religiously
confines himself to a small Pittance, that he may be in a greater capacity of
doing good: We are so far from discouraging such a Person, that we commend and
applaud him, and believe the Love of God is strong and vigorous in his Soul,
and do no: doubt, but he will be recompensed accordingly in the Resurrection of
the dead, provided this self-denial be not intended as a way to satisfy God,
or to make him compensation and amends for some sins, men are loath to part
with.

But we cannot be so foolish as to think, that by such self-denials a Man
merits any thing of God, or may challenge a higher degree of Glory, as his due
for that savours of monstrous Pride, and instead of exalting to, will certainly
exclude the Soul from the Kingdom of Heaven. And what need Men talk of Merit,
when they have a most bountiful Master to deal with, who rewards those that
diligently seek him, beyond what they are able to think, or to express. Nor can
we be so sottish as to think, that a Man who thus denies himself can spare some
of his good Works, or that the Virtue of them may be applied to others, who are
either defective in goodness, or suffer in Purgatory, and consequently such a
Poverty cannot be intended here.

To quit therefore the Negative, and to come to an Affirmative resolution of
this Point. By poverty in Spirit, is meant, True CHRISTIAN HUMILITY; for we
cannot suppose, that Christ would here lay down the way to Eternal Life, and
forget to press this darling Virtue, and of all Accomplishments the most
amiable, and most charming, indeed the very Foundation of all saving Religion;
and since there is no formal mention made of it in the ensuing Discourse, we
must necessarily referr it to this place, and believe it to be comprehended in
this Expression; the rather, because nothing expresses this Christian Humility
better, than poverty in Spirit.

A poor spirited Man, we know, is a Coward, but such a poor Spirit could never
be designed by Christ here, whose intent was to enable all his Followers to
tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and to trample on all the Powers of Darkness,
Luke X. 19. and they that do so, or can do so, are sar from being Cowards; so
far, that nothing argues greater Courage and Magnanimity.

To represent to you the Nature of this poverty in Spirit, or Christian
Humility, I shall describe it in the following Particulars.

As Humility is nothing but a generous contempt of our selves; so this
felf-contempt imports,

1. A lively Sense of God's Greatness, Holiness and Goodness. That Is it which
gives Humility being; that is it whereby the sacred Fire is kindled. A lively
Sense of God's greatness, gives the Soul a clear sight of her own nothingness;
A lively Sense of God's holiness, a clear sight of her sinfulness, a lively
Sense of his goodness, and a clear view of her own Unworthiness. The greater
this Sense is, the greater is the Humility; while that Sense lasts, this
Humility lasts when that decays, this vanishes. This lively Sense sows the seed
of Humility in the Soul, and makes it grow, and advance into fruitfulness; it
produces it waters it, cherishes, and keeps it warm. Where that Sense is very
lively, the Soul knows not how to lay low enough before God. A lively Sense of
God's greatness makes Abraham cry out, I have undertaken to speak to the God of
Heaven, who am but dust and ashes, Genesis XVIII. 27. A lively Sense of God's
holiness makes Job fall down and say, I ahhorr my self in dust and ashes, Job
XLII 6. A live Sense of God's goodness compels Jacob to prostrate himself
before God, and forces him into this Ejaculation; I am not worthy of the least
of all the Mercies, and of all the Truth which thou have showed unto thy
Servant, Genesis XXXII 10. And though I grant that all this may be said, and is
said daily by Hypocrites, and Persons in whom Sin and the World are
predominant; yet it is not the bare saying so that makes a Man humble, but the
Sense which dictates these Expressions.

2. From hence flow very low and despicable thoughts of our selves, not
transitory thoughts in the nature of flying Sparks, once in a Month, or once in
a quarter of a Year, or once in a melancholy Fit; but habitual, lowly thoughts,
which are constant Guests with the Soul, and whereby the Soul for the most part
entertains a very low or small opinion of her self; or worth, or any thing that
belongs to her; and if any proud or arrogant thoughts arise, presently pulls
them down again, with such considerations as these.

What a poor contemptible Creature am I? What have I, that I have not received?
My Body, what is it, but the result of God's bounty? My Soul the work of his
hands; what Parts, what Abilities, what external Accommodations and
Conveniences I have, they are Effects of his liberality; what Gifts, what
Accomplishments, what Perfections, what Excellencies, what Graces, what Virtues
I have; what are they but the Products of his undeserved Charity? Of my self,
what am I but a sinner, a Name which must fill me with horror, when I think of
it; a wretched Creature that have deserved the wrath and indignation of an
offended God, and the burning Lake! a very poor inconsiderable thing, or rather
an inconiderable nothing! And shall so vile, so pitiful a thing, the sport of
Winds, and whose Life is a shadow, a dream, and a vapor, be proud of any
thing? Who live upon Alms, and am maintained by the pure Charity, and
Compassion of an Omnipotent God? Sustained by his breath, upheld by his power,
cherished by his providence, subsisting by his Will, and moving at his
pleasure, and a thing no better than a Tennis-ball in his hand, which he may
strike away, and call for another. What? proud of being in debt, and having a
severer Account to give? For of this Nature are all my Mercies, show how much I
am indebted to God, and how great my Account will be, when the Great Master of
the World shall come and reckon with his Servants! These are some of the low
and despicable thoughts the humble Soul entertains, I Tim. I. 15. And from
hence flows,

3. A hearty detestation and abhorrency of self-conceitedness, self-admiration
and desire of vainglory; so that if the humble Soul at any time admits vain
imaginations, whereby she pleases her self with what she has done, as her own
Work, or let drop a Word, which looked like admiring her own performances, or
done any thing which tended to raise her Credit, and Reputation with Men,
though it was but by a side-wind, that she sailed to that dangerous Port, she
presently chides her self, laments her weakness, cries out against her folly,
is angry with her inadvertency, and declares an everlasting War against all
such sinister and preposterous Purposes, 2 Cor. XI. 15, 16.

4. From hence flows Humility to Men too, and preferring others in honor
before our selves, according to the Command and Character of Humility given,
Romans XII. 10. Surely that Man cannot be truly humble to God, that is not so to
Men; and in vain does he talk of lowliness, that shows no respect to his
lawful Superiors and Magistrates; that will not let abler and wiser Men
speak, or sit, or go before him; that cannot be content Men of greater worth
should be preferred to the Place he aimed at; that knows not how to condescend
to Men of low Estate, and is loath to show civility to Persons that are good,
because they are miserable in the World; that thinks it below him to lend his
helping hand, and to minister unto those whose Condition is mean; or never
learned yet in his practical Esteem, to prefer a poor Saint before a rich Man,
who is a stranger to real Goodness; that will not go one step out of the Road
of his humor, and will be affable and courteous no farther than is consistent
with his Interest. To be sure, such a Person does not think better of others
than of himself, which yet is the great ingredient of Humility. It Is true, the
humble Soul is not to think of Persons openly profane, and atheistical, better
than of her self; yet the Rule holds, where others appear to be vigilant, and
watchful, and sober, at least live in-offensive, and without scandal; and the
ground upon which this piece of Humility rises, is partly the secret defects
the humble Man finds in himself, and which he has a greater sense of, than of
the faults of others, and which really appear greater to him, than the offenses
of other Men, partly the secret Gifts, and latent Virtues, that may be for
ought he knows in another Man. Upon this Account, the humble Person is to think
of others better than of himself, yet with this caution, so to think of others
better than of himself, as not to run into despair, nor to conceal, or hide the
Grace of God bestowed upon him, when the Edification of others requires a
declaration of it, as is evident from Psalm. LXVI. 16. and 1 Cor. XV. 10. And
from hence flows,

5. A holy Contentedness in the mean Condition, God has placed us in. Humility
is particularly seen in outward Poverty, and he whom Providence has brought to
a very mean and low Estate in the World, and who is contentedly poor, is truly
humble. For he humbles himself under the mighty hand of God, submits to his
Will, and bears it cheerfully, because he is confident it will work for his
good. The same is to be applied to other outward Afflictions. The humble Man
gives his back to the smiter, and when he suffers, he threatens not only from a
sense of the Demerit of his sins, which he knows have deserved worse Usages;
but from consideration of the mighty alteration of his condition, when the Lord
Jesus shall appear from Heaven, to be admired in all his Saints. Humility is
more seen in bearing Afflictions and Reproaches, and Injuries than any where.
In these cases, for our thoughts to work downward, and to strike the Soul into
an humble Sense, and to quiet her as a weaned Child, this looks like the
Humility of a Disciple of Christ, 1 Pet. II. 19, 20, 21. But,

6. And lastly, This Humility is not complete, without a cheerful and humble
Submission to what God requires to be done. Pride is the cause of Disobedience,
and because Men insolently oppose their Wills to God's Will, They walk in the
imagination of their hearts. Hence we read, Jer. XIII. 15. Hear this, and give
ear, be not proud for the Lord has spoken: To show that Pride causes Men to
turn their backs to the wholesome Commands and Admonitions of the Lord: And if
this be the Nature of Pride, it must necessarily be the Temper of Christian
Humility, cheerfully and humbly to take Christ's Yoke upon us, and let the
Commands of the Gospel, be never so contrary to the interest of Flesh and
Blood, where Humility reigns, there none of those Commands will be grievous, 1
John V. 3.

This as near as I can guess, is the true Idea of Christian Humility commanded
in the Text; for though it be no formal Command, yet a Blessing being entailed
upon the Virtue, which Blessing is not to be had without the qualification, it
must be Tantamount to a Command. But, Why is this Humility called poverty in
Spirit? I answer: Poverty it is called,

1. Because the humble Man has no good thing of his own. He carefully
distinguishes what is God's, and what is his own. He is sensible, that all the
Evil he has is his own; and if what he may call his own be considered, he will
appear a very poor, miserable Wretch destitute of Mercy, and Favor, and
Comfort, and fit only to fall a Prey to the rage of the Devil. What good he
has or finds in himself, he ascribes to the true cause God blessed for
evermore. Not I, but the grace of God, which was in me, I Cor. XV. 10. He
freely and feelingly acknowledges, that he is nothing, has nothing, and can do
nothing that is good, without the power and influence of God. He sees nothing in
himself that can help, or save, or secure him. All his riches, hope, life and
power, and strength and virtue is in Christ Jesus: And having nothing of his
own, that he can boast of, he may tr^ly be called poor.

2. Poor, because he is always in want, always in want of God's grace and
goodness to guide him, to lead him, to conduct him, to strengthen him, to keep
him, to preserve him. He is always begging, always imploring the Divine
goodness to remember him. Begging is his Trade and Profession, I mean begging
the Mercy and Charity of the Father of Mercy; and he gives not over begging,
till his Prayers be turned into everlasting Praises.

But he is not only poor, but poor in Spirit.

1. Because Humility must take up its chief Residence in his Spirit, and inward
Man. Outward prostrations, humiliations, cringings, bowings, rags, a sordid
habit, sackcloath; and the course cloth he wears, signify nothing except the
Soul, or the Mind be lowly: If that be so, the outward Man will be truly so, if
the inward Man be a stranger to this Humility, the leathern Girdle, and the
Garment of Camel's-hair without, will soon be seen thorough. And therefore the
young Man in Cassian for all his frequent aggravations of his sins, and
wonderful semblances of an humble mind, discovered his Hypocrisy, when he
could not endure a reproof from Serapion. Lucian makes himself very merry with
a Cynick, a Man who pretended to more than ordinary Humility and Austerity of
life; A friend of his searching his Pockets, and thinking to find there some
old Rags and moldy Bread, and the Parings of Cheese, or some such stuff, to
his surprise found there a Bale of Dice, a Box of Perfume, and the Picture of
his Mistress. A very fit Emblem of a Person, who makes a show of Humility
without, but within is self-conceited, and an admirer of his own worth. The
heart must feel the power of this Virtue. That Is the Garden where the Flower
must grow, and there it must take root, if not, it is not a Plant of our
heavenly Father's planting; and a Christian may easily perceive, that it is
lodged in his inward Parts, by the lowly and humble Thoughts he cherishes
within. It was from what he felt within, that the Martyr said, Lord, I am Hell,
Thou art Heaven; and another, I am the most hypocritical Wretch, not worthy
that the Earth should bear me; and a third, I am the unfittest Man for so high
an Honor, as suffering for Christ, that ever was appointed to it; and a fourth
writing to his Friend, that was going to be burnt at the Stake for the Gospel
of Christ; O that my life, and a thousand such Wretches lives, might go for
yours! Why does he suffer me, and such other Caterpillars to live, who can-do
nothing but consume the Alms of the Church, and take you away a mighty Workman,
and Labourer in his Vineyard. The inward Humility sanctified these Expressions;
and whatever indiscretion might be in such Speeches, the humble Sense of their
own vileness within made them rational and elegant.

2. Poverty in Spirit; because this Humility is an effect of God's spirit, the
Holy Ghost breathes upon the Soul, and plants it there. The Spirit of God
disposes and inclines the Soul to these humble Sentiments, scatters the strong
holds of iniquity, and the vain imaginations, that exalt themselves against the
Obedience of Christ Jesus; throws down the high Conceits the man did formerly
harbor in his mind, and suggests to the Soul, arguments to baffle and resist
the Reasons of Flesh and Blood, and of the World; for where a Person endeavors
to bring his Heart to an humble Temper, the Devil is present with his Baits;
What? will you be a Fool? will you be laughed at by your Neighbors? what? put
up such affronts, which no Flesh is able to endure? what? show your self tame
under such an Aspersion? what will Men say of you? But the Spirit of God
teaches the Soul, how to answer all such Objections with the Example and
Command of Christ, and the hope of the Grace and Glory of God. And therefore
this Humility is justly called, Poverty in Spirit.

II. How the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs, and upon what Account it belongs to
them?

By the Kingdom of Heaven, in Scripture, particularly in the New Testament, is
meant, sometime the Kingdom of Grace, sometime the Kingdom of Glory. The
Kingdom of Grace is that sweet and gentle Government which Christ Jesus, the
Son of God, the Head of his Church, and the King of Saints, does by his Spirit
exercise over his Disciples, Followers, and such as have given themselves up to
his Conduct; by which Spirit he teaches, enlightens, guides, assists,
strengthens, and comfort and preserves them, makes them willing and obedient,
and communicate strength and life, and power to them more or less, according to
the improvement of the Stock committed to their Trust. This is the Kingdom of
Grace, and in this Sense the Expression is used, Matthew. III. 2. Matthew. XIII.
44. and in other places. The Kingdom of Glory is the future reward and
recompense, God intends and designs for those, who have resolutely taken
Christ's Yoke upon them, even that Glory, Honor and Immortality St. Paul
speaks of, Romans II. 7. consisting in seeing God face to face, and triumphing
over Hell, and Devils, and enjoying him, in whose Presence there is fullness of
joy for ever. This is the Kingdom of Glory, and in this Sense we find the
Phrases used, Matthew. VII. 21. Matthew. XIII. 43. Matthew. XIX. 23.

In both Senses, the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to the Poor in Spirit, or to the
Humble.

I. The Kingdom of Grace, and this you cannot doubt of, if you reflect upon the
signal Favors, God on this side Heaven confers on the Soul that is truly
humble. To the humble he gives Grace, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. V. 5. Nay, more
Grace as St. James notes, Chapter IV. 6. according as this Humility takes deeper
root, or runs out into larger Branches. The humble Man is disposed to receive
the warmer and stronger influences of God's goodness and mercy. The Soul that
purifies, and cleanses her self from all high and losty thoughts, or rejoices
in her meanness and low Estate; and being nothing, renders her self apt and fit
for the Almighty's abode in her, and invites him to take possession of her; and
from God's dwelling there, a Man may date a thousand Blessings. To such a
Person the Father of Lights communicates wonderful Treasures; to such there
arises a light in darkness, and into such low and humble Valleys, the richest
Showers, and the clearest Rivers flow: O that you were all sensible of this
Truth! O that you did but feel this Christian Humility working in your Souls!
You would find what Wisdom, what spiritual Wisdom God would infuse into your
Souls, even that Wisdom which is from above; first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, without partiality, without hypocrisy, full
of good works, James III. 17. I thank thee, O Father, that thou have revealed
these things unto Babes, says our Savior, Matthew. XI. 25. These Babes are the
humble, the poor in Spirit: To these God reveals the height, and breadth, and
depth, and length of the love of God; such may promise themselves the larger
Portions of God's Spirit; such Persons are most likely to grow in Grace, to
advance in Goodness, to a rise to perfection, and to be satisfied with the Corn
of Heaven, with Angel's Food. Such a Soul is fitted for Universal Obedience;
the severest Laws of the Gospel go down with her, and she embraces the Yoke
with Joy. Who can express the Comforts, the Peace, the Satisfaction that the
humble feel! It must needs be so, for it is the lowly in heart that are promised
Rest for their Souls, Matthew. XI. 29. Such get strength against their
Corruptions, Temptations, Lusts, and sinful Inclinations; such make a mighty
progress in Goodness, and get Courage in the greatest fiery Trials.

For this, I might appeal to the Examples of the Saints of Old, but I need not
go so high; I will appeal to the Experience of some pious Christians among us,
who feel what David said of himself; O God mine heart is not haughty, nor mine
eyes losty; surely, I have behaved and quieted my self as a Child, that is
weaned of his mother, Ps. CXXXI. 1, 2. Let such among you tell me, when they
have been in a very humble frame, when they have had a lively sense of God's
greatness, and goodness, and holiness, and a very deep Sense of their own
vileness; have not you seen more of God than ever; have not your Souls been
satisfied as with marrow and fatness; have not you been ready to go through
Fire and Water for God; have not you baffled and scorned the strongest assaults
of the Devil, and torn the snares and grins that were laid for you, with as
great ease as Sampson did his Bonds? Have not your hearts been ready to leap
within you, and your joys like mighty Rivers, been ready to overflow your
Souls? This is the Kingdom of Grace, and this belongs to the humble. But,

II. The Kingdom of Glory is theirs too; theirs by purchase, theirs by
possession taken already in their Names, theirs by promise, theirs by way of
earnest.

1. Theirs by purchase, and therefore called the purchased Possession, Ephesians. I.
19. Purchased, by whom? Even by Christ Jesus, the great Shepherd of the Sheep,
who laid down his life for them, and thereby obtained an everlasting
inheritance for them. None could purchase it but he, for whoever undertook the
Work, must be not only a Man innocent, spotless, and without sin, and die, but
of that Divine excellency too, as to be able to give his Death an infinite
value; the virtue whereof might extend it self to all Ages, and to all sorts of
Persons too: This none could do, but he that was the Son of God, and the Son of
David too. He did it, and wonderful was the Enterprise; nothing was ever
attempted like it. He died, and purchased this Kingdom of Glory for the humble;
his purchase makes it theirs. He was both able to purchase it, and when he had
done, to apply it to those for whom it was purchased. If a rich Man buys an
Estate for a Beggar, the Beggar may justly call it his; for he that had right,
and means, and power, and ability to buy it, bought it for his Use.

2. Theirs by possession taken already in their Name. The same Jesus, that
purchased this Kingdom for them; he it is that has taken possession of this
Kingdom for them, and in their Name. For in my Father's house are many mansions
If it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you,
says Christ, John XIV. 2. All the Christian World knows, that Christ ascended
into Heaven. There he actually enjoys the Kingdom of Glory, which he keeps for
the humble. He is the great Trustee, that secures and manages that vast Estate
for their Use: So that it may ju^^ly be called theirs, because of the
forerunner Jesus, who is entered into Heaven, being made a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedeck, as it is said, Heb. VI. 20. There he appears
for them as their Advocate and keeps their places for them, against they come
thither: As a Guardian takes care, and possession of the Orphan's Estate, till
the Pupil comes to Age; so Christ takes possession of this Kingdom, with an
intent to deliver it up to the humble, when they come in the Unity of the Faith
unto a perfect Man in Christ Jesus, to the measure of the Stature of the
fullness of Christ, Ephesians. IV. 13.

3. Theirs by promise; for so we read, Matthew. XVIII. 3, 4. Except ye be
converted, and become as little Children, ye shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Whosoever shall humble himself as this little Child, the
same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. He has promised it, who is able to
give it, even God, who cannot be worse than his word. The humble Man may depend
upon this Promise, more than he can upon Bonds, and Bills, and Securities that
Men can give him of an Estate in the World. God cannot fail him, he cannot
disappoint him: He not only will not, but cannot, as the Apostle says, He
cannot lie, Tit. I. 2. because that would imply an imperfection. If a Man of
Honor does faithfully promise his Neighbor a living, a place, or an office in
his gift, the Man makes bold to call it his, for he has confidence in his
honesty, and word, knowing him to be a Person that stands upon his credit, and
reputation, and scorns to do any thing that is base and mean: How much more then
may the humble Soul, call the Kingdom of Glory hers; since the God, the
Fountain of Truth, and Truth it self, has peremptorily said, it shall fall to
her share; and though such Persons do not actually as yet enjoy it, yet they
shall enjoy it as surely, as if they did already walk through that Jerusalem,
and view the Towers, and Bullworks, and all because they have to deal with a
God, who changes not, Mal. III. 6.

4. Theirs by way of earnest. In humane Contracts men give earnest, and that
makes the Bargain sure; and though the Covenant, God makes with Men, is not such
a formal Contract as is betwixt Man and Man, in buying and selling, yet some
resemblance there is in that, God a most bountiful Master, is willing to give
earnest to the humble Soul, to assure her, that this Kingdom of Glory shall be
hers.

This earnest is his Spirit, which is therefore called, The earnest of our
future inheritance, Ephesians I. 14. This Spirit is no fancy, but a real thing, which
the humble Soul feels as much as other Men do the moving of the Wind, by the
effects. This Spirit of God is discovered by its operations, which are kindly,
and great, and powerful, and make a very wonderful alteration in the Soul for
the better.

This Spirit works Grace, and that Grace is the earnest of Glory.

III. How, and in what manner a Title to this Kingdom makes the poor in Spirit,
or the Humble, blessed.

In the Greek it is (...), which is as much as (...), Men that may rejoice
much, or who have very great reason to rejoice; or as much as (...), Men not
subject to Death or Corruption. the word answers to the Hebrew (...), which
imports a perfection, or confluence of all good things. The Isle of Cyprus, was
anciently called Macaria, because of the mighty affluence, and abundance of all
good things, that were to be had there, which was the cause, why the Romans
seized it for their use. But what is all this to the Kingdom of Heaven, to the
Kingdom of Grace and Glory? Where all things that can make a Man truly, and
eternally happy, do concur; where there is no want of any thing, that Reason
can desire; and all things that fill and satisfy the Soul are present; where
God gives himself the perfection of Beauty, and Wisdom, and Greatness, and
Love, and Delight; which gift, as it is begun in the Kingdom of Grace; so it
shall be perfected in the Kingdom of Glory.

The humble Man is blessed:

1. Blessed in himself: 2. Blessed in the sight of God: 3. Blessed in the Eyes
of all good Men: 4. blessed in the midst of all his outward Miseries: 5.
Blessed in the opinion of all Reprobates: 6. Blessed, because he has a Title
to the Kingdom of Heaven.

1. Blessed in himself: He has reason to rejoice. His humility gives him that
content and secret Satisfaction, that it may justly be called the
Philosopher's-stone; Content, which surpasses all the Satisfaction, that the
luxurious, the proud, the voluptuous, the sensual, the carnal part of Mankind
boasts of.

He has Riches within, and Pleasures within, and a new Name within him, even
the white Stone, which no Man knows, save he who receives it. Nor is he subject
to corruption; for when he dies, he dies into an immortal life.

There is nothing of him dies, but the garment of flesh; nothing of him
corrupts but the Clay and Dust, he wears about him; the earthly Tabernacle in
which his Soul, that noble Inhabitant lived, decays and moulders, and falls;
but his Soul at his Death is born again, gets new life, new light, new
irradiations; nay, and his Body must at last follow his Soul to Glory; and
therefore blessed, blessed in himself, for he feels that Bliss within, which
all the Gold of Ophir cannot purchase. So true is that saying of our Savior.
He that believes in me shall never die, Joh. XI. 26.

2. He is blessed in the sight of God: God counts him so; God looks upon him as
happy, and he must needs be so, whom God judges to be so. God cannot be
mistaken: He cannot be out in his Verdict. He sees his heart, sees the lovely,
the amiable, the charming Virtue, he is most enamored withal, a Virtue very
agreeable to his Divine Nature, a Virtue which very much resembles the Great
God, who dwells on high; yet humbles himself to behold the things in Heaven,
and in Earth; and seeing his own Image there, he counts him blessed.

3. Blessed in the Eyes of all good Men. A good Man that beholds Humility
shining in his Neighbor, and finds that this Grace has taken deep root in his
heart, that he has very low thoughts of himself, that he is willing to submit
to Persons wiser and abler in things ambiguous and doubtful, that he thinks
more kindly, and favorably of others than of himself; that he ascribes all his
Gifts and Blessings to the free and underseved Bounty of God, and attributes
nothing to his own merits and desert; that he thinks himself unworthy of
Honor, and is not ambitious of worldly Glory; that he speaks humbly of
himself, and is willing to converse with Persons, mean, yet good, and to
contribute to their welfare; that he can bear reproof, and bear injuries well,
etc. The good Man, that sees these admirable effects of Humility in his
Neighbor, what does he see, but the Character of God's Children? And what can
be more blessed here on Earth than a Child of God, than a Son or Daughter
adopted in Christ: Jesus?

4. Blessed in the midst of all his outward Misery: Blessed he is in the midst:
of stripes, and lashes, and reproaches, and calumnies. Blessed in a Prison,
blessed in Dungeon, blessed when Men contemn and despise him, when all things
go cross, when he is reviled, abused, undervalued, and despightfully handled*
for while this spiritual Poverty like a good Angel dwells in him, while this
Humility reigns in his Soul, God's Spirit hovers over him, the Almighty
carresses him, Angels visit and attend him, his Conscience justifies him, and
the Lord Jesus, that Pattern of Humility loves him, and therefore blessed still.

5. Blessed in the opinion of all Reprobates, not in this World, but in the
next; when they shall see the humble Man advanced above the Stars of Heaven,
seated among the Elder Sons of God, raised from this dunghill World, and made to
sit with Christ together in heavenly Places; then the proud, the vain, the
foolish, that counted the humble Man's life madness, will all change their
Notes; and they that once looked upon his Humility, as baseness of Spirit, will
then be forced to acknowledge, that such a Man chose the better part,
understood himself, and was truly sensible of the Veracity of what God had said
so long ago. I am the lofty and holy one, who inhabits Eternity; with him also
will I dwell that is of an humble Spirit, Isa. LVII. 15.

6. Blessed because he has a Title to the Kingdom of Heaven. The World calls
an Heir to a great Estate, or Honor, or Dignity a happy Man. And must not then
the humble Man be happy and blessed, that is Heir to the Crown immarcescible,
Heir to all the vast Territories of Heaven, Heir of all the Land of Canaan,
Heir to all the huge Tract above, that flows with Milk and Honey? Nothing can
make a Man so happy, as the full enjoyment of God. Is God happy or not? The
Epicureans held, nay the Devil himself dares not deny, that God is the most
happy Being; and is it possible to enjoy that God, to be united to him, to live
in his glorious Presence, and to participate of his Felicity, and not be happy?
This blessedness the Kingdom of Heaven gives the humble Man. He has a right to
the Tree of life; and therefore blessed, as we read, Revel. XXII. 14.

Inferences.
1. Seeing so much depends upon this Humility, and spiritual Poverty; Is it not
fit, we should examine whether we are possessed of this spiritual Treasure or
not? Though the words of the Text be expressed in the Affirmative, yet a
Negative is implied, and it naturally follows, that those who are not humble,
not poor in Spirit, have nothing to do with the Kingdom of Heaven; and
therefore are in no blessed State or Condition. Surely, this Consideration is
enough to make a thinking Man inquisitive; and indeed it is impossible
seriously to believe it, and not make application to our selves. But where Men
are superficial Christians, and suspect that they are proud, and high, and
lofty, and self-conceited, and strangers to Christian Humility, and that they
shall find all naught within, if once they examine things, and bring them to
the Touchstone; there they will be loath to venture upon this Task, for fear
they should discover and see their Deformity, and be obliged to reform. So
carefully do most Men shun their own Cure, and shut their Eyes, that they may
not see the Sores, and Ulcers of their Souls.

There is no Spiritual temper, or qualification, or perfection, but God has
left Characters in his word, whereby we may certainly know, whether we are
Masters of it, and whether that which we have and looks like it, be genuine or
not, and this is particularly applicable to Humility. There is a painted, and
counterfeit Humility, which has base and sinister Ends, and Designs, and Pride
may lie at the bottom of it; But this Hypocrisy may soon be discovered by the
Characters before laid down, I mean the Characters of that truly humble Spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great Price. St. Bernard very ingeniously
observes, and from him others have taken and improved the Notion. True
Humility, faith he, like the Violet, grows low to the ground, hangs the head
downward, and hides it self with its own leaves. It prefers the approbation of
a good Conscience, before the applause of the World; and were it not that its
fragrant Smell betrays it to the observation of others, it would choose to live
and die in its own well pleasing Secrecy.

Truly Christians, did you know what stress God lays upon this qualification,
did you know the consequence, the worth and necessity of it; were you sensible
what an influence it has upon the whole frame of Religion, and what power it
has with God, and how its absence renders your spiritual Sacrifices useless,
and ineffectual; you would not only examine your selves to know whether you
have it, and how much you have of it, but labor to arrive to higher Degrees of
it than ordinary.

That which turns the Religion, which many of you seem to have, into mere
Formality, is the want of this qualification. Pride lies unmortified in your
Souls, that makes the Ground barren, and no Grace will thrive in you.
Pretending to Religion, while this Grace is neglected, is as insignificant, as
building a House without laying the Foundation; you are not fit to obey the
Gospel, till you cultivate this Plant in your Garden.

But then, as I said, in the preceding Discourse, the Heart, the Mind, the
Soul, the Spirit, is the Place where Humility must first display its Beauty and
Glory. An humble Sense of your selves within; humble, low, and despicable
Thoughts of your worth; in a word, a very low opinion of your selves wrought up
by frequent Meditation into a habit, that is it which will make you truly humble
to God, and Man: That will make you thankful for the least Mercy; that will
make you admire God in the meanest Blessing you enjoy; that will make you pray
often, and fall low before God's Footstool; that will make you resist such
Temptations, as would put you upon despising and undervaluing of your
Neighbors, and taking little inconsiderable things ill at their hands; that
will make you courteous and affable even to the poorest, and merciful, and
peaceable among those you converse with; that will pull down all
self-conceitedness, and self-admiration, and prevent your being tickled with
the Commendations and Applauses of Men, and allay your Ambition, and Hunger,
and Thirst after the great things of the World; that will have an influence
even upon your outward Dress and Habit, and make you go plain and decently, and
modestly, and keep you from imitating the Fashions of the World; that will make
you modest and moderate, and discreet in your Speeches, Answers, and
Discourses. In a word, That will make you speak and act like Disciples of the
humble, and self-denying Jesus; so that upon a review of these effects Humility
produces, I may justly call upon you as Solomon, Prove. IV. 23. Keep your hearts
with all diligence, for out of them are the Issues of Life.

II. We see here, that neither outward Riches, nor Poverty makes Men blessed;
nothing but a just Title to the Kingdom of Heaven. This is evident from the
reason here given, why the poor in Spirit, or the humble are blessed, even
because theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; as if our Savior had said: These poor
in Spirit may be outwardly rich, or outwardly poor, but neither the one, nor
the other makes them blessed, but their Title to the Kingdom of Heaven. Indeed
without this, the Richest of you are miserable Men, and the poor among you are
doubly miserable here, and hereafter. If this Kingdom be yours, if this belongs
to you, fear not, though the Earth be moved, and the Hills be carried into the
midst of the Sea. I know, the Judgment of the World is this; if a Man get a
loss in his Estate, or if he breaks, or if such a great Man, or his Relations
abandon him, presently he is miserable; but if he gets a good Windfall, or
lights upon a good Bargain, or thrives in the World, presently we count him
happy; but these are the wild Mistakes, which Flesh and Blood leads us into;
gain but a Title to this Kingdom of Heaven, and you will be happy though you are
never so great losers in the World. This Kingdom, O that I had the Tongue of an
Angel to represent it to you in lively Characters! This Kingdom is large,
ample, great and spacious; it holds not only all the blessed Angels, but all
the Saints that have lived since the Foundations of the World, and are like to
be to the End of it. It is infinitely rich; there is such plenty there, that
the Banks are overflowed, and the Cup of Joy runs over. It is infinitely safe,
safe beyond all the Castles and Cittadels in the World; for all the Inhabitants
are Brethren, love one another with a pure heart servently, and are
everlastingly faithful one to another; so fearless they are, that the Gates of
this Kingdom stand open Day and Night. It is durable beyond Rocks and Marble,
for it is incorruptible, and fades not away. The Queen of Sheba counted
Solomon's Servants happy, because they lived in his House; what then must the
Inhabitants of such a Kingdom be, where the King is the Fountain not only of
all Honor, but of all Bliss and Felicity, and the Subjects drink of that
Fountain, drink and never thirst again; where the Company is glorious, and
splendid to admiration, and the lowest Person there is an Angel; where
everlasting Content reigns, and all are free from sin, from the assaults of the
World, the Flesh and the Devil; where all are filled with Grace and Glory, and
all are satisfied with the Rivers of God's Pleasures.

Sirs, This Kingdom of Heaven we have Commission to offer to you, not a Kingdom
of this World; and if we could offer to you an Earthly Kingdom, that would not
make you so happy, as this Kingdom of Heaven will, for Kings on Earth we see
are not always the happiest Men: They have their fears and losses, their
discontents and vexations, as well as other Folks. This Kingdom of Heaven, the
richest Prize that ever was heard of, we offer to you: But we must tell you
withal, that there is no coming to this rich and wealthy Empire, except you
become poor. The Palace is stately and magnificent, but the Gate is low. The
richest, the greatest, the wealthiest of you all must become poor, poor in
Spirit, and humble as a Worm, if you mean to enjoy the Bliss of yonder Kingdom.
If we should bid you, as Christ did the young Man in the Gospel; Go and sell
all you have, and give it to the Poor, and follow a poor Savior, and you shall
have Treasure in Heaven; there is none of you but must confess, that it were
worth parting withal to get this Treasure: But such a Poverty we do not press
upon you, nor think it absolutely necessary, except in case of Persecution;
when Men must hate Father and Mother, Brethren and Sisters, Lands and Houses,
and Life it self for the Gospel's sake; but God has showed thee, O man, and
what does the Lord thy God require of thee, even to walk humbly with thy God.
Humility is the readiest way to a glorious Exaltation; and how often does our
Blessed Savior repeat that Golden saying, He that humbles himself shall be
exalted! This not only Saints, but Philosophers agree in; this the wisest Men
of most Nations, Countries, and Religions confess. The truth of it is so
evident, that it shines through the very chinks and crevises of Nature. Need I
ask any of you whether you have a mind to be happy, and blessed. I know, you
all would be so; and if this be your resolution, behold, here lies the way:
Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

SERMON IV.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted.
IN the Account our Savior gives of blessed Men; the mourners you see succeed
the humble, or the poor in Spirit. It was very convenient it should be so; for
Humility is the cause of mourning, mourning the effect of Humility, or
spiritual Poverty; and therefore we find the one immediately subjoined to the
other. The poor Man mourns; it is natural to do so, and so does the poor in
Spirit. As the poor Man mourns for the presence of Temporal Evils, and the
absence of Temporal Blessings, so the poor in Spirit mourns for the presence of
Spiritual Evils, and the absence of Spiritual Blessings; and this mourning, as
will appear in the Sequel, is sometimes great and loud, and vehement, like the
mourning of a Funeral, but as great as it may be there is comfort in it; for
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Three things will deserve our consideration.

I. Whether all mourners are blessed, and if not, who they be that are so.

II. Wherein their Blessedness consists.

III. How, and when they shall be comforted.

I. Whether all mourners are blessed, and if not, who they be that are so.

1. There is a natural Sorrow, or mourning for the Loss of Parents, or
Children, or other Relatives, or Friends, or Goods, or Necessaries, or outward
Accommodations. This Sorrow even the best of Men are subject to; and if it be
moderate, not long, not violent, not excessive, not bordering upon despair, as
if all our happiness were gone, not joined with mistrust of God's Providence,
but sweetened and qualified with thoughts of the Will of God, and our own
Demerits, and God's holy and wise Designs, it is allowable, and there is no
hurt in it; but still this cannot make a Man blessed, for at the best it is but
a natural Infirmity, and that is no ingredient of Blessedness. Excessive
mourning for outward Losses, or an impatient Sorrow, is a downright Sin; and I
need not tell you, that this is incapable of making a Man blessed. And of this
Nature is sorrow or mourning, because we cannot accomplish our wicked Design,
or because we cannot revenge our selves upon an Adversary, as we would, or
because we cannot have that Plenty, and Estate, and Fortune, and Prosperity,
which other voluptuous Men enjoy. All such mourning is offensive to God, and
makes Men miserable, and therefore cannot make them blessed. There is besides
all this, a sorrow proceeding from melancholy, which makes People lament and
mourn, and take on, and sigh, and look sad, and they cannot tell why: This must
needs be the effect of a Distemper, and therefore can be no part of
Blessedness, or true Happiness. And therefore,

2. The mourners who are pronounced blessed here, must be mourners of another
sort. And they are,

1. Such as mourn for their sins: Such a mourner was David, whom Sin and a due
Sense of it, made even roar by reason of the disquietness of his heart, Psalm.
XXXVIII. 8. Such a mourner was Peter, who after the denial of his Master went
out, and wept bitterly, Matthew. XXVI. 75. Such a mourner was Mary Magdalen, or
whoever the Woman was, that washed our Savior's Feet with her Tears, Luke VII.
38. The mourners, that are said to be blessed here, are Persons that deny
themselves, mourn not for such things as the World mourns for, but such as
sensual Men take no notice of. There is no self denial in mourning for outward
Losses; even Children can do that; but in mourning for his sins a Man must go
contrary to the stream of natural inclination, and offer a kind of violence to
himself, and that makes it a pleasing Sacrifice, and he mourns happily, that
takes on, because he is sensible how evil a thing, and how bitter it is to
forsake the LORD, and that his fear has not been in him, as it is said, Jer.
II. 19. Repentance cannot but make a Man happy, and the Nature of it is said to
consist in this, in looking at that Jesus, that Savior, that Redeemer whom we
have pierced by our Sins, and whose Love and Blood we have affronted, and to
mourn, as one that mourns for his only Son, Zachar. XII. 10.

2. Such as mourn for other Men's sins, whether public or private; such a
mourner was the Royal Prophet; Rivers of Tears ran down his Eyes, because other
Men did not keep God's Laws, Psalm. CXIX. 136. Such a mourner was Jeremiah, whom
we hear wishing, Jer. IX. 1, 2. O that my head were Water, and mine eyes a
fountain of Tears, that I might weep day and night; because my People are
Adulterers, an assembly of treacherous Men. Such mourners were those pious Men
we read of, Ezekiel. IX. 4. Who cried for the abominations of the House of Israel;
and lastly, such were the faithful Corinthians, who sorrow'd after a Godly
sort; for having given the incestuous Person too much encouragement to come
into their Congregations, a sorrow upon which St. Paul makes this remark, 2
Cor. VII II. What carefulness has it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your
selves, yea what fear, yea what vehement desire, yea what zeal, yea what
revenge? Such mourners are Persons of true Christian compassion; their sorrow
is noble and generous, and like the sorrow of God, Ezekiel. VI. 9. I am broken
with their whorish heart, which has departed from me.

3. Such as mourn for the loss or absence of God's spiritual Blessings; I say,
Spiritual; because there is a favor of God, which relates to the gay, and
great things of the World; such as Riches, Plenty, and outward Prosperity, a
favor bestowed even upon the worst of Men, and to mourn for the loss or
absence of this favor makes no Man happy; that which makes us so, is mourning
for the loss or absence of God's spiritual Blessings, such as being deprived of
the use of God's public Ordinances, a remarkable instance where of we have in
David, when forced during Readiness persecution, to wander in Deserts and
Wildernesses, among Heathens and Infidels, where he had no opportunity of
visiting the House of God, and participating of the Prayers and Praises of
God's People a lively Description of which mourning he gives us, Psalm. XLII. 3,
4. My tears have been my meat day and night, while they say daily unto me,
where is thy God? When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me, for I
had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the
voice of joy and praise, with the multitude which keeps holy day. How this
afflicted him he expresses more fully, Verse. 5. where he talks of his Soul
being cast down, and disquieted within him: And of this nature is the mourning
of many pious Christians, who have sometime felt great peace, great joy, great
satisfaction in the practice of Religion, but find the light of God's
countenance withdrawn, terror dwells in their minds, and horror fills their
Souls, they find not that cheerfulness, that fervor that alacrity in God's
service which once they felt, and for this they mourn; blessed are these
mourners.

4. Such as mourn, because they cannot as yet perfectly overcome the
corruptions, which do so easily beset them. Indeed the Reign, the Tyrannizing
Power, the Dominion of sin is broken in them; but as it was with the seven
Nations, after that their Empire was destroyed, some of the Enemies here and
there remained to exercise the Courage of the Israelites; so in good Men, after
they have shaken off the Yoke of the Devil; some relics of their old sins
remain, against which they fight; they strive, they labor, they watch, they
pray, that their Pride, their desire of vainglory, their passion, their
hastiness of Spirit, their pusillanimity and cowardice in speaking for God,
their timorousness in reproving their Neighbors, their mistrust of God's
mercy, their love and affection to the World, etc. may be gone, that God would
arise, and that these Enemies may be scattered, they use means, they enquire
what they must do to mortify these unruly desires, they deny themselves, they
fast, they are angry with these Corruptions, yet ever and anon before they are
aware they fall, and imprudently yield to Temptations of this nature; they
would feign be Masters of those virtues, accomplishments and perfections, which
did shine so bright in the primitive Saints, but cannot as yet arrive to that
excellent Temper; for this they mourn, and are dejected, and sorrow seizes upon
their hearts and minds; yet still, blessed are these mourners.

5. Such as mourn, because their stay in this World is long, because they are
kept out of Heaven, and from the perfect enjoyment of God, because they are
obliged to continue in this barren Wilderness of the World; where they must see
their God dishonored, his Name profaned, his Creatures abused, his Ordinances
derided, his Providence disregarded, his Precepts slighted, his Promises
undervalued, his Threatenings scorned, and Charity grow cold, and Iniquity
abound: This draws from them David's complaint, Woe is me, that I must dwell in
Mesech, and have my habitation in the Tents of Kedar, Ps. CXX. 5. Indeed such
mourners are but few, most Men being desirous to enjoy the World, as long as
they can; yet some there are that have made their Calling and Election sure;
and long to be gone, long to be dissolved and to be with Christ, and to be
clothed upon with their House from Heaven, long to join the Quire of Angels,
long to be freed from this Earthly Tabernacle, and all this upon the excellent
Principle of the love of God, not from impatience under their pain and
sickness, or frowns of the World, or their mean condition here; but because the
love of God is shed abroad in their hearts, and because they are kept from
enjoying their desire, because the amorous Needle is withheld from clinging to
the beloved Magnet, they mourn; blessed mourning!

But what? You Will say, do no mourners under Temporal losses and crosses come
into the Number of these blessed Men? I answer, yes.

1. If the cause for which, and in which they suffer losses of their Goods, or
Friends be great and noble; if they sulfer for the Gospel's sake, upon the
Account of Righteousness, and a good Conscience, in this case their mourning
under their Temporal losses may entitle them to blessedness, provided that
their mourning be mingled with faith and hope, and a holy self-resignation; and
that they mourn more for the wickedness of the Person, who are the instruments
of their Persecution, than for the want of their Corn and Wine, and Oil, and
the Garlicks, and Onions of Egypt.

2. If under their Temporal losses they mourn chiefly for their sins, which
have both caused and deserved these sufferings; Sorrow, barely for Temporal
losses, and for being deprived of the satisfactions of the flesh, cannot be
reconciled to that Spiritual life the Gospel presses; something there must be
to sweeten that sour Sop; as it stands alone, it comes under the notion of
sorrow of the World, and that we are told works death, 2 Cor. VII. 10. And
consequently happiness cannot be the fruit or effect of it. The Soul therefore
that mourns under such outward Calamities, must look off from the Calamity to
the cause of it, or Sin which has procured it; and that sanctifies the sorrow,
and makes the mourner blessed.

Yet to prevent mistakes, I must necessarily add these following cautions.

1. We are not to think, that in order to arrive to this Blessedness, a Man or
Woman must do nothing but mourn: There is a time for every thing, and there are
other things to be done besides mourning, even the particular Duties, and
Virtues, and Self-denials, required and commanded in this Chapter; so that when
it is said here, blessed are they that mourn, the meaning is, blessed are they
that do so as they have occasion to reflect either upon the Spiritual Evils
which are present, or upon the Spiritual Blessings that are absent from them.
It Is enough that there be a disposition or aptitude to mourn, which exerts it
self whenever any opportunity offers it self to consider, and to think of such
Objects as deserve and require our mourning, else Spiritual Joy would be no
Duty; and if our lives were to be filled with mourning, the Apostle's
Exhortation had been useless, Phil. IV. 1. Rejoice in the Lord always, i. e.
upon all occasions, and again I say, Rejoice. Neither,

2. Must the stress be laid upon the bare mourning, as if the mourning and
weeping, and sadness alone were pleasing to God, and groans were the only
livery of Heaven; but this mourning must be in order to a greater end, even to
establish our Souls in the love of God, to strengthen our graces, to
corroborate our repentance, and aversion from sin, and to purify our outward
and inward Man more and more, and therefore it is emphatically called,
sorrowing to Repentance, 2 Cor. VII. 9. Nor,

3. Are we to think, that a certain degree of mourning is always necessary,
even mourning expressed in so much weeping, and sorrowing, as we find in other
Christians of our Acquaintance. All men's conditions are not alike; a Person
that has been profane and lewd has reason to mourn more, than he, whose Sins
have been of a lesser size; not but that it was commendable to weep bitterly
even for infirmities, but the obligation of mourning is greater certainly upon
a rapacious Publican, than upon the pious Couple, Zacharias and Elizabeth.
Besides, all men's Constitutions are not alike, some being of that tender
Complexion, that the least touch or sense of things makes them weep; others of
a hardier make, who may be astonished and concerned at great things, but cannot
make that outward show of mourning, that others can. It Is enough therefore that
the sorrow be rational, and that the mind be so affected with the object, that
causes or deserves mourning, as to work in us a willingness to mourn more if we
could, and an indignation against the Spiritual Evils which are present, and an
earnest longing and endeavor after the Spiritual Blessings which are absent,
and we stand in need of.

Having set down these cautions, I proceed to the second Part to acquaint you.

II. Wherein the Blessedness of such mourners consists.

1. This mourning is the Character of Saints, Ezekiel. IX. 4. 2 Cor. XII. 21. Why?
what Blessedness is there in this? will some say. How? no Blessedness in being
a Saint? what is the reason then that Kings and Princes wish they were so?
what is the reason that most wicked Men, when they come to die, would fain be of
that Number? Nay, what is the reason that in your Creed you believe a Communion
of Saints? Is it not in this Creed, that you profess the greatest Blessings,
that were ever bestowed upon the Children of Men? And if the Communion of
Saints be one, must it not be a most blessed thing to be a Saint, and of that
Communion? According to the account the Holy Ghost gives of a Saint, such a Man
must be a greater Person, than the most potent Monarch of the World; and
although Solomon's Treasure in all his Glory was not so dear to God, as a Saint
is, one that is really so; not one that proudly assumes that Title; not one
whom Men in civility call so; not one who out of self-conceitedness thinks
himself one, but one in whom the true Characters of Sanctity meet.

2. He that particularly mourns for the sins of others, for the sins of the
Times, or for the sins of the Nation, or of the whole Christian World, is
thereby made conformable to the Son of God, of whom we read, that he drew near
the City and wept over it, because of the impiety that reigned in it, Luke XIX.
41. And to be like the Son of God, must be both a great and a blessed State.
Greatness and Blessedness do not always go together, but here they do; for as
nothing can be greater than the Son of God, so nothing can be more blessed:
Seems it to you a small thing to be the King's Son-in-law, said the shepherd's
Son, and is it not more magnificent to be like the Son of God? If he were
blessed in this mourning, certainly he that imitates him in that sort of
mourning must be so, for he was the Pattern both of our Virtue and Reward.

3. Such mourners are the Eriends of God; God takes care of them, and in the
midst of their mourning is concerned for them; his Bowels yearn over them; and
though he lets them mourn for their good, because their Souls thrive and
prosper under it, yet he leaves them not, forsakes them not, but is with them
in that mourning Condition; his Eyes are open upon them, not to punish but to
bless, not to destroy but to build up, not to kill but to revive; and as
despicable as their State may seem, they shall be comforted, which calls me to
the last Part.

III. How, and when they shall be comforted.

They shall be comforted in this World, and in the World to come.

1. In this World, and the steps or particulars of this Comfort are as follows.

1. They shall be supported by God's Spirit, and in their weakness shall be
made strong, as St. Paul was, when he mourned under strong Temptations, under
the buffetings of Satan's Angel; My Grace, says God, is sufficient for thee, 2
Cor. XII. 9. that is, though I do not think fit to deliver thee as yet, there
shall be sufficient Grace given to support thee under the Temptation; Or,

2. They shall be enlightened in the midst of their mourning, and they shall see
the wise and holy Designs of God, who suffers them to mourn, which sight shall
cause a serenity and calmness in their minds; such a calm as shall recreate
them in darkness, and make their Burden tolerable, or easy to be born: And
this is the effect of that famous Promise, Psalm. CXII. 4. Unto the upright
there arises a light in darkness. Or,

3. God will send Men to comfort them, as he did Philip to the Eunuch, who was
perplexed about a place of Scripture, and knew not how to help himself. His
good Providence will so order it, that either some faithful Minister of the
Word, or some other good Man shall come to them, and speak a word in season to
them, whereby their Souls shall receive strength and courage to hold out; as it
was in Hezekiah's case, Isa. XXXVIII. 2, 3. and following Verses: Or,

4. His word shall comfort them, either publicly preached, or read in private:
When they are meditating in the Law of God, something shall come in, that like
the dawning of the day shall revive the weary Traveller, and this David found
by experience: This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has quickened
me, Psalm. CXIX. 50. Or,

5. They shall be delivered from the Temptation, or vanquish the Corruption
under which they groan, and such Power shall be given them, as shall enable
them to mock all the fiery Darts of the Devil, and to overcome the Evil with
Good, as we see in St. Paul, Romans VIII. 2. Or,

6. God will make their very mourning sweet to them, make their Tears their
Cordials, their Sorrow shall be comfortable to them; and they shall find
greater content and satisfaction in their Tears, than others do in their Corn
and Wine, and Oil, as we see in the Apostles, 2 Cor. VII. 4. 2 Cor. XII. 10. Or,

7. God will give them a livelier sight and clearer apprehensions of the things
which are not seen, and these shall buoy them up in the Flood that rises
against them, and with these Bladders they shall swim through the salt Sea, and
be preserved from sinking, as we see in the Believers spoken of, 2 Cor. IV. 16,
17, 18. Or,

8. Their death shall comfort them, which shall deliver them from all their
Miseries and Annoyances; put a stop to all the rage of their Spiritual and
Temporal Enemies, and make an end of all their bitter Draughts; insomuch that
they shall be able to say with old Simeon, Lord now let thou thy Servant
depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, Luke II. 29, 30.

Some of these ways they shall be comforted in this present World. But,

2. More amply, more fully, more abundantly in the World to come.

The comforts to come are comforts indeed. These comforts David speaks of,
Psalm. XXIII. 2. He shall make me to lie down in green pastures; he shall lead
me beside the still waters. To this purpose Isaiah, Chap. XXXV. 10. The
ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting
joys upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow, and
sighing shall fly away. They shall have beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isa. LXI. 3.
When such mourners leave this World; such a scene of comfort will open to them,
as will make them for a while like unto them that dream, the surprise and the
comfort will be so great. St. John describes their comforts more particularly,
Rev. XXI. 4. and Rev. XXII. 4, 5. God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, and there shall be no more death; neither sorrow nor crying; neither
shall there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away. And they
shall see his face, and his name shall be upon their foreheads and there shall
be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the sun, for the
Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and ever.

Inferences.
I. Let not every Man that has sometimes in a Fit mourned for his sin,
presently imagine that he is one of the Number of the Blessed in the Text: It Is
true, they that mourn for sin, are ^n part the Men here aimed at; but the
manner of the mourning makes the difference; you have mourned for such a sin,
but how? Is the sin gone? is it vanished? is it dead? is it mortified? is it
likely to die upon this mourning? do you act like Men that are resolved to
subdue, and master it? I grant some sins are not so easily vanquished, as
others are; The secret sins of the Soul, such as pride, passion, vanity of
mind, love of the World, backwardness to self-denial, irresoluteness,
impatience, peevishness, etc. and such are not easily taken notice of without a
diligent search, are not so soon beaten down, as gross outward sins; such as
drunkenness, keeping ill company, swearing, cursing, fornication, extortion,
etc. yet let the conquest be more facile or more difficult, if you mourn for
such a sin, some good effect will appear. Does your mourning put you in a
striving, or wrestling condition? do you swim against the stream? do you cut
the hair as soon as it grows again? do you give the sin no quarter, when you
see it appear again? do you allow the dangerous Guest no harbor? do you hugg
it, embrace it, caress it no more? If your mourning produces not such effects
as these, it is naught, and they are counterfeit Tears you shed. If your
mourning does not make you groan, and long to be rid of your sins, if it does
not make you watchful against Temptations, if it does not make you cry out
with the Apostle, Who shall deliver me from the body of this death! If you
smile upon these Children of Hell again, after you have mourned; if you grow
careless and admit them into your Bosom again, you betray the falsehood and
hypocrisy of your sorrow, and God will answer you, as he did the Jews, Zech.
VII. 5. When you fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, did you at
all fast unto me, even unto me? If your mourning be right it will make you
hunger, and breath after God; God's favor will be better than life to you, you
will look upon sin as the greatest evil, you will be grieved for the sins of
others, and for the effects of other Men's sins, under which good Men groan,
you will run to Heaven with Prayers and Confessions in your Mouths; if you have
wronged any Man, you will make him restitution or satisfaction: It will
moderate your sorrow for losses Temporal, prevent needless sorrows; in a word,
it will work an Universal Reformation.

II. Carnal mirth is not such a happiness, as some imagine. Paul in his Chains
is happier than Dives in his Purple; Mourners are far happier Men in Christ's
Account, and Peter in a Prison is in a better State, than Herod on a Throne. By
carnal Mirth I do not mean a natural Joy or Complectional, which is a modest,
well-composed, rejoicing in the Blessings God bestows upon us, and our
Neighbors; this is both lawful, and a Duty, but by carnal Mirth, I mean
sinful Mirth; such as rejoicing in iniquity, laughing at our Neighbor's
infirmities, being glad at the misfortunes of our fellow Christians, making a
mock of offending God, taking pleasure in the follies and extravagancies of
others; being merry with ill company, breaking Jests upon Religion; and being
pleased and tickled with any thing, that favors of wantonness, lightness,
frothiness of mind, abusing of our Neighbors, Voluptuousness, or unlawful
Sports and Recreations, or Luxury, etc. Such merry Men the World counts happy;
strange Happiness! which God frowns upon, and is abomination in his purer Eyes!
such Mirth makes a David weep, and what good Man can forbear mourning, that
beholds Men making sport with Firebrarnds? The mourners at this are infinitely
happier than such Players; and though he can rejoice in little but Trifles, may
for a while pass for a blessed Man among Fools, and Sots, and Persons as very
Beasts as himself; yet Men whose Senses are exercised to distinguish betwixt
Good and Evil, must ever look upon him as a very miserable Man; for his Joys
are false deluding Joys, which will end in sorrow, and such sorrow as will
grieve all the Veins of his Heart. To such Joy a Man may truly say, as Solomon
did, Thou art mad, or rather as Christ, Luke VI. 25. Woe to you that laugh now,
for you shall mourn and weep; as if he had said, Woe to you, for you have your
reward; you desired a merry Life, and you have it; but when that is done, you
must give God leave to fulfill his Threatenings, to be as good as his word, and
to bring that black and dismal Cloud upon you, which fell upon and crushed the
jolly Man in the Gospel, that clothed himself in Purple, and fared deliciously
every Day. Son, remember, that in thy life time thou receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented, Luke XVI. 25.

III. But these are not the Men that I am at present concerned to speak to.
They are the mourners I am to comfort, and therefore step forth ye mourners of
Sion; you that either mourn for your own sins or for the sins of the Nation, or
for the sins of your wicked Neighbors, and Relatives, or mourn for the absence
of God's joyful Communications; or mourn under your Corruptions and
Temptations, because you cannot yet totally subdue them; or mourn, because your
Graces are not stronger, or because you must sojourn so long in this Valley of
Tears. Fear not ye of little Faith, for ye shall be comforted. The Son of God
assures you of it: Believe not a lying Devil, that would break your Confidence,
and dissuade you from laying hold on this gracious Promise. It must stand, it
must come to pass: Comfort is promised you, and Comfort shall be your Portion.
Search your Hearts, consult your Experience, and see what God has done for you
already: Look back and reflect what Comforts you have felt formerly, what Joys
in the midst of Tears, what refreshments in your Sorrows, what Gales of Peace,
what Characters of God's Goodness, what Marks of his Favor: These are Item's
that a more plentiful Harvest is to follow. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
that you shall weep and lament, but the World shall rejoice, and you shall be
sorrowful but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, says Christ, John XVI. 20
And he adds immediately this Comparison; A Woman when she is in Travail has
sorrow, because her hour is come; but as soon as she is delivered of the Child,
she remembers no more the anguish for the joy that a man is born into the
World. This admirably expresses both the Nature of your sorrow for sin, and the
Nature of your Joy, which will be the Consequence of it: A Woman in Travail
has pain, so your mourning for sin, or for the absence of Spiritual blessings,
causes throes and pangs, and anguish, but your sorrow is useful and
profitable: As a Woman in Travail brings forth a Man-child, that is the effect
or result of her sorrow, so your mourning produces the Fruits of Righteousness;
for Tribulation works patience, and Patience experience, and Experience hope,
and Hope makes not ashamed. But this is not all: Behold also in this similitude
the Nature of your future Joys; when the Child is born, the Woman for Joy
forgers her anguish so when your Fruit is ripe, it shall be laid up in the
granary of Heaven, and when you shall put off this Body of Flesh and Sin, for
the Joy that will crown your Temples, you will forget all the former anguish you
labored under; God will comfort you, and your Eyes shall see it; the Lord
Jesus will call to you, and your Ears shall hear it, Enter you into the Joy of
your Master. Heaven is the vast Storehouse of all Comforts; there, wherever
you cast your Eye, you will behold nothing but Comfort, Comfort in the Spirits of
Men made perfect, Comfort in the general Assembly of the first born, which are
written in Heaven, Comfort in the innumerable Company of Angels, Comfort in the
Hallelujah's of Cherubin, and Seraphin, Comfort above you, Comfort within you,
Comfort round about you. There your Heart will break no more, there your
Understandings will be clouded no more; there no storms, no enemies will
discompose you any more; there all that can make Men sad will be removed from
your sight, for sin will be gone, and Devils will tempt no more; there you will
lie incircled in the everlasting Arms, and Rivers of Joy will flow round about
you; your present April Showers will produce a glorious May; and after your
gloomy Night, the Son of Righteousness will shine upon you with healing under
his Wings; and as one hour changed Joseph's Fetters into a Chain of Gold, his
Rags into shining Robes, his Stocks into a Chariot, his Prison into a Palace,
his Water into Wine; so in that moment, that your Souls shall enter into the
Regions of endless Comfort, your mourning will be changed into dancing, your
tears into laughter, your sackcloth into silks, your ashes into garlands, your
thorns into laurels, your fasts into festivals, and your unutterable sighs and
groans into unspeakable joys.

SERMON V.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 5. Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the
Earth.
THIS Blessedness, or Beatitude in some Latin Copies of the New Testament is
the second, but in the Original, and in the Syriack and Arabic Versions it is
the third; and these as the most authentic, our Translation follows; what is
said of Meekness here, is taken out of Psalm. XXXVII. 11. where we read as it is
in the Text, The Meek shall inherit the Earth. Christ came not to reverse the
Morals under the Law, but to ratify and confirm, and to refine them into
greater perfection, and to enforce them with new Motives, and Arguments. Moral
Virtue has been the same in all Ages; and being founded on the Law of Nature,
must needs be unalterable: The encouragements for the practice of it, are
greater in the Christian Religion, than in any other whatfoever, and the lines
of the Duty are here drawn in livelier Colors, but the Virtue it self, like
the Nature of that God from whom it flows, receives no changes.

In the explication of the Text, we are to consider, as in the preceding
Sentences.

I. What Meekness is, and who the Meek are, and what their Character is.

II. Wherein their Blessedness consists.

III. How they shall inherit the Earth.

I. What Meekness is.

1. To be meek is not to be mealymouth'd, or gentle, or calm, when it is our
Duty to be angry; and it is our Duty to be so partly with our selves, when we
sin against Heaven, and in the presence of an Omnipotent God, and that is the
anger or indignation spoken of, 2 Cor. VII. 11. partly with others when they do
notoriously affront the Divine Majesty, and wrong their Consciences, Gall. III.
1, 2. particularly,

1. With those who are under our Command, and Power, and Jurisdiction, such as
Children, Servants, and other Relations; or Persons whose Masters, Governors,
Guardians, Teachers, or Tutours we are, when they prove incorrigible in their
sins, Genesis XLIX. 6, 7.

2. Even with others of our Acquaintance, and Persons whom we converse with,
when they profane the Name of God, or run out into licentiousness, and will not
be reclaimed by softer means, Gal. V. 12. Moses, though one of the meekest Men
in the World, yet his anger justly waxed hot, when he saw the Israelites commit
Idolatry, Exodus XXXII. 19. And our Savior himself, though the Pattern of
Meekness, yet could not behold the profanation of the Temple without anger,
John II. 15, 17. and St. Paul, and Barnabas, though Preachers of this Christian
Meekness, yet were obliged to break out into Passion, when they saw the Priest
of Jupiter bringing Oxen, and Garlands to do Sacrifice to them, Acts XIV. 14,
15. Elis Meekness to his Children proved his folly, and his Calmness is a Cause
where God was dishonored, pulled down God's Vengeance upon his Posterity. A
soft Expostulation here was altogether unseasonable; and instead of saying to
his Sons, why do you do so, he should have severely punished them, when their
stubbornness baffled all the gentler means of their Reformation.

Meekness properly relates to injuries done to our selves, where the injury is
directly offered to God, our Meekness must turn into Zeal; in all sins against
our Neighbors, and our own Souls: God is wronged because all sin is a
Transgression, and dishonouring of the Law of God, but some sins are more
immediately levelled against God; yet even in God's cause, where the anger is
just and lawful, discretion must guide the Passion; in a good Cause men may be
too hot; and where the anger turns into fury, it becomes madness; and instead
of advancing, diminishes and darkens the glory of Religion. There is a rational
anger, which with some warmth and heat, pleads and argues for God's Honor, but
runs not out into unseemly Behavior, or into reviling Language. And this is
that anger we are to show, when God is dishonored, when we dishonor him, and
when others do so. So that Meekness does not exclude all anger; for as all
Meekness is not lawful, so all Anger is not sinful. Be ye angry, and sin not,
says St. Paul, Ephesians. IV. 26. which shows that some sort of anger is innocent:
And it is so, when it is,

1. In God's cause, and from a sense of his Glory, which we see dishonored by
the sin, or by the wrong our Neighbors do either to God, or to their fellow
Christians; for though it be lawful sometimes to be angry at a fault we see in
our Brethren, yet the anger must be more upon the account of the indignity
offered to God by the offense, than upon the Account of the wrong, or prejudice
we our selves suffer by it.

2. It must be kept within due bounds and limits, must not turn into rage, and
throwing about Coals, and Firebrarnds, and odious and offensive Names. Nor,

3. Must it turn into malice, and hatred, but must still be followed with Acts
of Charity. And,

4. It must be after that we find gentler means useless, and ineffectual. There
are indeed some extraordinary occasions which require a present indignation, as
it was in the case of Zimri, and Cozbi, when Phineas executed Judgment, Numb.
XXV. 7. but ordinarily the rougher remedy is not to take place, till the softer
medicine be refused and scorned, Matthew. XVIII. 15. And from hence,

2. You may easily guess at the nature of that Meekness which my Text says,
makes its Votaries blessed. Its Definition or Description rather is briefly
this. It is a temper of Mind, a Grace, or Gift of God's Spirit, whereby a man
is enabled to curb, and subdue, and moderate his Anger, Wrath and Passion, and
Peevishness, and choleric Disposition, when it is necessary; and to behave
himself with Calmness, Gentleness, and great Modesty and Moderation in his
Speeches and Answers, in his Actions and Transactions with his Neighbors. I
call it a gift of God's Spirit, because, though some are naturally meek, and no
Choler seems to mingle with their Blood and Complexion; and though they are
born as it were into Virtue, yet even this natural Meekness must be resin'd and
polished by Grace, and the Spirit of God before it can be truly acceptable to
God in Christ Jesus. This Spirit must inspire it with Wisdom and Discretion,
when and where it is to keep within, and when and where it is to go beyond it is
natural bounds, when and where it is to use a Staff, and when and where it is
to turn that Staff into a Rod. Divines do commonly reckon up five degrees of
this Christian Qualification.

1. Vid. Cornel. a Lap. in Luc.
Conversing with, and speaking to all sorts of persons calmly, gently,
modestly, without Wrath, or Anger, or Rage, or Fury, according to the command,
Tit. III. 2. Show all Meekness unto all men.

2. By our calm and soft Speeches and Answers to endeavor to break, and
assuage the Rage and Anger of our incensed and offended Neighbors, according
to Solomon's rule, Prove. XV. 1. A soft answer turns away, or ought to turn away
Wrath.

3. Calmly to bear and to endure injuries and affronts offered to us in word or
deed, without rendering railing for railing, or reviling for reviling, for so we
read, 1 Pet. III. 8, 9. Love as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not
rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing.

4. Even to rejoice in this calm bearing and enduring of injuries, according to
the Precept we have, 1 Pet. IV. 13,

14. which imports, Rejoicing in such cases, in as much, as we are partakers of
Christ's sufferings: for so Christ suffered Reproaches, Threatenings, Calumnies,
Injuries, etc. and committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. II.
23.

5. By acts of Meekness to endeavor to overcome our enraged and ill-natured
Neighbors, according to the rule, Romans XII. 20, 21. If thine Enemy hunger,
feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: Be not overcome with evil, but overcome
the evil with wood.

These are the degrees of which I shall have occasion to speak more
particularly, when I come to explain v. 22. In the mean while, give me leave to
tell you, that he that arrives to one of these degrees, must not rest there,
but proceed, till he come to the top of the Ladder. This is the race a
Christian is to run in. He that will not go on to the furthermost Stage of his
course, has reached the first and second in vain. The difficulty of the task
must be no discouragement; if it be, we are not truly sensible of the
blessedness which attends this Meekness, which is the second point I am to
speak to.

II. Wherein the blessedness of meek Christians does consist.

1. This Virtue renders us acceptable to God and Man. How acceptable it makes
us to God, St. Peter shows, 1 Pet. III. 4. where we read, that a meek and quiet
Spirit is in the Sight of God of great price. God sets a mighty value upon it,
and the virtue makes men great and honorable in his Eyes. What pains do poor
Mortals take to gain credit and reputation with men of high rank and quality,
when they are to act, or speak, or do any exercise before them, they do their
best, and all the powers of their Soul are employed to come off with Applause.
But how few take the way to gain credit and reputation with God the great
rewarder of them that diligently seek him. To be meek is the way to his esteem,
and to gain his approbation and commendation. Meekness exalts the Soul, and
has such charms about it, as make a glorious God look with a very favorable
Eye upon the person adorned with this wedding Garment. Its the very Livery of
Christ's Disciples, the mark of his Sheep, and therefore cannot but be
acceptable to the great Shepherd of Men's Souls. Add to all this, That it makes
us acceptable to men too, not only, because most men had rather deal with a
meek than with a fiery or choleric Person, but because the virtue has such
advantages in it, as even force esteem and veneration. Brutish and sensual Men
esteem nothing that serves to aggrandize the Soul, and indeed their Verdict is
so inconsiderable, that it is not worth regarding. But Men of Sense, and
Reason, and Understanding cannot but value the Person in whom this Meekness
shines, it being an argument of the noblest Conquest, greater certainly than
Pompey or Caesar could boast of. Esau, though a profane Person, could not but
admire it in his Brother Jacob, Genesis XXXIII. 4. And if the great Savior of the
World, was justly counted blessed, because he grew in favor with God and Man,
the meek Christian must needs be so, for his Meekness has the same Virtue, and
renders him acceptable to God and Man.

2. It fits and dispose a man for the influx of Celestial Wisdom, for it is of
the same nature with Humility; and that, as I said before, prepares for the
richer influences of God's Communications. Humility and Meekness, like Twins,
live and die together. He that would be meek, must first learn to be humble;
for it is Pride makes men fretfull, and fly out into Passion; and as these two
Virtues go hand in hand together, so they participate of the same blessings.
Elisha, 2 Kings III. XV. was unfit for the Illapses of God's Spirit, while he
was in a Passion, and therefore a Minstrell was brought to play before him, to
compose his Thoughts, to allay the Storms his Soul was in, and to rock the
Waves of his disordered Passions into a calm; and when this was done, the
Spirit descended upon him in gifts of Prophecy. It is this Spirit of God, that
must illuminate the Mind, and fill it with Celestial Wisdom, and no subject so
fit for it, as a meek and quiet Spirit. This is no new Divinity, but as old as
David's time, for thus he says, Psalm. XXV. 9. The meek will he guide in
judgment, the meek will he teach his ways. And this even some Heathen
Philosophers have been sensible of, and with them agrees the Author of the
Wisdom of Solomon, chapter I. 4. Turbulent Passions keep out this Spirit of God.
But where the Soul is calm, this Spirit spreads his wings over it, as a Hen
over her Brood, and teaches her the mysteries of Godliness, displays to her the
glories of the Gospel, represents to her the designs of God's Providence,
given her a lively sight of God's Goodness, and the Reward to come, and at once
discovers to her, and presses upon her the powerful arguments of the Love of
God, which prevail with her to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. And since
the meek have the honor of being blessed with this Celestial Wisdom whatever
the World thinks of them they must be blessed and happy.

III. Blessed they are because they shall inherit the Earth, and how they do
that must be our last enquiry.

1. Some by inheriting the earth, understand the millennary Reign, or the Reign
of the Saints here on Earth for a thousand Years. But surely this cannot be the
meaning of it, for if there be such a millennary Reign, which I will neither
affirm nor deny; it is evident from Rev. XX. 4. that that Reign is confined to
Martyrs, and those that have been beheaded for the Testimony of Jesus; and
surely men may be meek, and expect a reward of God without being Martyrs.
Therefore others more justly understand it of the present Earth we all inhabit,
and referr the blessedness here spoken of to the quiet possession the meek
enjoy, or have of the blessings God's liberal hand bestows upon them. For
though sometimes they lose all they have in the world, though they are
harrass'd by their enemies, though their Meekness is sometime their loss,
though barbarous men sometime take advantage of their meekness to undo them,
yet for the most part they quietly and contentedly enjoy, what God gives them,
be it more or less; to be sure they have the best means in their hands to
possess what they have in peace. And that is their Meekness which makes them
recede frequently from their right for peace and quiet's sake: and God will not
suffer them to be losers by their Meekness; and therefore rewards that with
content which they seem to want in other things, it being his method to take
care of, and to fight for those who will not fight for themselves. But though
the meek may in this sense be said to inherit the Earth.

1. With respect to their quiet Possession of the temporal things God gives
them.

2. With respect to the favor of men God makes them Heirs of.

3. With respect to the success that some times attends their temporal
concerns, as a present recompense of their Virtue, as it was said of a great
man in this Kingdom, that rose from a small to a very great Estate, and used to
overcome the malice of his Enemies with Meekness and Patience; that he never
sued any man, nor any man ever sued him: Though I say, we must grant, that in
this sense the meek may be said to inherit the Earth: Yet,

2. This sense methinks in this place is not great enough, where we find our
Savior intends to encourage his followers to the noblest Enterprises by the
noblest and most excellent Rewards. When David spoke these words, The meek
shall inherit the earth; it is like he meant the Land of Canaan, and a quiet
Possession of their own in that Country: but as the Land of Canaan was an
Emblem of the Land of eternal Glory: so Christ, whose Province it was to bring
Life and Immortality to light, must be supposed to speak of this Earth in a
more sublime and exalted sense, and therefore by the Earth here must be
understood something greater, even the happy Regions of immortal Bliss, called
sometimes the new Heaven and the new Earth, Rev. XXII. 1. sometimes a heavenly
Country, Heb. XI. 16. sometimes the Land of the living, at least in the sense
of some of the Fathers, Psalm. CXVI. 9. even those Regions which were prefigured
by the Land of Promise, by the Land that flowed with Milk and Honey. In a word,
the Holy Ghost in Scripture loves to express those happy Regions of eternal
Love and Felicity by various Names; sometimes by a River, because the Joys are
in a perpetual Flux and Motion there, sometimes by a Mountain or Hill, because
the glorified Saints will be exalted to Seats high and lofty, and overlooking
all the World; sometimes by a City, because of the Unanimity of the
Inhabitants; sometimes by a Kingdom, because of the Splendour and Glory of that
State; and here by the Earth, because of the affluence of all things, that can
make the Meek rich, and blessed, and happy. And they are said to inherit this
glorious Land.

1. Because as Children they have a right to it while they live here, as a Son
has a right to his Father's Land.

2. Because after death they shall actually possess this Estate of their Father
which is in Heaven: so that their inheriting, speaks them Children, Sons and
Daughters of the Almighty, to whose share the rich Demesnes of the other World
will fall, not after their Father's death, who is immortal and cannot die, but
after their own death; and this shows the difference betwixt inheriting Estates
here on Earth, and inheriting the Regions of eternal Bliss. There Men inherit
after their Father's death, here after their own death.

Inferences.
1. It Is evident from hence, how improper and unfit a solitary life is for the
practice of the noblest Precepts of Christianity. Meekness and subduing our
wrathful, choleric, peevish and angry Inclinations is certainly one of the
most excellent rules of our holy Religion. But how shall he that retires from
all company, lives in a desert, in a wilderness, in a wood; where he lives' out
of all converse, how shall he live up to the strictness of this rule, who has
none to offend him, none to displease him, none to affront him, none to do him
an injury, none to talk impertinently before him, none to oppose or cross him.
Its temptations must try this virtue. To be chaste upon Mount Athos, where no
Women come; to be sober in Scythia, where no Wine, no strong Liquors grow, is
pitiful and mean, and at best but a negative innocence; but with Lot, to be
chaste in Sodom; sober with Anacharsis in debauched Athens; with the Salamander
to lie in the Fire, without being consumed; and like Fishes to swim in the Salt
Sea, and to contract nothing of its Saltness; this is virtue, this is heroic,
this is Christian like. Provocations, Insolences, Injuries, these are the
Touchstone that must show whether our Meekness be genuine or not. The most
choleric Man alive may fancy himself to be the meekest Creature under Heaven,
while there is none to disturb or disorder his Passions. But in your Trade, in
your Commerce, in your Traffic, in your Callings and Employments, in Company,
in Society of others, when you are slighted, abused, undervalued, dishonored,
called ill Names; when things are said and done, which are against your
interest, opinion, judgment; and when you are crossed by your Neighbors in your
designs, then to be meek, then to be silent, then to say nothing, or to answer
with Moderation and Discretion, then to return nothing that may favor of
revenge in word or deed, that is Meekness, that is the Trial, that is the Virtue
we speak of; then to curb your Passions, then to refrain, then to hush and
quiet your unruly Affections, not out of Policy, but out of Love to God and
Charity of your Neighbor, that is great, that is to prepare for inheriting the
land where Angels live. Some are such cunning Artists, that they can conceal
their Passion, when it is their interest not to show it, but whenever they have
a fair opportunity to show their Spleen, they will not fail to let the Offender
know that they have not forgot the injury offered them. But this is Hypocrisy,
not Meekness, Malice and Artifice, not Calmness, in a word, a perfect Cheat.
It Is a sense of God, a sense of our duty a sense of the necessity of it, a
sense of the love of Christ, a sense of the weight and importance of the
Precepts of the Gospel, that must plant this Meekness in our Souls, and this is
it that must check and overawe our unruly Appetites. Sinister ends and designs
spoil all virtue whatsoever. It Is not suppressing a Sin, but destroying it, not
hiding it from men for the present, but laying the Axe to the root of the Tree,
that makes men Favorites of Heaven. Besides, this Meekness must be universal,
exercised not only when Persons great and powerful, whom we fear, or from whom
we expect some advantages, give the Provocation, but when our Equals, or
Inferiors, or Persons whom we have some command over, say and do things which
are apt to stir up Passions within us. How far we may lawfully be angry with
such Persons, I have shown in the beginning of this Discourse, but for the most
part in the affairs of meum and tuum, in things where our Honor, Profit, Ease
and Pleasure and Interest are touched, that is the Theater on which this
Meekness must be shown.

II. Since such a Blessedness attends this admirable Virtue, no less than
inheriting the Regions of Eternal Bliss; need I give you any other Arguments to
make you enamored with it? when the present and the future favor of that God,
in whose Power it is to make us happy or miserable for ever, is promised and
entailed upon this qualification: What strange Hearts must you have, if such
Motives cannot prevail with you to resolve upon the serious Study, and Practice
of it?

But I am naturally fretfull, a. small thing discomposes me, and I cannot help
it. How sinner! Naturally fretfull? Has grace then done thee no Service? Has
the Gospel done no good upon thee? Art thou yet in a State of Nature, and art
not thou afraid? What? in the Flesh yet? and a stranger to the Spirit of
Christ, and unconcerned at the solemn Protestations of God, that they that are
in the Flesh cannot please God, and that he that has not the Spirit of Christ,
is none of his? Is that thy excuse, which ought to be thy sorrow? or shall that
serve as an Apology, which deserves thy deep Repentance?

Ay, But I have such provocations given me, that Flesh and Blood is not able to
endure them; the meekest Man alive could not forbear being in a passion, if he
had to deal with such Men as I have. Ah Christian! Christian did I say, thou
art none, till thou studiest Meekness; yet I know, thou art proud of that Name,
and be it so. Christian, how willing art thou to believe, that none is truly
meek, because thou art not! How willing to believe that none has such
provocations as thou have, and that none is able to bear them, because thou art
loath to endure them! Doubt not, vain Man, there have been, and are thousands
in the World, that with an admirable calmness of mind have born, and do bear
far more than ever thou had occasion to bear; What? Do thou think thy God
commands thee impossibilities? Do thou take him to be so hard a Master, that
he bids thee remove Mountains, and gives thee no strength to touch them with
one of thy Fingers?

There are means, which being conscientiously used will curb thy raging
Passions, and turn thy Wrath and Anger into the Meekness of a Lamb, and they
are these following.

1. Next to fervent and importunate Prayer, which must ever be used in all
Seize of Virtue, great Consideration must be used; Consideration I mean
of the Dignity and Excellency of this Virtue, and the Deformity, and
unseemliness of its opposite Anger, and Wrath, and inordinate Passion. What
harmony, what sweetness, what excellent Music does this Meekness cause in the
Soul; what disorder, what confusion does anger stir up in that noble part? How
amiable is the one, how detestable the other. Behold an angry Man, what a
disfigured Creature is he? The Picture is loathsome, and the Shape abominable.

2. When you find the passion of anger stirring in you be silent, say nothing,
do nothing till that inward heat be over, and then speak, and do what Reason
and Religion, and Conscience shall dictate. It was very good advice of
Athenodorus to Augustus the Emperor, whenever he was angry with a Man, to
repeat the four and twenty Letters of the Alphabet, before he proceeded to the
Execution of the sentence; for he thought by that time, his thoughts would be
cooler, and he would judge better.

3. Think of the many peremptory Commands, that press this Meekness upon you,
Ephesians. IV. 2. Col. III. 12. Matthew. XI. 28, 29. 1 Pet. II. 21, 22. 1 Pet. III. 4.
Surely these Commands were not given in vain; and did you reflect what the Name
Christian imports, not to go to Church, not to profess the Gospel, not to call
your selves Protestants, but to live up to the Commands of Christ Jesus, your
Lord, and your God, and how he protests, that he will own none for his Disciple
or Follower, that is unwilling to do what he Commands. Such serious reflections
would work upon you, make you venture all to arrive to this grace, the rather,
because while you live in neglect of this Virtue, you live in sin, and to live
in sin is a state of Enmity against God, and is this the Coat of God's Children?

4. The Example of Christ has moved, and persuaded others to this Virtue, and
can it not move you? Behold that Lamb of God, who endured greater reproaches,
injuries, calumnies? yet like a Sheep before his Shearers, he was dumb. It Is
true, he calls the Pharisees sometimes Fools, and blind Guides, and Serpents,
and a Generation of Vipers; but these are only just Descriptions of the Nature
of those Beasts, not the results of a disorderly Passion. In affronts offered
to his Person, how calm, how gentle was that Lamb! Behold the scene of his
sufferings, and you will see this Truth written with Sunbeams. Thousands that
are now in Heaven have been wrought upon by this great Example, and shall it
have no influence upon you? Strange! you should hope to be saved by him, and
neglect the way he has appointed in order to Salvation.

5. Take heed of a rash misconstruing of your Neighbor's words and actions
Nothing provokes to passion sooner than such misinterpretations. Either this
Man said so to reflect upon you, or he did not bow low enough before you, or he
did not show you that Civility he ought, or he did such a thing to express his
contempt of your Person, etc. Put favorable constructions on your Neighbor's
Deportment toward you, and you will prevent those Fits of Anger, which now you
fall into to the scandal of others, and the ruin of your Souls.

6. Consider how profitable this Virtue is; profitable to others who will
sooner hearken to you, and listen to your advice, when delivered with Meekness;
you will edify them, engage them to praise God for the grace which is bestowed
upon you; profitable to your selves, it will be a safeguard to you, you will
not only enjoy what you have more quietly, but you will be able to bear
adversity better when it comes; and we know that God very often rewards these
Acts of Meekness with turning the Hearts of Enemies toward the Meek into mercy,
and compassion.

To this purpose I remember a passage in Moschus, of a certain pious old Man,
when some Thieves broke into his House, the good Man stood silent by, while the
Barbarians rifled his Coffers; having taken what they thought fit, they
departed; but the old Man spying a Bag of Money, they had either overlooked, or
forgotten to take with them, he runs out and calls after them, that they had
left something of value behind them, and there it was if they would come back
and fetch it. The Thieves looking upon it as raillery, or mockery had no mind
to return; but Curiosity at last prevailed with them to go and see whether the
Man were in good earnest, and finding him real in what he said, they were so
confounded with the calmness and meekness of the Man, that they restored him
all they had robbed him of, and cried out, this is a good Man indeed. I
conclude with St. Paul's obtestation, Ephesians. IV. 30, 31, 32. Grieve not the holy
spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all
bitterness, and wrath, and clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away from you
with all malice. And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

SERMON VI.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, for they shall be filled.
There is nothing more common in Scripture, than to express the Doctrine or
Lessons God has thought fit to reveal to us, by Meat, and Bread, and Food, and
Milk, and Wine, and Water; and our docility or readiness to imbibe, or digest,
and obey these Lessons by eating and drinking; all which is done on purpose, to
give us clearer, and livelier apprehensions of things spiritual and unseen, and
as our knowledge comes by our senses; so by those external Objects and Actions,
to lead us to higher thoughts, sublimer notions. This being so, we need not
wonder to find our Savior speaking here of a hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, for this is but a continuation of the same Metaphor, for though
hunger and thirst be properly the office and function of the Body, yet there
being an appetite in the Soul which is very like it, Christ chooses to express
it by these known natural actions or inclinations. And lest this hunger and
thirst should be interpreted as a punishment rather than a mercy; the God-like
Preacher here not only pronounces a blessing upon it, but encourages to it by a
very weighty and precious promise in the Text, Blessed are they which do hunger
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.

THree things, call them Doctrines, or Propositions, or Conclusions, or what
you will, are here suggested to us.

I. That there is a hunger and thirst after Righteousness, which is very
commendable.

II. Without this hunger and thirst after Righteousness, a man cannot be
blessed or happy.

III. The happiness of those who do hunger and thirst after Righteousness,
consists in being filled.

I. There is a hunger and thirst after Righteousness, which is very
commendable. That Is as little as a man can gather from the Text; this State
being pronounced blessed, that Blessedness makes it commendable at least. By
Righteousness here, some do piously understand, Christ Jesus, who is called,
The Lord our Righteousness, Jer. XXIII. 6. and is said to be made unto us of
God, Righteousness, 1 Cor. I. 30. and the reasons why he is called so, are,

1. Because he is the Fountain of all Righteousness.

2. Because he is the Author of that Righteousness which is in us.

3. Because by his perfect righteousness, he covers the accidental and
unallow'd of defects of our sincere, though imperfect Righteousness. And no
doubt they that truly hunger and thirst after Christ, desirous to be taught by
him, as their Prophet; to be saved by him, as their Priest; and to be ruled by
him, as their King, may be said to be in a blessed State; but though the word
here used, may lawfully be applied to Christ, yet this cannot be the direct
sense of it in this place, where Christ's design is to represent all the Graces
a Christian is to be adorned with; and therefore by Righteousness here, must be
meant the whole circle of Virtues, the whole compass of Goodness, which a
Christian is capable of on this side Heaven, and this is the common acceptance
of the word, and in this sense we find it opposed to a sinful life in general,
Romans VI. 20. When you were servants of sin, you were free from righteousness,
and this Righteousness is afterward, v. 22. called becoming servants of God,
and having our fruit unto holiness. The righteous man is indeed represented in
Scripture, as a just man in his dealings: and Righteousness stands often for
doing justice, and rendering to all their due, and doing every man right; but it
is not with an intent to separate the other virtues from it, but to show, that
the good man, who is faithful and conscientious in his worship and doing the
will of God, among other virtues which he practices, exercises this also, and
does by others as he would have others do by him. So that by Righteousness
here, is to be understood an universal Goodness in all conditions and
relations, whereby both the outward and inward man becomes entirely subject to
God; and without it he cannot be said to deal justly and righteously with God;
and after this Righteousness it is that a hunger and thirst is commended here,
which hunger and thirst imports,

1. A great sense, that there is no true satisfaction either in sin, or in a
worldly carnal life. This we must necessarily suppose; for how should a man
hunger or thirst after Righteousness, except he be sensible, that here is not
his rest neither in sin nor in the contentments of this present world, these
being the grand impediments of that Righteousness. That Is the reason why men,
who place their chiefest happiness in sublunary enjoyments, have nothing of
this hunger and thirst after Righteousness, till they become sensible of the
vanity of this world, and the danger of a sinful life, their appetite after
Righteousness is insignificant, nor can their feeble wishes be called so, but
when they have a thorough view of the rottenness of the bottoms they have
sailed in; then they affect and desire this plank to swim out of the gulf of
perdition.

2. It imports a high esteem of this Righteousness and Goodness, and without
it, it is impossible to hunger and thirst after it, for men do not use to long
after things they do not value, nor are their desires very strong after objects
they see no satisfaction in. A man hungry and thirsty, prizes the meat and
drink that is before him, so must he the righteousness we speak of that does
truly hunger and thirst after it. If he does not prize it above Gold, and
Silver, and Pearls, and precious Stones, his hunger and thirst after it cannot
be considerable, but when he comes to count all things dross and dung in
comparison of it, then he is most likely to hunger and thirst after it.

3. It imports a very earnest desire to be righteous and good in all points.
Such a desire, as men very hungry and thirsty have after meat and drink, and
that we know is not very faint. The Scripture therefore expresses by a very
emphatical similitude, Psalm. XLII. 1. As the Heart pants after the water brooks,
so pants my soul after thee, O God. The Heart or Stag is a creature naturally
hot, but being chased and hunted, his desire after the cooling streams becomes
more earnest and vehement; and such must be this desire after righteousness,
even as it is, Psalm. LXIII. 1. My soul thirsts, my flesh longs for thee in a
dry Land, i. e. as a man or traveller spent with the labor or the trouble of
his journey in a dry land where no water is. These expressions import a very
strong desire, a desire which has no reserves, no sinister ends and designs,
but is sincere, and lively, and vigorous, and importunate, which will not be
denied, and prevails by its fervor and importunity.

4. It imports actual and earnest endeavors to be truly good and righteous, by
a diligent and conscientious use of the proper means. We do not look upon a man
that talks of having a thing, or pretends his heart set upon it, as being in
good earnest, if his endeavors be not suitable to his desires. The Merchant or
Tradesman that desires to be rich, we know what pains they take; nay the
Day-Labourer that desires a livelihood. So he that hungers and thirsts after
Righteousness indeed, will enquire, and hear, and read the word of God, and
ponder it in his mind, and pray hard, and deny himself, and break off from
loose Company, and meditate, and think, and shun occasions of evil, and follow
God, as the man in the Gospel did his Neighbor at Midnight for three Loaves,
and will leave no stone unturned, to compass this Goodness and Righteousness,
as a man who is very hungry or thirsty does not sit still, but bestirs himself
to get Food and Drink which he stands in need of.

5. It imports a Progress in this hunger and thirst, and when we are arrived to
such a degree of Righteousness, then to hunger, and thirst, and endeavor after
higher degrees of it. To this purpose are those frequent exhortations, Grow in
Grace, and see that ye abound more and more in faith, in love, and charity: And
give all diligence to add to your faith, virtue; unto virtue, knowledge; unto
knowledge, temperance; unto temperance, godliness; unto godliness, patience;
unto patience, brotherly kindness; and unto brotherly kindness, charity, 1 Thessalonians. III. 12. IV. 1. 2. Pet. I. 5, 6, 7. II. 18. A Christians labor, like
the Husbandmans, is never at an end; when one lust is mortified, he must begin
to subdue and mortify another, and when he has made one virtue his domestic,
he must take another into his Family. The hunger and thirst here spoken of, is
not a momentary appetite, which is to last for a day, or so; but an appetite
perpetual, which is to run through the whole course of our lives, and which is
still increased by being filled; insomuch that if a good Christian were to live
here a thousand years, he would still find degrees and acts of Righteousness to
hunger and thirst after.

6. It imports such a spiritual hunger and thirst, or such a desire after
Righteousness, as is content to undergo and endure bodily hunger and thirst,
and other temporal inconveniences both for the attainment and preservation of
it. He that is loath to be at any trouble for it, or unwilling to abridge
himself in any thing that is pleasing to the flesh either for the gaining of it,
or the maintaining of it, has but a weak appetite after it, to be sure no such
appetite as the man of honor has after worldly Glory, who can dispense with
scratched faces, with scars, and wounds, and hard lodging, and puddle-water,
and a homely diet, and all to attain to an empty name of a valiant man. Surely
righteousness deserves as generous a desire; we see what men will do in a
Famine, even venture reproach, and contempt, and being abused, and reviled, to
get food convenient; such must be this hunger and thirst after Righteousness:
for to be truly righteous, a Christian must reckon upon afflictions,
persecutions, and calumnies, and nicknames, and being laughed at; and he that
longs for the fragrant Rose, must not stand upon its being encompassed with
pricks, but resolve out of love to the one, to dispense with the other. And
that which enforces the duty, is the

II. Proposition, That without this hunger and thirst after Righteousness, a
man cannot be blessed or happy. As the former Proposition made this hunger and
thirst commendable, so this makes it absolutely necessary; for if he is blessed
who hungers and thirsts, certainly he is not so that wants this appetite. And
that there is no true blessedness without it, will appear from the following
considerations.

1. Without this hunger and thirst the Soul is sick, as much as we conclude a
man is not well, when his appetite is gone, nay if he have no appetite at all
we conclude him dead. A Carcass has not appetite, and most certainly, he that
has no hunger and thirst after Righteousness at all, is dead in God's account,
dead in Law, dead in the Law of the Gospel, a sad condition, and which deserves
to have the Motto of the Plague written over it, Lord have mercy upon him. The
Scripture generally makes him who is dead to Righteousness, a very miserable
man, gives so dismal an account of him, that nothing can be supposed more
wretched. You know the Parable of the Prodigal, till he got a hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, the holy Ghost represents him as a very contemptible
person, as one sent into the field to keep swine, and that would have filled
his belly with the husks the swine did feed on, but none gave unto him, Luke
XV. 14, 15. nay v. 32. he is pronounced a dead man, dead to the favor of God,
and the influences of God's Spirit, and to any right to the precious promises
of the Gospel; so is the man that has no hunger at all after Righteousness,
and if his appetite to it be weak and feeble; still its an argument of
sickness, and neither the one nor the other is a sign of bliss and happiness.

2. He that does not hunger or thirst after Righteousness, is a Fool, so
Solomon tells us, Prove. I. 7. For the wisdom he speaks of there, is this
Righteousness, and he that despises it, hates his own soul, and loves death,
Prove. VIII. 36. than which there cannot be a greater argument of madness, and
surely this is no sign of blessedness. Wisdom indeed such a man has, who is a
stranger to this hunger and thirst, but it is earthy, sensual, devilish, Jam.
III. I5. Earthy, i. e. he minds nothing but earth, his contrivances are
altogether how to compass the contents and pleasures of this life, the world is
his highest and chiefest good, the fashions of this world are the rules of his
life; he governs himself by the punctilio's of State, and Honor, and worldly
Policy; he does as the world does, and what worldly men say or do, he imitates,
and in endeavoring after temporal advantages, he stands not upon the stricter
rules of Conscience.

It is sensual too, all his caterings are for the flesh, and how to live easy
and delicately is all his care. He suffers himself to be discouraged from
things truly good by carnal reasons; and if his flesh and carnal desires be but
gratified, he is pleased, and more than pleased, than with all the comforts of
the Holy Ghost. His flesh is his sovereign, and the Lord that rules in him, and
its Dictates are the Law he lives by.

It is devilish too, for having no hunger, no thirst after Righteousness, the
Devil is his friend, his companion, though he sees him not, but he may feel him
by the suggestions which he yields to, and whereby his mind is rendered vain,
and averse from real Goodness: That Aversion comes by the Devils Instigation,
and in rellishing nothing but what pleads in favor of the brutish part about
him, he suffers himself to be made a Prisoner, to that Conqueror, becomes his
Slave and Captive: and surely such a man cannot possibly be happy, and
consequently without this hunger and thirst after Righteousness the only thing
that can make a man truly wise, a man is a stranger to real Bliss, to be sure
he is not capable of being enriched by the Consolations of God, nor is God
concerned to fill him in order to this bliss, which leads me to the III.
Proposition, viz. That the happiness of those who truly hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, consists in being filled. Filled! How?

1. Their very hunger and thirst after Righteousness shall be and is a
satisfaction to them. For it is a sign of Grace, a sign that God loves them, a
sign that he visits them with the favor he bears to his own people, and that
they are born again; that there is a signal alteration wrought in their
natures, and that their deceitful lusts and unruly desires of the flesh are
abated in order to a total destruction. This hunger and thirst after
Righteousness being predominant in them, is an item that God's Spirit has got
the better of corrupted nature, and from hence flows a calmness and serenity
into their Souls, and when the enemy beats them out of all their strong holds,
and they can fasten on nothing to give themselves comfort, this hunger and
thirst after Righteousness upholds their hope, and supports their confidence,
when they are so weakened, that they dare not pretend to St. Paul's having
labored more than all; to the Apostle's invincible patience under injuries, to
Zacharias and Elizabeth's walking in all the Commandments of the Lord
blameless, to Anna's serving the Lord with fasting and prayer Night and Day, to
the faith of the Thessalonians, which grew exceedingly, to the Galatians
readiness to pluck out their own eyes, and give them to their Teachers; or to
the Charity of the Macedonians, who did to their Power, nay beyond their Power,
though, I say, the hungry Soul from an humble sense of her frailty dares not
pretend to these Accomplishments; yet this Hunger and Thirst after
Righteousness, in the midst of all assaults of the Devil, is the sacred Anchor,
which she can make use of, and thereby preserve her Vessel from sinking; so
that this very Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness is filling.

2. They shall be filled with Righteousness, that goodness they did thirst
after, they shall have great store of; all their faculties shall be filled with
it, and like the rich ointment poured out on Aaron's Head, and running down
upon his Beard, and from thence into the very Skirts of his clothing it shall
perfume their outward and inward Man, and fill both their Hearts and Lives;
what they ask for they shall have, what they seek they shall find, and the Door
they knock at shall be opened to them. They shall find goodness growing in them
as the Lilies, and spreading its Roots as the Cedars in Libanon; Their desire
is, that God may totally subdue their hearts, and accordingly their Souls shall
become Temples of the Holy Ghost; they earnestly with, that every imagination
which exalted it self against the obedience of Christ Jesus, may become subject
to him, and they shall have their Heart's desire, and the request of their Lips
shall be granted them. They shall be filled with the spirit by degrees; so
filled, that in time they shall be abounding in the Work of the Lord, flourish
in the Courts of the Lord's House, bringing forth fruit in old Age, till they
become full of good Works, and Alms-deeds as Dorcas was, Acts IX. 36. and old
Disciples, as Mnason was, Acts XXI. 16. The duties they perform but weakly,
now, they shall perform with greater vigor, and with their virtues their
comfort shall increase, and the consolations of Christ shall abound in them, 2
Cor. I. 5. Thus they shall be filled in this Life: But is this promise ever
fulfilled to any? will some say, all I shall say is, go and ask those, who
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and they will tell you by Experience in
the Psalmist's Language, Psalm. LXXXIV. 11. The Lord is a Sun, and Shield, he
will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them, that
walk uprightly. But this is not all:

3. They shall be filled in the other World, with the plenty of God's House,
with the light of his Countenance for ever; when their Bodies do drop from
them, and their Souls shall be transplanted from this barren Wilderness, into
Eden the Garden of God; and of this fullness David speaks, Psalm. XVII. 15. As
for me I shall behold thy face in Righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy likeness. They shall be filled with the Joys of God; their
mouths shall be filled with laughter, and their tongues with singing, they
shall be filled with the finest of the Wheat, and with Honey out of the Rock
shall they be satisfied, not with material Honey, not with such Honey as
enlightened Jonatha's Eyes, but with the sweetness of God's glorious presence
for ever: All their senses, all their faculties shall be filled with
unspeakable satisfaction, with water of life that springs from the Rock of
Ages, for they shall be filled with infinite love, like Vessels thrown into the
Sea, all shall be filled, and their fullness shall last while the fountain of
goodness and the Ocean of felicity lasts, i. e. for ever.

Inferences.
There are three sorts of Persons, that in the Close of this Discourse, I must
necessarily speak to.

I. Those that pretend to hunger and thirst after Righteousness, but do not.

II. Such as neither condemn, nor greatly care for this Hunger and Thirst, but
hanker after something else.

III. Such as do truly hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and long to be
filled with it.

I. Those that pretend to hunger and thirst after Righteousness, but do not.

There is scarce a Virtue we speak of but there are several that flatter
themselves, that they are possessed of it, because they have something like it:
There are few of you I believe so hardened, as to have a total Aversion, or an
utter abhorrency from all goodness; many have some general desires after it;
but if these cold, general, indifferent desires be taken for this Hunger and
Thirst after Righteousness, what gross mistakes must you needs run into!

Cold desires certainly do not deserve the Name of Hunger and Thirst; to be
sure no such Hunger and Thirst, as I have described in the Premises. What?
Shall we believe your Hunger and Thirst after goodness real; when we see no
effects, no fruits, no signs of it? I suppose if you have this Hunger and
Thirst, you have withal a great sense of the danger of a sinful and carnal
Life, and a very high Esteem of Righteousness, and your desires after it are
vehement and pressing, and your endeavors to get it are great, and strong, and
you make a conscientious use of the proper means; and when you are come up to
any degree of goodness, you hunger and thirst and labor to extend the borders
of your goodness, and you are not frighted with the inconveniences that may
attend the pursuit of it, for these are the ingredients of this sacred
Appetite. What? Shall we take painted Fire for that which is in motion? Or
shall we call that Hunger and Thirst, which wants the Essential Characters? Do
we take a Man of Straw for a rational Creature?

Ay! But, says the self-conceited Christian, I am sure I have it, for I desire
to pay every Man their own, to defraud and wrong no body, and to live honestly
among my Neighbors. But, why? Is this all the Righteousness God stands upon?
What? Is one link of the sacred Chain of Graces, the whole Chain? Is one step
of the way the full length of it? Do all the other Virtues stand for Ciphers?
Is all that the Gospel requires, comprehended in this one qualification, Moral
honesty?

No, no; you do not truly hunger and thirst after any one Virtue, if you do not
hunger after all; if your Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness be right, you
will enquire, and take notice, and observe what things are good, and just, and
honest, and pure, and lovely, and of a good Report, and be enamored with them.
You will not speak of your spiritual wants slightly, such as, we all have all
our failings, and God amend us all, etc. but with some inpatience to have them
supplied, you will hunger and thirst after all the Graces of God's Spirit, not
only after Justice, or Chastity, or Temrance, but after a lively Faith and
Patience, and Charity, and Humility, and Fervor, and Love, and Obedience, and
a truly spiritual Temper; and after higher Degrees of all these; and your
Hunger and Thirst will be seen, and known by your industry and care, and
labor, and cautiousness of sinning, and resisting of Temptations, and by
Groans, which cannot be uttered, and by your unwearied Attempts to climb the
Hill of God, and not to give over till you come to the Top of it; and then
expect the Blessing of my Text. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, for they shall be filled.

II. Those who neither care for, nor condemn this spiritual Hunger and Thirst,
but hunger and thirst after something else, even after the sweet and
comfortable Enjoyments, the Riches, the Honors, and the Pleasures of this
present World; if they could but have such a Competency, or so much a Year, or
such a Place, or such an Office, or live as such a one lives, they would desire
no more, and this is all they hunger and thirst after. O how happy should they
be! But such Persons I would ask, whether they believe they have nothing but
Body and Flesh about them. Are your Souls made for God, created for his
Service, designed for Heaven, fitted for an Eternal Duration, redeemed with the
Blood of Jesus Christ, and is there no regard to be had to these? What can make
them happy, but Righteousness? What can satisfy them, but real Goodness? What
can fill or feed them, but the love of God? This World cannot satisfy them,
you see it, you know it, Experience is demonstration; for when you have got as
much as you can, and come to lie upon your Deathbeds, you find, they want some
other Food; Food, which all the World cannot give; Food, which none can give
but he, who has protested, that without Holiness no Man shall see his Face.
Righteousness is their life, their cordial, their nourishment, and without this
they die, without this they are lost, and all that you can do cannot keep them
from being miserable. Without this Food they starve, and while you deny them
this Meat, you murder them. If the World, or the Enjoyments of it be all you
are to hunger and thirst after, these Souls were given in vain, and God who
gave them lost his aim: I do not deny but you may lawfully desire an honest
livelihood in the World, with submission to God's Providence, and wish for
Necessaries and Conveniences; but the Word is, seek ye first God's Kingdom,
and its Righteousness, and all other things shall be added to you, Matthew. VI.
33. It Is this must have your Hunger and Thirst: The desires after necessary
Comforts of this life, must have the other's leavings: Nay you will never
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, as ye should, till you mind the World
less, and moderate, and qualify your greediness after it; for your strong
desires after the satisfactions of this World, will infallibly drown your
earnest Desires after Righteousness, whatever opinion you may have of your
skill to keep the balance even. To be strongly carried toward them both, is a
thing, as hard to conceive, and as hard to do as to reconcile contradictions.
There is such an opposition betwixt Heaven and Earth, that a Man may as soon
serve and please two contrary Masters, as be fond of both at the same time.
Therefore whoever they be of you, that are very sharp set upon the Wealth and
Honor, and greatness of the World; your Appetite after Righteousness, must be
flat and dull, and thus it will be to your dying Day, except your desires after
the Pomp and Vanities of this World be kept under, and brought into subjection.

III. Those who truly hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and I must boldly
say, for my Text warrants me to do so, you shall be filled: Blessed are ye
that, etc. How you shall be filled, I have showed already; and I doubt not, but
such hungry and thirsty Souls do find by blessed Experience, that this very
Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness is pleasing, that God does certainly give
his Holy Spirit to them that seriously ask it, and gives more grace to them,
that earnestly seek it, and greater strength against Temptations to them that
importunately beg it, and greater support to those that will not be satisfied
without it, and greater light to them that supplicate for it, as they would do
for their lives: May be some of you find, that their Hunger and Thirst after
Righteousness is not so strong, so lively as formerly it was; if so, the causes
of this decay must be searched into; and if suffering your affections to run
out after the World too much has been the cause of it, they must be checked in
their Career, and reduced into the right way again; if a vanity or secret Lust
has beguiled your Minds, that must be dismissed without Mercy; if want of
thinking has caused it, a fresh view must be taken of the Excellency, Beauty
and glorious Consequences of this Righteousness; if melancholy, or some other
bodily Distemper has occasioned it, God must be considered as a Father, who
will not turn a Child that is weak and sickly out of Doors: However, in the
first Conversion, this Hunger and Thirst after Goodness is ever more vehement
and brisk, than afterward, when the surprise of Grace and Mercy is over, and
the blazing Flame turns into a more gentle Fire, but this must not fright you.
If your present Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness has the same Effects,
which the former desire had, i. e. if it makes your obedience grow; if it both
confirms and enlarges your respect to the Commands of your Lord and Master, let
not the abatement of the former Flame discourage you.

Look up to that God, who has said, Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it.
Search what Graces, what Perfections, what spiritual Ornaments you want, and
quicken your Hunger and Thirst after them, and rest confident, that God will
satisfy the longing Soul, and fill the thirsty Soul with goodness. But
whatever fullness you may want here, doubt not, but Heaven will complete it.
Your Souls will there be filled, and your Cup will run over; there you will be
filled with the Rivers of God's pleasure, filled with Eternal light, filled
with the truest Wisdom, filled with Universal knowledge, the Glory of the Lord
will fill the heavenly Tabernacle, and you in the midst of it. In the
Tabernacle of old, his Glory that filled it, appeared in a Cloud; in the
Heavenly Sanctuary it will appear in the sweetest Light and Splendor. Job
complained, that his misery had filled his Face with wrinkles, poor Man! but
these, you need not fear in that place; where he that is altogether lovely,
will present you to his Father blameless, without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing. Here your faces are sometimes filled with shame, upon the account of
your falls and slips; there they will be filled with Joy and Gladness: There
you need not fear, that God, as rich Men do the poor sometimes on Earth, will
dismiss you with a Complement, Depart in peace, be ye filled, be ye warmed, but
you will be filled with all the fullness of God, it must needs be so, for in his
presence there is fullness of joy, and pleasure, at his Right Hand for ever more.

SERMON VII.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy.
A Mmianus Marcellinus, a grave Heathen Writer, taking notice of the
differences among Christians in matters of Religion, and the hatred one Sect
bore to another, and the Tumults that were caused at the Election of Bishops,
and the Blood that was spilt upon that account, has a very unlucky Expression
concerning it; There are says he no wild Beasts so cruel, or so barbarous one
to another, as some of these Christian Sects are to those, that differ from
them in opinion; a very sad Character this, and Pudeat haec de nobis, etc. It
is a shame, that Heathens and Infidels should have occasion given them to speak
so reproachfully of this Noble Religion.

But surely, this cannot be the fault of Religion but of the proud, and
choleric Men, who profess it, or have the management of it. Christ their
Master never taught them to do so. His Precepts run in another strain; they
savor of another Genius; No command of cruelty, or animosity is to be found in
all the Gospel; so far from a Command, that the very appearances of it are
forbidden. Mercy and Charity is the Soul, the Breath of those lively Oracles;
Mercy is the Language of that Book, and to Mercy runs the Promise of the Text;
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

For the understanding of which words, I shall

I. Give you a true description of the merciful.

II. Explain to you the reason of the truth implied here, that those who are
not merciful cannot be blessed; No mercifulness, no happiness.

III. Show how the merciful shall obtain mercy.

I. To give you a true description of the merciful, we must search into the
nature of Mercy, and in doing so, we shall find this virtue to be of a vast
extent, insomuch that there is none so mean in the world, that can justly plead
impossibility of practicing it upon the account of his circumstances in the
world, all being capable, all able, one way or other to exercise it. And,

1. One principal ingredient of this merciful temper, is a compassionate
heart, or an inward pity and compunction at the sight or hearing of the misery
of others; and therefore we are expressly called upon to put on (...), Bowels of
Mercy, Col. III. 12.

This is so necessary, that without it the most pompous external Acts of Mercy,
prove fruitless and ineffectual; at least the Apostle seems to intimate so much
in that known passage, Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and have
not Charity, I am nothing, 1 Cor. XIII. 3. Where by Charity must be meant true
Christian pity and compassion, which may be absent from the most stately
beneficence; for a Man may give all away in a humor, or in a bravado, or when
he can keep his Riches no longer, or out of a design to get himself a Name,
which makes the Charity nothing worth, because destitute of true inward pity.
The Stoics of old looked upon inward pity as a thing below a rational Man;
doing good and actual liberality to Men in distress, they allowed was a wise
Man's part, but to be troubled within for the Calamity of any Man, whether
friend or stranger, they said, became not a Man of reason. But in this, they
talked like Madmen more than Philosophers. Neither reason, nor Christianity
destroy the inward affections of the Soul; both teach indeed to moderate and
curb them, or to keep them within bounds, but do not eradicate, or pull them
up. Christ therefore, whose business it was by his Example to show the way to
perfection, was touched with inward pity; so he commiserated Lazarus, when
dead, and the People who were ready to faint for want of Bread, and the
Multitude that were scattered abroad like Sheep without a Shepherd; and
Jerusalem when her Ruin was approaching, and his Example as well as God's will
in this particular warrant a moderate inward trouble, and a compassionate
resentment of our Neighbor's Calamity. But here Mercy rests not, if it be in a
Capacity of going farther: And therefore,

2. There is required in the Exercise of this Virtue an actual relief of our
calamitous and miserable Neighbor. The Compliment St. James speaks of, James
II. 16. Depart you, be you warmed, and filled, without giving such things, as
are needful for the body, is perfect mocking of the Poor, and of God too, who
made them so, that they might be assisted by the gifts and beneficence of the
wealthier sort. The particulars of the Mercy, that is to be shown to the Bodies
or Temporal Concerns of our distressed Neighbors, are commonly comprehended in
that Latin Verse; Visito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo, condo. i. e.
Visiting them, when sick or in prison, and contributing to their Cure, when
distempered according to St. Paul's Example, Acts XXVIII. 8, 9. and James I.
27. giving them drink, when thirsty, Romans XII. 20. and feeding them, when
hungry, Acts XVI. 34. rescuing and delivering them from danger, if it be in our
Power, and the deliverance be just, Acts XX. 10, 12. covering their nakedness,
and giving them Clothes, when they have none, Acts IX. 39. receiving them into
our Houses, or providing lodging and harbor for them, when they have no place
to rest in, Acts XVI. 15. and burying them decently, when they leave, or have
no means, to discharge the Expenses of their Funerals, Acts VIII. 12. These are
some of the principal Acts of that Mercy, which is due to the Bodies of our
miserable Brethren; indeed we find them specified by our Savior himself,
Matthew. XXV. 35, 36. and so great a stress laid upon them, that they are made
the chief Subject of the last Assizes. But this is not all; and therefore,

3. Mercy must also be shown to the Souls of our necessitous Brethren, as we
find them oppressed with sin and ignorance; and the particular Duties of this
Mercy also, we find summoned up in that old Verse. Consule, castiga, solare,
remitte, fer, ora.

i. e. Admonishing, teaching and directing them, when they know not the way to
Eternal life, according to the Rule given, Heb. XII. 12, 13. reproving them
when they sin, and correcting them if obstinate, Ephesians. V. 11. 1 Cor. V. 5.
Comforting them when distressed, and speaking peace to them when dejected, 2
Cor. I. 4. forgiving their offenses, and pardoning the affronts and injuries
they have done us, especially where they profess sorrow and repentance, Matthew.
XVIII. 21, 22, 25. bearing with their infirmities; especially where they appear
invincible, Romans XV. 1. and lastly, praying for them, whether they be friends
or enemies, James V. 16. Matthew. V. 44. He whose necessities are such, that he
cannot relieve the Temporal wants of his Neighbor, may be in a condition to
redress his Spiritual; and indeed where this Spiritual mercy takes effect, and
that the admonitions and entreaties, and reproofs, etc. work a Reformation in
him, it proves one of the greatest Mercies in the World, for it is no less than
saving a Soul from death, James V. 20. But,

4. This Mercy runs out into more Branches still, and there are some higher
degrees of it, which merciful Christians in all Ages have justly thought
themselves obliged to exercise, and such is particularly our relieving others
unaskt, and preventing the wishes and solicitations of the Needy by our Aims,
and Liberalities. It is therefore recorded to the Eternal Praise of
Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy I. 16, 17. That when he was at Rome he sought out St. Paul
very diligently, to minister to his Necessities. Some niggardly Christians,
whose Religion lies all in hearing and talking, when they have hints given them
of their supine Neglect of this Mercy, are very apt to excuse themselves with
this Evasion, that they know no objects of Charity: A pitiful shift! Did you
ever enquire, did you ever consult with your pious Neighbors, or some
charitable Divine? If you did, your ignorance would soon be cured. When
Christians understood themselves better, they did not wait to be courted to
this Mercy. The Disciples of Antioch, Acts XI. 29. when they did but fear a
Famine, they presently and cheerfully determined every Man according to his
ability, to send relief to the Brethren, which dwelt in Judaea, and of this
religious Generosity St. Austin understands that saying of the Psalmist, Ps.
XLI. 1. Blessed is he that considers the poor, i. e. He that prevents the
poor Man's cry, and the Original will very well bear it, for there it is (...)
Maschil: He that gives his mind to think, how he may do good to his poor
Neighbor; or he that judiciously regards the distressed Man, which implies
doing good before we are put in mind of it. Some whom Providence has reduced
to a very low condition, are bashful and ashamed to beg, or to make their
wants known, but their Neighbors see and perceive, how hard it is with them,
and what shifts they make to subsist; to enquire and to find out such objects,
and to relieve them before they ask, this is Christian like, and becoming those
whom God has given a liberal Portion, and a liberal Heart, and is an Argument,
that we have right apprehensions of the Nature of our Religion, which bids us
go beyond Scribes and Pharisees, and Heathens, and the sinners of the World, in
our Mercy.

5. There is yet a higher Act of Mercy, and that is denying our selves even in
necessaries, and other advantages, that we may be the better able to succor
others in distress. This must necessarily have been the Case of the Macedonian
Christians; who to their Power, nay beyond their Power, expressed their Mercy
to the Churches of Judaea, 2 Cor. VIII. 3. i. e. denied themselves even in
necessaries for their Brethren's good. This denying and abridging our selves in
necessaries, and laying by the price of them, that we may be in a better
condition to show Mercy, as it is commendable at all times, so it becomes a
very great Duty when the Church of God is under Persecution, and Multitudes of
our Fellow Christians suffer for Righteousness sake. This was the reason why
the Primitive believers sold their Lands and Possessions, and brought the Price
of them, and laid them at the Apostle's Feet, that distribution might be made
to all as they had need, Acts IV. 34, 35. To deny our selves in superfluities,
in order to be the better able to show Mercy, is far from being the utmost
limit of this Mercy: The Love of God being shed abroad in the Soul, will
constrain the Soul to do it in times of Peace and Prosperity; but self-denial
in necessaries is a Duty peculiar to a time, when our Brethren, and such as are
of the Household of Faith, like the Prophets of old, are forced to wander about
in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, tormented, afflicted, as it is
said, Heb. XI. 37.

6. The highest Act of Mercy, is to lay down our lives for our Brethren, and of
this St. John speaks as a Christian Duty, 1 John III. 16. Hereby perceive we
the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, and we ought also to lay
down our lives for the Brethren. This Act of Mercy is chiefly to be shown in
times of public Danger; where it is so, that by our dying we may save a
Multitude of Christians alive, or contribute signally to the Welfare and
Prosperity of God's Church, or preserve some eminent Instruments of God's
Glory, who may do much good in their Generation: The ancient Christians were
loath to be outdone by Heathens in their Heroic Attempts, and since there was
much talk in Heathenish History of Pylades, offering to die for Orestes, though
that was only an effect of carnal Affection, and perhaps of vain Glory too; yet
they thought themselves unworthy of the Name they bore, if they did not
whenever there was occasion, show a readiness to die one for another, and of
this we have a remarkable instance in Aquila, and Priscilla, of whom the
Apostle bears witness, that for his sake they laid down their own Necks, Romans
XVI. 4. This Act of Mercy, it is true, is out of the common road, and there is
seldom occasion to practice it, but if there should be such an opportunity,
it is a glorious Death, and such as a pious Man would even be glad of, it being
a Transcript of the Death of the Son of God for us; and Mercy can go no higher.
It Is like some of you will wonder at these Acts of Mercy, and fancy that I
strain the Virtue too high; but the proofs I have brought for all that I have
said, will sufficiently confute that conceit. Mercy is a very excellent Virtue,
so excellent, that without it there is no true Blessedness, which is the second
thing, I am to speak to,

II. When the merciful are pronounced blessed here, a very ordinary capacity
may soon infer, that he, who is not merciful cannot be blessed, and the
reasons are these.

1. How should a Man be happy without being merciful, when in not being so, he
acts below the Dignity of Man. Notwithstanding the Fall, Man is still a very
excellent Creature. The very Ruins of God's Image in him, even before the
Grace of God transforms and renews him, will justify David's Exclamation; Lord
what is Man, that thou so regardest him, and the Son of Man that thou visitest
him? Even the Relics of that perfection, which was once in him, teach him
many admirable things, of which Mercy is not the least. Nature it self prompts
him to it, and the instances of it in the very Heathens, make it a Dictate of
the Law of Nature. Now the Dignity of Man, considered, even abstractedly from
Grace and the Gospel, consists in acting according to the honest Principles of
Nature, so that he, who is not merciful sins against a natural instinct: The
Gospel indeed refines and exalts this Mercy in him, but still Nature it self
instructs him in it; nay, Mercy is so riveted into our make, and frame, that he
who neglects it, or debauches himself into contempt of it, unmans himself. God
has furnished other Creatures with Claws and Bills, and Horns, and Arms, to
secure themselves against Assaults; but Man is born helpless, without weapons,
or defensatives, on purpose to let us see the need he has of Mercy, and of
being merciful, and helpful to others of his kind; so that what I have said
stands firm, that he who is not merciful, acts below the Dignity of Man, for
he forgets the end of his make, and therefore cannot be blessed; so far from
being so, that he makes himself worse than the Beasts that perish; for even
among these we see so great a resemblance of it, and the Histories of all Ages
confirm it, that to fall short of it, must be more than brutish.

2. He shall have judgment without mercy, that showed no mercy, says St.
James, Chap. II. 13. And surely, this can be no blessed Estate. God's method in
punishing, is retaliation, and proportioning the Nature of the Punishment, to
the Nature of Sin, and so it is here; He that is not merciful to his
Neighbor, the Judge who is to sit upon him, at last will show him no mercy;
nay in the Flames, which by the Judge's Order shall seize him, there will be no
mixture of mercy. Wicked men, who have been kind and neighbourly, and in some
measure merciful: though they are not capable of Glory and Salvation, because
they die without true Repentance, and Reformation of Life; yet their former
Mercy will in some respect qualify their misery in the next World; some drops
of cold Water may be vouchsafed to them, to take off somewhat from the excess
of their Torment, but he that showed little or no mercy, will be forced to
drink of the Cup of God's wrath without mixture; even of the Cup of trembling
and astonishment, without the least ingredient of sweetness, without any
interval of comfort, as we see it fulfilled in Dives, Luke XVI. 24. This being
a very miserable condition, it must be far froth having any relation to
Blessedness. But the merciful Man meets with other dealings, which calls me to
the third and last point.

III. How the merciful shall obtain Mercy. And here what I noted in the
preceding Beatitudes, holds good here too, that the recompense here promised
relates both to this, and the other Life.

And as to this present World:

1. The merciful Man may promise himself great Comfort in his Trouble; whether
it be sickness, or some other sad accident; to this purpose we have an
excellent saying, Psalm. XLI. 1, 2, 3. Blessed is he that considers the poor,
the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble: The Lord will preserve him
and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon Earth, and thou will not
deliver him into the hand of his enemies: The Lord will strengthen him upon the
bed of languishing; thou will make all his bed in his sickness. These words are
not much regarded, because the generality of men have but a very low opinion of
the promises of the Bible; though they believe it to be the Word of their God,
to which God will stand; yet they dare not trust his Promises; and so it fares
with this that I have mentioned; and yet would you make the experiment with an
humble Confidence in God's veracity, you would certainly find extraordinary
Assistances in the time of sickness: I will not say, that you would recover
without means or Physic, but your sickness would either become more easy and
tolerable, or you would recover sooner, or you would prepare for a long life;
your Acts of Mercy would be your security, that you should find mercy in your
distress. This is a great truth, and as loath as some of you may be to believe
it, I might furnish you, if it were needful, with variety of Examples, and
instances of men, who have found it by experience; but God having asserted, and
promised it, it is enough to engage you to believe it, and to make the Trial.

2. This mercy God rewards signally, even in this present World, by blessing
the merciful Man's endeavors; not only by turning the hearts of other men
toward him into mercy, when he stands in need of it, but by increasing or
prospering his Substance. Mercifulness is the true Art of thriving in the
World; what a multitude of examples could I allege here of Persons, who have
given away either the tenth, or the fifth Part, or more of their incomes to
pious Uses, and have been blessed even to admiration. It is a mighty mistake,
that you will be losers by being very merciful. Every thing you take in hand,
will prosper the better for it, except your unbelief or wavering, and trembling
faith should hinder God from doing any mighty Works for you. In showing mercy
you make God your debtor, you lend him and he is concerned even in this life,
to repay you with Usury, Prove. XVIII. 17. Men, that consider not the operations
of God's hand, will continue Infidels under all these asseverations; but we
know, and find it so, and are confident, that there is one, That scatters and
yet increases, scatters in Charity, and increases in Temporal mercies; The
liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered himself,
Prove. XI. 24, 25. But*

3. The greatest mercy is yet behind, even the everlasting Mercy of God in the
next life, which the merciful Man will certainly obtain. God drops only some
mercies on the merciful man here, but he will visit him with Showers in the
other World: He will take him into the bosom of mercy, encompass him with mercy
on every side, and make mercy his Crown, and Diadem. He will be merciful to
his sins, and remember them no more. The mercies the Father of mercy sheds on
him here, are Items of larger mercies hereafter, and what is but a Brook, and a
River here, will be all Sea, and Ocean there. The merciful Man will find God
exceeding merciful to him when he dies, and his Soul enters into the Regions
of Eternity, a mercy which surpasses all the mercies he enjoyed here; to be
sure the Souls in Hell, the Spirits in the Everlasting Prison would value God's
mercy upon their leaving this World at a higher Rate, than all the rich
Blessings they glutted themselves with on this side the Grave. Here the mercies
God sends upon the merciful Soul are mixed with Clouds, and Crosses; in the
next life they will be pure, uninterrupted, endless, high, and like the God
that bestows them, infinite; and the merciful Man will see, and taste, and
feel the meaning of that glorious Promise, Isa. LIVE. 8, 9, 10. In a little
wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will
I have mercy on thee. For this is as the Waters of Noah unto me: as I have
sworn, that the Waters of Noah should no more cover the Earth; so have I sworn
that I will not be wrath with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the Mountains shall
depart, and the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee;
neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord, that has
mercy on thee.

Inferences.
I. If mercy be the duty of every private Christian, it must be the duty of
whole Churches too. Cruelty can be no mark of a true Church; that is not the
Livery of the Prince of Peace, but of him whose Name is Legion; To destroy
men's lives upon the Account of Religion, can never be agreeable to the Nature
of that God, who waits to be gracious; and to call for Fire from Heaven upon
Samaritans, because they will not acknowledge the High Priest of Jerusalem to
be infallible, surely, is not to know what manner of Spirit we are of. G. Leti.
A late Historian of the Roman Communion, in his Life of Sixtus Quintus tells
us of a very strange Maxim, the Court of Rome makes the great Rule of her
Practice; That the Turks must be set upon with Arms, Heathens with Arguments
and Doctrine, but Eretici col fuoco, Heretics with Fire. If by Fire were
meant, that lambent one, of Love and Charity, we could not but highly extol the
Motto; but when that Church has used so much material Fire, whatever her
Language may be at this present, we have still reason to suspect, that this
Maxim is to be understood in the worst sense; and when her unmercifull
Practices, and which she yet never publicly disowned, and renounced, stand
still upon record, when we read of her proceedings against the poor Waldenses,
and Albigenses, of whom more than a hundred thousand were destroyed, her St.
Dominick being the Leader and Incendiary, when we know the dreadful Court of
Inquisition is in force in Spain, in Italy, and in Portugal; when we read of
the fatal St. Bartholomew, the Massacre of Paris in the Year 1572, where above
70000 Protestants were barbarously murdered, for which the Pope with his
Cardinals gave solemn Thanks to God; and when a Massacre nearer home lives
still in our memories, even that of Ireland, in the Year 1641, where according
to the common Account 200000 innocent Protestants were inhumanely butchered,
for which the Pope gave a plenary indulgence to the Actors in that Tragedy,
when our Martyrologies have preserved us, the Names and Piety of those many
Protestants, who in Queen Mary's days were burnt and executed for not believing
Transubstantiation, when we cannot but remember the Designs and Practices of
the Fifth of November, and are too sensible of the late inhumane Proceedings
against the Protestants in the neighboring Kingdom; to name no more, when
these things as I said stand still upon record, not denied by their Writers,
and to be sure never yet disowned by the Governing part of that Church, and the
Writ de Haeretico comburendo, whatever it may be in our Church, is not yet
repealed in theirs; we cannot look upon that Church, as a Church built upon a
Rock, except by that Rock be meant a Heart hard as Flint, and Adamant; I will
not deny but there is a sober Party in that Church, which detests and abhors
these Principles, but the governing Part of that Church, who would take it very
ill not to be thought the Principal, never yet by any public Rescript disowned
them, and therefore we cannot look upon that Church as merciful, except by
mercy we understand such mercies, as Solomon speaks of, that the Mercies of the
wicked are cruel. Erasmus tells us, in one of his Epistles, that a Friar at
Antwerp did in a public Sermon assure the People, that if Martin Luther were
there, he would tear out his Throat with his Teeth, and not be afraid with his
Mouth and Teeth all bloody, to go immediately and receive the Sacrament of the
Eucharist; as this was an Argument of a blind or mad Zeal, so I know not what
to call this tearing out men's Throats, because they are Heretics. I confess,
this is a way of answering Arguments without fear of contradiction, but surely
such a one as the Apostles did not know of, who command us to be always ready
to give an answer to those, who ask us the reason of our hope with meekness,
and godly fear: But I pass from this sad Theme to softer Reflections. And
therefore,

II. It is remarkable, that of the merciful here, it is said, that they shall
obtain mercy; mercy, not wages: God will reward their mercifulness, but that
recompense shall be matter of mercy, not of debt; those that would persuade
People, that by large Alms-deeds they merit Heaven, talk like Persons who never
read the Gospel; which beats down all opinion of merit, and makes us
unprofitable Servants after doing all we are commanded to do; gives us right
notions of our good Works, and of the nature of them, and does so advance the
Glory of God's Grace in all we do, that one would wonder Men should cherish so
much as the shadow of such a vain Opinion; but when we see that men dare to
believe, that Communion in one kind is sufficient, contrary to the express
Command, Drink ye all of this; and that religious Service and Worship is to be
paid to dead Men and Women, contrary to the express Order of God: Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; our admiration ceases
in the matter of merit of good Works. Some have been so vain, as to tell us,
that the Reformation has spoiled and weakened the Acts of Mercy, which the
former Ages were famous for; the opinion of merit formerly having raised
People's affections into greater readiness, to leave behind them signal
monuments of Charity; but this cavil may be blown away with a breath: Let but
any man examine the public Acts of Charity since the Reformation, and compare
them with those in the time of Popery, here in England especially, and he will
be forced to confess, that since the Reformation has been admitted, far
greater public Acts of Charity have been done, than were done during that Term
of Years in Popery before. It Is the Glory of our Religion, that our People can
be merciful without an opinion of merit, and give their Goods to feed the Poor
from a pure Principle of the Love of God, and I durst make an impartial
Adversary the Judge, whether it be not an Argument of a more excellent Spirit,
for men from the obligations of Piety, and out of Conscience toward God, and
from a sense of their duty, and the miseries of others, and out of gratitude to
God, to erect an Almshouse, or some other public Testimony of mercy, and in a
most humble manner to depend upon God's gracious Promise of a recompense in the
Resurrection of the Just, than for men to stream out their days in sin, and
luxury; and when they can keep their Wealth no longer, leave a large Sum of
Money to build a Monastery or Nunnery, to buy off the Pains of Purgatory, and
to purchase the Joys of the Blessed: The former to speak modestly, savours of
ingenuity; the other, were it possible to buy what is intended, of a mercenary
Temper; the former looks like love, the other like force and interest; the
former is as it ought to be, an effect of true Christian Pity and Compassion,
the other of selfishness and partiality.

III. Though to the Glory of our Church and Religion, it must be confessed,
that in its Bosom there are found truly merciful and charitable Persons, both
Men and Women, whose delight is in doing good; yet too many continue hard and
churlish, covetous and ill-natured, selfish and unmercifull; and because they
give now and then a Farthing, or a Penny to the Poor that pass by their Doors,
they think they are very merciful Men; Vanity of Vanities! shall the chips and
shavings of your incomes pass for that mercy, which thrusts its Head into the
Clouds of Heaven? Does God pour out Blessings upon you thick and threefold,
and do you hope to come off with scattering a drop now and then, and which
comes from your Hearts too like drops of Blood? Where is your Zeal to imitate
the men, who with their Blood sealed the Truth of the Reformation; the History
of their Sufferings tells you of many admirable Men then, of one, who in a hard
time thought not much to sell his Gold, and Chains, and Rings, and Jewels left
him by his Ancestors, for the Relief of others. Another forbore one meal a day,
to give the value of it to them that needed: Another fasted one day in four to
bestow the Price of that days Diet upon some of his poor Brethren: Another
hearing of a poor Woman that was brought to Bed, and destitute of all
Necessaries, sent her his own Bed whereon he lay, and confined himself to
Straw; and being in Prison with other sufferers counted it an Honor to wait at
the Table upon his Fellow Prisoners, and satisfied himself with their leavings:
Another used once a Fortnight to call upon the rich Clothiers of the Town,
where he lived, to go with him to the Almshouse to see what poor People wanted,
and to provide for their Necessities: Abundance of such instances might be
added here. These were some of the shining and burning Lights of our
Reformation, and I choose to allege their Examples, because I have spoken just
before in the Praise of that Reformation: But I fear, Examples will do no good,
if God's Command, and Christ's Promise, and your Duty, and everlasting Interest
cannot prevail with you: And yet when by the Grace and Assistance of God, you
are become bountiful according to this Rule; the other Acts of Mercy, I
mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse must not be neglected,
particularly the Acts of Mercy to the Souls of your Neighbors. There is
nothing, no Virtue that abounds more in encouragements, both Temporal and
Eternal, than this merciful Temper. God has dressed it in such Charms, that
it cannot but appear amiable to the Attentive Considerer. To show mercy to
others, is the way to be merciful to your selves: We call upon you often to
have mercy on your Souls, and your mercy to others is a sign that you study
Self-preservation. Hereby you secure your own Mercies, make them firm and
durable, and you establish your selves in the favor of God, and the good
opinion of sober Men: And therefore, what should hinder you from taking fire by
this Discourse, and suffering your Hearts to be warmed into Mercy and
Compassion? How cheerfully may you go about it, when there is a Voice behind
you calling upon you: Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

SERMON VIII.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God.
PVritan was once a Nickname, Vid. Cornel. a Lap. in Jacobi 1. v. ult.
a Name of Reproach, intended I suppose to traduce those who made a great show
of external Piety, but were strangers to good Morals; stumbled at a Straw, and
leapt over a Block; strained at a Gnat, and swallowed down Camels; prayed to
God, and reviled his Church; scrupled a Ceremony, and cheated the next
Neighbor they met withal: What justice there was in giving this Title to a
certain Party, whether they deserved it, or not, and whether many of those that
were called so were not very upright, and truly pious Men, I shall not now
enquire; but sure I am, that this Name rightly understood, and taken in that
sense, it naturally bears or should bear, is what every Christian ought to be
ambitious of: Purity is what every good Man must and does desire; and indeed
his goodness is mere vanity and show, if Purity be not the great object of his
love. A true Puritan, and a true Christian, are convertible Terms; and he that
laughs at this Character, understands not the Religion he is baptized into. He
that renounces Purity, renounces his Baptism; and whatever his outward
Profession may be, he is a mere Infidel under a borrowed Title. Purity is that
which the Christians of old did triumph in, not in the Name, but in the Thing;
and he that neglects it, must needs continue a stranger to all solid
Consolation. As ridiculous as it appears to carnal Men, it is our greatest
security; pur-blind Souls may not see the Beauty of it, but he that is Truth it
self assures us, that it is the way to real Bliss. Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God.

The method in handling these words, must be the same with that I used in the
Explication of the preceding Beatitudes, and that which any Man that hears, or
reads these words, would naturally desire to be satisfied in, is

I. The Nature of this Purity wherein it consists, and who the pure in heart
are.

II. Upon what account we cannot suppose those blessed, who are not pure in
heart, for that is implied here;

III. How the pure in heart shall see God.

I. The Nature of this Purity, wherein it consists, and who the pure in heart
are.

Children know, that by the Heart in Scripture, is for the most part meant the
Soul, the Spirit, and the inward Man; and so a pure Heart, is a pure Mind, a
pure Soul, and a pure Conscience; as we find it called, 1 Timothy III. 9. 2 Timothy
I. 3. 2 Pet. III. 1. and the true ingredients of this inward Purity are as
follows.

1. An antipathy to sinful Thoughts, or a settled abhorrency of such thoughts,
desires, passions, and affections, as are manifestly contrary to the Will of
God. Purity imports cleansing, and that the thing which is cleansed, is pure
from something, and the unclean thing here, is evil thoughts, not their bare
coming in, but concurring with them, which the Heart must be pure from. A pure
Heart is an Enemy to impure Speeches, and all impure and sinful Actions, but
more immediately to sinful Thoughts and Desires, which are the Parents and
Causes of the other; so that the pure Heart nips the Evil in the Bud, and is so
far from yielding deliberately to a bad Action, or an undecent Expression, that
it dreads an evil Thought. All men it is true hate some evil Thoughts or other,
and there is scarce any Man so debaucht or vicious, but hates the thought of
murdering his Father and Mother, or the thought of some monstrous ingratitude,
or the thought of doing hurt to an innocent Babe in the Cradle; but this does
not make them pure in Heart, and therefore this Purity must extend to other,
indeed all the Laws of God; without which there would be no distinction, no
difference betwixt the Saint and the Sinner; the latter pretending to the
hatred of some evil Thoughts, and Desires, as well as the other. So then this
Purity imports an antipathy, not only to thoughts of unnatural Crimes, but to
lascivious, covetous, malicious, revengefull, proud, foolish, vain, imperious,
romantic Thoughts, even before they break out into Words and Actions, to
thoughts whereby wronging, defrauding, slandering, abusing, reviling of our
Neighbors, and neglect of our spiritual and everlasting Concerns are suggested
to us; in a word, to all thoughts which are injurious to God, to our Neighbor,
or to the interest of our Souls, for these assented to defile the heart, Mark
VII. 21, 22. Such thoughts like Flies, or Bees may buz, and hum about the Mind;
but if the Mind drives them away, as Abraham did the Birds from the Sacrifice,
the Heart loses nothing of its Purity. The mind may be assaulted with evil
Thoughts, the Assaults do not presently render it impure, for if it hold out
against them, gives no consent, no approbation, shows them no countenance, no
favor, no respect, but that like Bullets shot against a Wall of Brass, they
fall off as fast as they are shot, the Heart still continues pure, and
therefore David expresses the Purity of his Heart by this very Character, I
hate vain thoughts, Psalm. CXIX. 113. and to this purpose is that Expostulation
of God in Jeremy, Chap. IV. 14. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within
thee! It Is giving them lodging and entertainment, that pollutes the Mind, but
if they knock at the Door, and are either permitted no entrance, or are thrust
out, the Heart preserves its Purity.

2. A pure Heart imports also a Purity from sinister Ends, or Aims, or
Intentions, especially in religious Actions. This must needs be the intent of
our great Master here, since we see he finds fault so often with Men, that
aimed to be seen of Men, to have Glory of Men, to gain the Applause and
Commendations of Men, and designed their Profit, and Gain in Actions relating
to Devotion. The Christian, that is free from such sinister Aims in praying,
praising, fasting, giving of Alms, preaching, speaking to others of his
Experiences, and has nothing before his Eyes but the Glory of God, the good of
his Neighbor, the peace of his own Conscience, and the Salvation of his own
Soul, may justly be said to be pure in Heart, and this is agreeable to that
simplicity, which we hear so often pressed, and which the Apostles did so much
rejoice in, 2 Cor. I. 12. Without this our services want that Sincerity, which
must make them amiable to the searcher of hearts; and the Apostle insists upon
it, Romans XII. 9. when he says, Let love be without dissimulation; and since
love to God is expressed by our religious exercises, it must necessarily
follow, these must be free from sinister ends, which if they be not, they fall
under the brand and character of Dissimulation.

3. A pure heart delights in holy Thoughts: These are Meat and Drink to it, and
such a person delights in thinking of the works of God, and the operations of
his hands, of his will, and of his commands, of his promises and of his
threatenings, of his various providence and dispensations, of Heaven and
eternal happiness. These Thoughts wonderfully purify the heart, and keep it
clean; these keep up the Spirit of Religion, and make the soul a fit temple for
the Deity to lodge in: it is true, there is no man so holy, and who lives in the
world, or has a lawful calling, but must think of his concerns in the world,
how to manage them to the good of his family and relations and others; such
thoughts are very necessary in order to a prudent ordering of our affairs, and
without doubt are allowable and lawful, for which of you intending to build a
tower, sits not down first, and counts the cost whether he have sufficient to
finish it, says our Savior, Luke XIV. 28. But all this may be done, and yet
the heart delight in holy thoughts, in these more than in the other, in these
for pleasure, in the other for necessity; to this purpose Solomon, The thoughts
of the righteous are right, Prove. XII. 5. but St. Paul more emphatically, 2
Cor. IV. 18. We look not so much at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen. Looking here, is thinking, and there is no beholding
things invisible, but by contemplation of the Heart and Mind. Contemplation
represents things eternal in lively colors, and in seeing these the primitive
Believers rejoiced more than in gazing on the riches and glories of this
visible world; temporal things they thought on by the by, but the strength of
their thoughts was reserved for the other.

A pure heart, is a heart enamored with God, a heart that loves nothing like
him; a soul whose secret desires are after him, and whose desires are strong
and vehement, and though it has obligations to love the creature, yet it is in
subordination to him and for him who is altogether lovely; a heart which
discovers its love, not only by external obedience, but by inward breathings,
and sighs, and groans which cannot be uttered, and loves any thing that belongs
to him, his word, his laws, his sacraments, his faithful ministers, and those
that truly fear him; what this inward love is, the admirable David describes at
large, Psalm. CXIX, and when in this Psalm you read such expressions as these,
With my whole heart have I sought thee, v. 10. My soul breaks for the longing
that it has unto thy judgments at all times, v. 20. Horror has taken hold of
me, because of the wicked that forsake thy law, v. 53. The law of thy mouth is
dearer unto me, than thousands of gold and silver, v. 72. my soul faints for
thy salvation, v. 81. O how I love thy law, it is my meditation all the day, v.
97. How sweet are thy words unto my mouth, yea, sweeter than honey unto my
taste, v. 103. I say, when you read such expressions as these, you may guess at
the nature of this love which purifies the heart.

Cassianus has an observation, which I cannot pass by without making some
remarks upon it, and it is this, That the greatest sign of a pure heart is,
when that inward purity influences our very dreams, and that a man instead of
dreaming of trifles and impertinencies, dreams of God and spiritual objects.
The observation seems a little odd, because in dreams the fancy plays, her
Mistress, reason (because the bodily organs, the tools whereby she works are
asleep) suspending her operations: and dreams we know, depend much upon the
constitution and complexion of the body, and yet there is some truth in it, for
if, as Solomon notes, Eccles. V. 3. A dream comes through multitude of business
Men have been engaged in in the day time, or from things they have heard, or
seen, or discoursed of: it may very well be, that a person who has got a habit
of contemplating things divine, and heavenly, whose thoughts are taken up all
day with spiritual objects, may find a tincture of all this in his very dreams,
and the things he most delighted in, and was most conversant with, may present
themselves to his fancy, and there appear in lively shapes and dresses in the
night; and I do not doubt, where a man could arrive to that felicity, as to
dream for the most part of Heaven and a future Happiness, and pray and praise
God in his dreams, whenever his Imagination wakes in his sleep, as it would
argue, that the person makes religion his business, so it would be a very good
sign of Purity of heart, and that his heart and affections are truly set upon
God; but I will lay no stress upon this observation, because it has not the
Scripture for its guide: the characters I have given of the pure in heart, are
warranted by the word of God, and in these we cannot be mistaken, and those who
are so are certainly blessed.

But then,

II. If the pure in heart are blessed, those that are not so, or will not be
so, cannot be happy; which is the second point I am to speak to, and I shall
evince it by these following familiar arguments.

1. Such persons cannot converse with God: in this converse man's happiness
consists, and the reason why they cannot, is, because their hearts are impure.
Can two walk together except they be agreed, says God, Amos III. 3. Purity and
Impurity are incapable of communion. When God converses with man, he takes
possession of the heart, there he dwells, there is his seat, but if that be
impure, and full of darkness, God avoids the infected place. In this case, the
castle is already in possession of Gods enemy, and therefore there is no
entertainment for him whose purity is infinite; for the law of this converse
is, with the merciful, thou will show they self merciful, and with the pure,
thou will show thy self pure, Psalm. XVIII. 25.

2. As the impure cannot converse with God, so they cannot appropriate him to
themselves, and therefore cannot be blessed: for man's blessedness arises from
being able to say, That God is his God, his Friend and peculiar Treasure. It Is
true, the man whose heart is impure, professes an interest in God, as well as
the purest souls; but words, and sayings, and boastings do not make the title
good; God will not be his God, that will not have him reign over him; his
indeed to judge him, but not his to save him; his to send him to Hell, but not
his to give him a right to the tree of Life. He, whose heart is impure, lets
Sin and World reign over him, offers the Throne of God, i. e. his heart to an
usurper, puts the Scepter into a Traitors hand, and sets open the Gates for
Thieves and Robbers to come in, and surely this cannot be the way to
appropriate God to our selves, or to take comfort in his love, and therefore no
right to blessedness.

3. Such are not blessed, because they cannot see God. The sinful worldly
Lusts, and Thoughts, and Desires which like Vermin crawl in their hearts,
darken their sight. There is a thick veil over their hearts, that they cannot
see and taste how sweet and gracious the Lord is. Their Souls are oppressed,
there lies much earth upon them, a very great weight of earthly, carnal,
disorderly Thoughts and Desires, that like Swine, they cannot look up to things
above them. Their Souls indeed are in the nature of Glass, but the Glass is
greazy and sullied with the Smoke of vain Imaginations which hinders them from
beholding his goings in the Sanctuary, or at the best, they look upon God, as
men do upon objects through the wrong end of a perspective, which represents
things great, and near, as little, and afar off. He that lacks these things,
says St. Peter, is blind and cannot see afar off. He that wants a pure heart,
is that person, and wants that which must give him right apprehensions of God:
the impure Lusts he cherishes in his heart, shut the eyes of his heart, and
understanding, that he has nothing but confused Notions and Ideas of God and
his ways; an estate very different from theirs, who are pure in heart, for they
shall see God, which calls me to the

III. Third and last particular, How the pure in heart shall see God; and since
this Vision relates both to this present Life, and that to come, we must take a
distinct view of both: And,

1. How they see, and shall see God in this present Life. And here it must be
taken for granted, that God cannot be seen with the Organs of the body, for he
is a Spirit infinite, immaterial, uncompounded, and though he fills Heaven and
Earth with his presence, and is not far from every one of us, yet no man ever
saw him, and indeed none can see him, 1 Timothy VI. 16. but this is still to be
understood of the Eyes of the Flesh; with the Eye of the Understanding without
all peradventure, he may be seen, and that is the seeing Christ aims at here;
for it is evident, he speaks of the purity of Heart and Mind, and therefore what
he says of seeing God, must be meant of the Eyes of that pure Mind. Even
Heathen Philosophers required Purification of the heart from all gross,
lustful, covetous, and worldly desires, without which they said a man could
never arrive to the brighter knowledge of Philosophy. Christ leads his
followers to a higher object, and promises not so much a clear insight into the
mysteries of Nature, as a sight of the best of Beings, God blessed for evermore.

And that no man may think, that this blessedness reaches only Divines and
other learned men, whose Studies carry them to contemplate God, his Nature,
Attributes, and Providence, I must tell you, that this Blessing is pronounced
with respect even to the meanest capacity, and a poor man that follows his
trade, or gets his livelihood in the sweat of his Brows, may see God, as well
as the learnedest Men alive, nay many times better, having none of the
preferments of this World to blind his Eyes. For this seeing God, is an
affectionate seeing him, and such a seeing as assimilates the Soul to him. This
seeing is not a bare Speculation, or being able to talk or write much
concerning God; but such a seeing as charms, and ravishes, and unites the Soul
to God; and as this seeing God relates to this present World, such as are pure
in heart, shall see him more clearly, more distinctly, more to their
satisfaction and edification than other men. All men that say they believe in
God, and talk of his divine Attributes, and have occasion to take notice, and
are sensible of his works, pretend a share in the seeing God; but none sees him
so well as the pure in heart. Their inward purity helps them to see him; they
see him in his Word, in his Ordinances, in his Providence, in his Mercies and
Afflictions.

They see him in his Word; how equitable, how just, how reasonable all his
precepts are, how agreeable to the divine Nature, how suitable to the Soul, how
glorious, how sweet, how precious all his promises are, how just his
threatenings.

They see him in his Ordinances, what Profit, what Advantage he intends by
them, how he designs them as Channels or Pipes whereby to convey his Grace, and
Spirit, and Influences to their Souls.

They see him in his Providence, how righteous, how holy, how potent, how
orderly he is in the management of the great affairs of the World.

They see him in his Mercies, how he condescends, how tender he is to them, how
like a Father, how like a Shepherd he deals with them.

They see him in their Afflictions, how wise, how kind, how good he is in
sending them, what Favor, what Love, what edification he designs by them.

They see him in all his Works, how admirable, how wonderful, how powerful he
is; and all this they see with joy and delight, and so see him, as to love him
more fervently; and this is called, Seeing him in the Sanctuary, Psalm. LXIII.
2. Thus the pure in heart see God here. But,

2. There is a vision of God in the next life, which surpasses all
understanding. Though they see him here to their comfort and edification; yet
at the best, they see him but as it were through a glass darkly, but then face
to face, 1 Cor. XIII. 12. There that Sun will shine directly in their faces,
and their sight shall be made so strong, that they shall be able to look upon
that astonishing light without being weakened by its luster. Here they see but
his back parts, there his face. That seeing him in the everlasting kingdom,
imports a comprehension. They comprehend in some small degree here what is the
depth, the height, the length, and breadth of the love of God; but then they
will understand perfectly all the mysteries of his nature, providence,
attributes and love to them in Christ Jesus.

And from this sight must necessarily arise joy inexpressible, Such as eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor is the heart of man able to conceive. The Sun
beams are amiable and pleasing here, but how would a man be surprised, if he
were at the spring of that universal fire, and saw how it rises, and how it is
managed? So God is very lovely to the pure in heart when they see him here, but
when they shall come near that inaccessible Light, and be perfectly united to
him, who can express the satisfaction? indeed it cannot be expressed, for it is
immense and infinite.

Inferences.
1. Here we see what a jewel that man enjoys, that is possessed of this inward
purity. This purity of heart is a treasure which no man knows, save he who
receives it. Comfort your selves Christians with it; comfort your selves,
having this Purity you are rich in the midst of your Poverty; and enjoy more
than those who boast of Lands and Houses. I know the world laughs at this, but
let them laugh on; the time will come, when this Purity will stand you in
better stead, than your carnal Friends and Relations. Men may think they shall
be able to deal with God as they do with men here on Earth, whose mouths they
can stop with fair words, or with a Bribe. But this is vain and foolish to a
Prodigy. Is God a Man? Is he to be imposed upon? Can Gold blind his Eyes? or if
it could, where would you have it, when you are deprived and dispoil'd of all?
Is not he the searcher of hearts? Can you deceive him who sees through all your
hypocrisy? Purity of heart is that which he requires, and not only requires
it, but is willing to assist you in the getting of it, and without this inward
Purity he will know none of you: but if this be the dress of your minds and
souls, the doors of his banqueting house will fly open to you, and all the
enemies you have on earth, or in Hell, shall not be able to keep you out.

2. Here is the spring of true Religion; a pure heart. If that be pure, the
outward man will be so too. If that be unclean, the outward whiteness will
never pass for current in Heaven. The Pharisees exceeded all the men of the age
they lived in, in outward sanctity; notwithstanding all this, the son of God
who saw their hearts, and the impurity of their souls, calls them serpents, and
a generation of vipers, Matthew. XXIII. 33.

There are some sins so purely the sins of the heart, that the heart can
consummate, and finish them without the help of the body; such are Pride, Lust,
Covetousness, and Discontent because Providence crosses our designs, and bitter
Envy, and black malice, and rejoicing at our Neighbors misfortune, etc. These
lying at the heart, and being cherished there, shed a poisonous influence upon
the outward devotion, and consequently render the external worship (though
never so specious) ineffectual, and a sacrifice of Fools. To pray like a Saint,
and to breath revenge like a Turk; outward Love to good men, and secret
fondness to sinful Lusts and Pleasures of the world; outward strictness and
inward looseness; complying with God without, and with the Devil within; a
punctual observance of outward duties, and neglect of mortifying our secret
Lusts, such as Ambition, Self-conceitedness, Self-admiration, lascivious
Thoughts and Desires, etc. is the true complexion of Hypocrisy. Therefore, To
be a Saint, the heart must be purified; for sins like fatal diseases invade the
Vitals first, before they appear outwardly. And as in such dangerous distempers
of the body, which first seize the Heart and the Garrison of Life, and then
discover themselves in little blisters and boyles in the skin; he that should
lay a Plaster to those boyles, and use repercussives to strike them in, cannot
be said to cure the distemper. So he that is diseased with sin, which creeps
inwardly, and infects the soul, and becomes manifest at last in the outward
man: he that does only restrain the outward acts, and uses means of grace; only
to cut off the outward excrescences, but takes nothing inwardly, to eradicate
the distemper out of his heart and mind; makes but an imperfect cure; and for
all the outward applications will still be in danger of Death, even Death
eternal.

It Is true the wise man cries out, Prove. XX. 9. Who can say I have made my heart
clean, I am pure from my sin? which seems to imply an impossibility of making
the heart pure. But this he speaks with respect to the rigor of the law, not
with regard to the equity of the Gospel. Go to the strictness of the thing, no
man can say, he has so purified his heart, that he is perfectly free from all
vain and evil thoughts; or that he is never surprised into an impertinent, and
foolish imagination. This the holiest man alive cannot say. But then in a
Gospel sense, it is not only possible to purify the heart, but a duty, i. e.
so to purify it, as to arrive to an habitual delight in holy, serious, and
heavenly thoughts; and to an habitual aversion of the Mind, and Heart, and
inward Man, from any thing that is directly contrary to the Will of God. And
this habitual Purity is consistent with surprises of evil Thoughts and Desires,
when a bright gilded Temptation strikes the Heart, and dazzles the Mind, and
inclines the Will to consent. But then, in Persons where the Grace of God
works; within a very little while the Spirit does recover out of the Surprise,
puts by the thrusts of Fancy, and the stabbs of Temptation, and reasons its
self into Health, and Resolution, and Resistance again.

He that is regardless of this Purity hates his own Soul, knows not what
Religion means, and his outward performances will never make him blessed or
happy. Christians! Do you believe this, and will not you labor after it? I
mean after this Purity of Heart. Look into the Gospel, examine the Places where
the Mind, the inward Man, the inside of the Cup and Platter, are commanded to
be purified: Consider how frequently this is pressed. Do not you see what a
stress the Holy Ghost lays upon it? Why should you deceive, why should you
delude your selves? Why should you think it needless? Is it not Wisdom to
believe him, who is the Fountain of Truth and Wisdom? Does not Reason, nay,
does not Sense tell you, that if the Waters in the Spring be muddy, the Streams
and Rivulets cannot be clear? What? would you have the Fruit good when the Tree
is naught? How can your Actions be pleasing to God, when your Minds are full of
weariness, and unwillingness, and backwardness in his Service? Can the outward
Man be good when the inward is rotten and putrefied? Are you wise Builders, do
you think, do you hope to make a good piece of work of it, to build the Top of
the House, when you have not laid the Foundation?

This purity of heart produces a great sense of God, and another World; a great
sense of the Love of God, which constrains the Soul to live in conformity to
his Will; and this is the Foundation of all true Religion. If this sense be
settled in the Heart, if this Ground be well manured, the whole Garden of your
Lives will abound with Flowers, and Fruits of all Sorts.

Ay! but how is this Purity to be attained? I answer, not with Laziness, not
with crying, There is a Bear, there is a Lion in the way: Not by being over
curious about the Purity and Ornaments of the Body. When People spend more time
at the Glass, than at their Prayers; take more than ordinary satisfaction in
dressing, and adorning the Body; seek more to please Men than God; do all they
can to pamper the Flesh, the Mind will run out into a thousand Vanities. But,

1. By studying the Word of God. For the Law of the Lord is perfect converting
the Soul; the Testimony of the Lord is sure making wise the simple. The
statutes of the Lord are right rejoicing the heart, the commandment of the Lord
is pure enlightening the eyes, Psalm. XIX. 7, 8. What made David wiser than his
Enemies? What made him understand more than the Ancients? What made him know
more than his Teachers? He tells you, Psalm. CXIX. 97. Oh how I love thy Law, it
is my meditation all the day, Verse. 104. Through thy Precepts I get
Understanding, Verse. 140. Thy word is very pure. And it is so pure, that if
digested and pondered on, it will purify the Heart too.

2. By taking notice of God in every thing: While other Men talk of chance, and
take notice of the Shell and Outside, and of the little Wheels whereby their
own and other Men's affairs are turned about; do you look still upon that God
that hides himself behind the Curtain, and turns all according to his good
Pleasure. Take notice of him in every Blessing; whether you eat or drink, or
whatever Convenience, Mercy, Providence comes upon you, have an Eye to him, and
you will find your hearts will become very pure. They looked upon him and were
enlightened, and their faces were not ashamed, Psalm. XXXIV. 5.

3. By calling in the aid and assistance of his Holy Spirit: For it is the
proper Province of that Spirit to enlighten the Mind and Understanding, and to
purify it from gross, terrestrial, and brutish Idea's, and Imaginations; and
to replenish, and fill it with a sense of spiritual things. And this Spirit is
ready to come, ready to enter, ready to lend his helping hand, when he finds
the Soul willing to be purified; willing without Tricks, without Reserves,
without Proviso's, without Conditions: Such as, Lord suffer me first to go and
bury my Father, or suffer me first to go and take leave of those at my house.
In a word, this Spirit loves to deal with downright honest Men, that mean what
they say, and think what they speak in their Addresses to God.

4. By acquainting your selves with the true Nature of Sin: For a principal
part of this Purity of Heart consisting in an Aversion from sinful Thoughts,
and Desires; it is not possible a Person should arrive to that Aversion, that
sees not that Evil in Sin, which is really in it.

What? Shall I hate a thing I see no harm in? Shall I dread the Appearance of a
thing which I spy some Beauty and Satisfaction in?

The best, the plainest, and easiest way to acquaint our selves with the Nature
of Sin, is by reflecting on the Wages of Sin, which is Death, even everlasting
Death and Misery. It may be my Understanding is dull, and weak, and I cannot
dive into all the Tendencies of Sin, nor find out all the Indignities it offers
to God's Attributes; but this I know, Eternal Misery is threatened to it. This
seems indeed to be unproportionable to its short duration. But still, God
having certainly threatened it, there must be something in it very nauseous,
very grievous, very odious, very dreadful, very injurious to God, and to his
infinite Purity; the very shadow of it must be poisonous, and infectious; and
by this the Heart will take fire, and hate the very thoughts of it, even every
false way.

5. By representing to your minds the infinite Purity of God; with whom your
Souls are to converse, and who offers to make your Heart his Temple, and the
Place of his Residence. If you are to receive a King, a Sovereign Prince, or a
Person of extraordinary Quality into your House, do not you make all clean and
handsome, and take care there may be nothing wanting, that may give him content
and satisfaction; every Chamber, every Room in the House is set out, and
garnished, and adorned, as far as your ability reaches; and Neatness is a thing
that at such a time you glory in. But what is a great Man to Almighty God? What
is a Prince, or a King to the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords? This
Sovereign Majesty is willing to lodge, nay, to dwell in your Souls. A God purer
than Angels, purer than the Sun, and Stars, and dwelling in Light inaccessible,
to whom ten thousand times ten thousand minister, and by whose Order and
Direction the whole Creation stands, and falls. And then how holy, how pious,
how clean, how pure ought your thoughts to be to give so great, so rich, so
magnificent a Guest suitable Entertainment?

6. By representing to your selves the vast advantages that come by this inward
Purity: I shall name some of them by and by: In the mean while, I will mention
but this one. It will make you pray without wandering, worldly, and base
troublesome thoughts. Many People complain that they are mightily troubled with
wandering thoughts in Prayer: Purity of Heart is a remedy against that
distemper; for that consists in a great measure in an habitual delight in holy
serious thoughts. And when you go to Prayer, your thoughts will delight to fix
upon that lovely, and amiable object. And the secret love to God, (which is
another ingredient of this Purity) will force your desires upward, and keep
your thoughts together, and they will willingly quit all other hold, and with
cheerfulness gather about that All-sufficient Being, to whom you pray and offer
your Devotions. For indeed wandering thoughts in Prayer, come for the most part
from want of fervent Love to God: what we love we think of. Therefore as this
Purity of Heart teaches and inclines you to be enamored with that excellent
Being; so it will procure steddiness of thoughts, and affections in Prayer;
will keep your thoughts in a great measure from roving, and wandering up and
down among Briars and Thorns, meaner and baser Objects. Thus Purity of Heart is
to be obtained. But then,

To prevent Discouragements, and to obviate the Mistakes, and Objections of
some pious serious Christians, and to keep them from sorrow and dejectedness in
their serious Prosecution of this Purity; I must add here by way of
Advertisement.

1. That from an imperfect purity of heart, a Christian must not therefore
presently conclude he is a total stranger to it.

2. That neither contemplation of sin, nor unallow'd of blasphemous Thoughts
defile the Heart.

1. That from an imperfect purity of heart, a Christian must not presently
conclude he is a total stranger to it. We do not think that Rome was built in
a day, no more do we imagine that this Purity of Heart is perfected in one
Week. Indeed when the seed of God is sown in the Heart, there is an earnest
desire and endeavor after perfection, which discovers it self in a cheerful
progress; but it is not actually perfected but by degrees. Ye that labor to
remove sinful Lusts, and Desires, and Designs, and Passions from your hearts,
and to possess them with humble, and meek, and kind, and charitable, and
religious Thoughts, and to make God the darling and joy of your Souls; be not
dismayed nor frighted, if this Purity of Heart in you be not come up yet to
that degree to which it is advanced in others.

Those other Christians in which that Diamond glisters, and that Star does
shine, have been many years to pollish it. When you have labored so long as
they, and as hard as they, your happiness will be the same with theirs. Purity
of Heart is that which will find us work, will employ us through the whole
course of our Lives; for it meets with many rubs, with many clogs and
impediments, which to remove, will find us work at all times. Stop not, stand
not still, the measure of Purity you are arrived to, seek still to enlarge it,
to extend it, make frequent journeys to Heaven with your Prayers, and you will
find it will spread forth as the Valleys, as Gardens by the river side, as the
trees of Lignaloes which the Lord has planted, and as Cedar trees beside the
waters, Numb. XXIV. 6.

II. That neither Contemplation of sin, nor unallow'd of blasphemous Thoughts
defile the Heart.

1. Contemplation of sin does not defile it. But here we must distinguish, for
there is a Contemplation of sin that does defile the Heart, i. e. when a man
acts his sin over again in his mind; and having been in a vicious extravagant
company the day before, represents the scene of that folly meeting to his mind
with delight, thereby to whet his appetite into a desire of having such another
opportunity, and to confirm his love to that Sensuality. Or when a man having
committed Lewdness, or been guilty of acts of Uncleanness, by lively Thoughts
of that sin, makes the impure Pleasure skip and dance afresh in his memory,
thereby to prompt himself to new enterprises in that Villainy: Then indeed the
Soul is stained with a witness, and a Man becomes a Devil, delighting in his
own ruin. But when the sins of our former life are thought on with sorrow and
Contrition, and the particular Circumstances of it rehearsed and represented
with due Aggravations, in order to work our selves into a detestation of that,
and all other sins; here the Contemplation becomes wholesome, and instead of
defiling, helps to purify the Heart, serves to keep it clean, and to arm it
against fresh assaults.

Such Contemplations are purgatives, restore the soul to health, give it new
strength and courage to fight against the World and the Flesh; and if this way
were followed, we should have purer Christians, and the World would soon be
better, and men would learn to present their souls and bodies living sacrifices
unto God, which is their reasonable service.

I do not deny, but this Contemplation may be driven too far, into Terror and
Consternation, and into a belief that the sins are unpardonable; but that is
not the fault of Contemplation, but weakness and infirmity of the Considerer.

2. Vnallow'd of blasphemous or other wicked thoughts in the heart do not
defile it. This Doctrine must be often inculcated, because of the great number
of pious Souls, who look upon themselves as the vilest Wretches in the World,
and are ready to run into Desperation, because so many blasphemous thoughts and
filthy suggestions present themselves to their minds, and disturb them in their
Devotions and other religious Exercises. But not being allowed of, nor
encouraged, nor consented to, as dreadful, as heinous as they seem to be, they
do not defile the heart, no more than boistrous Winds, and the Commotion of the
Water, do fully the Pearl that lies at the bottom of the River. That they are
not their own Thoughts, is evident, because their Will is contrary to them,
their Understanding is convinced, they are injurious to God, and their hearts
desire to be rid of them. The Soul in this case is like the young Men in the
fiery Furnace, while a thousand Sparks fly about them, not a hair of their head
is singed.

Those blasphemous Suggestions, as they are purely Satanical and thrown in by
the Devil; so when the Soul continues declaring War, and Hatred, and Resistance
to them, not all the Legions of the burning Lake, not all the Whirlwinds they
rouse, not all the Dust they make, can defile the Spirit, which is secured, by
opposing its forces to those Hellish Troops, and preserves its Purity by
Contradictions.

3. It may not be amiss to take notice here of the reason why the Soul is
rewarded or punished before the body. When men die, the Body is laid in the
Grave, and returns to Dust, and there it lies till the Arch-Angel's Trumpet
rouzes it from its Slumber. The Soul in the mean while is in a state of Bliss
or Misery, and the reason lies in the Text, because of the Purity or Impurity
of the Soul or Spirit.

The Soul was able to sin without the Body, i. e. without the help and
assistance of the Body; could be lewd, and proud, and vain, and envious, and
malicious, without discovering it by bodily Actions. This is the Impurity of
the heart. Therefore as the Soul did sin without the assistance of the Body, so
its fit it should be punished in the absence of the Body.

Again, in sinful actions, when Soul and Body are concerned, the Mind sins
first, before the Body participates of the Poison; for the Will must consent
before the outward Man can act. As therefore the Soul is the first Actor in the
sin, so it is fit it should be first in suffering the penalty of the Law.

And so it is in the future Reward or Recompense. The Soul performs many
excellent services in which the Body is not concerned; such as holy Thoughts,
and pious Meditations. And the good which both Soul and Body are partners in,
begins in the Heart or Mind, and from thence it runs down into the Actions, as
the precious Oil from Aaron's head ran down to his Beard and the skirts of his
Clothing. Therefore as it was devout and serious, without the help of the
body; and in the good works in which the Body was concerned, was the first
mover of the fact, so it shall see the Glory of God before the Body, and
separated from the Body, and while the Body participates of the common Fate:
But,

4. Let me end all with David's excellent Motto, Psalm. LXXIII. 1. Truly God is
good to Israel, even to them who are of a clean Heart. Good indeed! good to
them in a time of Peace, good in Adversity, good to them in public Commotions,
good to them in his Promises, good to them in their life time, good to them at
their Death, and good to them after Death. The pure in heart they taste, they
see, they feel his Goodness; this supports them, this comforts them, this
strengthens them. All the World see his Goodness; but O how great is that
Goodness that God has laid up for the pure in heart!

The pure in heart they shall see God. Ay! that is the Goodness God has laid up
for them. And O what a happiness do they enjoy! the purblind World sees not the
Beauty, the Order, the Harmony of Providence: the pure in Heart behold it, and
are thankful. Good God! To see thee, what ravishments must that cause! To see
the fountain of Goodness, what delights must flow from that sight! To enter
into a Prince's Cabinet, and to see the Pearls, the Diamonds, the Rubies, the
precious Stones, the Curiosities, the Rarities, the Riches, the Plenty, the
costly Things, the great Variety that is there, this is something: But what is
all this, to the seeing of God, in whom are concentered all the Beauties and
Rarities of Heaven and Earth.

To see but one Attribute of his clearly and distinctly, suppose his Wisdom is
enough to charm a Soul into eternal Admiration.

Behold how men run to see an Indian or African Ambassador! or a Craesus, a
Darius, an Alexander! any thing that is attended with Pomp and Greatness!

Rejoice ye that are pure in heart! you run to see a greater thing than the
greatest Emperor in the World. Could you see all the Riches and Glories of the
world at one view; all that is above and within the Earth; all that is within
and above the sea, and all the Men and Women that have been since the Creation
of the World; it would not be so stately a sight, as a clear sight of God
blessed for evermore.

This is your shield, your exceeding great reward, this most glorious Object
you shall see at last; see him and admire him, see him and desire to be with
him, see him and love him, see him and rejoice in him, see him and be united to
him, see him and cling to him for ever.

You shall see all the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and all the
Prophets, all the holy Apostles, all the Martyrs that have suffered for the
Testimony of Jesus. You shall see the great Jesus that died at Jerusalem, was
crucified on Mount Calvary, sweated drops of Blood in the Garden of Gethsemane,
was crucified and rose again, and is set down on the right hand of Majesty on
high.

The Believers St. Peter speaks of, saw him not, yet rejoiced in him with joy
unspeakable and full of Glory: What then will your joy be, when you shall see
him face to face? For this we want expressions, and therefore I shall draw a
veil over it, and leave you to live in joyful Thoughts and expectations of it,
that when his Glory shall appear, you also may appear with him in Glory.

SERMON IX.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be
called the Children of God.
AS in this divine Sermon of our Savior, Men and Women are pronounced blessed
and happy, with respect to things which the dull sensual World spies no
felicity in; or as here, those are counted happy whom the World counts
miserable, and those miserable whom the World counts happy; so it fares with
the persons mentioned in the words before you, and the Blessedness which
attends them; the world, you know, magnifies great Generals, and Soldiers, and
Martial Men who can fight well, and are very skillful in besieging Towns, and
in scaling Walls, in bombarding Castles, and surprising Forts, and defeating
Armies, and slaying Men; and he, that with Saul has killed his thousands, and
with David his ten thousands, is cried up, and the Bells ring at his entrance
into a conquered Town, all sing his Praises, Flowers of Rhetoric and Applause
are strow'd in his way, public Intelligences are filled with his
Commendations; and who so much talked of, as the man who is very expert in
making, maintaining and managing a War.

Our blessed Master over-looks all these partial verdicts of the World, and
knowing that Nature, and Vice, and Profit, and Honor, Ambition, and Lust are
enough to inspire a man with courage and Wisdom to fight, and to cause
Disorders and Disturbances among Men, instead of commending men, who are
skillful in making War; set a peculiar mark of favor on those who are skillful
in making Peace in the words, I have read to you, Blessed are the Peacemakers,
for they shall be called the Children of God.

Blessed are the Peacemakers; what? All Peacemakers? Then Turks, and
Infidels, Heathens, and Pagans, and the most licentious of Christian Princes do
all come into the number of the blessed, and all must be Children of God. For
there is no Prince, though never so great a Tyrant, though he has spilt Blood
like Water in his Conquests, though he has made no more of destroying men's
Lives, than Tarquinius did of taking off the heads of Poppies, or Domitian of
killing Flies, yet makes Peace sometimes, and tired with the Toil and Fatigue
of the War, concludes a Truce at last with his Enemy; and what? Do all these
come into the society of the blessed?

To give you light into this affair, I shall enquire,

I. Who these Peacemakers are that are pronounced blessed here.

II. I shall examine the reasons of the supposition or the thing supposed and
implied here, that those who have an aversion from this Peacemaking are, and
cannot be blessed.

III. I shall take the blessedness of these Peace makers into consideration,
and show how, and upon what account they are, and shall be called the Children
of God.

I. Who these Peacemakers are, that are said to be blessed here.

The word in the Original is (...), which as Interpreters observe in Greek
Authors signifies and denotes strictly those who make or procure Peace among
Persons who disagree, and unite those who are at variance, but in Scripture the
expression is of a larger extent, and includes a great deal more than a bare
reconciling of Enemies, and the persons here aimed at are as follows.

1. Such as do make Peace with God and with their Consciences. To this purpose
is the exhortation, Job XXI. 22. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at
Peace, and great good shall come unto thee: And from this Peace with God,
arises that Peace in believing, we read of, Romans XV. 13. Man naturally is at
Enmity with God, Romans V. 10. to be sure, an Enemy of the Cross of Christ, for
the Law of the Cross is directly opposite to the Principles and Dictates of
sinful Flesh, Phil. III. 18. and this Enmity still grows greater and greater,
as corrupt nature is improved or abused into more corrupt practices, and from
hence flows Man's misery. So that to be happy, a Man must be at Peace with God,
which is a Maxim so natural, that Heathens do not think themselves safe without
appeasing their angry Deities, and this puts them upon offering Sacrifices to
them. But this does not take with the true God, who delights not in
burnt-offerings. The Sacrifices of God, which unite the Soul to him, and
establish a Peace betwixt God and the Sinner, are a broken and a contrite
Heart, and laying aside voluntarily and deliberately, and from a sense of the
madness of the attempt, even of resisting and clashing with an Omnipotent
Being, those things which God professes and declares his Hatred and Abhorrency
of, and a cheerful Compliance with his revealed Will; and you all know that
the things he hates are our sinful customs, practices and inclinations, for
your Iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid
his Face from you, says God, Isa. LIX. 2.

To be at Peace with God, a man must be at War with his sinful Inclinations.
To live in Peace with these, is to fall out with God, and the longer we
maintain Friendship and Familiarity with these, the greater becomes the
distance betwixt God and our Souls, the breach is still made wider, till we sin
away at last all hopes of Reconciliation; where the Soul has any reasonable
assurance, that God is at Peace with her, there Joy, and Gladness, and Serenity
flows naturally into her bosom, and that is the Peace of Conscience, St. Paul
speaks of, Romans XIV. 17. And indeed there are no persons more likely to be
successful in making Peace among men, than those who first make Peace with
God, and with their own Consciences.

2. Such as make it their business to live peaceably in humane societies, and
seek to maintain that Peace, which either Nature, or Religion, or Friendship,
or Neighborhood have settled among men, with whom we live; and concerning this
sort of Peacemaking, St. Paul speaks, Romans XII. 18. If it be possible, as much
as in you lies, live peaceable with all men. To maintain Peace, is part of
Peacemaking, for this is to make that Peace which is begun and which we find
settled to our hands to continue and flourish; in a word, to preserve it, and
according to the old saying, Non minor est vertus, etc. It is as great a Virtue
to preserve the good thing which we have purchased, as to purchase it; and
while we behave our selves inoffensively, unblameably, and keep a Conscience
void of offense toward God and Man, we take the readiest way to live peaceably.
It Is granted, that the most inoffensive actions, nay even Acts of Duty and
Devotion may stir up the wrath and fury of choleric and prejudiced men, as we
see the Apostles by preaching the Gospel, and attempting to beclaim men from
their Vices, and telling them their Duty, raised all the World against
themselves; but this is not our fault, as long as we give no just occasion to
men to quarrel with us, or give no just offense; while we are ready to do good
offices, do by others as we would have others do by us, and in our Discourses,
and behavior observe the rules of Modesty, Decency, Sobriety, and Charity; if
after all, men will speak ill of us, and be angry, because we will not run out
with them into excess of riot, as it seems those did St. Peter speaks of, 1
Pet. IV. 4. We have discharged a good Conscience, and may comfort our selves
with this, That we have given no just occasion to break the Peace.

3. And here comes in the stricter signification of the word, such as from a
sense of Christian Love and Charity endeavor to reconcile disagreeing Persons,
and Neighbors, and their fellow Christians that are at variance: And
concerning this peacemaking, St. Paul gives this grave and serious Admonition,
1 Cor. VI. 5, 6. I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man
among you? no not one that is able to judge between his Brethren? But Brother
goes to law with Brother. And this must needs be his meaning in that other
Exhortation, Romans XIV. 9. where he bids us follow after the things which make
for Peace. And indeed, where there is true Christian Compassion, a man will not
only be ready to run to make up differences, when he is entreated, but of his
own accord, and before he be entreated, especially, where either Friendship and
a long Acquaintance, or some near Relation gives the invitation. It was
barbarous language of Cain, Genesis IV. 9. Am I my Brother's keeper. Such a word
must not drop from the Hearts and Mouths of those who are adjured by Bowels of
Mercy, not to look every one on his own things, but every man also on the
things of his Neighbors, as all Christians are, Phil. II. 4. The common laws
of humane societies, require this Peacemaking, much more the Laws of
Christianity; and since we are bound to love our Neighbors as our selves, how
is it possible to obey that Law, without endeavoring to foder and join the
clashing and dis-jointed Members of Christ's mystical body; in doing so, we
love our Neighbors as our selves, even in endeavoring to keep others from
disagreeing, as we would keep our selves from being at variance with others.
How good and how pleasant a thing is it for Brethren to dwell together in
unity; it is like the precious ointment that ran down from Aaron's head into
his Beard, and so on to the skirts of his clothing, says the Royal Psalmist,
Psalm. CXXXIII. 1, 2. As Christians, we are all Brethren, and then it must be
our duty to see the Beauty, Order and Harmony of that brotherly society
preserved, which is impossible to be done, without actual and personal
endeavors of reconciling those who are at difference, and this argument Moses
made use of, when he saw two Israelites striving together, and would have set
at one, Why do you wrong one to another, seeing ye are Brethren, Act. VII. 26.

4. Such as endeavor to make others like themselves, and do instill this
Christian Principle of reconciling Persons, that quarrel and live in Enmity,
into others. This is still making Peace, when we labor to make others
enamored with this duty of Peacemaking, which is done either by Exhortation,
or Entreaty, or Representing to others the Nobleness, Excellency, and
Profitableness of this peaceable and peacemaking Temper. It Is natural for men
to endeavor to make others of the same Temper and Principles with our selves,
which is the reason that men of all Persuasions do what they can to make
Proselytes. A truly good man cannot forbear saying with St. Paul, I wish that
all men were even as my self, 1 Cor. VII. 7. I mean with respect to the good
things, the Grace of God has infused into him: And as no man can be sincerely
good, without endeavoring to unite, and reconcile his disagreeing Neighbors,
so that Goodness will farther prompt him to bespeak those of his Acquaintance
in St. Paul's language, Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them
that walk so, as you have us for ensamples, Philip. III. 17.

And from hence it will be an easy matter to give a just answer to the
Objection I proposed at first; whether all Peacemakers are indifferently
concerned in the blessedness of the Text; It Is plain from hence, that not every
one that makes Peace either by force, or of necessity, or for profit, and
interest, or being tired with a long and tedious War. Not every one of these
comes into the number of those blessed men. All the four Qualifications I have
mentioned are requisite to entitle a man to this happiness making Peace with
God, and our Consciences, living peaceably, and from a sense of Christian love
and charity, endeavoring to reconcile disagreeing Neighbors, and instilling
this reconciling Principle into others.

And having thus laid down the true Characters of these Peacemakers, whereby
you may examine your selves, let us go on, and,

II. Enquire into the reasons of the supposition, or that which is implied
here, that those who have an aversion from this Peacemaking, cannot be blessed
or happy.

The reasons are,

1. Selfishness is plainly predominant in such persons, and that is no good
character of bliss, so far from it, that the Apostle reckons it among the
Plagues of the last days, 1 Timothy III. 1, 2. This know also, that in the last
days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of themselves. It Is
true to love our selves, is a natural principle, but to love our selves so as
not to be concerned for the good of others, is a sinful self love, which
renders us contemptible to God, and despicable to rational men. He that matters
not whether his Neighbors fight or agree, whether they live in love or wrath,
and sees a fire kindled in their Breasts, a fire lighted by the Flames of Hell,
a fire which breaks forth, and threatens to lay their Consciences wast, and
does not offer his helping hand to quench it, has a Soul base and low, a poor
pitiful Spirit, guilty enough to suffer in Hell, but alienated from that life
which must give him a title to Heaven.

2. He that does not make Peace with God or with his own Conscience, and cares
not for it, robs himself of the greatest comfort; and surely that man can never
be happy. To be at Peace with God, is to be at Peace with our judge, with him
who has the same power over us, that the Potter has over his Clay, and is
able to destroy both Soul and Body into Hell; with him whose voice breaks the
Cedars, divides the Flames of Fire, shakes the Wilderness, and makes the
Mountains tremble, and who has a Prison to tame men in, a Prison from whence
there is no coming out till they have paid the uttermost Farthing. To be at
Peace with this Almighty and Sovereign Being, must needs be a mighty
satisfaction to the Soul that knows what God is, and looks beyond this world:
To enjoy his Friendship, to be sure of his favor, to be secured of his good
will, this establishes the Soul, and gives her courage in the time of the
greatest Danger. He that is indifferent, whether he be at Peace with God or
not, not to mention that he is a Sot and a Fool, and understands not his true
interest, he deprives himself of that which ought to be the greatest stay and
staff of his life, and therefore whatever his outward conveniences, and
Accommodations may be, he is unhappy.

3. He that does not or will not live peaceably with his Neighbors, I need not
tell you that he is unhappy, for he himself finds by sad experience, that he is
so. The Disorders and Tumults he finds within, the uneasiness of his condition,
the danger he is in from without, and the vexation and discontent he runs into
are sufficient Items that he is as far from being happy, as he is from being
wise: His lusts war within his members, as St. James speaks, Jam. IV. 1. His
Soul is like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, Isa. LVII. 20. He is no kin
to God, for he is the God of Peace, Romans XVI. 20. No kin to Angels, for they
rejoice in Peace on Earth, Luke II. 14. No kin to good men, for they seek Peace
and ensue it, 1 Pet. III. 11. If he be related to any thing, it is to the
Prince of Darkness, who delights in wrath and envy, Rev. XII. 17.

4. Such men are no Children of God, and therefore cannot be blessed; that is
the argument of the Text, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be
called the Children of God; therefore those that have an aversion from this
Peacemaking are not blessed, because no Children of God; surely no Children of
God, when so much of that Spirit reigns in them, which rules in the Children of
Disobedience: He particularly that seeks not to be at Peace, or to live
peaceably with his Neighbor, most certainly does not love his Brother, and he
that loves him not, is by the Holy Ghost in Scripture put into the number of
strange Children, for so we read, 1 John III. 10. Herein the Children of God
are manifest, and the Children of the Devil: he that works not righteousness is
not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother. Not to love our Brother, and
to hate him in Scripture are equivalent, different expressions for the same
sin; and if any man say, I am in the light, and hate his Brother, he is in
darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because the
darkness has blinded his Eyes, 1 John II. 11.

So that true Blessedness lies altogether in the opposite temper, viz. the
Peacemakers, and of these it is, that it is said, They shall be called the
Children of God; and how, and upon what account they shall be called the
Children of God, is the

III. And last particular, I am to speak to.

And here I must premise, that in Scripture Language, to be called so, is very
often as much as to be so; And thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the
most High, i. e. thou shall be a Prophet, Luke I. 76. and after the same
manner, That holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of
God, i. e. shall be the Son of God; so Matthew. I. 23. They shall call his name
Emanuel, i. e. he shall be so, God with us, God and Man. And after this style,
you are to understand the Phrase of the Text, They shall be called the Children
of God, i. e. they are and shall be so.

Children of God! Why? What great blessedness is there in this title, beyond
what other men enjoy? Are not Princes and great Men, who are commonly none of
the best, called the Children of God, Psalm. LXXXII. 6. and is not God the
Father of all mankind. It is very true, but still there is a very great
difference between Children and Children. All rational creatures, both Men and
Angels, are God's Children, as they are the works of his hands, and with this
respect, even Devils come into that number, because they owe their Being to an
Omnipotent God. Princes and great Men particularly are the Children of God upon
the account of Power, and Grandeur, and Authority God communicates to them, but
for all these respects, they may be everlastingly miserable. To be a Child of
God by Regeneration, to be born again, to be born of God, to be begotten again
through a lively hope, by the Word and Spirit, this is it, that makes the title
truly comfortable, and such Children are the Peacemakers commended here. To be
a Child of God in this sense, is more, and a greater honor, than to be related
to all the greatest Princes in the World. For,

1. Such Children of God have higher marks of favor set upon them. They enjoy
the Blessings of God's left hand in common with the rest, but besides these,
they have Blessings of the right hand heaped upon them. Besides the
Preservation, Protection, Provision for their bodies, and common Deliverances
from dangers, they participate of with the greater number, their Souls are
visited by very magnificent Guests; For if any man love me, he will keep my
words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him, says our Savior, Joh. XIV. 23. God Governs them by his
Spirit, and feeds them like a Shepherd, gathers the lambs into his arms,
carries them in his bosom, and gently leads those that are with young, Isa. XL.
11. They are made Partakers of the divine nature, love what God loves, hate
what he hates, desire what he desires, and aim at the same end God himself aims
at, to wit, the Glory of God, blessed for evermore.

2. To such Children of God belong the Promises of the everlasting Covenant;
and there is no condemnation in them. They are delivered from the wrath to
come, and Christ intercedes for them in Heaven. For them the balm of Gilead
flows, and when their Souls are sick, Physic is administered to them from the
Clouds. They are washed, they are justified, they are sanctified, and shall at
last be glorified. To such power is given to tread on Serpents, and upon all
the powers of darkness: For their sakes, God spares whole Nations. To go no
farther than our own: All sober men believe we are ripe for God to put in the
Sickle of vengeance. The Atheism, Profaneness and Hypocrisy, the dull
Formality we are sunk into under the greatest encouragements, together with
other crying Sins, which are among us, are enough to make a rational man
wonder, that the Viols of the wrath of God are not yet poured out upon us, but
it is for the Children of God's sake, who are among us, that we are spared thus
long; for their sakes it is that God brings the strangest things about, and
though they are try^d often by Affliction, yet the Fire, that proves them, does
only cleanse, not crush the Frame. To protect them, God sends his own Guard, a
Troop of Angels to surround their persons and habitations; and if so, the
blessedness of such must infinitely exceed the happiness of those, who are
called Children of God, upon the account either of their Creation, or Power and
Authority.

But to come closer to the words, the Peacemakers are in a very special manner
the Children of God, if you consider them either with respect to this life, or
with regard to that to come, for to both these states, as I have told you
often, does the recompenses mention^d in these Beatitudes relate.

As to this present life.

1. They are Children of God, because they are like him. They express his
Nature in their own: For God is the God of Peace, Philip. IV. 9. His Divine
Essence is the true Pattern of Peace and Order. The ever-blessed Trinity is the
grand Exemplar of Concord and Unity. It Is God, that makes Peace within thy
Borders, says David, Psalm. CXLVII. 14. He speaks Peace to his People, Ps.
LXXXV. 8. He creates Peace, Isa. LVII. 19. And calls to Peace, 1 Cor. VII. 15.
And is the Author of Peace, 1 Cor. XIV. 33. And is the Lord of Peace, 2 Thessalonians.
III. 16. The peaceable, and such as are of a peaceable Temper, resemble this
God of Peace; He lives in them; There is a great similitude betwixt that
inexhausted Spring, and these little Rivulets; a great Conformity betwixt these
Copies, and that Original. The features and lineaments of Peace, that appear
upon their Souls, discover that they are the Children of God.

2. They are the adopted Children of God in Christ Jesus. Christ is the true,
natural, and only begotten Son of God. The peaceable, and such as are of a
peacemaking Temper, tread in the Steps of Christ, imitate his peaceable
Nature, and upon that Account are admitted to the Honor of his Filiation, and
Sonship. The Spirit of Peace, which dwelt in Christ Jesus, dwells in them,
Col. III. 15. Christ is the Prince of Peace, so he is called, Isa. IX. 6. Nay
he is our Peace, who made both one, and pulled down the middle Wall of
Partition between us, having abolished in his Flesh, the Enmity, even the Law
of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, making in himself of twain, one new
Man, so making Peace, Ephesians. II. 14, 15. And he came and preached Peace to them
that were a far off, and to them who are nigh, verse. 17. He is the great
Peacemaker, who made Peace betwixt Heaven and Earth, which makes the Angels
sing at his Nativity; Glory be to God on high, and on Earth Peace, Luke II. 14.

Nor does Christ's Saying, Matthew. X. 34. Think not that I am come to send Peace
upon Earth, I am not come to send Peace, but a Sword. I am come to set a Man at
variance against his Father, and the Daughter against the Mother, etc. I say,
this Oracle does not at all invalidate, or weaken the Character, or Title given
him, which is Prince of Peace; for in so saying, he only describes the
unnatural Events, and Consequences of his Gospel.

1. When a Man is truly converted to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, there
is immediately infused into him a mighty hatred and indignation against sin,
and vice, wherever he meets with it, though it be in a Father, or Mother, or
Brethren, or Sisters. To find it in such Relations, does not make him like it
the better, nor can all their persuasions make him have any good opinion of it;
and therefore if the Father be carnal and wicked, he will hate his Son for
being so holy and precise, and keeping such a stir about Religion; or if the
Father be good, and the Son naught, the Son will be either secretly, or openly
angry with his Father, for having so strait-laced a Conscience. Hence arise
quarrels and dissensions, which are not the natural Effects of the Gospel, but
of Men's vicious humors, which hate to be controlled by the Gospel; and hither
must be referred the Persecutions, that befell the Primitive believers, when
they would not offer incense to the Heathen Gods, whereupon they were
imprisoned, harrass'd, persecuted with Fire and Sword. The Son rose against his
Father, if he were a Christian, and the Daughter did her best to throw the
believing Mother into the Fire, and the nearest Relations became mortal Enemies
one to another; not that Christianity made the Christians hate their Heathen
Relations, but it made the Heathen Relations hate their Christian Kindred.

2. This Christ speaks with relation to those Carnal and Hypocritical
Professors of his Religion, who in After-ages, pusht on by Pride and by the
Devil under a pretense of Zeal for his Honor, and Glory, would kill, butcher,
burn, massacre thousands of their Brethren, who retained the Substantials of
Christianity, only differed from them in things which Carnality, and Pomp, and
Superstition, and Ambition to regulate the Church by the Court of Princes,
should add to the ancient Faith delivered unto the Saints, and of this we have
seen very sad instances: But still, these are only accidental Effects of Men's
Pride and Passions, not the natural Products of the Design and Tendency of the
Gospel; so that notwithstanding all these quarrels and dissensions ill Men
raise about the Gospel, Christ is still the Prince of Peace, and the Peaceable,
and such as are of a peacemaking Temper, are upon that account his Brethren,
for he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. II. 11. and therefore the
Children of God.

As to the Life to come.

These Peacemakers shall be, and shall be treated like darling Children of
God. This St. John assures us of, 1 John III. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons
of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know, that when he
shall appear we shall be like him. Like him! How? Like him in Eternal Glory and
Honor, and Splendor. They were like Christ in their peacemaking Temper here,
and they shall be like him in a glorious Immortality. Their Father which is in
Heaven will let Men and Angels sees that they are his Children, that they are
so not in Name only, but in Deed. He will give the unbelieving World a visible
Demonstration, that they are so in the last Day, in the great Day of Account;
he will place them at Christ's Right Hand, and the Men that would not believe
and repent, shall behold how dear they are to him; for the great Redeemer shall
carry them up into his Father's Kingdom: If Sons then Heirs, Heirs of God, and
joint Heirs with Christ, says the Apostle, Romans VIII. 17. Christ as Man, and
Mediator, became Heir of his Father's Royalty, and Power; so shall they in the
right of adopted Children. As Christ ascended into Heaven so shall they; as
Christ was exalted so shall they; as Christ was enthroned so shall they; as
Christ was advanced from a low Estate to the highest Dignity so shall they; as
Christ lives for ever so shall they; as Christ cannot be hurt by the second
Death no more shall they; as Christ had power given him over the Nations, over
Hell and Devils, so shall they reign over all their Enemies; as Christ shall
judge the World, and the Apostate Angels so shall they; being Fellow-sons,
Fellow-heirs, they all share in his Authority and Grandeur: It Is true, all this
must be believed, for it is not seen yet; but who can forbear to believe it,
when we have the Word of the living God for it?

In a word, They shall be Possessours of Heaven and Earth; for not only their
Father, but their Elder Brother is so. Crowns and Diadems are preparing for
them; Crowns which fade not away, Crowns which the Moth cannot corrupt, nor
Thieves break through and steal; Crowns made of Beams of Eternal Light; Crowns
which not only adorn their Heads, but fill their Faces with incomparable
Beauty; Crowns such as Angels wear; Crowns which cannot be viewed, cannot be
thought of, without Eternal Admiration.

Inferences.
I. It is easy to guess what Tempers and Actions are contrary, and directly
opposite to the admirable Qualification recommended, and commanded in the Text.
Peace being either public or private, and the public either Political, or
Ecclesiastical, either of Church or State; whoever they be that wilfully pusht
on by Pride or Passion, or some worldly carnal Design, without a just, lawful,
or warrantable Cause, disorder, or disturb that Peace, cannot be true Disciples
of Christ, because they have an Aversion from that peaceable, peace-keeping,
and peacemaking Temper, which Christ with all the pathetick Adjurations
imaginable has enjoined his Followers.

I shall not here reflect on secular Estates and Princes, who either begin or
maintain an unjust War, either to enrich themselves by the Spoils of their
Neighbors, or to advance their own Glory, or to enlarge their Empire, and
Dominion; for the very Light of Nature confutes these Practices, and he that is
but a Novice in Religion may see, nothing is more contrary to the Design of the
Gospel. However, I cannot but spend some Considerations on the sad Divisions
and Quarrels, that are among those who call themselves Christians, upon the
Account of Religion.

I wonder not to see Mahometans and Jews scandalized at these Divisions, the
Jews especially, when they read such lofty Promises of the Peace and Unity of
the Church, that was to be under the Messiah, as Isa. II. 4. They shall heat
their Spears into Plough-shares, and their Swords into Pruning Hooks. Nation
shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more;
and Isa. XI. 6. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down
with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a
little Child shall lead them. Though these Prophecies have been in a great
measure fulfilled, not only in the Apostles times, when the Jews and Gentiles,
who were mortal Enemies before united into one Church under their common Head
Christ Jesus; but afterward when the Empire became Christian, and the Heathen
Powers, who had most violently persecuted the Christians, submitted to the
Gospel, and embraced those whom they had burnt before; and though these
Prophecies may moreover be said to be exactly fulfilled, partly with respect to
the Design and Tendency of the Christian Religion, the design and intent of
Christ's Laws being to make Men peaceable, and partly with respect to the
signal Change that is actually wrought upon those who are truly, not only in
profession, and outwardly, but inwardly too, converted to the Faith of Christ;
for upon this Conversion their former hatred and enmity to others is laid
aside, and they are all for Peace and Concord; though I say these Prophecies
are actually accomplished in despite of all the Sects, that profess Christ's
Religion; yet the Jews, a dull, hard, inconsiderate sort of People, and who are
guided much by their Senses; seeing the everlasting quarrels that are among
Christians, and how one party persecutes and abuses the other, and upon what
slight occasions they quarrel and fall out, and break Peace and Communion one
with another; I wonder not to see them offended at these doings, and hardened
in their Unbelief; for not to mention the Divisions, Heresies and Schisms in
the ancient Church, at this day, the Eastern Churches stand divided against the
Western; the Western is broke into several Parties; the Church of Rome against
the Protestants, and the Protestants against the Church of Rome, and the
Protestants are divided among themselves.

In these Divisions the Church of Rome erects her Head, and pretends she is the
only True and Catholic Church, because they are united among themselves. But
to show the weakness of this boasting:

1. At this rate every particular Church must be the Catholic Church, because
the Members of every particular Church are united among themselves. So in the
Church of England, her Members and Pastors all subscribing to the Articles of
her Communion, and professing the same Doctrine, Ceremonies, and Worship,
whether they be in Europe, or Africa, or Asia, or America; and there is no
particular Church, that is constituted by any public Authority, but may boast
of this Unity.

2. It is not a bare Union of Men that makes a Church a true Church, but that
Union must have Truth for its Foundation; else you know, Thieves, and Robbers,
and High-way-men, and Pirates, and Buccaneers, because they agree among
themselves might lay claim to this Title, and the most perverse Heretics,
because they agree in certain Points, might say they are the true Church, and
Heathens and Pagans, because they agree in Superstition, and in believing a
Multitude of Gods, might bid fair for this Character. However,

3. The Unity the Church of Rome boasts of, is only a pretense; for all the
World knows the mighty differences that are within her own Bosom, of the
Scotists and Thomists, of the Franciscans and Dominicans, of the Jansenists and
Jesuits, who stick not to call one another Heretics; not to mention the late
Divisions betwixt the Disciples of Molinos, and their Opponents; and were it
not for fear of Fire, and Prisons, and the Inquisition, some of these would
break out into open War against their Adversaries and Competitours. Nay,

4. There is no Christian Church that has been more guilty of breaking the
Peace of Christendom, than the Church of Rome; and because several Churches
would not satisfy or gratify her Ambition, would not put their Necks under
her Yoke, nor believe the falsest and idlest thing in the World, her Supremacy
and Infallibility, she has boldly separated her self from their Communion;
this was the reason why she separated from the Eastern Churches, and by this
insolence she has forced the Protestant Churches from her Communion, and not
he that is forced away, but he that forces is the Schismatic.

And indeed, that which justifies the Protestant Churches separation from her,
or breaking Peace and Communion with her, is

1. Because she would impose that upon the Consciences of Men, which Christ and
his Apostles never imposed.

2. Because she has turned the Spiritual Worship of the Gospel, into carnal
and mechanical Devotion, and introduced innumerable Superstitions, which have
no foundation in the Word of God, and would have them believed as firmly as the
Gospel it self.

3. Because she has brought in a Worship, which with all the favorable
Interpretations imaginable, cannot be excused from Idolatry; even the Worship
of dead Men and Women, of the Bread in the Eucharist, of Images and Pictures,
and Relics, etc. contrary to the Design of the Gospel.

4. Because though she has been often entreated, admonished, and exhorted to
reform these Abuses, for some hundred Years together, yet she is obstinate, and
instead of reforming has hardened her self in them, and thinks to hectour Men
by her Power and Authority into a Belief of that, which cannot be defended with
solid Arguments.

5. Because rejecting the Supreme Authority of the Scriptures, which are the
sole Rule of Faith, she has made her pretended Head, and such Councils as he
shall call, or approve of, the sole Dictatours, and Expositours of the Doctrine
of Christ, requiring blind Obedience to their Decisions contrary, not only to
the Word of God, but to the Sense of all true Antiquity: So that there can be
no peace, I mean no Peace of Communion with Rome; for though we are commanded
to live peaceably with all Men, yet we are withal to have a due regard to
Truth, Ephesians. IV. 15. Nor must Peace be bought at so dear a Rate, as to comply
with Men in their Sins and Errors, which is the Reason why Peace and Holiness
are joined together in that known Exhortation of the Apostle. Follow peace with
all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. XII. 14.
Indeed an external Peace we are to maintain with all Mankind, but this differs
much from Peace of Communion in Divine Worship and Sacraments.

The Divisions among Protestant Churches are to be deplored so much the more,
because the Points they differ in are inconsiderable, and might easily be
composed, if Men had but peaceable Tempers, and were resolved to lay aside
Interest, and carnal Respects, and Punctilio's of Honor, and Credit, etc. for
they all agree in fundamentals, all are satisfied that the Church of Rome has
notoriously deviated from the simplicity of the Gospel; and the matters in
difference, are things in which Salvation is not concerned. And upon that
account their labors deserve great Commendations, who heretofore, and very
lately have endeavored to reconcile the Protestant Churches into a perfect
Union: A blessed Work. Blessed are the Peacemakers, that endeavor to make
Peace among the jarring Members of Christ's Body; and though they may fail of
Success, yet they shall not lose their Reward.

In the mean while those who widen, or heighten these differences, and incite
the respective Parties to hatred, and wrath, and animosities one against
another, to be sure are no Children of the God of Peace, and had need at least
before they die, make public Satisfaction for the dreadful Effects, their
Heats and Passions do produce.

But as this Peace among Protestant Churches is very much to be wished and
prayed for, so I despair to see so glorious a Work take effect, except the
differing Parties would resolve to stand to the Rules following.

1. That the respective Parties which agree in the chief Points of Religion do
not make any of those Points they differ in, fundamental, as if the Fortune of
Religion depended upon it, or as if those different Points were so many
different Religions.

2. That the differing Parties do not damn one another for those differences,
there being nothing that has done Religion more hurt, than Men's damning one
another for things, which Christ and his Apostles have affixed no Damnation to.

3. That notwithstanding the little differences that are among them, they make
one Church, and endeavor after the Welfare and Prosperity of it, and join
together in public Prayer, and in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which is the
Badge and Symbol of Fraternity, and Amity.

4. That one Party be not presently jealous, and suspicious of the other, as if
the opinion which one Party espouses were embraced, or maintained in a Humor,
or for worldly Ends, but that they charitably believe, it is Conscience, that
puts them upon it, at least, till either the Party espousing that opinion
confesses, that conscience is not at the bottom of it, or that it appear by
undeniable Evidences, that a worldly or sinister design is the foundation of it.

5. That the differing Parties do not multiply the controversies, which are
amongst them, make them neither more numerous nor greater than really they are,
and that they do not interpret an accidental unwary expression, that may drop
from the Pen, or mouth of one party, as a new controversy.

6. That one party do not charge the other with consequences, which they do not
own, nor with Doctrines and Positions, which they detest from their hearts.

7. That each party defending, or proving their opinion do it with great
modesty, without provoking or exasperating, or approbrious Language, and
revilings, or bitter reflections on the other.

8. That of these differing parties none do vye with the other, except it be in
living up to the Precepts of the Gospel, particularly those of patience,
long-suffering and charity.

These rules I apprehend to be the foundation of Peace and Concord of
Protestant Churches, that differ in points of no great concernment; and were
these Maxims once put in practice, the particular controversies might soon be
compromised. To this purpose is that saying of the Apostle: Nevertheless, where
to we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
things* and if any be otherwise minded, God will even reveal that unto you,
Phil. III. 15, 16. But however,

II. If we cannot mend the public, let us endeavor to reform particular
Persons. It is a sad sight to see Christians divided among themselves, but it
is as dismal a spectacle to see so many of us at war with God. This I know will
hardly be believed by the guilty, and because they do not blaspheme God, or do
not trouble their heads much about God, or Religion, they know nothing to the
contrary but that they are at peace with God, and that they and God are very
good Friends. This is true stupidity, and were the stupidity invincible as it
is in Beasts, such Men would be safe, safe as the wild Ass, or the Dromedary in
the Wilderness, safe I say from the Danger of God's Wrath. But this cannot be
the case of any of you, that live in a Country where the Gospel is preached,
where you are told, that not to love God, is to hate him; and that not to
delight in his ways, is to incurr his displeasure; that to live in those sins,
which exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven, is to bid defiance to him; that to be
neglectfull of his Will, is to wage war with him; that to slight the
admonitions, and entreaties of his Messengers, is to be at enmity with him; and
that to mind the World more than his Service, or to seek to please Men more
than him, is to provoke him to anger.

And has not this been the temper, and is not this the complexion of many of
you? How many years have some of you born Arms against God? Your wilful sins
are the Weapons whereby you fight against him; and though like the Giants in
the Fable, you do not heap Mountain upon Mountain to pull him out of his
Throne; yet by espousing that life, which is odious to him, you affront his
Sovereignty, and by living contrary to the Gospel, you despise and dishonor
him who has the greatest right to command you. And is it not high time to make
peace with him? If God be not at peace with you here, he will never be at peace
with you hereafter. What peace while the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezabel, and
her Witchcrafts are so many? said Jehu, 2 Kings IX. 22. So here, what peace can
there be betwixt God and you, while you continue in that pride and vanity, and
intemperance, and other sins, against which the wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven? Do you think you are at peace with God, because you thrive and prosper
in the World? Do not the wickedest of Men do so, and is that an Argument that
God is their Friend? Will you make his patience a sign of his being reconciled
to you, when it is only a motive to a reconciliation? There is no peace, says
my God, unto the wicked, Isa. LVII. 20. Let them be never so potent, never so
rich, never so wealthy, their impiety takes away all peace betwixt God and
them. He has declared so much, and will not you believe him? Will you give no
credit to his word, till with Dives you lift up your Eyes in Hell, and see that
God is not your friend? If you do thrive and prosper in the World, cannot those
Blessings move you to be at peace with him? Do you believe he is kind to you,
and shall his kindness provoke you to be his Enemies? Nothing can settle a
peace betwixt God and you, till you change your lives, and make conscience of
your ways, and abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good.
Then indeed were your sins as crimson they shall be as wool, were they of a
scarlet Dye, they shall be as white as snow; but till then, your sin, like that
of Judah, is written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, as it
is said, Jer. XVII. 1. and you do as good as say to God with those Desperadoes,
in Job, Chap. XXI. 14. Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
Till then you can never be at peace with your own consciences, carnal security
you may have, but peace of conscience is another thing, for this can never be
at rest, while it has reason to believe God frowns upon it; but being sure of
the light of his loving kindness, a Man walks in Paradise, and dwells in the
Garden of God. But,

III. When Christ in the Text professes and declares how pleasing and
acceptable a peaceable, and peacemaking Temper is to God; would not one think
that every one that believes the Gospel, should be ambitious of those
qualifications, which God not only approves of, but promises to reward with the
highest Honor and Dignity? Yes, did Men love God in deed and in truth, they
would not only be glad to know what is pleasing to him, but even run to do it,
as good natured Children that observe their Father's temper, and endeavor to
gain his love by a deportment and behavior, they know he delights in.

Peace among men God delights in, peace among Christians especially; to whom he
has vouchsafed a higher dispensation. Among these, no noise, no clamor, no
railing, no quarrelling, no Swords, no Cannon should be heard; these profess
themselves Disciples of Christ Jesus, the Prince of Peace; and there is no
command that is more strictly, or more frequently enjoined, than that of Peace.
This they are to pursue, to follow, and to endeavor after by all possible
lawful means. This is their livery, and the very mark, whereby they are to be
distinguished, even their peaceable Behavior. This is the Salt which is to
keep them sweet, as Christ calls it, Mark IX. 10. But you all know, how
contrary to this character the generality of Men live, upon the least provocat
on they break the Peace, and all friendship is renounced; especially where they
have a Purse to maintain the dispute; many a Man that was humble and peaceable
before, when poor; no sooner does he find his Purse swell, but his Temper
alters; and now if his Neighbor does displease him, though there be no malice
in the case, presently he talks high, and big, and he cares as little for his
Neighbor, as his Neighbor does for him. This is the humor of the Age, and
instead of repenting of their heats, and divisions, they justify their
contentions, and oppose the reasons of flesh and blood, and the circumstances
of their birth and quality, of their honor and grandeur, to the laws of that
Savior, by whose Blood they say, they are redeemed. Strange Christians these
that will be so, in despite of Christ, though they have nothing of the
character in them. And let us but consider what trifles they are Men quarrel
about, and how frivolous the things for which they break forth into flame, and
fury, and break the Peace which they should maintain and keep, things, which a
Philosopher would put by with a smile, and a wise Man think below himself to
take notice of. But what shall we say? Till men come to stand in awe of the
Gospel, more than of the laws of the Land, and the threatenings and punishments
of the Magistrate, thus it will be, and when opportunity serves will be carried
away with the stream of their passions, and sinful inclinations; and upon such
I cannot hope to do any good, though the Arguments were never so convincing, or
powerful.

But if there be any here, as I hope there are several, that look upon this
peaceable, and peacemaking Temper as their duty, are persuaded that they are
in danger of God's displeasure, if they want this qualification, and are
concerned about it, and desire to be informed of the way and method they are to
take, how to compass it; to such I shall recommend these following Directions.

1. Be injurious to no man, wrong no man, defraud no man, oppress no man, speak
evil of no man. This is the way to make peace, and to keep peace. It Is the
wrong that men apprehend is done to them by another, that causes quarrels and
dissensions. Remove the cause, and you remove the effect, a remedy prescribed
by the Apostle, in order to a quiet and peaceable Life, Tit. III. 2.

2. Love to do good. This strangely obliges, and wins, and charms, and moves
even our Enemies to be at peace with us, and makes People desirous to live in
friendship with us, and not only so, but hereby we weaken our quarrelsome
disposition, and become more tractable, and gentle, and heap coals of fire upon
the heads of our Enemies, i. e. melt them by kindness into a better nature,
Romans XII. 20.

3. Watch against selfishness, and covetousness, for its greediness after
profit, and an over fondness of our temporal Interest, that puts us into heats,
if we are crossed in it. Moderation in our desires after these outward things
composes the mind, quiets the passions, and keeps the blood from boiling over.
The Apostle therefore very much insists upon this Virtue, 1 Timothy VI. and Phil.
IV. 5.

4. Believe not every ill thing that is said of you, for we see daily how
little credit is to be given to reports. A too easy belief of ill things said
of us, is an instigation to break the peace, to harbor hatred, and secret
grudges, and tempts to strangeness of behavior, to revenge, to moroseness, and
watching opportunities, to be even with the supposed offendour, charity
believes the best, 1 Cor. XIII. 7.

5. Be not ashamed to confess your faults, when it is evident you are in the
wrong; an obstinate defense of a fault, is apt to make Persons, who take notice
of it, angry and furious, because it argues a very ill temper of mind; whereas
an ingenuous acknowledgment of our errors, reconciles and prevails with
Persons of ingenuity to be friends with us, and that is the reason why St. James
is so earnest for it, James V. 16.

6. Bear with infirmities in others, with such particularly, which appear to be
invincible. I do not say, bear with wilful sins, and habits of vice and folly,
but with failings and imperfections, which cannot well be remedied; either when
the understandings of your Neighbors are shallow, or not so quick as yours, or
when their Wisdom and Sagacity does not reach so far as yours, and this
according to the Command of the Holy Ghost, Romans XIV. 1.

7. For peace sake be content to recede sometimes from your own right: Where
two parties are stiff, and neither will yield, or abate any thing of their
demands, the quarrel must needs continue. But concessions and relinquishing
part of our right prepares for peace, and so did the Father of the faithful,
to prevent dissensions betwixt him and Lot; though upon the account of
seniority, it belonged to him to determine where he should pitch his Tent, yet
he leaves it to Lot to choose, which part of the Country he would go to, Genesis
XIII. 8, 9.

8. In order to promote peace in Families, David's method must be taken, Ps.
CI. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land.

One great means to promote, and preserve the public Peace of the Nation, is
to do our own business, to be followers of that which is good, to do our own
duty, and not to speak evil of dignities; for it is written, Thou shall not
speak evil of the Rulers of thy People.

Consider after all how your Interest is bound up with this peaceable, and
peacemaking Temper; for as Christ says of a Kingdom divided against it self,
that it cannot stand; so if by quarrels, and clamours, and dissensions, you
divide the Society you live in, you undermine your own ease and happiness. To
this purpose Solomon, Prove. XVII. 1. Better is a dry morsel, and quietness
therewith, than an house full of sacrifices with strife. Besides, by this you
avoid innumerable sins, such as ill language, odious names, envy, hatred,
malice, and revengefull sins, and desires, and engaging other Men in sin with
you, and doing mischief to men, etc.

But is not the Title in the Text, given to the peaceable, and peacemaking
Christian, enough to make you endeavor to attain to this Character? What?
Children of God? And do you feel no desire to be so? Did you ever seriously
examine the privileges which attend the Children of God, and are these no
motives to you to come into the number? Suppose the Children of God are not
much regarded here, but is there not a time coming, when they shall be honored
before the whole World? Is there not a life to come, which shall manifest their
Dignity, and their Glory? The Peace of Heaven shall fall to their share: Do not
you reflect sometimes on that Peace, which the Children of the everlasting
Kingdom shall enjoy? Or is that Peace so inconsiderable, that it deserves no
consideration? What is the future felicity, but perfect Peace, everlasting
Peace, uninterrupted Peace? The peaceable Christian shall feel it, feed upon
it, possess it, live upon it, peace with God, peace with the Prince of Peace,
Christ Jesus, peace with all the Angels of God, peace with all the Spirits of
Men made perfect. No war shall disturb it, no tumult discompose it, no sedition
annoy it, no rebellion disfigure it. The God of Peace shall live in him, and he
in the God of Peace; God will tell him that he is his friend, and one with him,
and that no Men, no Devils shall pluck him out of his hands. There Rivers of
Peace shall flow upon him, Rivers where no Wind does blow, no Storms do come,
no Tempests rise, no Hurricanes molest. I conclude with St. Paul's Obtestation,
Colos. III. 15. And let the Peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also
ye are called in one body: and be ye thankful. Amen.

SERMON X.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 10. Blessed are they which are persecuted for
Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
I Did once think to have joined this Verse and the next in the Explication,
but upon a more accurate Examination, I find, that this Verse I have read to
you treats of Persecution in general, but the next of a particular Persecution
with the Tongue; i. e. Calumniating and Reviling, and therefore shall allow
them a distinct Discussion, or Consideration. To be persecuted, is to be
robbed, plundered, beaten, buffeted, bruised, imprisoned, tormented, hanged,
burnt, drowned, etc. And are these marks of Blessedness, says the Carnal Man?
What! to be beaten, and think it a Kindness! to be buffeted, and look upon it
as a Favor! To be put in a Dungeon, and delight in sinking into the mire! To
be led to the Stake, and sing! To be tormented, and give God thanks! To be
robbed of all, and make a low bow for being so! What! be happy in Misery! and
blessed in Chains, and glorious in Torments, and honorable in a fiery Furnace!
Yes, all this is very good Divinity, and very agreeable to the Doctrine of the
Gospel of Christ; and if the Cause be good, Gibbets, and Gallows, and Chains,
and Shackles, and Fetters, and Fire, and Sword, are a Christians Jewels, and
Pearls, and Pendants, and Necklaces, and Ornaments; For blessed are they which
are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Three things will here deserve Consideration.

I. What it is, to be persecuted for Righteousness sake; and who they be, that
fall under that denomination.

II. Whether these words, as well as the preceding, imply a Negative, That
those who are not persecuted for Righteousness sake are not blessed.

III. I shall enquire into the Nature of the Blessedness here mentioned, and
show, how the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs, that are persecuted for
Righteousness sake.

I. What it is to be persecuted for Righteousness sake, and who they be, that
fall under that denomination: In answer to this,

1. To persecute, (...) in the Original is properly to follow hard after a
thing, and with great earnestness to endeavor to seize upon a thing we desire,
or to pursue it as Hunters do their Prey, which they quit not till they take
it. The word in Scripture is used sometimes in a good, sometimes in a bad
sense: In a good sense, when it is applied to Virtue, as 1 Thessalonians. v. 15. Follow
that which is good. Heb. xii. 14. Follow Peace with all men. 1 Cor. xiv. 1.
Follow after Charity. 1 Timothy VI. 11. Follow after Righteousness. In all which
places, for follow in the Original, the word (...) is used, which in other
places we render persecute, to show, that till it be joined with something else
that alters the Sense, it is no more, than following hard after a thing. When
it is applied to Persons, it is commonly taken in a bad Sense, and implies
pursuing with a desire or intent to hurt the Person pursued; and that is the
usual Notion and Acceptance of the word, even to prosecute or pursue a Person
with an intent to afflict, or hurt, or punish him; and that is the meaning of
the word in the Text, where the persecuted must be persons hunted or haunted,
teazed, tormented, imprisoned, abused, or, in a word, evil entreated, as is
evident from Christ's scope in these Beatitudes, which is to comfort those whom
the World counts miserable.

2. By Righteousness here, is meant the whole Circle of Religious Duties and
Offices, or Obedience to the Laws of God or of the Gospel; and it takes in both
believing and practicing, i. e. believing what God has commanded us to
believe, and practicing what God in his Word has commanded us to practice, and
consequently forbearing to believe or practice, either what God has not
revealed, or has forbid to believe or practice. I know the word Righteousness,
is used sometime for just dealing, sometime for Mercy and Almsgiving, but then
there is some word in the Context that shows, it must be restrained or confined
to that Sense, but here is nothing to give it that determinate Sense; and
therefore it must be the same with Goodness as it is opposed to Wickedness; and
in this Sense it is ordinarily used both in this and the next Chapter; in this
v. 6. and 20. in the next, v. 33. and is sometimes called, The Righteousness of
Faith, as Romans iv. 13. i. e. a cheerful performance of the duties God has
commanded in the Gospel; as the Righteousness of the Law is complying with
God's Will and Commands under the Law, or the Old Testament.

This being premised, it follows;

1. That to be persecuted for Righteousness sake, is not barely to suffer or to
endure Punishment; for at this rate all Malefactors, and such as our Law
punishes either with the Sword, or with Fire, or the Gallows, for Crimes which
are destructive to Humane Societies would fall under this Notion. No, no, to
suffer as an evil doer, is a very different thing from being persecuted for
Righteousness sake. St. Peter has determined this long ago, 1 Pet. ii. 20.
What glory* is it if when ye are buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it
patiently, but if when you do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently,
this is acceptable with God; and again, 1 Pet. iv. 15. Let none of you suffer
as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy-body in other
men's matters; but if any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed. That
old Saying is very true, Not the Suffering but the Cause makes the Martyr.
Indeed, it is to be considered in all Sufferings, and it skills very much what
it is we suffer, and what we suffer for, and what manner of man the person is
who suffers. Some we read of that have suffered for Vainglory, as Peregrinus
in Lucian, and the Gymnosophists, and Regulus, and Mutius, and the Alexandrian
Woman, and others in the Greek and Roman Histories: And the Circumcelliones of
old were so fond of suffering Martyrdom, that some would cast themselves down
headlong from steep Hills, or throw themselves into Fire, or into Water, and
even courted men to knock them on the head: And therefore the Church, Ps. xliv.
21, 22. to remove all suspicions that she suffered upon a wrong Principle, or
for a sinister End, appeals to God the searcher of all Hearts; He knows the
secrets of the Heart: for thy sake are we killed all the day long; as if she
had said, Thou, O Lord, who know all things, know, that it is not for a
sinister End, or for Trifles that we suffer, but it is for thy Name's sake, and
because we will not lift up our Hands to a strange God.

2. Nor is it to suffer for every Cause where Conscience is pretended. He that
is persecuted for Righteousness sake suffers for his Conscience, but not every
one that suffers, and pretends he suffers for Conscience, is therefore
persecuted for Righteousness sake. We know the greatest Villainies have been
carried on under a show of Religion, and Conscience has been pleaded by
Murderers of Kings, and Princes, and Bishops, and others; and when such
abominable wretches have suffered for it, they have been most justly punished,
but far from being persecuted, farther from being persecuted for Righteousness
sake. To pretend Conscience when Men act against a known Law of God is mocking
of God, and if it were lawful to laugh at a thing so sad and dreadful,
deserves to be ridiculed more than argued. Felix Mauz a turbulent Anabaptist in
Helvetia, being put to death for practicing against the State and Government,
had the Impudence to thank God that he had called him to seal the Truth with
his Blood; and among other expressions before his death, said, Lord, into thy
hands I do commend my Spirit. It Is like unwary and weak Spectators looked upon
his suffering as being persecuted for Righteousness sake, but it was nothing
less, indeed no more than a just Punishment for his Treasonable Practices,
however colored over with Expressions and Sayings of Conscientious Men. He
that deceives himself, or suffers himself to be deceived into an erroneous
Doctrine or Practice, and believes that his Conscience dictates to him both
that Belief and Practice, and suffers for it, cannot properly be said to suffer
for Righteousness sake, if that Righteousness he pretends to, and for which he
thinks he suffers, have no relation to the express word of God. Conscience must
be guided by the plain word of God; I say, plain, for I do not think that
obscure, hard, and knotty places of Scripture which have exercised the Wits of
the Learned Men are an ordinary Rule of Conscience. If a Man fancies that his
Doctrine or Practice for which he suffers is commanded in the Word of God when
really it is not, he suffers indeed for an erroneous Conscience, which he
should have taken care to rectify and inform better, but cannot be said to be
persecuted for Righteousness sake, because he suffers not for a notorious
Doctrine or Action, manifestly commanded in the Word of God; and though I grant
that the Magistrate who punishes him may be too severe upon him, and the
Officers of Justice who execute the Law may handle him rudely and barbarously,
and though I believe God will pardon his Error, if accompanied with simplicity
of Heart, and free from Malice or sinister Designs, yet still he cannot be said
to be persecuted for Righteousness sake.

And having told you, what being persecuted for Righteousness sake is not, I
must in the next place tell you what it is. And here though you may guess at
the Nature of it by what has been said already; yet for Orders sake,

1. To be persecuted for Righteousness sake, is to be evil entreated for
asserting or maintaining a Principle or Doctrine which God has plainly
revealed either by the light of Nature, or by the light of Scripture, and for
not subscribing to a Doctrine manifestly false, or contrary to the Scripture. I
mention here the light of Nature, for the light of Nature is the light of God
as well as the Scripture. It Is granted the Scripture is the brighter and the
clearer light, but still the light of Nature is the light of God. And he that
is persecuted for asserting there is but one God, and that Polytheism, or a
multitude of Gods is Nonsense, or a Fable, as Socrates the Heathen Philosopher
was, who died for that Doctrine, may be justly said to be persecuted for
Righteousness sake, because he suffers for a true and manifest Principle of the
light of Nature, and for a Truth written by God upon the Heart, and which every
Man is bound to assert and maintain; which is the reason that Justin Martyr
makes Socrates a kind of Christian, and a Martyr for a standing Principle of
Divinity.

After the same manner, if a Man should be persecuted for maintaining the
Resurrection of the Dead, or that the Scripture is the Word of God, or that
Jesus of Nazareth is the true Messiah, and Savior of the World, and that he is
God, as well as Man, and that he died for our sins, and rose again from the
Dead, etc. as the Apostles were persecuted by the Sadduces, Pharisees, and
Heathens; such a Person is truly persecuted for righteousness sake; for these
Truths are very clearly revealed in Scripture, and every Christian is bound to
profess them; and the same may justly be said of those late Sufferers in the
neighboring Kingdom, who suffered for not believing, or not subscribing to the
Doctrines of Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, etc. for
these Doctrines are not only not to be found in the Word of God, but are
contrary to it.

2. To be persecuted for righteousness sake, is to be evil entreated for
espousing a Worship, or Practice, which God has plainly commanded; on for not
yielding to a Worship or Practice, which he has plainly forbid Thus the three
young men in Daniel were persecuted for righeteousness sake, because thrown
into a fiery Furnace for not worshipping the golden Image which Nebuchadnezzar
had set up, and thus Daniel himself was persecuted for righteousness sake, when
cast into the Lion's Den, for worshipping the true God three times a Day: Thus
the Primitive believers were persecuted for righteousness sake, when
imprisoned, condemned to the mines, butchered, tormented, thrown to the Lions,
forced to fight with Beasts, etc. because they would not sacrifice to Idols,
nor offer Incense to Jupiter, nor swear by the Emperors, and their genius,
etc. And thus the poor Waldenses and Albigenses were persecuted for
righteousness sake, when pursued with Fire and Sword, for not worshipping
Saints and Angels, and for not believing the Infallibility and Truth of the
Roman Church. And the same may be said of any Christian, that loses his place,
or the favor of his Master, Prince, or Relatives, for not telling a lie, for
not profaning the Lord's Day, for being loath to cheat, or defraud, or to
comply with others in their sins. In a word, to suffer for obeying any
affirmative, or negative, standing Precept or Command of God, is to be
persecuted for righteousness sake; and such Persons are pronounced blessed in
my Text; which leads me to the

II. Point; whether these words, as well as the preceding, imply a negative
Truth, viz. that they who are not persecuted for righteousness sake, are not
blessed. You may remember, that in the explication of the preceding
Beatitudes, I have still proved the Negative implied, as that those who are not
poor in spirit, or are not meek, or not pure in heart, etc. are not blessed.
Here one would think the Negative should not hold, for it seems impertinent and
absurd to say, that those good Christians, who have lived and died in times of
Peace and Plenty, and Tranquillity, are not blessed, nor made partakers of the
Kingdom of Heaven. But, notwithstanding all this, the negative is as true as
the affirmative, provided we take Christ's meaning by the right handle; as thus,

1. Those who are persecuted, and are not persecuted for righteousness sake,
their bare Persecution will not, cannot make them blessed, and this is very
true. For,

1. A Man, as I said before, may be persecuted for his Crimes, for robbing or
stealing upon the Highway, for clipping the King's Coin, for breaking open a
House, and may suffer for it. This may be called Persecution, because the same
severities are used upon him, that are upon Men, who suffer for righteousness
sake, but still, this suffering cannot make him blessed, or happy, because he
is not persecuted for righteousness sake, it is true, such a Man being
apprehended, and imprisoned may repent, and become a new Creature, and upon
that account he may be blessed, but his bare Persecution does not make him so,
because he is not persecuted for righteousness sake.

2. A Man may be persecuted for a false erroneous Doctrine, yet that cannot
make him blessed, i. e. if the Law, or the Officers of Justice should persecute
a Man that teaches that the Pope is Christ's Vicar, and has Power to depose
Kings, and to excommunicate them when they prove Heretics, and to give their
Kingdoms away to others, or that there is no Salvation out of the Church of
Rome, etc. Considering the Penalties and Punishments, the Law inflicts in such
Cases on such pragmatical Men, this may be called a Persecution, but this
Persecution cannot make the Teacher of these Doctrines blessed, much less
entitle him to the Kingdom of Heaven, because all this while he is not
persecuted for righteousness sake; and he cannot be supposed to suffer as a
Confessor or Martyr, but rather as a Criminal: It Is true, the Teacher of such
Doctrines may apprehend them to be part of the righteousness taught in the
Gospel; but it is evident to all unbiased, impartial, and unprejudiced Men,
that they are not, but rather that they are as false as God is true, and
contrary to the Word of God, and therefore his suffering cannot make him
blessed, no, not if he should be canonized by his own party, because here is
nothing of righteousness in the case, no Doctrine, no Precept plainly revealed
by the Word of God; a pretended righteousness may be, but no real one.

2. The Negative also holds, if we say, that those who are loath to suffer for
righteousness sake, when called to it, are not blessed, and cannot be; and this
is the Negative chiefly intended here; even that those who in times of
persecution for righteousness sake, prefer their ease and quiet, and Temporal
prosperity before suffering for Christ, are very unhappy Men; and the reasons
are plain.

1. The Threatenings of Christ pronounced against all such Persons are very
dreadful; Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father
which is in Heaven. He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy
of me. He that loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me: He that
does not deny himself, and follow after me, is not worthy of me. He that shall
seek to save his life shall lose it, Matthew. X. 33, 37, 38, 39. And again,
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous and
sinful Generation, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in
the Glory of his Father, Mark VIII. 38. And surely, this can be no blessed
Estate. It Is true, we are not to run into the Fire of persecution without need,
or without a call, and the ancient Church justly blamed those forward Men, who
offered and accused themselves to the Heathen Judges and Executioners, and even
provoked them to dispatch them, because they were Christians, but when we are
called to suffering for righteousness sake, and God thinks fit to try us by
that Fire; there to refuse it, and for worldly profit, greatness, power, and
honor, and an easy life to deny the truth, or to subscribe to errors which
we are persuaded in our Consciences are so; this is such a blot upon Religion,
such a dishonor to Christ, such an affront to truth, that such a Person must
needs appear very odious in the sight of God, and an object of his wrath and
anger, cannot be blessed.

2. Such Persons forfeit all their Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, and
therefore cannot be blessed; this is implied in the Text; and if a Man had all
the Kingdoms of the World in Possession, and were excluded from the Kingdom of
Heaven, he would be a very miserable Man, miserable in all his greatness, power
and authority, and so much the more miserable, because after the height of all
this splendor, he is to sink into the nethermost Hell, from one extreme to
another, from the greatest felicity to the greatest misery. The Kingdom of
Heaven is intended for Conquerours. He that is loath to suffer for
righteousness sake, when God calls him to it, and flinches, and shrinks, and
like the Children of Ephraim turns back in the day of battle, is so far from
conquering, that he falls basely, loses ground cowardly, kisses the Temptation
and is enthralled by the worst of Enemies, and therefore must necessarily fall
a Prey to that Enemy, by whom he suffers himself to be conquered, and judge you
whether such a Man can be blessed.

And now, that I am talking of the Kingdom of Heaven, I speak of the very
blessedness, which attends those that are persecuted for righteousness sake;
and consequent^y, this calls me to explain the third, and last Point.

III. How the Kingdom of Heaven shall be theirs.

This reward you see is the same with what was promised to poverty of Spirit,
or deep Humility, v. 3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. And the reason why Christ promises the same recompense to
the persecuted for righteousness sake, he does to the humble, is, because there
is a very great affinity betwixt humility, and suffering for righteousness
sake. Suffering for righteousness sake is the deepest Act of Humiliation,
especially if that suffering be accompanied with death. Humility can go no
lower; a Man in suffering and dying for righteousness sake, pulls down all his
lofty thoughts, makes all stoop to the Cross of Christ, submits his Faith to
the Gospel, and for things invisible denies himself in all the visible comforts
of this life, and that is Humility in its Glory. Therefore the reward is
expressed in the same language; but then, as suffering for righteousness sake
is the deepest Act of Humiliation, so we must suppose, that the Kingdom of
Heaven is theirs in a peculiar manner; and how that is, the following
particulars, will declare.

And here to keep to the rule, I have so often mentioned in the preceding
Beatitudes, that these rewards respect both this present, and the next life.

1. The Kingdom of Heaven is theirs on this side Heaven, because even here they
feel Heaven in their Souls, and the Kingdom of Heaven is within them. There is
hardly any History of Martyrs and Confessors, hardly any Martyrology, but
gives an account of the wonderful joy that poor persecuted Christians have
felt in the height of their Persecutions, and what is this but a Kingdom of
Heaven here on Earth? what is it, but a Heaven in their Souls? The three young
Men, Dan. III. sang in a fiery Furnace; St. Paul and Silas in a Dungeon, lifted
up their Voices in Hallelujah's: The Apostles when beaten and whipped, and
scourged, departed from the Council rejoicing, because they were counted worthy
to suffer shame for the Name of Christ, and St. Paul, 2 Cor. VII. 4. I am
filled with comfort, yea, I exceedingly rejoice in all our Tribulation. But not
to mention any more passages of this nature out of ancient Histories, our own
Book of Martyrs shall serve to furnish us with instances; I mean of the
Protestant Martyrs, that suffered in Queen Marys Days.

One Rogers coming to the Stake where he was to be burned, fetched a great leap
for joy. One Dr. Taylour, approaching the Fire in which he was to be
sacrificed, danced and skipt to the Wonder and Admiration of the Sheriff. I
thank God for this Prison, said one Bradford, more than for the richest
Parlour, more than for any pleasure I ever found, for here I find God, my sweet
God always After I came into this Prison, said one Glover in a Letter to his
Wife, and had reposed my self there awhile, I wept for joy, and gladness, my
belly full, and said to my self, Lord, what am I, that I should be counted
worthy to be numbered among those that suffer for the Gospel's sake! I am now in
the Coal-house, said one Philpott, as dark, and ugly a Prison, as any is about
London; but I have six other faithful Companions, who merrily rouz upon the
Straw, and in our darkness do cheerfully sing Hymns and Praises to God. I was
never merrier in Cbrist, than I am now in Prison, said one Tims. One Pierson,
with a cheerful Countenance embraced the Stake, at which he was to be burnt,
and kissing it, said; Now welcome my sweet Wife, for this day thou and I shall
be married together. O how my heart leaps and skips for joy, said another. One
Bainham, when his Arms and Legs were half consumed by the Fire, cried out in
the Midst of the Flames, Behold, ye Papists, ye are much for Miracles: Here you
may see a Miracle, for in this Fire I feel no more pain, than if I lay on a Bed
of Down, it is to me as a Bed of Roses. Abundance more I could name to this
purpose, and what was all this but a Kingdom of Heaven in their Souls?

2. In the next World, the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs in a peculiar manner
too, because of the high degree of Glory, they arrive to in the next life. This
has been the belief of the Church in all Ages, that for the Martyrs, the
higher and loftier Mansions of Heaven are reserved; the ruins of this truth
are preserved among Mahometans and Heathens. The Mahometans fancy, that those
who die in the War against Christians are Martyrs, and they assign them a
higher place in Paradise, and Geographers tell us of a People in the West
Indies, who believing the Immortality of the Soul, fancy that those who die in
defense of their Country, are advanced after death to a very high degree of
felicity. These are nothing but relics, and remains of the Chri^^ian
Doctrine, which Tradition has left among them, that those who are persecuted
for righteousness sake, are, and shall be made partakers of higher degrees of
Glory. It Is certain their Bodies shall rise before the Bodies of other Men; for
so we read, Revel. XX. 4, 5. And I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for
the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the
beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark in their foreheads, or
in their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand Years. But
the rest of the dead lived not again, until the thousand Years were ended. This
is the first Resurrection.

And in the Kingdom of Heaven, they will outshine other Saints in brightness
and splendor. All those that by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for
Glory, Honor and Immortality, shall inherit Eternal life, but those who have
been persecuted for righteousness sake, their sufferings work for them a far
more exceeding Eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. IV. 17. a reward, enough to make
a Man fond of dying, in love with suffering, enamored with a Prison, and
desirous of Chains and Fetters for righteousness sake: Wonder at this Blessing,
O my Soul! For, Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Inferences.
I. As one place of Scripture gives light to another, so by this we are upon,
we may judge of a parallel Passage, which makes that necessary, which in the
Text seems only providential. It is St. Paul's saying, 2 Timothy III. 12. All that
will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. What? Can none be
called Godly, but those that are persecuted for righteousness sake, and is
there no getting an interest in Christ Jesus, but by being harrass'd and
teased, and evil entreated for his Name? Are all Hypocrites though never so
pious, that have not suffered as the Apostles did? Or must all be accounted
reprobates, that walk softly all their days, and never felt the rage of
Tyrants, and sworn Enemies of the Gospel? I answer,

1. This saying was certainly true of the Apostle's days, and the time when St.
Paul writ this Epistle to Timothy: There was then no living Godly without being
persecuted. To obey the rules of the Gospel, was to draw the rage of turbulent
Men upon their Backs. To profess Christ was to become a Prey to Jews and
Heathens. To be a Disciple of a Crucified God, was looked upon to be as bad as
to be an Enemy to the State, and he went in danger of his life, that said,
there was another King one Jesus. The Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles
the Apostles writ to comfort the believers in their fiery Trials, are evidences
to prove all this; and this lasted the greatest part of three hundred Years
after Christ, during which time, happened the ten famous or rather infamous
Persecutions under Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Severus, Commodus, Maximinus,
Decius, Valerianus, Aurelianus, Dioclesian; in the last of which, it was death
to have a Bible in their Houses.

2. This saying is still true of our days, and true it will be to the World's
end, and so it is, all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
Persecution, if not from Men, yet from the Devil, who walks about like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. V. 8. The Temptations a
Christian meets, and must meet with, and without which his Faith can never be
tried, what are they but Persecutions? the Soul at least is persecuted, and
though these Persecutions of the Devil appear stronger and more fiery in some
than in others, especially in Persons to whose minds their former sins are
represented in very dreadful Colors, with the wrath of God flaming out
against them, breathing nothing but despair and destruction; yet be they more
or less, still they are Persecutions, and though abundance of Christians, that
take up of Religion just so much as is consistent with their ease and profit,
and pleasure, are not very sensible of these Persecutions; yet where Men
attempt to mortify their dear lust, crucify their flesh, are resolved to do
more than Heathens and Pharisees, and do truly swim against the strong current
of corrupt Nature, they will find there are fiery Darts thrown at them, and
though they are not visible, yet its enough that they are felt; and indeed on
some these Persecutions lie so heavy that they are ready to despair, ready to
throw off all, and even to betake themselves to a sensual course of living as
their Neighbors do. Thus Persecution is still the lot of good Christians,
insomuch, that he who is not persecuted in this Sense cannot be supposed to
live Godly in Christ Jesus, for having sworn in Baptism to fight against the
Devil, is it possible, if he makes good his promise, when he grows up, the
Devil will not fight against him, tempt him to evil, discourage him from
goodness, fright him from the strait way, provoke him to sin, throw
stumbling blocks in his way, suggest impediments and excuses, and entice him to
prefer an easy form before the power of Godliness; and is not this Persecution?

3. Those that will live Godly live so among wicked Men, in wicked Families, in
wicked Societies, will not fail of suffering Persecution, For what Communion
has Light with Darkness? or what fellowship is there betwixt Christ and
Belial? Wicked men cannot endure a man that is Precise, and Godly, and
Conscientious, and reproves them, and therefore will be his Enemies, despise
him, deride him, abuse him, and do him an injury if they may do it with safety
to themselves, and what is this but Persecution?

4. The evil Works, which he that lives Godly in Christ Jesus sees and beholds,
are a Persecution to him; as it is said of Lot, 2 Pet. II. 7, 8. That dwelling
in Sodom, in seeing and hearing vexed his righteous Soul from day to day with
their unlawful Deeds and filthy Conversation; and to this purpose are those
Expressions we meet with, Ps. CXIX. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of
the wicked, which forsake thy Law, v. 53. I beheld the Transgressors and was
grieved, because they kept not thy Word, v. 158. so that there is no need of
having recourse to the ordinary Afflictions which befall good men, as if they
were meant by Persecution in these words. The thing is true with respect to the
Particulars, I have mentioned, and to this day it cannot be otherwise but those
that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecutisn. And yet

II. Though Persecution, like the Trojan Horse, carries innumerable Evils in
its Bowels, yet we must not think it unbecoming the Divine Providence to see
Righteousness persecuted. Ever since the fatal enmity betwixt the Seed of the
Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent has been proclaimed, Genesis iii. 15. it has
been so; it began very early, and they were scarce got out of Paradise, but
Cain persecuted his Brother Abel, and pursued him to death, for asserting,
says the Chaldee Paraphrast, the Rewards and Punishments of the World to come:
And this has been the fate of abundance of righteous Men and Women in all
Ages; more signally, since Christ Jesus appeared in the World, and taught
mankind a more perfect and stricter way of Righteousness than the World was
acquainted with before. And what was our Savior's life, but a continual
persecution from his Cradle to his Cross? And when it was so with the Master,
we cannot think his Apostles and Disciples should escape these uncivil and
barbarous usages. Accordingly Stephen was stoned, James beheaded, Timon, one of
the seven Deacons, burnt, Thomas slain with a Dart, Simon Zelotes crucified,
Jude slain in a tumult raised by the people, Mark the Evangelist burnt,
Bartholomew beaten to death with Staves, Andrew crucified, Matthew stoned and
beheaded, Philip crucified and beheaded, Peter crucified with his head
downward, and Paul after a thousand sufferings beheaded.

Indeed, considering what love and esteem God professes to Righteousness, and
the cruelties that have been exercised upon righteous men, Flesh and Blood will
be apt to wonder how God could suffer it; for some had their Brains breaten out
with Mauls, some were cast to the Swine, some to the Lions to be devoured, some
were hanged up by the middle, some tormented to death with Trees, a Hand or an
Arm being tied to one Tree, and a Leg to another; some were scraped to death
with Shells, some were burnt with their Entrails torn out; some broyl'd upon
Grid-irons; some roasted alive against the Fire; some Women had their Breasts;
some Men their Legs and Thighs seared with hot Irons; some were tossed to death
upon Bulls-horns; some hanged by the Neck and Heels; some were burnt in a
Furnace; some fried in an Iron Chair; some had their Bones broken with Batts;
some were beaten with Cudgels; some had sharp points thrust in under their
Nails; some were put in Vessels of boiling Oil; some dragged through the
Streets and Kennels; some had their Tongues cut out; some had their Eyes bored
out; some were sawn asunder; some flead alive; some torn in pieces with wild
Horses; some killed with Famine; some suffered to perish in Frost and Snow.

Where was God, where was the Lord Jesus all the while? will some say; why he
was there, he was with them in all their Torments, gave them Courage to endure
all this, Strength to bear up under all their Miseries. Here the Power of God
appeared more than it would have done in their greatest Prosperity. This made
the World to gaze and stare, and think they must be more than Men, that
suffered with so much Patience: This gave Reputation to Religion. By this means
the Name of the Lord Jesus came to be glorified. This converted Heathens,
wrought upon Infidels, pulled down Idolatry, chased the Devil from his Throne.
This made Men come in to Christ in multitudes. This made them forsake the Devil
and the World; this made them part with their Sins and Lusts, and lay force
upon the Kingdom of Heaven: And thus the World was overcome, and Scepters and
Crowns were made to stoop to the Cross of Christ, and it is hard to say, whether
more were converted by Miracles, or by these patient and heroic Sufferings of
Christians; their Sufferings forced people into a belief of a future Reward,
and the Torments they endured made God amiable that thousands did embrace him.
And yet

III. As in other things, so even in matter of Persecution great mistakes may
be committed; and therefore in judging of Persecution we must ever attend and
look to the cause for which men are said to be persecuted: This caution is very
necessary, that we may not wrongfully accuse men whose office it is to punish
Offenders, nor flatter our selves with the satisfaction of a good work, when we
have done nothing less. Persecuting for righteousness sake is a very great sin,
a sin that cries for Vengeance, which is the reason why God even in this
present life has poured out his Wrath upon persons guilty of this crime. Nero
was thrown down from the Imperial Throne, proscribed by the Senate as an Enemy
of mankind, and at last forced to kill himself. Domitian was slain in his
Chamber, not without the consent of his Wife, and all his Images and Statues
thrown down by order of the Senate. Decius was killed in Battle, and deprived
of the common Honor of Burial. Valerianus was taken by the Persians, and put
in a Cage, and at last flead, and his Skin hung up for a Trophy in one of the
Persian Temples. Aurelianus in the very beginning of his Persecution dies
miserably, and wallows in his own blood. Galerius, a prodigious and unusual
Sickness seizes him, a sore rising in the nether part of his Belly, which bred
such a swarm of Worms, as made him stink above Ground; Maxentius was vanquished
by Constantine the Great, and his body thrown into the River Tiber, not to
mention any more Instances of this nature. And I wish, that this trade of
persecuting had been confined to Heathens; but here it stayed not. After that
the World turned Christian, it was not long before one Party began to persecute
another. The Arrians were the first that began it, and the Church of Rome soon
learned this art, beginning with the Novatians, but practiced it afterward
with greater cruelty upon the Waldenses and Albigenses, and all those whom she
is please to style Heretics. The Greek Church, when she had Power and Princes
that favored her Interest has run too often upon the same Rock. And I know,
this very Church we are Members of, has been often charged by our dissenting
Brethren with a persecuting Spirit. I shall not now enquire into the truth or
falsehood of this charge, being willing to forget what is past, even the shadow
of it, the rather, because the Point will require examining various
circumstances, which either heighten or very much qualify the pretended sin;
but whatever Errors, Rudenesses or Insolences have been committed by officers
of Justice in executing the Law upon Dissenters, which must not be presently
charged upon the Doctrine and Temper of the Church: Blessed be God, there is at
this time in our Church a general Inclination to Tenderness, Compassion and
Mildness to the moderate sort of those who differ from the Sentiments of the
Church, and to hearken to a reasonable Accommodation of Matters to the
satisfaction of those who look upon themselves as Sufferers.

That which I chiefly aim at in this Discourse, is, that we must not rashly
charge every thing that looks like Punishment with the odious name of
Persecution for Righteousness sake, neither in the persons that inflict
Punishment, nor in those that suffer it. And indeed a person that suffers, or
is like to suffer for an Opinion or Practice of his own, had need consider well
before he suffers, what he is going to suffer for, and whether the thing he is
ready to suffer for is worth it. To suffer for any Catholic Doctrine received
in all Ages, by all Churches, or for a known Article of Faith, or for a thing
expressly commanded or forbid by the Gospel is great, and noble, and
Christian-like; but to suffer for an Invention of our own, or for things which
have no solid Foundation in Scripture, has nothing of Glory or Christian
Magnanimity in it, nor will God give us any thanks for it; and in this case a
Christian had a thousand times better endeavor to rectify his Judgment,
especially when no substantial Doctrine or Duty is prejudiced by it, and comply
with the Will and Desire of the Magistrate, than suffer for a thing for which
he has no good Authority from the word of God. I might apply this to some
particular differences, but I forbear; and though I do believe, that many who
have suffered for such things which are not plainly delivered in Scripture, may
have found very great comfort in their Sufferings, yet whether that comfort was
a sign that they were persecuted for Righteousness sake, I very much question.
However, if such persons do suffer wrongfully, they shall lose nothing by their
sufferings, for God is not unrighteous to forget our Work, and labor of love,
and the time will come, when God will bring forth our Righteousness as the
Light, and our Judgment as the Noonday. The truth is Men's understandings
being of various capacities and sizes, and apt to be by ass'd by various
interests, and circumstances; there may, and will be mistakes committed, both
by those that punish Men for different opinions in matters of Religion, and by
those, who suffer for such opinions. However, let us thoroughly acquaint our
selves with the Will of God in the Gospel, that we may know what things we
ought to suffer for, and what not. And if it be so that we suffer for the Name
of Christ, happy are we, for the spirit of glory, and of God rests upon us, 1
Pet. IV. 14. And in such sufferings we have reason to be not only patient, but
cheerful, which gives me occasion to put you in mind

IV. Of a fault: We that are so impatient under ordinary Afflictions, what
should we be if Persecution should come among us. Blessed be God, we have for
many Years sat under our own Vines, and under our own Fig Trees, have enjoyed
the Gospel, and the truth of God without any considerable disturbance, and I
hope, we shall do so still. But should it please God to send a Persecution
among us, because of the Word; it is to be feared, that abundance with Demas,
Ecebolius, and the Traditores of old would embrace this present World, and
prefer their ease before suffering, though they buy it at a very dear Rate,
with the loss of truth, and the Shipwreck of a good Conscience.

Indeed there are very few of us, that prepare themselves for such a
Providence. We pamper our Bodies, we consult the interest of the Flesh, we give
our selves all the ease we can; we do not deny our selves in things pleasing to
our Appetite.

Every thing our Flesh craves, and our Purse can procure we are eager for; we
dread any thing that is irksome to our Bodies, we do not acquaint our selves
with voluntary sufferings, do not keep under our Bodies, nor bring them into
subjection, and is this a due preparation for Persecutions? Nay, under any loss
or cross, or ordinary sickness, or sad accident; how faint, how weak, how
impatient, how uneasy, how discontented are we!

Thou that frettest for the loss of ten or twenty Pound, what would thou do
if in time of Persecution, thou should be plundered, and turned out of all?
Thou that complainest so much, if thy Finger does but ache, what would thou
do, if in time of Persecution, thy whole Body should be burnt? Thou that
look upon thy self as a very miserable Man, because an ordinary distemper
hangs about thee, what would thou do, if in time of Persecution thou should
be tormented with Pincers, and Tongs, and Irons heated in the Fire? Thou that
can not bear the loss of a Child, or a Husband, what would thou do if in
time of Persecution all thy Relations, and Friends should be torn away from
thee, thy Children murdered before thine Eyes, their Brains dashed out against
a Stone, and barbarous Soldiers embruing their Hands in thy Father, or thy
Mother's Blood. Thou that art so discontented now, because thou can not have
such outward accommodations, as thou would have, what would thou do if in
time of Persecution, thy Body should be broken on a Wheel, or nailed to a
Cross, or thy Skin plucked off, or thy Tongue cut out, or thy Flesh killed with
Cold, or starved with Hunger, and so left naked to the open shame of the World?
Such considerations surely cannot be improper for Men, who fear, and talk of a
Persecution: And were these thoughts often upon our minds, in all probability,
they would make us less anxious about the felicities of this World; lay a
restraint upon our wild Appetites, and the foolish desires of the Flesh, and
with the Martyr, move us to try our Finger in the Candle, before our Bodies
come to feel the Fire.

Nay, this very consideration would make us more patient under our ordinary
Troubles, and thank God he lays no greater Trials upon us, that he deals so
gently with us, and as yet suffers no Temptation to befall us, but what is
common to Men: Whatever affliction befalls us, let us think of the various
Torments of the Saints of old, and think this is nothing to what St. Paul
endured, or to what St. Peter suffered, or to what such a^ Apostle, such a dear
Servant of God felt. Setting the greater Trials before us, will make our common
sicknesses and crosses seem less in our Eyes as Men forget the pain of the
Gout, or the chilliness of an Ague, when they find the House over their Heads
on fire.

V. And now that we speak of Persecution, who sees not, that Persecution for
Righteousness sake, is a certain sign, there is a Kingdom of Heaven; if we
believe there is a God that sees all, and knows all, and takes pleasure in
them, that serve him; is it possible that he can see Men suffer for him, and
bleed and die for his Gospel, and not reward them? It is certain they have no
reward here, and therefore they must necessarily have a reward hereafter. The
Apostle therefore might very well say, 1 Cor. XV. 19. if in this life only we
had hope in Christ, we should of all Men be most miserable. As the impunity of
Men abominably profane, and the uninterrupted Prosperity of very wicked Men, is
a Demonstration that there must be Punishments in the next life; so the
sufferings, the continued, the exquisite, the grievous sufferings of Men, that
truly love God, that obey him, stand in awe of him, and fear him more than the
greatest Monarchs, can forego all for his Name sake, and rather lose Lands and
Houses, and Goods, and Life it self, than offend him. Their sufferings I say,
without any visible reward, or recompense here, are Items sufficient to any
rational and considerate Man, that there must be a Kingdom of Heaven, or a
wonderful felicity in another World, that is to be their individual companion
and attendant.

If there be a God, it stands to reason, he must be infinitely perfect; if
infinitely perfect, he must be infinitely good; and if infinitely good, how is
it possible for him to see Men live and die to him, and for him, and do nothing
remarkably for them? A great Man here on Earth, that has any generosity in
him; if a Man has worn himself out in his Service, or for his sake has lost
all he has in the World, even life it self, thinks himself in Honor obliged
to make some provision for his Wife, and Children, if he leaves any, or to
erect a Monument for him, or to do something after his Death to testify his
grateful acknowledgement of his faithful service. And what is the goodness,
and generosity of Man compared with the Infinite goodness of God, a mere
shadow, an atome, a grain of sand compared with the Sun, or a Mountain, or the
vast Globe of the Earth. And as God is infinitely good, so the rewards he gives
must be supposed infinite, like himself, and that is it we mean by the Kingdom
of Heaven.

This Argument is needless to you, that believe the Word of God; however, to
such as never seriously pondered the Promises of the Gospel, and who pretend
they can believe nothing but what is agreeable to their reason, to such I say,
this Argument must needs be of very great Weight provided, that they seriously
think of it; for let a thing be never so rational, if it be not minded, or
pondered, it will do no good; and neither Moses nor the Prophets, nor a Man's
rising from the Dead will make any impression upon them. Whether a Man can
comprehend the Immortality of his Soul, or the Nature of its subsistence, and
operations after Death, or not still; if he believes a God, this is a very
natural and rational inference, that this God will not let Men who give
themselves up to his Conduct, and make his Will the rule of their life and
death, go unrewarded; and having no reward considerable here, there must be one
hereafter, and then there is a Heaven, and an everlasting Kingdom, and an
immense Felicity; which deserves striving, and wrestling, and working, and
watchfulness, and circumspection, and self-denial, and industry, and a diligent
care not to be barren, or unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And as dismal and rugged as the Way seems to be, that leads to the
Kingdom of Heaven: Let me add,

VI. That it is a glorious thing to be persecuted for righteousness sake,
glorious with respect to the Company, glorious with respect to the Honor,
which attends it, glorious with respect to God's Account and Esteem of it,
glorious with respect to the present advantages which arise from it, and
glorious with respect to the reward to come.

The Company, such a persecuted Christian suffers in, is no less than the
Company of the Son of God, who was made perfect by suffering; the Company of
the Holy Apostles, the Pillars and Foundations of our Religion, the Company of
so many admirable Men, Saints and Martyrs, who have washed their Robes, and
made them white in the Blood of the Lamb, and whose Names and Memories are dear
to us at this Day.

To suffer in such Company must needs be a very great Honor: It Is true, the
generality of us can be very well content without this Honor, and we count our
selves very prudent for being so, but surely, there were wise Men before us,
who understood themselves, and Religion better, and were not so corrupted with
ease and luxury, and love of the World, as we are now; and they thought it a
very great Honor to be Martyrs, and sufferers for Righteousness sake: We are
grown more effeminate, more luxurious, more soft in our way of living, and that
makes us have so low an Esteem for those noble Sufferings.

It Is glorious with respect to the Account, and Esteem God has for such
Sufferers. These are the Champions of the Almighty, the Hero's in his Army, the
Worthies of God, and the Men that have lost an Eye, a Hand, an Arm, a Leg, or
Life it self for his Name; of these the Sanhedrin of Heaven is made up, and
they are the Elders of that City, which has Foundations; for in Heaven rewards
and preferments go not according to seniority, or rank, or quality, or
breeding, but according to the degrees of suffering, and self-denial.

It is glorious with respect to the present advantages arising from it. This
cancels and blots out all sin, wipes away all offenses, and makes the Blood of
Jesus most effectual, and beneficial to the Soul. This persecution for
righteousness sake, is the great deletory of guilt, the great purgative of all
uncleanness; this opinion the primitive Church had of these sufferings,
especially, when they were accompanied with the loss of life in God's Cause,
and this was it that made so many thousands desirous to die for the Name of the
Lord Jesus.

It Is glorious with respect to the reward to come, a reward which we are forced
to express by little emblems and similitudes, taken from things here on Earth,
but it surpasses all Rhetoric and Eloquence to express it.

Happy sufferers! Their Wounds will be turned into Trophies, their Scars into
Sunbeams, their wallowing in Blood into being rapt up into the third Heaven,
their Prison into a Banqueting House; the Banner whereof is Love, their
Dungeon into a Palace made without Hands, their Stripes into Marks of Honor,
their Buffetings into Ensigns of Victory, their Tears into Laughter, their
Mourning into Dancing, their Poverty into Riches, which perish not, their
Sackcloth and Ashes, and all their Mourning-dresses into triumphal Chariots,
and Acclamations, and Joys, and Hosannahs, and Hallelujahs. Blessed are they
which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven.

SERMON XI.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil-against you falsely for my sake.
THE preceding Verse, which I have already considered, treated of Persecution
in general; this I have read to you, of a particular or peculiar Persecution,
in which the Tongue is chiefly instrumental; and Blessed are you when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, is as much as, Blessed are you when men shall so
persecute you, as to revile you, and speak all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake. Persecution is not only a Sin of the Hand or Actions; there
is a smiting with the Tongue, as well as with the Hand, Jer. XVIII. 18. and
Ishmael, who was a Scoffer, is said to persecute him that was born of the
Spirit, i. e. Isaac, Gal. IV. 29. I need not tell you what it is to Revile; for
there are few of you but are very sensible of it, without a Monitor or
Interpreter, when it falls to your share to be reviled: however, it is either
to load a Person with reproachful Names, or to object Crimes to him, great and
base, odious and abominable: and if this be done without a just Cause, falsely,
and for the Name of Christ, because Men will not sin against Christ, it seems
by the Rule of the Text that it turns to very good Account to those who lie
under the Pressure or sharp Arrows of such evil and slanderous Tongues: for,
Blessed are you when men shall revile you, etc.

To entertain you with something useful and edifying, I shall enquire,

I. What Instances there are of Men who have reviled, and do revile, and speak
all manner of Evil of Persons who sincerely and conscientiously believe in
Christ.

II. What it is that moves them to be so base, as to revile, and to speak evil
of such Conscientious Persons.

III. How that which is a Sin to one, can be a Blessing to another. Reviling
innocent Persons being a great Sin, how that can make those blessed who are
reviled.

1. What Instances there are of Persons who are guilty of the Crime in the
Text. When a Sin looks black, a charitable Man hopes that few or none are
guilty of it: So here, reviling Men, and speaking all manner of evil of Persons
who conscientiously believe and obey their God and Savior, seems to be a Crime
of a deep Dye; and therefore it is worth enquiring, what Instances there are of
such Sinners. And here I must tell you, That this Reviling of Conscientious
Christians began very early; and having called the Master of the House
Beelzebab, we may suppose that his Apostles, and those of his Household, could
not long escape their virulent Tongues. When St. Paul and his Company, out of
Charity to Men's Souls, preached the Gospel at Philippi, their Reward was
Calumny; and instead of Gratitude, they charged them with Rebellion, for they
brought them before the Magistrates, Acts XVI. 20. saying, These men, being
Jews, exceedingly trouble our City, and teach Customs which are not lawful for
us to receive, being Romans. And so in Thessalonica, Acts XVII. 6. These men,
cried they, which have turned the world upside down, are come hither also. And
in the same Chapter, Ver. 18. The Philosophers and others, call St. Paul a
Babbler, because he preached to them Jesus and the Resurrection of the Dead. And
Acts XXIV. 5. We have found this man, says Tertullus, meaning St. Paul, a
pestilent fellow, a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the world,
and a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes. Nor did this Trade of Reviling
Conscientious Christians die with the Apostles, but their Successors, and those
who survived and lived after them, met with the same Fate; and the Crimes the
Heathens did most commonly charge the Primitive Believers with, were Atheism,
eating their own Children, and the Use of promiscuous Lusts: and this Calumny
being once raised, spread like Lightning. There is no Fable, you will say, but
has some Foundation in History. What could be the Occasion of this Calumny?
Why? in short, it was this; There were some lewd Societies of Men, Disciples of
Simon Magus, Gnostics, Carpocratians, who were Villains, obscene, and brutish
beyond the rest of Mankind; these, by the Instigation of the Devil, called
themselves Christians; whereupon the Heathens, making no Distinction at all,
charged all Christians with these Crimes; and it is like, some cowardly
Christians, who were tortured and put to the Rack, to be freed from their
Torments confessed what the Executioners would have them confess, and charged
themselves with Crimes they were never guilty of. This was the Condition of the
Christians of the first three Centuries after Christ. Nor was this all; for
some time they called them Asinini, Followers of an Ass, either upon the old
Calumny fixed upon the Jews, that they were Worshippers of an Ass's-Head, or
possibly because they were Worshippers of Jesus, who rode on an Ass when he
made his Entrance into Jerusalem: sometimes the best Name they could give them
was Semistii or Semaxii, or Sarmentitii, Words that cannot be well expressed in
English without a Paraphrase, but thus they called them to jeer them, upon the
Account of their Sufferings, and because they were tied to a Post or a Board
divided or cut in two, which they bought very cheap, and threw Faggots and
Rubbish underneath, which they kindled, and so burned them. I omit here several
other odious Names they gave them, such as Praters, and Sibyllists, and
Beggars, and Cross-worshippers, Credulous, and Night-walkers, etc. Julian the
Apostate called them Galileans; this was the Nickname, or the Name of Contempt,
he gave them, as the Arians called the Disciples of Athanasius Followers of
Sathanasius, or of the Devil: and hither may be referred the Vollies of
Calumnies the Donatists shot against the Orthodox Christians. The Church of
Rome has punctually followed this Track, when it pleased God to raise Men who
had the Courage to confute or to speak against their Errors. The Waldenses,
because they could not believe that the Emperor depended upon the Pope, and
spoke against the debauched and dissolute Lives of the Roman Clergy, were
accused of Manicheism; sometimes they were called Arians, and Deniers of the
Divinity of Christ, because they could not digest Transubstantiation. Wickliff
was traduced, that he called the Saints of God Wicked Varlets, because in his
Version of the Bible, he translated, Paul a Knave of Jesus Christ; which Word,
was good and harmless in those days, being as much as a Servant, tho since that
time it has been changed into a Name of Reproach. It were endless to heap
together all the Calumnies and reproachful Names which Jesuits, Monks, and
Friars, have vomited against Protestants: sometime Calvin and Luther died being
drunk; sometime Theodorus Beza died a Papist; but the best of it was, Beza was
then alive when this Calumny was published and printed, and had the opportunity
to confute it; a Passage much like that in the Year 1621. when the Roman
Missionaries gave out, that Dr. John King, Bishop of London, was upon his
Deathbed reconciled to the Church of Rome by one Preston a Romish Priest; and
that in his last Sickness he composed a Book called The Bishop of London' s
Legacy; wherein he gave the Reasons of his Conversion, and exhorted all his
Brethren to follow his Example: But not only the Book was found to be a
Forgery, but Preston being examined before the Archbishop of Canterbury, openly
confessed, That he had never been at the Bishop's House, never spoken with him,
nay never so much as seen him. After the same manner they gave out, that Bucer
at his Death denied Christ; that Oecolampadius died suddenly, though he was
sixteen days sick in his Bed. Sometimes they have had the Confidence to tell
the World, that we Protestants teach that no God is to be worshipped; that a
Man may break his Faith whenever he sees it for his Interest; and that a Man
must suit his Religion to the Times, etc. Salmero publicly taught, that the
Lutherans look upon Fornication to be no Sin at all. A little before the
Massacre of Paris, the Monks reported, that the Protestants met together to
fill their Bellies with good cheer, and then put out the Candles, and went
together promiscuously as brute Beasts. When the House in Black Friars in the
Year 1623. October. 26. the House I mean where the Papists met to hear Mass and a
Sermon, fell upon the People assembled there, and killed a hundred Persons, and
among the rest, Drury the Priest, and their Preacher, it was given out, that
the Puritans had sawed in two the Beams and Timber of the House, and that this
Fall came by their Treachery; and so the Powder Plot, if it had succeeded,
should have been laid upon the Non-Conformists. Bolseck's Life of Calvin, what
is it, but a Collection of the greatest Calumnies, where the Lies seem to keep
pace with the Lines? And what horrid things have the Priests in some Popish
Countries possessed their People with against the Reformation? b. e. That our
Churches here in England are turned into Stables; that the People here are
become barbarous; that they eat young Children, and are grown as black as
Devils since the Lightnings of the Vatican have scorched us, i. e. since the
Pope has Excommunicated the Protestants: All which I mention to let you see,
that there are too many and too sad Instances of Men guilty of the Sin
mentioned in the Text, viz. Reviling, and speaking Evil of Christians who
sincerely believe in Christ. But,

II. What can be the Motive to all this? What it is that makes Men so base and
wicked?

1. A preposterous and unhappy Education. Where Men have been bred and born in
a false Religion, they imbibe great Prejudices against those that would inform
and teach them better. Education rivets Errors into the Mind as well as Truths,
and an Error being taken for a fundamental Truth, whatever crosses it, is
looked upon as dangerous and heretical, and therefore abominable; and
unthinking Persons, having no convenient Means to satisfy themselves as to the
Truth of the opposite Doctrine, they speak as they are taught, and talk
bitterly against those that would undeceive them, according to the Idea's
imprinted on their Mind by ill Men, and deluded Teachers. This was the Case of
the Jews, who had been taught, that out of Galilee could arise nothing that was
good, and that no Prophet could come out of Galilee, John I. 46. John VII. 52.
And that was the Reason why they cast so many Reproaches upon Christ, who was
reported to be a Native of Galilee. The same may be said of the Opinion they
had sucked in with their Mother's Milk, That the Messiah was to be a Temporal
Prince, and appear with outward Splendour; which being wanting in Jesus of
Nazareth, they despised and reviled him.

2. Another Reason is, a blind Zeal, the effect of an unhappy Education. This
blind Zeal appears chiefly in passionate and choleric Men, who being bred up
in a false Religion, are not only able to do, but do a world of Mischief, their
Tongues being set on fire of Hell, with the Fool in the Proverbs, will throw
about Swords, and Arrows, and Firebrands, and spit Flames against those who
contradict their darling and perhaps profitable Principles. Thus it was in a
great measure with St. Paul before his Passion was sanctified, and himself
converted, his Zeal was blind and violent, and that made him not only blaspheme
Christ and his Saints, but think it his Duty to do so; as himself confesses 1 Timothy I. 13.

3. Another, is Pride. A proud Man is naturally tempted to slandering and
abusing those who do not please him. His Pride makes him undervalue the Person
that opposes his Insolence; and that undervaluing provokes him to bitter Words
and abusive Language. The Pharisees were monstrously proud, swelled with a
mighty Conceit of their Holiness and Strictness; and this was the Cause of the
horrid Language they gave to the Savior of Mankind, calling him Samaritan, a
Devil, and an Impostor, and the People that followed him, Cursed, John VII. 49.

4. A fourth Reason, is Malice and Envy, bitter Roots, which produce very
bitter Fruit, even bitter Language: Malice is a Soil which evil Spirits do
delight in, and they dictate this hellish Rhetoric: Malice will make Faults
where it finds none, and misinterpret harmless Actions as unpardonable Crimes:
It turns accidental Reports into Verities; the shadow of a Sin into a real
Crime; and idle Peoples Talk into Demonstration and Evidence. And in this Art
the High Priest that sat Judge in Christ's Cause seemed to be very well skilled,
who could spell Blasphemy out of Christ's Confession, That he was the Son of
God, Matthew. XXVI. 63.

5. Another Reason is, Want of a sedate, even, serious, and attentive
Consideration of the Cause of such innocent Christians. From a precipitate
Judgment a Man can expect little but inconsiderate Speeches and Expressions;
and where Men do inspect a thing hastily, survey it only superficially, and
will not take time to weigh the Circumstances of it, we need not wonder if they
take the Cause by the wrong Handle; and when that appears dreadful to them,
which upon a deliberate View would be found harmless, and tolerable, and very
rational, rash Censures and ill Language will be the Effects and Consequences
of it; as we see in the Proceedings of the Jews in St. Paul's Case, Acts XXII.
27, 28, 29. They had seen one Trophimus an Ephesian with him in the Streets;
without any Examination of the matter, they suppose he must be his Companion in
the Temple too; whereupon they raise a Cry, That he had brought Greeks into the
Temple, and profaned that holy place.

More Reasons might here be drawn from Profit, and Interest, and worldly
Advantages; from the Company Men keep, and from the high Places and Stations
they possess in the World, and the Figure they make in a Commonwealth, all
which very often tempt them to revile those whom in their own Consciences they
think innocent: but what has been said may serve for a Taste. But let us go on,
and see

III. How that which is a Sin to one can be a Blessing to another. Reviling and
speaking Evil falsely of good men being a great Sin, how this can make the
Persons who are unjustly reviled, blessed?

1. A very ill thing may be the Occasion of a very good one. It Is true, a
corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit, nor do Men look for Grapes from
Thorns, nor for Olive-berries from a Bramble, nor for sweet Water from salt
Springs; but though a bad Thing cannot be the proper efficient Cause of a good
one, yet it may prove the Occasion of it, as we see Men's dissolute and
disorderly Actions are Occasions of very excellent Laws. And as the Man whom
History speaks of, his Enemy who struck him with an Intent to kill, broke the
Imposthume in his Body, which proved his Health and Recovery; so the Devil's
accusing the Brethren before God day and night, is the Occasion of their steady
Protection. After the same manner, from wicked Men's reviling Conscientious
Christians, God takes Occasion to reward them with Love and tender Mercies,
turns those Revilings into Blessings; as Joseph's being sold into Egypt, and
turned out of Potiphar's House with Infamy, and Disgrace, and his Imprisonment,
into Grandeur and Royalty.

2. Not so much the Revilings of wicked Men make such Persons blessed, as their
Innocence under those Revilings. God, that sees them wrongfully abused, and
reproached, takes their part. An ordinary Judge is bound in Conscience to plead
the Cause of him whom he knows to be unjustly arraigned, much more the
righteous Judge of the World may be supposed to take notice of the Innocence of
his Servants whom Men unjustly calumniate, and to take them into his
Protection. Shall not the Judge of the whole World judge righteous Judgment?
says the Patriarch, Genesis XVIII. 24. And this makes them blessed.

3. It Is not these Revilings so much that makes them blessed, as their
Behavior and Deportment under them, even their Patience, and Meekness, and
Calmness, and committing themselves to him that judges righteously. Should he
that is unjustly reviled render railing for railing, or reviling for reviling,
in doing so, he would spoil his Blessedness; but bearing the Reproach of
Christ, and esteeming it greater Riches than the Treasures of the World,
without recriminating, this is it that makes him blessed, the rather, because
this is to be a Disciple of Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. II. 21, 22.

4. That which makes them blessed, is, the Cause for which they are reviled;
and therefore it is said, for my sake. In our worldly Concerns, to be unjustly
traduced, has something of Blessedness in it, because we have the Testimony of
our Conscience, that we have done what is lawful and right, much more when we
are evil spoken of falsely for Christ's sake, because we adhere close to the
Gospel of Christ, because we obey our Master's Will, and because we will not
dishonor him by doing things which he has forbid. This makes the Blessedness
great, as the Person is for whom we suffer. So that though (as I said before)
these Revilings may occasion their Blessedness, yet the Particulars I have
mentioned are properly the ministerial Causes that make them blessed, and
consequently it is no Absurdity to say, That a thing which is a Sin to one is a
Blessing to another, no more than we count it a Solecism to say, that what is
one Man's Meat is another Man's Poison.

Inferences.
I. Without my telling you, you may gather from the Premises, That every Man
who is reviled is not therefore blessed. A Man's Life and Actions may be so
bad, that he deserves to be evil spoken of; but that is no reviling, but
speaking the Truth. I grant a Man may speak Truth of another with an ill
Intent, which may make it Sin to him; but if he have a Call to it, and his
Intent be good, speaking of another what he is really guilty of, can be no
reviling, to be sure no unjust reviling. Christ spoke very ill things of the
Scribes and Pharisees, but their insolent Behavior both justified and required
such Corrosives. We are not to flatter Men in their Sins, nor to applaud their
evil Actions; we must not call an Adulterer chaste* nor a Choleric Person
meek, nor a Person given to Tippling and Drinking, sober; nor must he be styled
a good Man, who walks directly contrary to the Rules of the Gospel. Therefore,
Christian, if thou would not be ill spoken of, do that which is true and
just, and good, and honest, and lovely, and of a good Report; and Who will harm
you if you be Followers of that which is good? says S. Peter 1 Pet. III. 13.

If thy Lewdness or dishonest Actions open Peoples Mouths against thee, thy
Misfortune is of thine own making; God denounces a dreadful Woe against those
that call evil good, and good evil, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter, Isa. V. 20. And though Charity believes the best, yet it believes with
Discretion; it does not, neither indeed is it bound, to believe blindly that
Black is White, or that Stones are Bread: Blessed be God, we are not come to
that extravagant Belief which Bellarmine asserts to be necessary, that if the
Pope should so far err, as to make Virtue Vice and Vice Virtue, the whole
Church would be bound to obey him. This is Bedlam Talk; and we see what
Absurdities the Reward of Purple can lead Men into. Our Reason was not given us
for fashion sake, but we are to prove that which is good, and to try the
Spirits, whether they be of God.

Our Religion bids us walk circumspectly; and to take care that we be not evil
spoken of, is our Duty, not only by avoiding Sins scandalous, and which make us
to be pointed at, but by shunning even things which though they seem to have no
great harm in them, yet may give Offense to weaker Brethren. There is a great
Wisdom to be used in things indifferent, and we must deny our selves in
speaking and doing things, in Postures, and Gestures, and Dresses, which may be
a stumbling block in the way of our Fellow Christians, and may either make them
remiss in their Duty, or stop them in their Progress in Goodness, or tempt them
to Apostasy. To this purpose is the Exhortation 1 Cor. X. 32. Give no offense
neither to the Jews nor to the Greeks, nor to the Churches of God, even as I
please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of
many, that they may be saved.

II. As those who are reviled and ill spoken of for a conscientious Believing
and Obeying Christ Jesus; as these are certainly blessed Men, so those who
unjustly revile such Persons must needs be in a cursed State. Not to meddle at
this time with those profane Persons who profess themselves Members of our
Church, and revile others that will not swear and drink with them, or run with
them into excess of riot; it is a lamentable thing to see some Masters of
Families, how angry they are with their Servants, Apprentices, nay sometimes
Children too, for being devout, and serious, and cautious of offending God, and
wronging their Consciences, and what reproachful Titles they heap upon them,
calling them Fools, Sots, Melancholy, Precise, Fanatics, Hypocrites, and what
not; nay are angry sometimes even with the Ministers of the Gospel, by whose
Persuasion they have turned to God! Madmen these! that are angry with the
Blessings God sends them! strange inconsiderate Creatures! Are you angry with
the means of your Preservation? A religious Servant in a wicked Family helps to
preserve that Family from being ruined and destroyed, at least keeps off some
greater Evils that did hang over their Heads: God blessed the Egyptians house
for Joseph's sake, Genesis XXXIX. 5. A religious Servant, or Apprentice, or Child,
I mean one that is truly so faithful to God and Man, that makes Conscience of
discharging the Duty of his Calling and Relation, as well as his Duty to God;
not one that pretends to Religion, and neglects his Master's Business, but one
that has an equal Respect to the Duties of the first and second Table; such a
Person is a greater Treasure in a loose Family than his Superiors think for: It
is for such a Man's sake that God blesses them, and withdraws his Wrath and
Anger from them, or reprieves them, who are otherwise ripe for Vengeance. And
that your Profit and Trade does not decay, it is for such excellent Persons
sakes whom God loves; and for their Piety God exercises Patience toward you.
And are you angry with us too, who exhort them to be good, oblige them to make
Restitution when they have wronged you, and admonish them to be faithful, and
to please you well in all things; when by our Entreaties and Counsel we have
driven the evil Spirit out of them, are you sorry that we have not let him
continue in the House where he had taken up his Residence?

Cursed Children! who are displeased with the good Angels God sends into their
Houses, and who are their Guardians too, that defend them from imminent Danger!
Instead of reviling your Servants or Inferiors for standing in awe of God more
than of Men, you should encourage them; and instead of giving them ill Language
for being desirous to visit the House of God, and to come to the Holy Sacrament
at convenient Seasons, you should rejoice that God has blessed you with such
Mercies, and sent you such Protectors of your Fortunes, and adore the Divine
Goodness who has vouchsafed such shining and burning Lights to your Houses.

But this is the Nature of Vice and Corruption: It hates the Light, and those
that walk in the Light: It cannot be easy while it sees such Examples, who are
a perpetual Reproach to their Lives and Conversations. Men wicked and debauched
do not think themselves secure while their Domestics choose the better part,
and by so doing tell them that they are in the Highway to Damnation: such Men's
Condemnation will not be only just, but greater than other Men's, because they
refuse not only him that speaks to them from Heaven, but even those who by
their Deeds speak to them here on Earth, and make the Goodness they see in
sober Men the Cause of their Anger, which is intended as a Motive to their
Remorse and Repentance. But,

III. Let no Man's Heart fail him because he is reproached, reviled, or evil
spoken of for the Name of Christ; it is a blessed thing to be reproached for
Righteousness sake, to be reviled for being serious, to be despised for doing
the Will of God. Has not this been the Case of the best Servants of God? When
I wept, and chasten'd my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach, I made
sackcloth also my garment, and I became a Proverb to them, they that sit in the
gate speak against me, and I was the song of the drunkards, says the excellent
David, Psalm. LXIX. 10, 11, 12. John came neither eating nor drinking, and they
say he has a Devil. The son of man came eating and drinking, and they say,
Behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners,
says our Savior, Mat. XI. 18, 19. But Wisdom is justified of her children:
What you lose in the Opinion of wicked Men you gain in the Esteem of those who
walk in the way of the Lord. It is a mercy to you, that you have something to
lose for Christ, and an Honor to them, that you do lose something for the Name
of Christ: and though you lose not an Arm, a Leg, a Hand, an Eye, or Life for his
sake, yet I say it is a very great Honor that you lose your good Name in his
Cause; and yet you do not lose it neither, but you rather raise and make it
greater, for your Names are written in Heaven. Whatever any Man loses for
Christ, he shall receive an hundredfold in Peace, Content, and Satisfaction
here, and in the world to come life everlasting.

Only, Let patience have its perfect work. Being reproached and cursed, do you
bless; being abused, do you pray for those which despitefully use you; being
defamed, do you entreat; and being made Spectacles to Angels and to Men, do you
rejoice in the God of your Salvation. The time will come, when those very Men
which revile you now for your Obedience to the Gospel, will praise and admire
you: If God converts them here, they will certainly do so, and they cannot
forbear; but if they resist the Arguments of God, and will not turn, the Misery
and the Torments that will fall upon them in the other World, will extort, and
force this Admiration from them.

Let Men call you all to naught, it is enough that God respects you, and has
promised not to leave them, nor to forsake them. Do but wait for the Day, for
the glorious Day of the Manifestation of the Children of God, and you will see
the Scene of Affairs changed, and a greater Revolution of things than ever
happened since the Creation of the World: Those that call you Fools now, will
magnify your Wisdom then; those who count your Life Madness now, will confess
it was the most rational Course; those that laugh at you now, will weep when
they behold how much they were mistaken; and those who now make a Mock of your
Devotion, will own then, that you acted upon very noble Principles. Let no
Reproaches fright you from fighting the good Fight. These are the Temptations
you must overcome. Against these Enemies you are to fight; that is your Work,
your Task, and the Race you are to run in: and Blessed is the man that endures
Temptations, for when he is tried, he shall receive a Crown of Righteousness,
which God has promised to them that love him.

Amen.

SERMON XII.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your
Reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets that were before you.
THE future Rewards which God has promised to them that love him, are things
we have often occasion to speak of, partly because the Holy Ghost is our Guide,
partly we can never say too much of it, and partly because it is a thing which
so nearly concerns us, that it requires our daily Thoughts and Contemplations:
But as familiar as the Subject is, it is always useful. Christ having in all
the preceding Beatitudes still shown wherein the Blessedness of those virtuous
Men whom he commends does consist, he does the like in this; for having in the
foregoing Verses pronounced those Persons blessed who are reviled, and evil
spoken of for Righteousness sake, or for the Name of Christ, he declares in
this the Nature of their Blessedness, Rejoice, says he, and be exceeding glad,
for great is your Reward in Heaven. And to encourage to a more cheerful bearing
of these unjust Reproaches, he sets before them the Example of the Prophets of
old, For so persecuted they, says he, the Prophets that were before you; as if
he had said, so they used them, so they dealt with them, so they calumniated
them. This was the Custom of the World many hundred, a thousand, two thousand,
three thousand Years agone, to speak all manner of evil of those excellent Men;
so they called Moses a pragmatical Man, and Samuel an old Dotard, and Elijah a
Troubler of Israel, and an Enemy to the Commonwealth, and Elisha Bald pate, and
Micaiah an impertinent Fellow, and Amos a Man ungentile and clownish; and so
they dealt with Isaiah, whom after many Revilings they sawed asunder; and so
they used Jeremias, whom after a thousand Reproaches they stoned to Death. So
persecuted they the Prophets that were before you.

And this will give me occasion to observe to you,

I. That the great Rewards of Heaven are just matter of Joy and Gladness to
pious Sufferers: Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in
Heaven.

II. It Is comfortable to suffer in good Company: For so persecuted they the
Prophets of old.

1. The great Rewards of Heaven are just matter of Joy and Gladness to pious
Sufferers. If it were not so, Christ would never have encouraged those who are
unjustly reviled for his Names sake to rejoice and be exceeding glad for this
Reason, because great is their Reward in Heaven. At once to prove and
paraphrase upon this Subject;

1. The Question is not, Whether the Rewards of Heaven are matter of Joy and
Gladness to those who are already actually possessed of them, who have left
this World, and exchanged this Life for a better, and as they have heard, see
in the City of our God, and see no more darkly, as through a glass, but face to
face. There is no Dispute among Christians, but that these Rewards are Joy and
Gladness to such. What! Can they forbear rejoicing that lie at the Fountain,
drink of the River of God, which is full of Water, even Water of Life? Can they
be sorrowful, that have the Bridegroom always present with them, and are out of
all Danger to be deprived of his Company? Can they be sad that are united to
the bright increated Sun, which irradiates the vast Territories of Heaven, and
are perpetually warmed into Strength and Vigor to praise and adore the Author,
and Life, and Glory of their Being?

The Question is not concerning these, but such as are on this side Heaven, in
this Land of the Living, in this Valley of Misery, and are afflicted, reviled,
persecuted, abused, as if they were forsaken not only of Men, but of Heaven
too. Whether the Rewards of Heaven, things invisible and unseen, out of their
reach and sight, and for which they have nothing to show but a few Lines in a
Book called the Bible; whether such things as these can be just Cause of Joy
and Gladness, and to Persons who are despicable and miserable, and perhaps made
the offscouring of all things. This is the Point I am to prove; and therefore,

2. That these Rewards of Heaven, as much out of sight as they are, have been,
and are matter of Joy and Gladness to wise, rational, and inquisitive Persons,
is evident from what Experience tells us; and when I was upon the Tenth Verse
of this Chapter, I gave you very considerable Instances of it: nor is this Age
so barren of Goodness, but that several excellent Christians do rejoice and are
exceeding glad at these Rewards, and are able to say with the Apostle, and the
Believers of old, We rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God, Romans V. 2. So
that the matter of fact is certain. All the Difficulty lies here, Whether these
Rewards so much talked of, are Ground sufficient and solid enough to build such
Joy and Gladness upon; for Men may delude themselves with Fancies, as we see
People in Bedlam do. But even this will soon be made out; for if a Man have
sufficient ground to believe that there are such Rewards in Heaven, and that
the Book called the Bible contains the Promises and Oracles of the Living God,
and that God has certainly promised such Rewards, and Rewards so great, so
wonderful as that Book speaks of, to Persons duly qualified, then such a Man
has sufficient reason to rejoice in the Hope and Expectation of it. And that
what the Bible says of these Rewards, is the express Word and Promise of God,
is evident from hence, because the several Writers of that Book, and
particularly the Assertors of these Rewards, whose Prevarication and Aberration
from the Truth could never be proved, do peremptorily affirm it: And that they
affirm nothing but the Truth, the Miracles they wrought before whole Multitudes
in Confirmation of what they say, and the Truth of which has been conveyed and
handed down from Age to Age, and sealed with a thousand and a thousand Deaths,
do sufficiently demonstrate. And as true Miracles can be nothing but the
Effects of an Omnipotent Power, so it is absurd to think, that God would lend
or vouchsafe his Omnipotent Power to confirm a Lie. And we may as well question
the Public Acts and Edicts in such a King's Reign, who lived two or three
hundred years ago, attested by public Authority, as the Records of these
Miracles; for the former we have only the Testimony of a single Nation, for the
other the Testimony of the whole Christian World, even that of Enemies, not to
mention, that the natural Dictates of Reason, and the Light of Nature, speaks,
though more darkly, to the same purpose: So that there is no room left for any
rational Doubt that there are such Rewards, which may certainly be had, and
consequently they are just matter of Gladness and Rejoicing. And yet,

3. We see that these Rewards do not cause this Joy in all, the generality
rejoicing more in Temporal and External, than Spiritual and Eternal Blessings:
nor indeed do we find this Joy in all Persons who are in Distress; for the
Sorrow they lie under, and their secret Fondness of these outward Enjoyments,
we see, drown their Joy or Rejoicing in these Rewards: Though I know Heaven at
such times is often talked of, yet it is evident it moves not; the Discourse,
may be, amuses the Party, or for the present makes him attentive; but being
over, like a Stone forced up into the Air, when that Force is withdrawn, it
sinks to its Mother Earth again. We must suppose therefore, that he who can
rejoice in this Reward, I mean truly rejoice, must be a Person duly qualified;
and that which qualifies a Man for it, is a lively Belief of it, a lively
Representation of it to the Mind and Understanding, a firm Persuasion of the
Certainty, and of our Right and Title to it, a very high Esteem of it, and an
actual preferring it before the Satisfactions of this present World: and
accordingly we find that those who have been thus qualified, have rejoiced in
these Rewards with joy unspeakable and full of glory; as we see 1 Pet. I. 8. But

4. Besides this, there are two Qualifications more which very much promote
this Joy, or help toward it, and that is, 1. A blameless Life. 2. Suffering in
the midst of that blameless Life.

1. A blameless Life. A Man that lives in Sin, or minds little but the World,
or allows himself in any thing that is manifestly contrary to the Gospel, cannot
possibly rejoice in these Rewards; as well may a Beggar rejoice in such a
Nobleman's Estate who is a mere Stranger to him, as a Person who is loath to
submit to Christ's Yoke rejoice in the hopes of these Rewards, which do not at
all belong to him. Purity of Life has the Promise of this Reward, and
therefore the pure Liver only is the Person that can justly rejoice in it;
especially,

2. If he suffers notwithstanding his blameless Life; for in this case, the
Rewards of Heaven he takes a View of, assure him, that the time will shortly
come, when all this Troubles shall vanish away like Smoke at the glorious
Presence of God; that it will not be long before he shall be out of the reach
of all slanderous and malicious Tongues; and that the greater his Sufferings
are, the greater will his Glory, and Triumph, and Satisfaction be. His
Sufferings fix his Thoughts upon this Reward, and move him to dwell upon it.
The Bitterness of his Affliction gives that Reward a greater Sweetness, and is
the same that makes him relish it the more: Hence comes this Joy; and the
nobler the Cause is, in and for which he suffers, the greater is the Joy.

But 5. Though all this helps, yet the Holy Spirit of God must work with it,
and work in and upon the Heart, and make the Impression of the future Reward so
lively, that it shall cause Joy and Rejoicing: much depends upon the Spirits
mingling those Rewards with the Thoughts of the Mind, whereby the Affections
are affected, and roused, and elevated into Joy and Rejoicing, and such Joy as
shall carry the Soul above her Sufferings, and make her contentedly want those
Accommodations, and Conveniences, and Advantages, that others do enjoy: For
this Spirit, as it must assure us of our Right to that Reward, Romans VIII. 16,
17. so it is from that Assurance that this Joy rises, which is the Reason why
it is emphatically called Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans XIV. 17. And yet after
all, it must be confessed, that good Company does not a little contribute
toward their Joy. Which leads me to the

Second Proposition; viz. It Is comfortable to suffer in good Company; so
persecuted they the Prophets that were before you. That Is the Comfort Christ
gives here to Persons suffering, and bids them solace themselves with the
Company of the ancient Prophets. And this Proposition also I shall explain in
these following Paragraphs.

1. Solitariness in Affliction aggravates Affliction; which is the Reason that
Jeremy makes it an Ingredient of the greatness of Jerusalem's Misery, Lam. I.
1. How does the city sit solitary, which was full of people! how is she become
as a widow, that was great among the nations! she that was a princess among the
provinces, how is she become tributary! All the Heathen Nations round about
swam in Plenty, Prosperity crowned their Labors, and Ease and Liberty was
their Companion: Jerusalem alone sighed under her Load, and groaned under her
Burden, and wept while her Neighbors rejoiced and triumphed in the Success of
their Attempts and Enterprises. Company in Affliction is a kind of Balm which
supplies the Spirit, and gives some Refreshment to a wounded Soul: it takes off
from the greatness of the Grief, and makes the Burden lighter. Solitariness
looks strange, like a stinking Weed in a curious Flower-garden, and coming in
the shape of that, which is unusual, it surprises more, and consequently
afflicts more; and that is the Reason, may be, why Men bear a common Calamity,
where many fare alike, better than they do a private, where they have no
Partners in their Sorrows. And yet,

2. It Is hard to conceive how a Man can be solitary in Affliction, except by
Solitariness we mean, that in the Parish or Street, or House, or Family we live
in, there is none that is afflicted as we are. Set this aside, there can hardly
any Affliction be named, but some or other in the World have been and are as
great or greater Sufferers than we are; and in this sense a Man cannot want
Company in Affliction: But then, in this case, the Mind must call the Company
in, and the Understanding represent their Sufferings to the Thoughts, and
Meditation must make their Afflictions present; which being a thing generally
neglected by Persons who suffer, they are very apt to sink into this Fancy,
That none are miserable in the World as they are: as we see Jerusalem
complained, Lam. I. 12. Behold and see whether there be such a sorrow as my
sorrow is, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his anger. And
yet,

3. It is not suffering in every Company that is comfortable: To suffer with
Evildoers, is a Grief rather than a Consolation; and to be afflicted with
Malefactors, is made an Ingredient of the Bitterness of our blessed Savior's
cup, Mark XV. Nor will Company in Hell be any Ease to the Sufferers, but rather
increase their Torments, none being able to help the other. The Comfort arising
from suffering in Company, is confined to this present World; and in this case,
the Company must be such as a Man has no reason to be ashamed of, and that
must be the Company of truly pious Men, whether they be present or absent,
whether they have lived lately, or a thousand or two thousand Years agone,
whether they dwell in the same Town, or City, or Village we are of, or a
hundred Miles off: for this Company of good Men with whom we suffer are either
as good as we are, or better than we.

1. If they be as good as we our selves are, the Reflection is very natural. If
this be the Lot and Portion of Persons under the same Circumstances I am under,
then no strange thing happens to me, then God deals with me as he does with his
other Children. If I am not better than they, why should I expect more
favorable Dealings at his hands? and yet these Dealings are favorable too: If
Men as good as my self have looked upon the Crosses that have befallen them as
Marks of God's Favor, why should not I look upon mine through the same Glass!
How can it be said that I am as good as they, if I make not the same pious
Constructions of these Providence! if I fall short of these rational
Interpretations of God's Dispensations, I must needs fall short of their
Goodness. Or,

2. The good Men in whose Company I suffer are better than I; and then the
Argument of Comfort will be stronger still. Have the Heroes of Religion
suffered so much, and shall I, a puny Christian, complain? Have the great
Champions of the Gospel endured as much or more than I, and shall a Christian
of an ordinary size find fault? Have such Men as St. Paul and the Holy
Apostle's gone through fiery Trials, and shall I, a Disciple of those great
Masters, tremble at the Fire? Have the Fathers, the strong Men in Grace, old
Disciples, been scratched, and wounded with Briars and Thorns, and shall I a
Babe look to tread on Carpets? Have the Generals, the Captains in Christ's
Army, gone through a Sea of Adversity, and shall I, a common Soldier, shrink at
the Waves? Have such Men as Samuel, Elijah, and Elisha, Men that could in a
manner command Heaven by their Prayers, been reviled, traduced, reproached, and
shall I, a Shrub, take it ill that I am called out of my Name? This is a very
strong Argument of Comfort. So that you see, that the Comfort arising from
suffering with other good Men, lies partly in the Ease the Mind receives by
their Society, and partly in that their Examples give us opportunity to make
use of the same Motives to Patience which held them up.

1. In the Ease the Mind receives from the suffering Society. It gives a sort
of Content which all the Physic in the World cannot give, especially if the
suffering Company be present; for then the Sufferers being able to disburden
their Grief into one another Bosom, it gives such Satisfaction as People who
are ready to burst with Grief do find when a shower of Tears does give their
Sorrow vent. This Ease is chiefly in the Mind, and if the Mind be easy, the
whole Man receives Comfort; if that be easy, it is as much as if a Man did not
suffer at all. It Is our Minds and Thoughts that make us either happy or
miserable. If a Man thinks himself happy in Misery, he is so; and if he thinks
himself miserable in his Sufferings, he is so. It Is our Thoughts, certainly,
that make us uneasy in Adversity; and musing at such times upon wrong Topics
and Arguments, puts all into disorder; whereas calling to mind such Reasonings
as are proper and suitable, alleviates our Grief, and makes our Minds easy.
And of this nature is the good Society we suffer with: For,

2. This gives us opportunity to make use of the same Motives to Patience that
those other good Men have used to bear up under their Crosses; and in all
likelihood they will have the same Effect upon us, and end in the same
Consolation. The Primitive Believers looked upon their Afflictions as Trials of
their Faith, and that gave them Ease; so must I: They had a regard to the End
for which God did correct them, viz. to produce in them the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness, and that taught them Contentedness; so must I: They encouraged
themselves to Patience with the Example of Christ, and that quieted them; and
so must I: They relied upon the Promises of God without wavering, and that
revived them; so must I: They looked upon their Troubles as short momentary
things, and that made them lightsome; so must I: They thought their Afflictions
necessary to make them breath after their heavenly Country, and that made them
cheerful; so must I. So that if their way be followed, and our Fellow Sufferers
be considered under these Notions, their Company in suffering will certainly
afford more than ordinary Consolations.

Inferences.
1. Having explained the several Beatitudes mentioned in this excellent Sermon
of our Savior, give me leave to observe to you in the Close of all, That
though every single Virtue and Qualification in the preceding Beatitudes has a
glorious Reward annexed to it, no less than the beatifick Vision of an
All-sufficient God; yet you must not think that he who should apply himself to
the Practice of one single Virtue, and neglect the rest, would upon that
account be rewarded with Heaven: This is impossible as the Case stands; for
Christ expressly requires Universal Obedience; but if I mind only one of these
Qualifications, and disregard the rest, how is my Obedience universal? It Is
true, Christ affixes a spiritual and eternal Reward to every particular Grace,
partly for our greater Encouragement, partly because every one of the
aforementioned Graces tends to that Center, and like Lines meet in that one
Point, and partly because the future Reward shall be suited to the several
Virtues, and in some measure answer and resemble the Nature of the respective
Accomplishments; yet still there is such a Connection among them, that they are
inseparable, and he that sincerely, according to the Intent of the Lawgiver,
practices one, cannot forbear practicing the rest, and consequently he that
pretends to observe one, and does despise the rest, does not observe that one
as he ought. The serious and conscientious Observance of one, will make us
enamoured with all the Links of the whole Chain: the Beauty and Reasonableness
of one will invite and charm us into a cheerful Compliance with all the rest.

The several Qualifications mentioned in the preceding Verses, are so many
Steps to Heaven. Humility is the first; Mourning for our Sins, the second;
Meekness and composing our turbulent Passions, the third; Hunger and Thirst
after Righteousness, the fourth; Mercifulness, the fifth; Purity of Heart, the
sixth; Peaceableness, and a Peacemaking Temper, the seventh; and a patient
enduring Persecutions, Calumnies, and Afflictions in a good Cause, the last. So
that you see how you are to rise, and by what Ladder you are to ascend to
Glory. He that advances but a step or two, will never reach the everlasting
Hills. One Grace is the Foundation of the other. Humility, or an humble Sense
of your selves, and of your own Worth, will dispose you for mourning, because
you have offended, and do offend a very great, holy, and gracious God; and this
Sense which makes you concerned for the Injuries and Affronts you have offered
to the best of Beings, and which makes you mourn, will dispose you to Meekness
toward your Neighbors who do offend and have offended you, and move you to
curb, and moderate, and mortify your Anger and Pettishness at Faults you see in
others; subduing your inordinate Passion, you will be more at leisure to
consider the Beauty and Excellency of Righteousness, and that will make you
hunger and thirst after it. This Hunger and Thirst will dispose you to
Mercifulness, for he that desires to grow in Grace must apply himself to Works
of Mercy, for by these Holiness is signally increased. This merciful Temper
will dispose you for Purity of Heart, not only because Almsgiving cleanses the
Soul, and quenches Sin, as Fire does Water, but enlarges your Love to God. This
Purity of the inward Man will dispose you for Peaceableness and a Peacemaking
Temper; for as Strife and Contention rises from an impure Heart, from Lusts
warring within us, so a peaceable Disposition rises from inward Purity. This
peaceable and Peacemaking Temper will procure you (may be) the Hatred and
Ill Will of Men; from hence will come Persecutions, Slanders, Reproaches,
Calumnies, etc. which if you bear with a patient and generous Mind, you secure
your Reward in Heaven; and then rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is
your reward in Heaven.

II. I must here take notice, that nothing deserves our rejoicing so much as
these future Rewards. What is there in this World that should make us so fond
of rejoicing in it? The three great Idols of the World are Riches, Honor, and
Sensual Pleasure; but look ye, how inconstant, how uncertain, how uneven, and
how short, are all these! He that is rich this Year may be a Beggar the next,
Valerianus and Andronicus, who are Emperors to day, to morrow shall be
despicable to all their Subjects. He that wallows in Pleasure this hour, some
grievous Pain or Disease may arrest him the next, and fill him with Vexation.
Do not we see how these outward Enjoyments crack in the very handling, and make
themselves wings and flee away? He that is a Minister of State to day, may be a
Prisoner to morrow; he that sits at the Helm to day, to morrow may groan in a
Dungeon; he that gives Law to others to day, may be exposed to the fury of the
Rabble to morrow; and he that dwells in a stately House to day, may see it laid
in Ashes before the next Morning Light. And are these the mighty Things you
rejoice in? Do these Butterflies deserve such Admiration as most Men bestow
upon them? Be wise ye Children of Men, be wise; the Rewards of Heaven are
solid, lasting, constant Treasures: they fade not, they fail not, they perish
not, and are the noblest Objects of your Thoughts and Contemplations. Here
you will have always matter of rejoicing; here is something that will be able
always to support you; here is something that will always raise your drooping
Souls: Do but secure these Rewards, and you will be able to be always joyful,
joyful in Persecution, in Poverty, in Exile, in Sickness, in Weakness, under
good Report and evil Report. And indeed, till you can rejoice in this Reward,
and so rejoice in it, that the Joy in a great measure drowns your Sorrow, you
are none of the best Christians. It Is possible to make sure of this Reward; and
how it is to be done, Christ shows in the preceding Beatitudes. Let these
Rewards be always rolling in your Minds, and you will have a perpetual Antidote
against Adversity and Dejectedness. Whatever befalls you, reflect upon this
Reward, and you will be able to live above the World, and pity the poor
Creatures that have no Props to rest on but the broken Reed of Egypt. This is
to begin your Heaven here; and when you come to die, you have no more to do,
than to enter upon your Estate, and to take Possession of your Inheritance.
Your Death will be wonderfully sweetened with these Thoughts, and you will be
able to die with rejoicing, because great is your Reward in Heaven.

III. Hear this, all ye Sufferers; you I mean, that suffer according to the
Will of God, that glorify God in your Sufferings, and improve your Sufferings
into a holy Conformity to the Rules of the Gospel. You are not alone in your
Sufferings; for besides that God is present with you, and the Lord Jesus, that
merciful High Priest, is touched with the feeling of your Infirmities, you have
admirable Company in your Sufferings. The Patriarchs were Sufferers, the
Prophets were Sufferers, the Apostles were Sufferers, the best Christians were
Sufferers, Heaven is full of Sufferers. What a glorious Society is here! The
high and lofty one, who inhabits Eternity, dwells among these weeping and
groaning Saints. The Son of God is their Captain and Principal; Who would not
suffer with such Society! With these suffering Saints you shall rejoice at
last. As you have mourned with them, so you shall sing with them. As you have
born the heat and burden of the day with them, so you shall rest with them. As
you have drank of the cup of trembling with them, so you shall drink with them
of the cup of salvation. As you have been reviled with them, so you shall be
honored with them: And your Honor shall not be like that of Haman or
Nebuchadnezzar, which like a glorious sun-shiny Morning was over-cast before
Night, but your Honor shall be like that of the Son of God, you shall rule in
the House of Jacob for ever, and of your Kingdom shall be no end.

SERMON XIII.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 13. Ye are the Salt of the Earth; but if the Salt have
lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.
HAving considered the several Beatitudes, or Blessednesses mentioned in the
preceding Verses, and which are an Introduction to the admirable Discourse
which follows in this Chapter; we proceed to the Characters Christ gives of his
true Followers. Diverse and various are the Names and Titles the Holy Ghost
gives of Christ's Disciples, calling them sometimes Sheep, to put them in mind
of the Obligation that lies upon them to be innocent, and meek, and patient,
and Enemies to Revenge; Sometimes, Brethren, to show how dearly, how tenderly,
how affectionately they ought to love one another. Sometime new Creatures,
because it is supposed they have put off the Old Man, and put on the New Man,
created after God in righteousness and true holiness. Sometimes Babes, because
of their imbibing the sincere Milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby.
Sometime lively Stones, because they are built up a spiritual House, of which
Christ is the Cornerstone, and in which he dwells by Faith. Sometime Priests,
because of the spiritual Sacrifices of Prayer and Praise, and Righteousness,
which they offer to God. Sometimes Kings, because their Province is to Conquer
their Lusts and evil Desires, and Worldly Affections. Sometimes Virgins,
because they keep themselves undefiled, and unspotted from the World. Sometimes
Freemen, because Christ has made them free from the Dominion of Sin, and the
Bondage of Iniquity, and themselves are and must be ambitious of that Liberty.
And to come to the Words of the Text, there they are called Salt, even the Salt
of the Earth, Ye are the Salt of the Earth; but if the Salt, etc.

For the understanding of which words, I shall enquire,

I. Upon what account Christians are, and ought to be the Salt of the Earth.

II. How this Salt comes to lose its Savor.

III. I shall examine the Consequences of this Corruption, and the Commination
added to it: It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be
trodden under foot of Men.

I. Upon what account Christians are and ought to be the Salt of the Earth. I
proved in the beginning of these Meditations on Christ's Sermon, that the
Disciples of Christ, to whom the following Rules and Commands are directed and
enjoined, were not barely the Apostles, nor the Apostles considered only as
Ministers of the Gospel, but all that have entered themselves into the
Discipline of the Holy Jesus; and therefore the Enquiry here is very justly
extended to all that call themselves Christians: And that none may wonder at
Christ's saying, that they are the Salt of the Earth, as if all that have the
name of his Disciples were actually so, either born so, or became so
immediately upon their Profession. You must know, that this way of speaking
expresses the Nature and Tendency of the Christian Religion, and shows, what
those who are true Disciples are, and what those who would be so, ought to be;
and the meaning is, If you are true followers of me, thus it is with you, and
thus it will certainly be with you, even as it is with Salt; what Salt does,
you will do in a Spiritual sense, and in your Actions and Conversations you
will imitate the Nature of that Mineral.

The dullest Papist imaginable, that hears or reads these words cannot imagine,
or from hence conclude a Transubstantiation, as if therefore the Disciples of
Christ were Transubstantiated into Salt, because it is said, Ye are the Salt of
the Earth; and this may justly raise our Wonder, they should be so blind as to
fancy a Transubstantiation intended in the words, This is my Body, when the
absurdities flowing from the Sacramental Bread being changed into the Natural
Body of Christ, are every whit as great as the other would be, if we should
believe, that every true Disciple of Christ is Transubstantiated into natural
Salt. There is nothing more common in Scripture, than by the Verb is, and am,
and art, and are, to express a likeness, or representation, or resemblance, or
a memorial, and that must necessarily be the meaning here, viz. If you be my
Disciples indeed, you do, and will resemble the Salt of the Earth, and in what
things this resemblance consists, the following Particulars will inform you.

1. Salt is a very useful thing, one of the most beneficial things in the
World; It is as it were the Balsom of Nature, which preserves all things; Than
Salt and the Sun nothing is more profitable, said the Philosopher; Pliny.
so a true Christian is a very useful Creature: When Men of this Profession
first appeared in the World, the rude Pagans, a great many of them, were loath
to believe that they were of any use to Mankind; and though they usually called
them Christians, which is as much as useful, yet this was by way of Contempt;
and in saying so, they meant the contrary.

Hence it was, that when a Land-Flood came, or an Inundation rose, or a Plague
broke forth, or the Corn was blasted, or any public Calamity befell them, the
fault was presently laid upon the Christians: Notwithstanding all this, they
were, and all true Christians at this Day are very useful Persons, for their
Nature and Temper, to teach, to instruct, to comfort, and to edify their
Neighbors; and as heretofore God did, so still he does very often, for the
good Christians sake, (who are Inhabitants there) spare a Place, Town, City,
Nation, and Country; an Emblem whereof God gave in the Case of Sodom, when he
professed his readiness to spare the City, if but ten righteous Men could be
found in it, Genesis xviii. 32. And to this purpose he told St. Paul in the Ship,
wherein he sailed, God has given thee all them that Sail with thee, i. e. For
thy sake they shall be saved from Drowning: And if Men observed Providence
more, they would see and admire some very strange Instances of this nature, the
safety that is vouchsafed to wicked Men, being clearly upon the account of the
Pious Christians that live near them, or about them.

2. Salt is the Symbol of Wisdom. So we read Colos. iv. 6. Let your Speech be
always with Grace, seasoned with Salt, i. e. with Wisdom. To this purpose is
the Saying of the Old Comic, Si quis haberet salem, etc. If a Man had that
Salt which yon have, i, e. that Wisdom; and that of Catullus, Nulla in tam
magno corpore mica sali^. There is not a Grain of Salt in that vast Body, i. e.
of Wisdom: And Livy for this reason calls Greece, where the wisest Men then
lived, The Salt of the Gentiles, or of the Heathen World. A true Christian is a
truly Wise Man; a Fool indeed in the Eyes of the World, but Wise toward God,
and unto Salvation; so Wise as to walk circumspectly, and redeem the time,
Ephesians. V. 15. He walks in Wisdom toward them that are without, Col. IV. 5. and
he orders his affairs with discretion, Psalm. CXIV. 5. And for this reason he is
said to be a wise and faithful Servant, who keeps himself ready, and does the
work his Master has set him, that when the Master of the House returns, he may
commend, and reward him, Matthew. XXIV. 45.

3. In Salt there is a mixture of Fire and Water. It Is hot, like Fire; and yet
cools like Water. These two different qualities you will find in a true
Christian, not that he is inconstant, and unstable in his ways, sometimes hot,
then cold again, sometime all Fire, and then all Ice again; sometime very
serious, then vain and foolish again; but by his Zeal he warms others, and by
his meek and peaceable Temper, he lays and cools the Feverish Heats of others:
Of the former St. Paul speaks, 2 Cor. IX. 2. Of the other, we have an instance
in the Apostles, who when Contentions arose among the Grecians about the relief
of Widows, by their moderation composed them, Acts VI. 1, 2, 3. and when a Fire
of Dispute was kindled about Circumcision, by their Prudence and peaceable
Disposition quieted the Tumults that rose about that Controversy. Acts XV. 23,
24.

4. Salt renders Things savoury, and creates an Appetite. In this also we see
the Temper of a true Christian, who by his pious Discourses and gracious
Speeches, creates many times an Appetite after Things Spiritual and Divine, in
those who hear him, and whose Hearts God touches, that they attend to the
things which are spoken; as we read of Lydia, Acts XVI. 14. Nor is this all,
but by his Pious and self-denying Behavior he renders many of those Severities
he practices, Amiable and Charming in the Eyes that observe and take notice of
them, as is evident from the Constancy and Fortitude which appeared in the
Primitive Believers in their Sufferings: Virtues which looked so lovely, that
Thousands were enamored with them, and followed their example. And what are
the Acts of the Holy Apostles, but Comments upon this Truth? The Courage and
Heroic Patience of those excellent Men, were transcribed into the Lives of
those who beheld them.

5. Salt raises Thirst; so a Pious Christian by his delight in God, and the
satisfaction he takes and finds in the ways of Religion, raises in others a
hunger and thirst after Righteousness. Paul and Silas sing Praises to God at
Midnight, and in a Dungeon too: The Jailer awakened with that as well as with
the Earthquake, feels a strange Commotion in his Soul, and cries out, Sirs what
must I do to be saved? Acts XVI. 30.

6. The thing chiefly intended by this similitude is this: Salt preserves from
putrefaction; for it consumes the sanguineous Humors of Meat, or extracts
them; whereby it is preserved from stinking. So a true Christian, partly by his
blameless Life, partly by Entreaties, partly by fraternal Correption, and
partly by friendly Admonitions, preserves, and is to preserve others from
running into Sin and Error. All that I have said before concenters in this,
and this is it which is expected from us, if Christianity be more than a Name,
even as much as in us lies to prevent the corruption of others, whether
Relatives or Strangers we converse with, whether Friends or Foes; As no
Religion in the World presses Love and Charity to our Neighbors, more than
that we profess, so thit hearty endeavor to preserve others from sin, and
offending God, is the natural result of this Charity. There is no Man but
grants, that to preserve a Neighbor from Drowning, or doing himself a
Mischief, is a Duty incumbent on all that have any thing of Humane Compassion
in them; and if the concerns of the Soul are greatest, as we ordinarily confess
they are, it will follow, that to preserve Men from wounding and undoing their
own Souls, must be absolutely necessary. Religion exalts Nature, and the
kindnesses which the Law written upon our Hearts requires of us toward the
Bodies of our Neighbors, Religion bids us exercise to their Souls, which are
the nobler substances. Religion, as it makes us concerned for our own Souls, so
it raises a desire to do good to the Souls of others. Till a Man comes to be
concerned about spiritual Affairs, he is a Stranger to Religion: As things
unseen are the proper Object of the Soul, so to be truly concerned about things
unseen, is the proper Character of a Religious Man. And as Religion, in
imitation of its Author is communicative, so the Soul of another Man comes to
be very dear to us, if our care and solicitude be once seriously employed about
our own; and this is the ground of the great Duty pressed here, viz. preserving
others from Sin and Corruption; to which purpose, our Savior tells Peter with
respect to his resurrection from his Apostasy, when thou art converted,
strengthen thy Brethren, Luke XXII. 32. And St. Paul in larger terms, Exhort
one another daily, taking heed lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. III. 13. This being the true import of the
similitude used here; Let us

II. Consider how this Salt comes to lose its Savor. And this happens,

1. When a Man after he comes to know his Duty, either by reading, or hearing
the Word preached in season and out of season, acts contrary to his Profession,
and enticed, or overcome by the Cares, Riches, and Pleasures of this Life,
grows senseless of the weighty Concerns of his own and other Men's Souls, and
wilfully and obstinately (maugre all the Checks of his Conscience to the
contrary) continues so. We all know, that when Salt has lost its Picquancy,
and Sharpness, and Quickness, it is gone, and it can be called Salt no more.
Just so it is with a Man that owns himself a Christian, if taken with these
outward things that please the Flesh, and pamper the Body, and gratify his
Carnal Interest, he boldly neglects exerting his Zeal and Fervor for his own
and other Men's Souls, which his Religion presses and urges him to; he ceases to
be a Christian; for a Christian is a Person active, that acts according to the
Rules of his Profession. Where it is so, that the love of the World does so
blind and intoxicate him, that he looks neither after his own Soul, nor the
Soul of his Neighbor, and feels no love to either; or if he feels something of
it, choaks it again with the Briars and Thorns of this Life, he loses the
Spirit of Religion; and then as the Body without the Soul is dead, so his
Christianity without this Love, becomes dead also. Indeed we call the dead, Men
still; but that is only a Name: Properly speaking, they are no Men; and so it is
here, he that is a stranger to this Love is no Christian; for this Love is as
much of the Essence of Christianity, as sharpness, or quickness is to Salt.

2. This Salt loses his Savor: When a Man has been for some time solicitous
about his own Soul, and the spiritual Concerns of his Neighbors, and grows
weary of it; or for Carnal Reasons quits those hearty Endeavors of preserving
others from Sin and Corruption; This the Holy Ghost calls departing from the
Holy Commandment delivered to us, 2 Pet. II. 21. Though losing in Scripture
imports sometimes, neglecting that which is a Man's greatest interest to mind,
yet for the most part, loss supposes having; and that we once had that which is
now gone from us; and this is an aggravation of the fault, and consequently of
the Sin mentioned in the Text: And he loses his Savor as a Christian, i. e.
loses his Christianity and Sense of God with a witness, that begins in the
Spirit, and ends in the Flesh; runs well for a time, and suffers himself to be
stopped in his Race, has endeavored to do good to the Souls of others, and
taken care that his Life and Actions might be edifying to those who conversed
with him; but having laid his hand to the Plough, looks back, with Lot's Wife,
who became a Pillar of Salt, and of Disgrace and Infamy too. Salt is used in
Scripture for permanency, that is the reason of the expression Numb. XVIII. 19.
A Covenant of Salt, i. e. a lasting Covenant; and a Christian that is to be
Salt in one sense, i. e. preserve others as much as he can from sinning, must
be Salt in the other sense too, i. e. continue patiently in well-doing; if he
does not, he loses his Savor, and Religion; and then if the Salt has lost its
Savor, wherewith shall it be salted?

Whether Salt can lose its Savor, I leave to Naturalists to enquire and
determine; if it cannot, the possibility of it may, however safely be supposed,
for the instruction, of the ignorant as St. Paul supposes an Angels Preaching a
new Doctrine, If an Angel from Heaven should Preach another Gospel to you than
what we have Preached unto you, let him be accursed; not that its possible an
Angel can do so, but such a supposition makes the Argument in hand more
powerful and convincing. And having considered how the Salt, or the Persons
represented by Salt, lose their Savor, lets go on and consider

III. The nature of the Commination here spoken of, which is, That the Salt
after that cannot recover its taste, but is cast forth and trodden under foot of
Men. To explain this,

1. As Salt when it has lost its Sharpness is rendered incapable of recovering
that Sharpness, there being nothing in Nature that can give it the taste of
Salt again; so where People will not be persuaded either by good Examples, or
by other means to endeavor the preservation of others from Sin, God very often
hardens them, and takes away from them a Heart and Will to do it for the
future. When Men neglect their known Duty, or delay applying themselves to it,
though they have many Motions of God's Spirit to that purpose, and hope to do
it this time and that time, and yet still find Impediments, there it is just
with God to put them in an incapacity of doing it at all; and to take from them
that Grace and Power he gave them to preserve others from Corruption, or to
bring upon them an impossibility of recovering that Grace and Power, as much as
Salt cannot be Salted again, or recover its Sharpness when it has once lost
its Acrimony. God cannot endure to see Men play with his Gifts. He makes
anotherguess account of his Gospel he vouchsafes to Men, than the generality
do, and those who give up their Names to him, and will not by the strongest
Arguments be prevailed with to act according to their Profession, shall be in
danger of being so infatuated, that they shall not be salted again with the
Salt of Grace and Favor, and influences of his Spirit; for this is to bury our
Talents in the Earth, or to lay them up in a Napkin, and from such shall be
taken away even that which they have, Matthew. XXV. 29.

2. As Salt having lost its savor is thereby rendered incapable of recovering
its sharpness, and is thence forth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and
trodden under foot of Men; so it shall be with such unprofitable Servants, that
would not take any care or pains to Convert their Neighbors from the Errors of
their ways, God will cast them out, and tread them under foot, as base and
unjust Stewards of his Gifts, as Liars and perjured Persons, that made nothing
of their Baptismal Covenant; as Contemners and Despisers of his Gospel, as
ungrateful Wretches to the best of Masters, who enlightened and assisted them
with his Spirit, gave them Opportunities revealed his Will to them, directed
them how to order their Steps, yet would not be moved by all he has done for
them, nor by their own Interest, nor by their Neighbors Necessities and
Miseries to make any Attempts to rescue them from the Devil's Snare; and this
as it is an Argument of Cruelty and Unmercifulness, so it follows, that they
shall have Judgment without Mercy, that have shown no Mercy, Jam. II. 13.

Inferences.
I. We see here the reason why the World is so bad as it is. Even because
Christians do not do their Duty; they were intended to be the Salt of the
World, but that Salt has lost its savor. Christians were intended to be like
so many Angels in this Sodom of the World; and by the Beauty of their Lives to
attract and charm even the most barbarous. And had they continued steadfast in
that Innocence, and Purity, and Zeal the Apostles taught them, there would not
have been so much Heathenism, and Idolatry, and Impiety in the World, as we see
there is. Their evil Lives after the Apostles decease, confirmed Infidels in
their Vices, and their Quarrels and Animosities made them a Laughing Stock to
the Pagans that beheld them; and from hence rose Mahometanism, and Popery, and
a Thousand Heresies. While they continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and in
Fellowship, and in breaking Bread, and in Prayer, and fear was on every Soul,
and they were of one Heart and one Mind, and their Charity was fervent;
Thousands came in to them daily, left their Gods and their Sins, and shook off
the Yoke of the Devil: But when the Piety of their Lives decayed, the
Reformation of Mankind decayed also. And though I cannot say it is altogether so
bad now, especially in Protestant Countries, as it has been in some of the
darker Ages, when Popery and Ignorance prevailed, yet the greater part of
Christians, instead of being Salt, do nothing but give Scandal; and in
Countries where Christians live mingled with Heathens and Infidels, it is hard
to say which of these live better Lives, nay many times, the Pagans are Men of
better Morals, and less given to Cheating, Defrauding, Hypocrisy, and Passion,
than those who call themselves Christians. And among our selves, what a
lamentable sight is it to behold, how Men lead one another into Hell, and
instead of Reforming, entice and delude one another into Vices, which should
not be so much as named among Christians; so that we need not wonder, if the
glorious and worthy Name whereby we are called, be blasphemed and evil spoken
of, and Men even abhor the Offerings of the Lord. But such shall receive the
greater Condemnation.

II. Behold here what a Noble Profession Christianity is. A Christian is as it
were a Tutor or Teacher to Mankind, and therefore it is said here, Ye are the
Salt of the Earth. The whole Earth is a Christian's Theater to walk and show
himself in; wherever he is, whatever part of the World he is in, his business
is and must be, by his grave and modest, and blameless Life, to show others the
way to Salvation; and as far as he is able, and has convenience and
opportunity, to purge away the Dross that cleaves to others: A very great
Honor, if People had Hearts to understand it; an Honor not to make them
Proud, but Profitable to the World; an Honor it is true, not much regarded, and
which very few are ambitious of, yet an Honor which you and I must be very
desirous of, if we mean to be Christians indeed; we profess our resolution to
do so, when we call our selves so; and it is our Calling to do it, as much as it
is a Painters, or Limners, to draw Pictures. If a Man should profess himself to
be a Carpenter, or Shoo-maker, or Joyner, or any other Handy-crafts-man, and
yet through want of Skill, were not able to do any thing belonging to his
Calling, you know he exposes himself to the Contempt and Scorn of Men; and Men
will look upon him as a Cheat, and Impostor. And do not you expose your selves
as much, or more, to the Contempt and Scorn of a Just God, in calling your
selves Christians, while you labor not to preserve others from Sin, nor
endeavor to make them Good; for this work is Essential to your Profession; and
not to do it is to forfeit your Right and Title to the Profession. We may
therefore reduce the Dispute to this dilemma. Either you are content heartily
to endeavor after this Reformation of others or you are unwilling. If
unwilling, leave your Profession; for you may be Heathens more innocently than
Christians, and do nothing that belongs to the Profession. If willing, let us
see you go about it; but then how will you be able to Reform others, except you
first Reform your selves? Thou that teach another, do not thou teach thy
self? Thou that say a Man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that
say a Man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? Romans II.
21, 22. Indeed the great reason why we are not more intent upon the Reformation
of others, is because we have no serious regard to our own Souls, did we prize
our own Salvation, we could not but prize that of others too: But he that is
unfaithful in his own spiritual Concerns, how should he be faithful in those of
other Men? Did we apply our selves to a steady Conformity to the Rules of the
Gospel, a Conformity which neither Prosperity could melt, nor Adversity break,
what abundance of good might we do? How would People read their Duty in our
Actions and Behavior! Wicked Men would be afraid of sinning in our Presence;
nay in our absence would, may be, think and reflect on the Grace of God they
saw in us; and who knows how this might work upon them! especially, if to our
blameless Lives we added now and then some seasonable Exhortations, Entreaties,
and Reproofs, as opportunity serves.

Think not that this would interfere with the Work of the Ministry: No, no: A
Kings watching over his People, does not, need not hinder a House keeper from
watching over his Family. Notwithstanding all your endeavors to reform evil
and inconsiderate Men, the Ministers of the Gospel will find work enough; nay,
by this means you would be helpful to the Ministry, and prepare Men for our
larger Instructions, and fit them for the understanding of our Sermons; and
that Fire which your pious Counsels have kindled in them, we should be able to
cherish and increase by our Power and Authority.

And what if you have seen no great success of your Endeavors to Reform
others; may be you have exhorted and reproved them, but have not shown them a
good Example; or may be you have admonished them carelessly, or in Jest; and
this is not the way to edify; or while you have Chid them for one sin, suppose
Swearing, or Drinking, or keeping Ill Company, you have lived in another, such
as Wrath, or Anger, or Covetousness, and Incharitableness, etc. and this must
necessarily obstruct their Conversion: But suppose your endeavors both by a
good Example, and gentle Admonitions have proved ineffectual; All that can be
said is this, they have done no good to day, or this Week, but how do you know
but they may prove beneficial to morrow, or next day, or next year? Industrious
Men are not discouraged with miscarrying in their business once or twice, but
fall on again, and try again; and at last, their Wishes are accomplished, and
their Desires fulfilled; God gives no success to the first Attempts, on purpose
to encourage us to make more. Be not therefore weary of well-doing. Do you but
your Duty, and leave the Success to God; You Will be no losers by your Endeavors
in the last day. In the mean while, you make good the Title of the Text, and
have the Peace and Comfort of a good Conscience; and if you do any good by one
act, you bring a great number of Blessings both upon your selves and others.
For so we read Jam. V. 20. Brethren, if any of you err from the Truth, and one
convert them, let him know, that he that Converts a Sinner from the Error of
his Ways, shall save a Soul from Death, and cover a multitude of sins.

SERMON XIV.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 14. Ye are the Light of the World.
IT cannot be denied, but that the Titles Christ gives his Followers are
magnificent and glorious; but then it is not to flatter, or to puff them up,
but to make them know their Duty. As he brought the best Religion with him into
the World, so he would have his Followers distinguish themselves from the rest
of Mankind by something extraordinary. Those that improve, or rather abuse the
lofty Names which are given to Christians, into self-conceitedness and contempt
of others, mistake their Masters design, and pervert the hopes of his
Commendations. The Titles do no farther belong to them than they make them
good, nor does the Name entitle them to real Happiness, while that which is
signified by it is wanting. It will serve indeed to aggravate their future
Misery, but cannot contribute any thing to their Salvation. God is not taken
with outward shows, and they may stand knocking at Heaven-gate long enough
before the Door is opened, that have nothing to plead for their entering, but
that they were Abraham's Children. Here on Earth Men may be admitted into the
Royal Presence, because of their Titles of Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, etc. but
in the Court above Men have no respect shown them, but such as expressed the
Elegies and Epithets given them by their Actions. This as it is to be observed
with respect to the Title Christ gives to his Followers in the preceding Verse,
where he calls them the Salt of the Earth, so it is particularly to be applied
to that which follows in the Text, where Christ reflecting on the Sun and Moon,
and Stars, and all the Lamps of Heaven, and considering how beneficial they are
to this nether World, thinks fit to describe and represent the Manners of his
Disciples by that Simile, Ye are the Light of the World.

And that you may see what this Title imports, I shall

I. Examine the Qualities of Light; and then it will easily appear what Duties
are implied.

II. Whether this addition, Of the World, Ye are the Light of the World, has
any thing of Emphasis or Weight in it, or imports something more than the bare
Title; and of these in order.

I. What the qualities of Light are; and here to insist only upon such
qualities, which fall under the Cognizance of the meanest Capacity.

1. Shining is the great quality of Light, so a Christian is to shine in
Virtues and good Works; and what these Virtues and good Works are, you may see
Gal. V. 22, 23. 2 Pet. I. 5, 6, 7. Romans XII. 8, 9. and following. Man is
naturally in a State of darkness; For ye were sometime darkness, but now are ye
Light in the Lord, says St. Paul, Ephesians. V. 8. Not but that unregenerate Men may
be very quick and sagacious in Worldly concerns, and things relating to their
gain and profit, and thriving in the World; nay, and may be very great
Scholars, Philosophers, and speculative Men; in which sense they may be said to
have a quick natural Light, but with respect to real and substantial goodness,
they are in a state of darkness; and though I doubt not, but that in their
Baptism they receive some degrees of spiritual Light; for which reason they are
said to be enlightened, Heb. VI. 5. yet that Light as they grow up, we see very
often drowned by the Vanities and ill Examples of the World, so that they sink
into darkness again, and sometimes greater darkness than those, who never heard
of the Gospel labor under. But when the Light of God's Grace, and the Spirit
of the Holy Jesus irradiates their Minds, that Light which shines within even
in their Understandings, does and will certainly break forth, it being
impossible to be shut up or imprisoned, and shine without upon their Lives; and
that Shine is nothing but good Works: And the Sun does not gild the Earth more,
than good Works the outward Man. These adorn the Christian, and are the
Splendor of his Life; and they transfigure him in a manner, as Christ was
transfigured on Mount Tabor, of whom we read Luke IX. 29. That his raiment
became white and glistering. Good Works are a true Christians Raiment, and they
are glistering too. They are so many Stars that spangle that Firmament; and
though the Kings Daughter be all glorious within, Psalm. XLV. 13. yet that Glory
within is of such force, that it will shine without; and in this sense he is
truly changed from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of our God, as it is
said 2 Cor. III. 18.

2. Light is of an illuminating Nature; it enlightens Houses, Rooms, Caves and
Dens, and an infinite variety of things* so a Christian must make it his
business to enlighten other Men, those especially who walk in the dark, are
Children of the Night, and live in sin; for that is called darkness in
Scripture. In our Converses, Dealings, Business, Employments, we meet very
ordinarily with Persons ignorant; and not only ignorant, but wicked; for
Ignorance is the Mother of Impiety, and there is no doubt, abundance of Men do
things odious to God, and pernicious and destructive to their own Souls,
because they know no better. We whom God has enlightened into greater Knowledge
and Purity, give but a bad Evidence of our being so, if we do not as occasion
and opportunity serves, endeavor to enlighten them into a better sense of
things. Bashfulness in this case is sinful; and where Nature is backward to the
work, it must be forced by Motives and Arguments, into Courage to discharge
this Duty of our Christian Calling, to teach them better Principles. The Light
we have must be communicative; if it be not it is painted and counterfeit, not
natural and genuine; not is this being a busy body in other Men's matters and
things, which do not concern us. Our Neighbors Souls are precious things; in
the saving of which we must not be negligent; but resolutely imitate the
example of Aquila and Priscilla, who finding that Apollos, though an eloquent
Man, yet was not thoroughly instructed in the Mystery of the Gospel, they took
him unto them, and expounded to him the way of God more perfectly, Acts XVIII.
26.

3. Light is warming. The light of the Sun is so. So must a Christian not only
heat and chafe the Principles of Light God has bestowed upon him, into
spiritual Fervor; but by that Fervor endeavor to warm others into the same
Zeal and Earnestness. This must be one great end of his Fervor, to attempt to
make others like him. Lukewarmness is the great Distemper, that the generality
of Christians who enjoy Ease and Plenty are sick of. To Cure others of that
Malady is part of our Employment; and this we cannot do, except our Love to God
be strong and vehement; where it is so, and that we love him with all our
Might, we may hope that others, who see our ardent Desires, will write Copies
after us. This Fervor as it rises upon Motives drawn from what God has done
for us, and the particular instances of his miraculous goodness to us; so if
those Motives be suggested, and represented to our Neighbors, they may by the
Blessing of God, have the same effect upon them; at least, we have this
satisfaction, That we have done what became us as Lights. It was no doubt from
the mighty Zeal that appeared in St. Paul, that the Galatians were warmed into
that Fervor, that if it had been possible, they would have plucked out their
own Eyes, and given them unto him, Gal. IV. 15.

4. Light is comfortable: It comforts not only the Spirit of Man, but all other
sensitive and vegetable Creatures; so must a Christian comfort others that are
in any trouble, with that comfort wherewith himself has been comforted of God,
2 Cor. I. 4. This is pure Religion, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
Affliction, Jam. I. 27. And when he says Visit, he means such Visits as are
attended with suitable Consolations; and this we shall be the better able to
do, if we call to mind the Comforts we our selves have felt, and the Means
whereby we have come to feel them. This is my comfort in my affliction; for thy
Word has quickened me, Psalm. CXIX. 50. The Word of God affords the richest
Comforts; to which purpose the Apostle, Romans XV. 4. That we through Patience
and Comfort of the Scriptures, might have Hope; so that acquainting our selves
with the Word of God, containing so many excellent Examples, and precious
Promises, and making use of that Word in our own Troubles, we shall be able to
Administer Comfort to others also. A Christian is a Person that imitates
Christ; not in his Miracles, not in Raising the Dead, not in Curing the Lepers,
not in Opening the Eyes of the Blind; but in Charitable Actions: And we all
know what his Language was to Persons that were in Distress; Be of good
comfort, says he to the Woman who was troubled with a Bloody Issue, Matthew. IX.
22. so he said to others; and this was suitable to the Prophecies which went
before of him, particularly that Isa. LXI. 2. where the Prophet speaking of
him, expressly tells us, That his business would be to proclaim the acceptable
year; and to Comfort those that Mourn.

5. Light is Cleansing; for it clears the Air of Fogs and Mists. So a
Christian, as much as in him lies, is to cleanse his Neighbor from that
Filthiness which sticks to him: And as this is to be done by gentle Reproofs,
mingled with Pity and Compassion; so if those Reproofs light upon a Person of
Ingenuity, it will be taken as a Kindness, and prove an excellent Oil; which as
it does not break the Head, so it very often breaks the Heart; not into
Despair, but Repentance; not to Destruction, but Edification, Psalm. CXLI. 5.

This Cleansing the Apostle aimed at, when he said, Ephesians. V. 11. Have no
Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather Reproach them: And
he calls the Sins of others, Works of Darkness, with Allusion to the Light of
Reproof; which he thought would be the most likely way to dispel them: And a
Light it is, which very often shines into the Heart, and inlightens the inward
Man, and dissipates the wrong Notions Men had of Religion, and which makes them
come to themselves again; as it is said Luke XV. 17.

6. Light is directing; so it is to the Traveller that has lost his way in the
Night. So a Christian seeing his Neighbor go astray, what should he do, but
direct him into the good way? He is bound to do so much to his Neighbors Ass
or Ox by virtue of that Law of Equity Deuteronomy. XXII. 1. and what! not use the same
Civility to his Neighbors Soul? Does God take care of Oxen, and not of the
Souls of Men? But here it is to be noted, that this Duty of directing others,
has respect not only to erroneous Opinions in Matters of Religion, but to
erroneous Practices too. If the Error in Opinion be an Error of no great
Consequence, it is not worth while to take pains to rectify his Mistake; but
the erroneous Practices are more dangerous. And this was the Duty intended in
the preceding Character, Ye are the Salt of the Earth; and it is reinforced in
this of Light, to show it is not a thing indifferent. The Command being
doubled, and reiterated, discovers the great necessity, and the mighty
importance of this Act of Charity, and God's peremptory Will. And as our own
good Example is one part of this Direction, so our Advice and Counsel is
another; to which purpose St. Paul, Gal. VI. 1, 2. Brethren, if any Man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are Spiritual restore such a one in the spirit
of Meekness; considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted: Bear ye one
another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

Having thus explained the qualities of Light, and shown what Duties are
required in the similitude, let us

II. Enquire, whether this addition in the Text, of the World, Ye are the Light
of the World, makes the Command more Emphatical; and the Duty of being
Beneficial to others in spiritual Concerns more Extensive. And to this I must
answer in the Affirmative; for as the Light of the World is the Sun, so we know

1. That the Sun Shines at all Seasons, Spring and Fall, Winter and Summer. So
a Christians good Works and Virtues, are to Shine not only in Adversity, but
Prosperity too; not only in the Winter of Affliction, but also in the Summer of
Ease and Plenty; both in the Spring of his Years, and in the Fall of his Age.
His doing Good must not be confined to a certain Time, or to a certain Stage of
his Life, such as Sickness, or a Deathbed; but discover it self in the various
Conditions God has placed him in. His Goodness must not Shine by fits. Being
inconstant, it betrays its weak Foundation; and when either a ruffling Wind can
blow it away, or the Sun melt it as Wax, its a sign it did not fall from Heaven.

2. The Sun shines in all Places, in all Parts of the Hemisphere; so a
Christians Goodness must shine and display its Glory in all Companies, and
Places too. He must not with Peter, Eat with the Gentiles, and withdraw himself
when those of the Circumcision come in; must not only maintain his strict
Obedience to the Gospel, when he is in Company with mean, little, and
inconsiderable People; but even in Caesar's Family; not only when it is safe to
do it, but also when he is in danger of losing by it either his Credit, or
Place, or Estate; not only in private, but in public too; not only in
Gethsemane, but in the High Priests Palace too.

3. The Sun, the Light of the World, shines upon all sorts of Men and Things,
good and bad; Dunghills as well as Gardens and Vineyards, participate of his
Shine and Splendor. So a Christian is to bestow his pains in illuminating and
warming others, not only on the tractable, and such as are easily wrought upon,
but even on the stubborn and obstinate; and not only on those who have already
made some progress in goodness, but on such too who are very bad, and wholly
destitute of the Life of God, and Plough the barren Rock as well as the kinder
Soil. This makes his Goodness truly Catholic and Universal, and in that
resembles the Light of the World, or the Sun exactly, which gives Life to the
Wormwood as well as to the Rose, to the Thorn as well as to the Lilly, and
influences both the Thistle and the Lavender.

Inferences.
1. Ye are the Light of the World. Though this is spoken to all Christians, yet
it concerns the Ministers of the Gospel in a special manner. Light! How pure is
it! And how pure ought their Lives to be, that are to Light others to Heaven!
If those Lights be Darkness, how great must be that Darkness! If their Lives be
spotted with any scandalous Sin or Immorality, what deformed Creatures must
they be! If they Preach one thing, and Practice another, how uncertain must the
Sound of those Trumpets be; and who shall prepare himself to Battle? If they
that are the Guides go astray, how shall the Blind find their way to Paradise?
If the Sin against which they Thunder be found in their Skirts, what hope is
there that their Hearers and Disciples should become Wise unto Salvation?

If by their Holy Lives and Doctrine they Convert many unto Righteousness, they
shall shine as the Stars in the Firmament: But if by their ill Example they
Light others into the Chambers of Hell, they shall Shine too, but in the Flames
of the burning Lake; and there learn, that the Servant who knew his Masters
Will, and did it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes. To be a Minister of
the Gospel, is something more than to be in Orders; something more, than to
have a Living or Preferment in the Church; something more, than to perform the
Offices prescribed by the Canons, and Law of the Land. Doing good must not only
be their Work, but Delight and Pleasure too. Their Splendor lies not in
shining Dignities, but in fleeing youthful Lusts, becoming Patterns of Virtue
to those under their Charge, and following Righteousness, Faith, Charity, and
Peace with all them that call on the Lord with a pure heart, 2 Timothy II. 22.

II. Ye are the Light of the World. Then surely, those who are in love with
works of Darkness, are no Christians. What the works of Darkness are, you will
find 2 Timothy III. 1, 2, 3, 4. This know also, that in the last days perilous
times shall come; for men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, proud,
boasters, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of Pleasure more than lovers of God; and having a
form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof. They that are in love with
any of these Works, can be no Christians; for the fundamental Law of our
Religion, is to depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy II. 19. There is scarce any
similitude which is more frequently made use of to express a Life of Holiness,
or a new Nature by, than Light; and Sin, or love to it, is as frequently
represented by Darkness; for in this love to a sinful course, the mind is
darkened, and has no right apprehensions of God, or of the Life to come, or of
the dreadful Consequences of neglecting so great Salvation, no right
Apprehensions of the Love of God, or of the Sufferings of Christ; or the
Apprehensions are not bright, not brisk, not lively, not convincing, not
operative, as Light is, and ought to be. The Flesh and the World oppress the
Mind, or fill it with confused Notions of Religion; which is a sign the Spirit
of God, that Spirit of Life and Light, finds no entertainment there, and
therefore here can be no Christianity; for true Christianity and God's
enlightening and sanctifying Spirit, go together. Christianity makes us the
Sons of God; and whoever are the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God,
Romans viii. 14.

As many of you as are enamoured with any of the aforesaid sins, or any other;
and surely you are enamored with them, when all the Charms of the Love of God,
cannot oblige you to depart from them, mince it, and qualify it as you will,
you walk in darkness at noonday, and the God of this World blinds your Eyes,
which hinders you from effectual believing, and keeps out the glorious Light of
the Gospel of Christ from shining into, and warming your Hearts: And what these
Works of Darkness, if cherished, tend to, and will end in, you may easily know,
if you will but consider what you have so often heard, that there is such a
place as outward darkness, where shall be howling, and gnashing of teeth,
Matthew. XXV. 30.

III. Ye are the Light of the World. Light is not defiled by shining upon
Dunghills. No more must you, who pretend to be enlightened by the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ in this adulterous and sinful generation. Whatever ill
examples you behold, whatever vain Company you light into, whatever viciousness
you see abroad, that must be nothing to you, your Souls must not he defiled,
nor your Minds darkened by such Spectacles. Your business is to keep your
selves pure, as Lot in Sodom. A multitude that does Evil, is no President for
you to follow; for you have heard, that the way which leads to perdition is
broad, and many there be that walk in it. Numbers in sin, must be no Motive to
do after their ungodly Deeds. Among these you are to shine as Lights in the
World. While you preserve your goodness, your Light is preserved, and your
Candle continues burning; when that decays, your Light decays; and should a Cry
be made at midnight, Behold the Bridegroom comes; in what Condition will you be
when your Lamps are gone out? The Light that is soon extinguished by the
circumambient Darkness which surrounds you, is a counterfeit Light. It comes
not from the Father of Lights, nor is it a genuine Beam of the Sun of
Righteousness; for whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, i. e. so as to
make a trade of it, or to yield to a habit of it; for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin because he is born of God, 1 John III. 9.

Ill Examples must make your Light burn the brighter; and the greater
Wickedness you are encompassed with, the higher must your Zeal rise; and by
this the World must be taught, that there is something in you which is greater
than the World; and that in despite of all the Miseries which befall good Men
in this World, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous.

IV. Ye are the Light of the World. When you behold the Light of the World,
what should you do, but remember your Duty, which is to walk as Children of
Light. Can you complain of want of Remembrancers and Monitors, when the Light
of every Day puts you in mind, what manner of persons you ought to be? When you
see the Sun shining upon you, is not this an Item, how you are to warm others
by your blameless Conversation? When the Light breaks in, and displays its
Glory in your Chambers in a Morning, is not this a silent admonition, how you
are to deport your selves that day? Even like the Children of God, without
rebuke; and to walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not
in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envy; for they that sleep,
sleep in the night; and they that be drunken, are drunken in the night, but let
us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breast plate of Faith and Love;
and for a helmet, the hope of Salvation, 1 These. V. 7, 8.

This is the Wisdom of God, to express our Duty by things which incur into our
Senses, are familiar and obvious, and which we daily behold; that looking upon
those Objects, we might remember what we are called to, what we are designed
for, and what our Master requires at our hands. Light must make us reflect upon
the Light of Grace and Holiness, and put us upon examination, what Footsteps of
the Grace of God appear in us; and upon Resolutions to walk worthy of the Name
which is given us; and so to guide our Thoughts, and Words, and Actions, that
by what we do in the World, our Neighbors, and those who behold our
Conversation, may be edified and encouraged to lay hold on Eternal Life.

V. Ye are the Light of the World. And God has given you a Light to walk by,
which is his Holy Word; for thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto
my Paths, says David, Psalm. CXIX. 105. By this Light you are to try the
Spirits, whether they be of God; for many false Prophets are gone out into the
World. There are Men abroad, that teach for Doctrines the Commandments and
Traditions of Men: Men that will tell you, that except you are in Communion
with a certain Prelate, who exalts himself above all that is called God, even
above Kings and Princes, you cannot be saved; Men that will tell you, that you
must Pray to Saints, and implore the Intercession of the Blessed Virgin, and
hear Mass, and believe against Sense and Reason, that Bread is Flesh; that you
must hear Mass, and Prayers you understand not; and be content to be deprived
of the comfortable Cup in the Holy Sacrament. There are others that talk much
of Religion, and yet are great Strangers to the Christian Virtues of Meekness,
and Charity, and not only confine the Favor of God to a certain Party, but
would straiten yours too, and place Religion more in talking against
Ceremonies, than in the greater and weightier matters of the Law. And abundance
of other false Teachers and Doctrines you may meet withal abroad; for lets do
what we can, the Enemy will sow Tares among the Wheat; but the way not to be
deceived by such false Fires, is to examine them by the clear Light of the Word
of God. To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this
Word, there is no Light in them. By this Light you may find out not only
erroneous Opinions, but sinful Works and Practices too; not only in others, but
in your selves also. Take but a serious view of your Actions, Designs, Aims,
Principles, Behavior, and Discourses; by this noble Light, and those spots and
blemishes of your Souls which before you took no notice of, will stare in your
Faces. This will soon tell you, what Rocks, what Shelves, what Sands you are to
shun; for we have a sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed as
unto a Light shining in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the morning star
arise in your Hearts, 2 Pet. I. 19.

VI. Ye are the Light of the World. But what? is no good Christian in darkness?
Do we not see many excellent Persons, who dread Sin as Hell it self, yet see
nothing of the Light of God's Countenance? Its very true. There are such
Persons, and yet for all this, they are Light in the Lord. They have the Light
of Holiness in them, though they have not the Light of Joy and Gladness. They
are made partakers of the Divine Nature, and therefore must have Light in them;
and such Light, as will at last light them to Heaven: But through strong
Temptations, or some fatal Distempers, it comes to pass, that the Light they
possess is clouded, and hindered from going on to a perfect day; and they carry
it as it were in a dark Lanthorn. But all I shall say to such at this time, is
what God bids the Prophet proclaim in the Ears of Persons under such
Circumstances, Isa. L. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the
Voice of his Servant, that walks in darkness, and sees no light? Let him trust
in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Excellent Counsel! In the midst
of all temptations, darkness, clouds, and shadows of Death, let them even
resolve to depend upon God's Mercy and Goodness; and rest there whatever comes
of it; and though they can give no reason for so doing, yet let them fix here,
and upon this Resolution; If I perish, I will perish in the hopes of God's
Mercy.

While the Light of Holiness shines and burns in them, there is that in them
which will secure their Title to the Enjoyment of God's everlasting Light.

Light will mingle with Light, and the Light of the Love of God in the Soul on
this side Heaven, by a natural Tendency, must necessarily at last terminate in,
and be united to him, who dwells in a Light which no mortal Man can approach
unto. For with thee O Lord, is the Fountain of Light, and in thy Light shall we
see Light. Lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us, and we shall be
safe.

SERMON XV.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 14. A City set upon a Hill cannot be hid.
IN these Words, our Savior prosecutes his Design in the preceding Characters,
he had given of his Disciples and Followers. He had called them the Salt of the
Earth, and the Light of the World, and these Characters he illustrates and
inlarges upon, not only in the Text, but in the two Verses following. He had
told them, that their Lives must be Exemplary, their Conversation Edifying, and
their Actions such, as might serve both to reform and enlighten others; to this
he adds another simile, ye are, says he, and God expects, and intends, you
should be like a City set upon a Hill; now, a City set upon a Hill, cannot be
hid, i. e. Men will take notice of you, as they do of a City seated upon a
Hill; if your Lives are not according to the rules of my Gospel, your
Christianity, and Discipleship will soon be seen through, and you will quickly
betray your Hypocrisy: Your business is, to own and profess the Truth in the
Face of the Sun, and by your conformity to my holy Laws, to let the World see,
that you are of the same Mind and Spirit, and Temper, that I am of: Cities are
conspicuous, all Men that pass by them, look upon them; especially, if they be
set on a Hill, so the Eyes of the World are, and will be upon you; and it will
soon appear, what manner of Spirit you are of. Let it be therefore your care,
so to behave your selves, that those who look upon you, and observe your
deportment, may be convinced, that you do not profess one thing and practice
another.

This is the natural Sense and Design of our Savior's Expression here, as will
appear to any one that shall examine the Drift and Scope of Christ in this
Sermon on the Mount, and the antecedent, and consequent Passages. But because
the Church of Rome lays a great stress upon this Place, and makes use of it to
prove the perpetual visibility of their Church, I must necessarily discover to
you the Vanity of that pretense, before I draw any Inferences from this
Passage, to instruct you, how to govern your Lives and Actions according to the
import of this Similitude; not that I am fond of controversy, or love to insult
over a dying Religion; but the Subject lies in my way, and to balk it, would
look like betraying the noble Cause, we have espoused, built upon the eternal
Pillars of Truth and Reason.

The pretense therefore is this: It must be granted say they, that the Church
of Christ must have been visible in all Ages; for it is a City set upon a Hill,
which cannot be hid; and there is no reason it should, for how should Heathens
and Infidels be converted to the Faith of Christ, if the Church which must
teach them that Faith, were not visible. If it had lain hid and obscure in the
World for several Ages, confined to Caves and Dens, to Corners and Deserts, as
you Protestants pretend, Christ must have missed of his Design, which was by
the conspicuousness of his Church to draw Unbelievers into the bosom of it. Now
it is evident, that the Church of Rome has been visible in all Ages,
conspicuous and splendid for many Centuries together, without any interruption;
yours never began to appear, till Luther and Calvin, and Henry VIII. made it
visible; therefore the Church of Rome must be the true Church, and yours the
false, because it has not been visible in all Ages.

This is the Pretense, and now let us briefly consider the Weakness and
Absurdity of it.

1. Whatever may be said for the perpetual visibility of Christ's Church, it is
plain, that from this Text it cannot be proved; for Christ does not speak here
of his Followers considered as a Church, or a body of Men united under their
Pastors in the Profession of the Doctrine of the Gospel; and in the Use and
Administration of the Sacraments of the New Testament; but of every individual
Disciple considered as a Christian, and a follower of Christ to teach him how
he ought to live and behave himself in the World to the Edification of others.
And this is evident, from the Virtues of Meekness, and Humility and Patience,
and Peaceableness, etc. pressed in the foregoing Verses, which are things
appertaining to every private Christian; and this saying, you are a City set on
a Hill, which cannot be hid, is spoken to the very same Persons, of whom the
aforesaid Virtues are required. So that these Words relate to a Christian Duty;
not to the State, or Condition, or Splendor, or visibility of Christ's Church.
But,

2. Suppose they do relate to Christ's Church, considered as a Church, they
must necessarily relate to Christ's universal Church; for here is no particular
Church mentioned. Christ's universal Church of all Ages, Nations, Countries may
he called a City, as it is in other places styled a Body; for as a City is made
up of various Buldings, and as a Body consists of many Members, so Christ's
universal Church consists of many particular Churches which make up that great
City, and that vast Body, and if these. Words relate to Christ's universal
Church, how can they be applied to a particular, and especially to the Church
of Rome more then to the Church of Ethiopia, or Greece, or Armenia, and how
absurd must be the Consequence. The universal Church of Christ, is a City set
upon a Hill, which cannot be hid; therefore the Church of Rome is that Church,
or therefore the Church of Rome is that City? It Is true, they call themselves
the Universal or Catholic Church, so did the Donatists of old; but what does
calling themselves so signify when it is evident, and clear as the Sun at Noon,
that the Church of Rome is but a particular Church? There were Churches in the
World before the Church of Rome was heard of, and there are at this Day, and
have been all along Churches which may Vye with the Church of Rome for
Antiquity and Duration; and though they may not be able to boast of the same
outward Splendour, Plenty and Prosperity, yet what is outward Splendour and
Prosperity to a Christian Church, when in Scripture it is made the Character of
wicked Men, more then of those who will live godly in Christ Jesus?

3. We do not deny, that the Church of Christ has been visible; so far from
it, that we believe it to have been visible in all Ages; indeed some of our
Divines talk of a visible and invisible Church, but when they do so, they
consider the Church, as we consider a Man, who consists of two Parts, a Body
and a Soul, the Body is visible, the Soul invisible, so it is with the Church,
the outward Society, in which true and sincere Believers live, is the Body, and
that is visible, the sincere Believers are the Soul of that Body, and they are,
and must be invisible being known only to God, the searcher of Hearts; but the
outward Society, which profess the Faith of Christ, and which is the Body
wherein that Soul lives, is, and has been always visible; and that which makes
it so, is the Profession of the Fundamental Principles of Christianity,
contained in the Apostles Creed, and understood in that Sense, that the
Primitive Church understood them in; this makes and constitutes a Christian
Church, and there is none but must grant that these Fundamental Principles of
Christianity have been visible in all Ages, even in times of the greatest
Persecution, even in the midst of Arianism, and consequently the Church of
Christ has been visible in all Ages, and shall continue so to the end of the
World; and though in abundance of Churches for some Ages together these
Fundamental Principles of Christianity have been mingled with many accidental
Errors, Superstitions and Idolatries; yet still so far as these Fundamental
Principles have been retained in the respective Churches, so far the Church of
Christ has been always visible, as a sound Egg swiming in a filthy, nasty,
stinking Pool of Water, is visible notwithstanding the Filth, which surrounds
it, and therefore as sickly and corrupt as the Church might be in some Ages,
the essentials of Christianity being every where retained, Heathens and
Infidels had still Opportunity and Motives to join themselves to it, for in
these Principles and the Profession of them it was visible. So that,

4. To that common impertinent Query, Where was your Church before Luther,
Calvin, or Henry VIII? The answer is this. It was all the Christian World over,
even in all the Christian Societies that were either in Ethiopia, or Egypt, or
Africa, or Asia, or Greece, or Constantinople, or Alexandria, or Antioch, or in
Muscovy, and even in the Church of Rome her self; for since we profess the same
Faith, or the same Fundamental Principles of Christianity, which were professed
in all these Churches all along, our Church must necessarily have been in all
those Churches where those Fundamental Principles were Retained and Professed;
so that it is in vain to urge that our Church was not visible two hundred Years
ago; for it is enough that the universal Church of Christ is always visible, I
mean the Church of Christ dispersed through the four Quarters of the World.
This will be always some where, and God will never suffer it to decay,
according to his Promise, Matthew. XVI. that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. As for particular Churches, they may either become invisible by
being destroyed, or become visible whenever they appear in the World, and hold
the same Catholic Faith that the universal Church holds; but from thence it
follows not, that either these particular Churches which have been destroyed,
or which rise at such a time, be it sooner or later, are no true Churches: As
to particular Churches which decay, it is evident that the Churches of Africa,
of Carthage, Hippo, Numidia, where St. Cyprian, St. Austin, St. Fulgentius, and
other eminent Bishops governed, are totally destroyed, but no Man will
therefore say that they were no true Churches, when they were in being; and as
to Churches which are of no long standing, their being of a late Plantation or
Erection does not make them false Churches, else the Church of Rome her self
would be in an ill case; for the Churches they pretend to have erected in
China, and in other Eastern parts of the World, are not much above a Hundred
years Standing, yet they will not think them false Churches, because their
Plantation is late and they cannot boast of many Hundred years continuance. So
that the Faith a Church holds must be the great Standart to judge by both of
the Truth and Visibility of it; where the aforesaid Fundamental Principles of
Chrianity are retained, professed, Preached and Maintained there the Church is
visible, and consequently the Church of Christ has been visible in all Ages;
for in one part of the World or other, those Fundamental Principles have been
Professed and Retained from the beginning of Christianity unto this Day, and if
a Church appeared but yesterday, it holding these Fundamental Principles, the
Pillars and Foundations of Truth, it would be a true Church and Visible, and
consequently has been visible in those Churches where the same Truths have
been Professed; and had the Church of England been raised but Forty or Fifty
years agon, that would not make her either a false or invisible Church; because
she retains the Principles on which Christianity is founded. But,

5. Lest any Person should infer from this Discourse, that since the Church of
Rome has been visible for many Ages, as well as other Churches; and has
retained, and does retain to this Day the Fundamental Principles of
Christianity, there is no reason to separate our selves from her, or to leave
her Communion: I answer, were it possible in that Church to eat only of the
wholesome Fruit she has kept and preserved, without Participating of the Poison
she has added to it, or mingled with it, something might be pleaded for
continuing in that Communion: But that is impossible now, as the Case stands. Of
Children that are Baptized in that Church, and Baptized only into the Faith
delivered in the Apostles Creed, and die before they come to be of Age, we
cannot but entertain a favorable Opinion: But for the adult, and Persons who
are of years of Discretion that join with that Church, It is evident, they
cannot be Members of that Church, except they swallow the Ratsbane as well as
the Milk, the unwholesome as well as the wholesome Food; especially since the
Confession of Pope Pius IV. and the Council of Trent, which has made the
monstrous Sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints,
worshipping of Images, Purgatory, Indulgences, seven Sacraments, the Belief of
human Traditions, etc. of the same necessity to Salvation that the Incarnation
of the Son of God is. They do indeed retain the Foundation of Christianity; but
then they have added also Fundamental Errors which every Christian who
believes God more then Men, is bound to abhor; and since it is impossible at
once to abhor them, and to continue in Communion with that Church, it must
necessarily follow, that Separating from it is a Duty; and a Duty, as much as
our life is worth. But,

6. Though with respect to the Fundamental Principles of Christianity, we grant
the Church of Rome has been visible for many Ages, as well as other Churches,
yet in regard of those additional Articles I mentioned just now, if the Doctrine
makes a Church visible, we must with very great Assurance affirm, that the
Church of Rome has not been visible in all Ages; for it will appear to any
impartial Considerer, that the present Doctrins which they have added to the
old Foundation were neither taught in the primitive Church for the first three
Hundred years after Christ, nor even in the Church of Rome her self a Thousand
years ago. Not in the primitive Church; for in all the genuine Writers of the
first three Hundred years, we find not a Word of Invocation of Saints, of
Transubstantiation, of Worshipping of Images, of religious Veneration of
Relics, or of the Supremacy of the Church of Rome, much less of her
Infallibility. Nay, for a Thousand years after Christ the Church of Rome never
had the Boldness to call her self Infallible, not till Hildebrand's time, or
Pope Gregory VII. by the Confession of some Romanists, a Monster of Pride and
Vice: He was the first that gave himself and his Church that pompous and
ridiculous Title.

And as I said, the present Doctrins of the Church of Rome added to the Creed,
and made Articles of Faith, were not believed, much less looked upon as
necessary Articles, even in the Church of Rome her self, a Thousand years ago,
I mean in the time of Pope Gregory the First; the Doctrins which are visible in
that Church now were not visible then; for in that Gregory's time the Sacrament
was administered to the Laity in both kinds; Worshipping of Images was counted
abominable; the Title of Universal Bishop was thought Antichristian; private
Masses, where the Priest only receives and communicates were reputed unlawful;
the Books of the Maccabees were not taken into the Canon; Purgatory was not yet
licked into a perfect Shape, much less into an Article of Faith; No Masses were
yet said, for the Dead to deliver Souls from that Fire; Auricular confession,
and extreme Unction, were not yet made Sacraments, etc. And therefore the
Church of Rome could not possibly be visible in all Ages, since her Doctrins
she now Professes were not professed, no not by her own Members in all Ages.

Inferences.
1. A City set upon a Hill cannot be hid. It follows therefore, that a hidden
Piety is no Piety. I mean where a Person thinks it enough to Worship God in his
Chamber or Closet and to pay him due respect in private, and when he comes
abroad into Company, vain, and sinful, and wicked, does as they do, dares not,
or will not own his pious Principles, but conceals his better Inclinations and
love of God, and makes no expression of it, either by disliking the Sins he
sees, or by dreading to imitate them, or by vindicating the truth of the
Gospel, I say, this Piety must needs be counterfeit and naught; for it is
against the Character Christ gives of his Disciples and Followers, and in
calling them a City set upon a Hill, which cannot be hid; and besides this is
to be ashamed of him and of his Gospel before Men; and how he resents that, and
will resent it in the last Day, you may read Matthew. X. 32, 33. Mark VIII. 38. I
do not deny that Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea were Disciples of Christ,
but secretly for fear of the Jews, Joh. XIX. 38. But,

1. Though they were no open Professors, yet they consented not to the Impiety
of the Jews in traducing and slandering the Lord Jesus. Their Blood rose to
hear him abused, and in the midst of all their Fears, we find very notable
Effects of their Zeal for his Cause and Person. Of Nicodemus we read Joh. VII.
10, 11. that when the whole Counsel was for condemning Christ to Death, the
brave Man stood up and argued with them, Does our Law judge a Man before it
hear him, and know what he does? And of Joseph St. Luke reports, that he
consented not to the Counsel and Deed of the barbarous Men, who judged him
Guilty of Death, Luke XXIII. 11. And St. Mark adds, that he went in boldly unto
Pilate, and craved the Body of Jesus, Mark XV. 43. But,

2. Though these two Men were fearful, and had no great courage to assert their
Love and Devotion to Christ openly, yet it was at a time when they were not
thoroughly instructed in the Mystery of the Gospel. The case altered when they
came to have a more perfect knowledge of it, and then not all the rage of
Tyrants, not all the Tumults the Jews could raise, nor all the Terrors of
Pilate could hinder them from owning their Love to his Doctrine and Commands. We
live in the broad Daylight of the Gospel, and therefore must not take example
by Men who were Novices in Christianity, and while they were so. For us to be
one thing at home, and another abroad; Pious when alone, Wicked when we do
converse; devout within the Walls of our Horses, and profane and loose in
Company, which can bear no Strictness; this is notoriously to dissemble with
God, and to be False and Treacherous to him. What? Caress a Friend and hug him
in a Corner, and revile, or not to know him in Society? Such baseness among Men
is counted abominable, and therefore cannot be supposed to be very pleasing,
when the same Affront is offered to God, nor will your private Seriousness
stand you in any stead in that Day, when your Souls must give an account of
their Behavior before Men. A Christian must be a Man of Courage, and when he
is to do a known Duty, not all the Threatenings and Comminations of cruel Men,
not all the hopes of Gain, not all the baits of Profit, not all the fears of
losing his Honor, Credit or Life, must deter him from it; for let come what
will come of it; the Life to come, which is, and must be his greatest Treasure,
will make infinite Recompense for all his Losses.

II. A City set on a Hill cannot be hid; This shows that an active Life, or a
Life of Society and Converse is a much nobler Life, than a Life solitary and
retired from the World. I will not deny that a solitary Life has its
Advantages, and he that separates himself from Temptations, is not very likely
to be enticed by them: Yet still it is a greater Act of Virtue, and more
Christian like to be good in the midst of all the enticing Pleasures of the
World.

There is indeed greater Difficulty in it, but then the Virtue is greater, and
the Fruit sweeter, and the Reward will be Proportionable. The Solitary good Man
saves himself; but he that is Religious in Society is in a way of saving both
himself and those that see him. In so wicked an Age as this is, good Men had
need show themselves to the World, to do something toward the Amendment and
Reformation of it: And without doubt some good they do; and though it is to be
wished, that the World were better, yet that it is not worse, they are beholding
to such Examples, which shows that some good is done by their Living and
Conversing in Babylon.

III. Were I to speak to Princes, to the Nobles, to the Gentry of the Nation,
to Magistrates, Ministers, and to men in Authority; this should be my Text. All
such Persons, who make some Figure in the World are like a City set upon a
Hill; to such the nether World, the Plebeians, the Commonalty, and the Ordinary
sort of People look up. Their Example they take Notice of, and these Examples
they Ordinarily follow. I would tell them, that as God has raised them above
the Common level, so God expects they should be eminent in Goodness, and be as
much above all Vice, as they are above the common Rank. I would tell them, that
their Sins are spreading, and like the Plague destroy whole Cities and Towns. I
would tell them, that in this Case they are more Barbarous than the Tyrants
Mankind cries out upon, for they lay several men's Consciences waste by their
ill Practices, which is more than sacking Towns, and burning Cities.

All ye, that are advanced to some Government, and surely Parents and Masters
of Families are so; Behold your selves in this Glass; according as your
Examples are so will your Inferiors be. I do not say it is so always; but this
is ordinarily the Effect of your Behavior. As you are, so will your Children
and Servants be at least, there is Reason to think, that so they will be, for
your Example strangely influences those that are under your Charge and
Protection. If you sanctify the Lords day both in Public and Private by
letting the Word of God dwell richly among you in all Wisdom, Teaching and
Admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, singing with
grace in your Hearts unto the Lord, your Inferiors in time, its possible would
do so too. If you are enemies to Pride, to Intemperance, to Drunkenness, to
Swearing; there is hopes that your Inferiors will learn of you. If you are
Grave and Modest, and curb your Passions, and deny your selves for Heaven and
Gods Service, it is not improbable that your Inferiors will be wrought upon to
make you their Patterns. We see, they do so in evil Things, why should we
despair of their following you in that which is good. At least you have this
Satisfaction, that by your Example you showed them the Way, to the Land which
flows with Milk and Honey. You will have this Comfort, that your Example did
not lead them into the Chambers of Death, nor make them fling their immortal
Souls away. All ye that are Professors of Religion, that pretend to be holier
than ordinary; the Eyes of the World will be upon you. The least false step you
make will be taken notice of. See then, that you walk Circumspectly, as wise
Men redeeming the Time, because the days are Evil.

IV. Such of you, whom the Spirit of God has made free from the Law of Sin,
you are not only a City set upon a Hill, but behold you are come into mount
Sion, to the heavenly Jerusalem, unto the City of the living God; and to the
innumerable company of Angels, as the Apostle says, Heb. XII. 18. Behold God
has called you to be Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, called you to be
Companions of Angels, called you to dwell on the Hill of God, on the
everlasting Hill. How high is your Calling! How excellent your Vocation! How
great the dignity God intends you! Your conversation is to be in Heaven; and
will you mind the Trifles of the Flesh, and so mind them, as to set your
Affections upon them? Will you, who are Born, new Born I mean, to an
everlasting Kingdom, will you be fond of this pitiful transitory World, you
that are intended for the highest Employment, will you do as the Children of
the World do? They are from Beneath, you are from Above. Do Eagles catch Flies,
and you that are intended to soar above the Clouds, will you disgrace your
Pedigree, and and set your Affections on things Below? God intends you as
Conquerours, and will you suffer your selves to fall a Prey to filthy
Temptation, and expose your selves to the Contempt and Scorn of the Fowler, who
Flatters you till he draws you into the Net, and then Punishes you for being
taken?

Behold the glorious City, the City of our God, the City set upon a Hill
indeed, the City which has Foundations, whose builder and maker is God! Do you
hope to be Members of that Community, and will you disparage your selves by
Actions that will certainly exclude you from that Republic? At the Gates of it
no unclean Thing shall enter: A clean Heart, and a clean Life must give you jus
Givitatis, make you free Denisons of that City, and will not you prepare your
selves for the Honor of that Naturalization? Except you imitate the Manners of
the Citizens above, you can never hope to be Partners with them in their Glory;
and what are their Manners? Why? They love. Love is their Trade, their
Employment, their Business, their Pleasure, their Delight, their Satisfaction.
They love nothing but God, or if they love any Thing besides him, they love it
for his Sake; and love God in it. Love is their Principle, their End, their
Mark, and their Entertainment. Love is their Meat and Drink, and their
Recreation. They love Dearly, they love Constantly, they love Eternally. God is
love, and he dwells in them, and they in God. To be like them, see that ye love
him, that has begotten you again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead. See that ye love one another with a pure Heart
fervently, See that your love be without dissimulation. See that ye love not in
Word, nor in Tongue, but indeed and in truth, and when the Thread of your Life
shall break, that Love which dwelt in you, will exalt you to the Regions of
perfect Love, where the Inhabitants speak of Love, and think of Love, and sing
of Love; and tell one another, how Christ has loved them, and washed them from
their Sins with his own Blood. To him be Glory forever. Amen.

FINIS.

