A Copy of a Paper sent to John Otway, Justice of the Peace, concerning
SWEARING.
My Friend,
THo I am little known to thee, or acquainted with thee, as to any Converse or
Conversation, yet hearing of thy sobriety, and readiness to hear and enquire
into those things which are scrupled among Christians; and what may be said for
or against any thing wherein every true Christian ought to be satisfied in his
mind, before he can believe and receive it as a Truth (to have his Conscience
obliged thereby) which I account a point of Wisdom, and not to take things upon
Trust, and Hearsay, and Tradition as many do, without any further enquiry;
Also understanding, that thou have not a hand in Persecuting thy Neighbor, in
bringing them into Bonds, and others which I know thou might have done, had
not something in thy self limited thee beyond either Law or Examples, which I
hope thou will never have cause to repent thee for: For the Meek shall inherit
the Earth; and to the Merciful God shows Mercy. And If ever there was an Act
of Mercy, this is one, To be tender of them that are tender of Gods Glory and
Worship, when so great severity has been used against them that fear the Lord
in their hearts, which is the Seat of the Lords Judgment in Man. Likewise
hearing, that thou at a public Session at Kendall lately, in thy Charge or
Speech in the Court, spoke something about Oaths, and the lawfulness of them,
and said that some gave false Glosses upon Matthew. 5. and James 5. and did
assert the Morality of them among Christians, and how the Angel Swore after
Christ had given that Command; and showed a necessity of them among Christians.
The Consideration of these things, with some other, was an inducement unto me,
to write these few things unto thee, and shall leave them to thy
Consideration,, and to the Spirit of the Lord in thy self to Judge according to
that, and seeing I am a Sufferer at this day, and a great one too, upon this
account, which If I were not certainly persuaded upon good ground of the truth
of that I have believed in this particular, I neither could nor would suffer
for it; but I must not forcean implicit Faith upon any, only Judging it may
induce thee the more to consider what I say. I have had my share of long
Contests about this thing amongst my Brethren, and much has been written about
this particular by diverse Hands, whether any of them ever reached thy hand or
not; but however, I would not be tedious unto thee, and therefore shall contain
my self in as narrow a compass as may be in so weighty a matter, for which many
thousands have and are like to suffer.

First of all, There was a time when there was no Oaths, When Man was made in
the Image of God, which consists in Righteousness and true Holiness, Equity,
long suffering, Patience, Goodness, Mercy and Truth, wherein man was in a
capacity to believe in God, and men to believe one another: this was in the
beginning after the Heavens and the Earth was made, and all things that are
therein; Then there were no Oaths, neither needed any, for Truth lived and man
in it, and that spoke; and a certainer Testimony there could not be, nor a
greater: and this was before Sin and Unbelief entered.

2. Whosoever comes to witness a restoration again into the same Image by
Christ, the second Adam, as all that are born of God and are true Christians
indeed do come to, there will be nothing but Truth speaking and ruling in the
heart, and in the words: and Oaths ends.

3. But after man had transgressed, and eaten of the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, and went from the power of God, and had broken the Covenant of God,
he lost his wisdom, and folly entered; he lost Truth and a Lie entered and
Unbelief: so that he believed not God, neither the Sons of Adam in the Fall
could believe one another; and Sin being entered, and Death by it, Deceit grew
fast and Unbelief, and but a few in a Generation bore the Image of God before
the Flood, as Abel, Enoch and Seth, and some few in comparison; and the rest
generally corrupted their ways, and bore another Image, and went after the
imagination of their own hearts, and set up Images and Idols; and also after
the Flood when the earth began to be replenished, the cursed Seed grew faster,
and many great Nations became ignorant of the True God, and made Gods of Gold
and Silver, Wood and Stone, and reverenced them, and Worshipped them, and stood
in fear of them, and had them in esteem; and Swore by them as the greatest
thing, and gloried in them.

4. Abraham who feared the Lord, and hearkened unto his Voice, whom the Lord
singled out of many people, as a righteous Root of whom he would raise up a
righteous Generation; and more righteous than the rest of the Nations, and made
a Covenant with him, and he was called The Father of the Faithful, and was the
Original of all the Tribes of Israel, and the thousands of the people; but the
most of them became vain also, and as corrupt as other Nations. And the four
hundred years that they had lived among the Egyptians, they learned too much
their manners, and were much corrupted and darkened in their understandings, and
therefore the Lord was wroth with them, and few were made partakers of the
Promise, because of their Unbelief.

5. The Law was added because of Transgression four hundred and thirty years
after the Promise was made; or as some account from the Creation two thousand
years, which Law was given at Sinai to Israel, and not to the Gentiles; as it
is written to Jacob, He gave his Law to Israel, his Statutes to every Nation he
did not so; which Law some of latter times have divided into three parts,
Moral, Judaical, and Ceremonial: which distinction I do not read of
particularly in the Scripture. Moral, as that which pertains to the manner of
Israel, how they ought to Worship God, and walk toward their Neighbor.
Ceremonial, that which pertained to the Priests and People, as to Form or
Discipline, which was shadowy. Judaical, as that which belonged to their Policy
or State. The two last generally are acknowledged (if I may say parts of the
Law) to be ended, and is not binding unto Christians; but the first part, some
have said, is Moral and perpetual; the discussing of which would take up more
time and reading than I intend to trouble thee with.

6. Seeing the Law, all of it was added because of (Transgression) that was the
cause its evident, If there had been no Transgression there had needed no
addition of a Law, as a limit or rule: so whosoever comes through Christ Jesus, to
witness Transgression finished, and an end of Sin, they become dead to the Law
(tho they are not without a Law to God) for it has power over a man as long as
he lives, to convict him, and Judge him; but being come to the Image of God
against such, there is no Law, tho they are not without one, as I said, to God
and his Christ.

7. But because the Lord would not suffer Israel to walk according to the
Heathen, he in love to them, gave them a Law suitable to the State they were in
before the Seed Christ was manifest, and the Covenant was suitable to their
state; their minds was outward; and their Covenant was outward: their minds was
mutable, their Covenant was so; and these pertained to a part above the Seed,
and were shadows of good things to come, which ended all in Christ (tho not
destroyed) so the Tabernacle, Temple, Priests, Oblations and Offerings;
Sabbaths, Fasts, Feasts, Oaths, Tithes, Circumcision, and the like, tho they
were all real Commands of God in their time, and continued unto the time of
Reformation, that is, till the Law ended, and the Priesthood, Covenant and
Hebrews.

8. It is granted by us in the Covenant, the Jews might Swear, and did in Truth
and Righteousness, and were Commanded so to do, to Swear by the true God, and
reverence his Name and sanctify it; and least they should Swear as the
Heathens did by their false Gods, and reverence them that are no Gods, he
Commanded to Swear, and fear and reverence his Name that was the living God;
and I look upon it as the low condescension of God, or stooping to them in
their state they were in, because there was Unbelief in them; therefore to end
strife they might Swear, and it was permitted them, even as it was to have a
King when their hearts was set upon it; so the Lord considering their state,
the Lord Swore by himself, for their sakes, and as they Swore by the greatest;
so he by himself, being there was no greater to confirm the Truth of his words,
because of the weakness of their Faith, or rather Unbelief.

9. But we do not read of all the Oaths amongst the Jews for some there was
that feared an Oath, that ever they were imposed under any outward penalties,
as they have been of late among Christians in name; but for all the Scriptures
and Examples that have been or can be brought, to prove Oaths lawful under that
Ministration and Covenant to save all men the labor, who would contend for the
Jews Swearing, we allow the same and assent to them; so thus them that will
contend and prove Swearing, then they shall contend without an Adversary for me
or that People I own in Judgment.

10. But the great thing that seems to carry all the weight on its back, is the
Morality of it still among Christians, as some plead; unto which I answer, Was
not the Sabbath of the Jews, as Moral of that of Oaths, or any other Command in
the Ten, or elsewhere, which I have heard some Parish Priests say was Moral and
perpetual among Christians, and yet they themselves break it by practice; the
Command reached only to the Seventh day, and whosoever alters it, lets up another
thing, and then how is it Moral. The like Doctrine they teach about Oaths, and
has darkened peoples understandings without distinguishing betwixt time and
time, and Ministration and Ministration; but some say, Christ came not to
destroy the Law Moral but to fulfill it; it is granted again, some say, tho they
very far strain the words in the third Commandment, we are not only forbidden
to take Gods Name in vain, but to sanctify by praying, praising, and Swearing
upon occasion: If I grant all these under the Gospel in force, in the substance
as under the Law; I say, leave nothing of the shadow, or Type, or Ceremony, as
to be standing or binding among Christians (as it is not.) Its granted, the
substance of all had nothing of force under the Gospel: For the Law had a
Shadow of good things to come that came by Moses, but the Grace, the Truth came
by Jesus Christ, the substance (and he is the substance) and he living in a
Christian, speaks and testifies the Truth, and there need no other in any
Judicature, and that was never denied by us but often proffered, but seldom
received. Incense was the Ceremony of praying and praising, but the substance
is lifting up the heart to the Lord, from the motion of his Spirit* and
Praising is making melody in the heart to the Lord. And Circumcision of the
heart is the substance of the Circumcision in the Flesh, Romans 2. And Christ the
substance of the Passover; and Christ is the substance of that Shadow or
Ceremony of Swearing, and that which every Christian ought to do, is to speak
the Truth, and to testify the Truth from the heart, and this is the substance,
and that which is required under the Gospel; and this we never refused, and
this diverse learned men has confessed is the sum; read Isa. 45. 23. and
compare Romans 14. and 11. and so is Confession of a Truth, and testifying the
same about any matter, be not equivolent with an Oath under the Law.

11. As for Matthew 5. and James 5. we give no glosses upon them, but do
receive the words as they are, the Precepts of Christ and James; and we cannot
allow all those Glossers, who would pervert their words from their jenuine
sense, which we take clearly to be a limitation from all Swearing whatsoever
under the Gospel; and not only in Communication, but even before all men, and
at all times; not only from vain Oaths, and false Swearing, and by the
Creatures, but from all Swearing whatsoever, the Scripture is so evident and so
clear, that its much that any should stumble at the Commands; the very stop of
the Chapter clears the thing; yea, even some who have contended against us,
have been made to confess that the perfection of obedience required under the
Gospel, was above that the Mosaical Law did exact or teach; and from these
Scriptures, so Dr. Gauden and Usher, the one contended against the Quakers, the
other for the Waldenses against the Romanists. Christ says of old time it has
been said, Thou shall not kill; Thou shall not commit Adultery; Thou shall not
for swear thy self, nor by the Creatures; and if they were not to Swear by them
alone, nor the Altar, neither Head nor Foot, then, why now by the Bible or upon
a Book, seeing that its made of Creatures? But its said by the Contents of the
Book what does the Book contain more then true words; and if the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain him, I am sure the Book cannot. Away with this Imposed
Traditional Ceremony. But Christ says, Whosoever is angry with his Brother, is
in danger of Judgment. And again, Love your Enemies; And whosoever looks upon a
woman, and lusts after her, has committed Adultery: But I say, Swear not
all, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, whatsoever is more comes of
Evil; So that its evident he speaks of a further perfection of obedience under
the Gospel, than under the Law: For if it be only vain Oaths and false
Swearing, and by the Creatures that he prohibits, then the Law had said as
much, and he said no more than the Law, for these were reproved by the Law; but
its manifest he required a more exact obedience than under the Law; and
likewise those things that had been permitted because of the hardness of their
hearts, he took away and brought them by his Doctrine to that state which was in
the beginning before darkness and hardness was. And as concerning the Angels
Swearing, to which of the Angels said he, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee? And again, I bring forth my first begotten Son, and let the
Angels worship him: and therefore the Ministration of the Son is above the
Angels, and both Angels and their Ministration are to give way unto Christ, and
he must be worshipped; and no example of either Angels or men ought or can
violate the Commands of Christ.

12. It was a Doctrine believed and received among the Primitive Christians not
to Swear at all, that there was no question made of it, tho in the times of
Persecution, when their Liberties and Lives lay upon it, yet they denied to
Swear, and keep in the first Gospel Doctrine taught, and would not violate it. A
Cloud of Witnesses I might bring to confirm the truth of what I say in that
particular, but that I intend this only as a Manuscript and no further; so I
will not be tedious, but only take a few Fathers whose Doctrine is generally
received. Origin says, It behooves not a man, who lives according to the
Gospel, to Swear at all. Chrysostom forbids not only Swearing, but to Swear at
all. Jerome, The Gospel Truth admits not of an Oath. Austin, Any man that is a
common Swearer, no more credit can be given than to a Liar, a thing too much in
use in our Age, yet none debarred from Swearing in Judicature. Jerome upon Mat.
5. and James 5. These are his words, It was permitted to the Jews, being in
wickedness and infancy to offer Sacrifice to God, least they should Sacrifice
to Idols, so they might Swear by God, not that it was righ full so to do, but
because it was better to Swear by the Lord, than by false Gods or Devils; but
the great Evangelical Sincerity and Truth admits not of an Oath, since every
True Saying is equivolent thereunto. Theophalact, Hillary, Athanasius,
Theodoret, and Lactantius, and others taught much against Swearing without any
limitation. Polybius observes in the best and purest times, and simpler Ages of
the World, Oaths were never used in Judicature; but after Unbelief and Lying
increased, Oaths increased. Justin Martyr says, It was enough security in all
Cases to say, I am a Christian; and if any Oath either for matter or manner was
tendered, they repeated this as the only satisfaction they could give, I am a
Christian. Polycarpus and Basilides, both Martyrs, denied to Swear at all, and
what is this become such a strange, new, and dangerous Doctrine amongst us in
those days that profess Christianity; as that now are reckoned good Members
either of Church or State but Swearers, But I have done, desiring thee to
peruse these things over in the same love that I writ them, and what ever thou
do hold thy hand from Persecution, for assuredly God will bring a rebuke upon
the Nation for it, and all them that withstand the Lord in his People. Farewell.

Thy True Friend, Francis Howgill.


