A VINDICATION of the Late SERMON, On -- Curse ye Meroz, From the Idle
Aspersions cast upon it and its Author.

With a Full and True Narrative of many Material Passages in Mr
Hickeringill's's LIFE.

LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne. 1680.

REFLECTIONS On a Late LIBEL, etc.
SIR,
YEsterday came to my hand the said Libel (so I call it, because) it is
throughout false and slanderous, and without a Name, no, not so much as of the
Bookseller or Printer, that durst Print or vend such a venomous Pamphlet.

Besides this, I have seen many a private Letter written to him, but without
any Name subscribed, since the publishing of -- Curse ye Meroz. -- One
threatens he shall be stabbed; another says, he wonders the Bishops do not pull
his Gown off his Back, he is such a Common-swearer, Common-drunkard,
Common-Barrater, and Common Debauchee; another threatens, that the Sermon shall
be answered very speedily in Print; and then he shall see, how publicly they
would make a very Rogue of him, and prove he was a Rebel against K. Charles I.
But that the mischief on it is, K. Charles was Beheaded before Mr. Hickeringill
was 16 years old. And to complete his misery, yesterday he received a Letter,
that begun (with a witty Anagram upon his name) thus, Mr. Hickeringill, Anagr.
Mr. Hectoring Devil. So mad they are, you see, that they throw their very
Brains as well Gall at him. All which I was unwilling to conceal from you that
loves him so dearly, and to beg of you, that as you love your self, your Life,
your Wife and Children (or which is dearest to you) your Reputation, take
warning by Mr. Hickeringill's Fate, and never dare to Print or Preach against
Fanatics; for they are old Dog at Lying and Slandering, Murdering, and
wounding Reputation.

Indeed, Solomon says, Answer not a Fool according to his Folly, lest thou also
be like unto him; that is, lest thou be accounted, by taking notice of his
Folly, as foolish and impertinent as he. And yet in the very next verse, Prove.
26.5. as if upon second thoughts, he had changed his Opinion, he gives quite
contrary Advice, saying, Answer a Fooll according to his Folly, lest he be wise
in his own Eyes; lest he plume himself (like this Observator) Crow and Strut,
as if he was unanswerable and uncontrollable, in reviling a Sermon that has
carefully asserted his Majesty's Prerogative, and the Parliament and Peoples
Properties and Immunities.

It Is true, Holy David knew not any Remedy for a slanderous and venomous
Tongue; What shall be given thee, and what shall be done unto thee? Oh, thou
false Tongue! There is no such Antidote against the Poison of Asps and Vipers,
as their own Flesh, they carry about them their Alexipharmacon; and all the
Remedy that I shall make use of at present against this viperous Libeller, (the
poison of Asps being under his Lips) is only taken out of the Body of the Libel
it self, and show the Falsehood of those Scandals, by their own Incongruity and
Inconsistency.

For the Observator (so I Will call him, as he calls himself) shooting in the
dark at Men's Reputations, and wounding them without Fear, (as well as without
Control) instead of making Observations upon the said Sermon, says not one
word that is significant in Answer, or to confute the same; but according to
the wonted Attacques of such Adversaries, falls foul upon the Person, and
shaking hands with the Argument, lets drive at Mr. Hickeringill, when he has
first aspersed him with his smutty Ink.

And because he knew Mr. Hickeringill's Conversation to be so innocent and
unblamealble, that nothing but Malice and Falsehood conjoined, can vilify him,
therefore he dare not say, but yet makes a wild and impertinent Supposal, p. 7.
of a Graceless Villain, insinuating slily, that Mr. Hickeringill was that same
Graceless Villain; but lest he should be taken by the Beard for it, with --
What do you mean, Sir? He presently cries peccavi, and Oh Lord, Sir! I beg your
Pardon, etc. For when he has made his Supposal of that same Graceless Villain,
etc. immediately he subjoyns -- But what is all this to our Sermon? Nothing at
all I hope; but why may not a man be impertinent now and then?

So that I say, all the Venom of the said Libel may be healed by its own self,
its own confessed Impertinence and Incongruity.

But lest the Observator should be wise in his own Conceit, and puffed up, as
thinking and hoping that Mr. Hickeringill and his Friends will scorn to answer
such a Trifler, (for he that throws a Stone at every bawling Cur, shall have
work enough) and also because the Author of the said Sermon (Mr. Hickeringill)
is so unblameable in his Life and Conversation, that this Libeller is the first
that ever durst Print (whether they might mutter behind his Back) any thing
against the Uprightness and Integrity of his Life. Therefore I (that have (as
well as you) been intimately acquainted with him above thirty years) thought it
my Duty as well as Honor, thus to make his Apology.

Some Passages of the said Sermon, the Observator does indeed Re-print, but
confutes not one word thereof, except by telling an apparent Falsehood page 5.
concerning Deborah, who (he says) was no Sovereign over Israel, but a
Prophetess, etc. as if he should say) and he might with equal Truth say it)
David was no Sovereign over Israel, but a Prophet; and Solomon was no Sovereign
over Israel, but a Preacher. The man flings, and kicks, and rails as if he was
gaul'd and wounded, and by that therefore he must be either a Papist or a
Fanatic, for no other are agriev'd at that innocent Sermon, and plain and
honest Interpretation of the Text; or else the Observator is some envious and
malicious Scribler, whose Spleen as well as Gall overflows.

And I am apt to think he is one of this last Character, by the Care he takes
to blast the Reputation of the Author, as appears by such Expressions as these:
( p. 5.) This Gentleman man would engross the Glory (and to the Prejudice of
all his Brethren too;) and p. 4. There are many honest Divines (without
necessity of including this Gentleman) who are as active Preachers up of
Loyalty.

So that the fear lest Mr. Hickeringill should get a Monopoly to be the Loyal
Preacher, and the Sermon on -- Curse ye Meroz -- a Nonesuch, and so engross
all the Glory (and to the prejudice of all his Brethren too) whilst they (good
men, if they could tell how) are as active Preachers up of Loyalty. This, this
made the Observator in haste call for Pen and Ink, and resolve before People
have given in their Verdicts, and before the Term be done, to make Observations
enough upon it, to brand it, as guilty, guilty of engrossing the Glory (and to
the prejudice of his Brethren too) who are as active Preachers up of Loyalty,
and therefore resolved to write something if he could, true or false to lessen
the Reputation of the Sermon, and its Author.

If I be not much mistaken in this same Observator, this same -- As active a
Preacher of Loyalty, was in Oliver's Time, as active a Preacher up of Oliver,
and during all the several Vicissitudes and Changes of Government, kept his
Fellowship, and in the Rump's time was a Rumper; in Oliver's time for Oliver;
in Queen Dick's time for Richard; and in the Committee of Slavery's time for
them; and in the happy Restoration and Reign of his Majesty, he takes it in
Dudgeon, that any man should engross the Glory of a more Loyal Preacher, than
this same Will. for the King.

He makes me think of the Story Dr. Fuller tells of the Vicar of Bray, that in
Henry the Eighth's days was a Papist, in Edward the Sixth's Reign a Protestant,
in Queen Mary's time a Papist, and in Queen Elizabeth's time a Protestant
again; of all which, when his Parishioners complained to him, for making them
(and that from the same Pulpit and the same Throat) with several Notes and
Tones dance in and out in the Church, as if they were (in Religion too) dancing
the Hay; he answered* good people, whatever were the Premises, I always did,
and will hold me to this Conclusion, To live and die Vicar of Bray.

Such another Mercury is (and has been) our Observator; with the Fanatics he will
snivle and groan, with the Church of England he is as 'Piscopal and as active a
Preacher up of Loyalty as the best of them, and rather than not be the
Fore-horse, he will with envy burst his Girdle, though he thereby make himself
the Fore-ass.

Yes, yes, it is he indeed -- now I look better at him, it is he, that some Vicar
of Bray, (but I spare his name, though perhaps I Will pull him out of his
lurking-hole e're it be long) I know him by the same old, insipid, phlegmatic
style, the same old Supposals, Dilemma's, and Venturing-pins, it is some
sneaking, peevish, envious and spightful Black-coat, (and where shall a man
find less good Nature, more envying, slandering or undermining of one another,
greater Make-bates then are some of them, or -- as the Sermon has it, tell me
of any Mischief Tumults or Rebellion, that some of these same Black-coats have
not had a great hand in,) such as think they can never look fair, except they
make a Black-patch of others, especially of their next Neighbors, or such as
are near them; and though such sneaking Rascals never meddle but to their own
shame, yet their envy prompts them on to lying and slandering, though in
Conclusion they always meddle to their hurt.

And as they are the worst natured men, so certainly the most dangerous to the
Peace and Quiet of Mankind, they are always finding fault with others,
despising others, railing at others, undermining other men's good name, lest
they should shine to eclipse and benight their twinkling Puny-ships, conscious
of their own Baseness and Demerit; like the poor Levellers, they would pull
down their betters, and render them (if they could by any base ways, false News
and lying Pamphlets) as low, that is, as base as themselves.

But all their Attacques are sneaking and cowardly, clandestine and in the
dark, still robbing men of their good Names with a Vizard on, for fear of due
Chastisement and Discovery, for fear (not of being belied and slandered, the
only weapons with which all the Antagonists can assault Mr. Hickeringill) but
for fear of being exposed in his own Colors, and then he would look as black
as Vulcan himself, (or which I dare say he is) the Son of a Blacksmith, That
sneak't into the University by lacqueying it to a Gentleman, that got a Degree
and a Fellowship by his Dexterity in making (clean) his Tutors Shoes, and
Coalfires, that always thrive by Flattery only, base compliance, and
supplanting other men; and therefore since he is such a Littany-man, I Will join
in Prayer with him with some Addition, and conclude him, as he does his lying
Pamphlet, with the same or the like Petitions -- From the Kilne that calls the
Mill Burnt-Arse: From all drunken, debauched, and envious Black-Coats: From
undermining and supplanting Rascals, and Graceless Villains: From Liars and
Slanderers, and the Vicar of Bray: From Pulpit-Fools, as well as
Pulpit-Enthusiasts -- deliver us -- and let all good Englishmen say, Amen.

His words p. 5. are -- For suppose one that from other places is thoroughly
satisfied, that Subjects are bound to be obedient to, and aid their Princes
against all Rebellions, should yet be so dull, as not so clearly to apprehend
it, informed by this particular Text, because Deborah was no Sovereign over
Israel, but a Prophetess, and acting by an extraordinary Call against Invaders
of her Country, Chap. 4.4. (Note by the way, if it were her Country, then she
was Sovereign, and Chief Magistrate of the same.) And so the Notes of our
English Bible, (but E. H. has declared himself no Friend to our English Bibles)
expound those words, She judged Israel, that is, says the Margin, -- by the
Spirit of Prophecy, resolving of Controversies, and declaring the Will of God.
And indeed, had she been their Princess, Barak had talked very sawcily, when he
says, verse 8. If thou will go with me, I will go; but if thou will not go, I
will not go. Now if the case were so extraordinary, the Consequences he draws
(though in themselves Positions true and warranted by other places of
Holy-Writ) may yet not seem to arise from hence, so necessarily as to qualify
it with the ranting Title of the most Loyal Text in all the Bible.

She judged Israel, -- that is, says the Margin, by the Spirit of Prophecy.

I know not what English or Geneva Bible the Observator has got for his turn,
but (except himself) no man, I dare say, did ever see such a Margin in the
Bible, whether English or Latin, Greek or Hebrew.

There is no Marginal Notes to Judge. 4.4. but the Words are these, And Deborah
a Prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time.

Oh! but she had an extraordinary Call thereunto.

Not so extraordinary (it seems) but Barak durst talk sawcily, or rather
familiarly to her; But worse men than Barak did, not only talk sawcily, but act
scurvily and disloyally, as cursed Meroz, in the said T^x^; yet not so sawcily
and scurvily, as Rebels in our times have both talked and acted against their
Sovereigns

Nor more extraordinary was her Call to the Sovereignty, than was all other the
Judges in those days; Moses, and Joshuah, and Gideon, Jephthah and Sampson,
Samuel, Saul, and David; for none of them had it by Succession, but by special
Appointment.

Now, except the Observator means, that no Subjects are bound to aid their
Sovereigns, except their Sovereigns have an extraordinary Call; (no which
extraordinary Call of Deborah does appear in the Text) and which seems to be
the consequence of his Observation, I cannot Divine what he would be at, but
sure he might as pertinently turn Augur, and observe the flying of Birds, as
observe at this extravagant rate.

Besides, to abuse the Reader with an untruth, (in alleging Marginal Notes
that were never heard of,) is not the first he has told, as I will show by and
by.

But the first Cavil he makes, is against the Author's Veracity and Memory,
because he says -- That this Text was never before insisted on by him at any
time: yet notwithstanding he finds a Sermon made of it by the same Author in
Gregory Father Gray-beard, three or four Octavo pages long: which is an
instance that the man was resolved to find fault right or wrong, or otherwise
he had not at the beginning tired upon so impertinent a Quarry, that he can get
so little by, except shame and contempt by all ingenuous men, Does the
Observator think indeed and indeed that that was a Sermon? And ever Preached in
any Pulpit by Mr. Hickeringill? which he confesses was only a little Ryme
Burlesque? But such a Trifler is not worth the answering, no more than his
Cavil against those six Verses in Greg. which a far better, but as immodest a
Pen as his, answered only, as he does, by giving it as he does (an ill Name)
Ryme Doggerel: namely, By the Liturgy learn to pray,
So pray, and praise God every Day.
The Apostles Creed believe also,
Do as you would be done unto.
Sacraments take as well as you can,
This is the whole Duty of man.


He is a Stranger in England that does not know that Papists and Fanatics,
Atheists and Debauchee's are very considerable Parties in the Kingdom; now if
no man can be any of these, if he observes those six verses, they are certainly
the most useful Rymes doggerel that ever were made. Another Untruth we meet
with p. 4. where the Observator alleges out of the said Sermon -- That the
most Loyal Text in all the Bible, is now (like a piece of Apocrypha) laid
aside, antiquated and out of Date; which he calls an odd, indeed a saucy
Reflection on all the Loyal Clergy in England.

This lying Libeller says so, but there is no such Assertion in the whole
Sermon: there is indeed a quare in the said Sermon in these words -- shall this
Text now (like a piece of Apocrypha) be laid aside, antiquated and out of Date?

Not asserting it is so, but querying whether it be not so? which, whether it
be not a very inoffensive Quare? and whether the said Text be not very seldom
(if at all) insisted upon in these times, I leave to you the ingenuous Reader
to judge, craving your Pardon that I should vouchsafe to trouble you with
pointing at Mistakes in this same thick-skull'd Observator, that to every
vulgar Capacity are so obvious; and readily discerned without this Index.

But I must either mind such Untruths or nothing in the whole Libel; for it is
but one continued and scurrilous Lie and Slander, a whole Sheet full; from one
end to the other.

And therefore I shall take notice of no more, but that for which the whole
Pamphlet seems to be writ, and that is to cast an Aspersion, very slyly though,
and by way of Supposal, which yet he recants, and retracts immediately, his own
Conscience (if he have any) telling him that it is (as he acknowledges)
impertinent, and no more to the Reverend man (as he styles) the Author in his
first Line, than to the man in the Moon.

Yet p. 4. we are entertained, (as indeed all the Entertainments in the whole
Pamphlet, and all the Truths therein, are only the Expressions he Re-prints out
of the said Sermon) as in these Words -- But above all that Passage p. 26.
(namely of the Sermon) is remarkable -- A Holder-forth may yawl and yawn,
snivle and whine, thump and bawl, 'till his Lungs and his Heart ache, and yet
neither make open-hearted nor open-handed their close-fisted Disciples; nay, he
shall turn up the white of his Eye, and play as many Tricks as Hocus Pocus at a
Fair, and yet not get so much Money at Night as a common and profane Hocus --
This well considered as a most enlightening Paragraph; are things thus indeed?
Well, suppose then there were ever a graceless Villain in a Country, that had
first cousin'd his Tutor of a Fellowship, by gobling up the Covenant himself,
whilst he persuaded the old man, there was Rats-bane in it, that had renounced
his Christendom and been publicly dipped in hopes to thrive among the
Anabaptists, that had listed himself in the Rebels Army; and both preached and
fought against his Sovereign, that had afterward got a Shipboard, and even
there kik't for fear of debauching the Tarpaulins; after all these
Disappointments, and trading being so horrible dull amongst the Conventiclers,
do you imagine such a Fool would not think it high time to change Note and
Coat, if it were possible to get into some fatter Pastures, and rave and rant
to the purpose, to be taken notice of? Yes marry would he, and kiss the
Mass Book most reverently I Will warrant him, if there were any thing to be got
by it.

But what is all this to our Sermon? Nothing at all, I hope; But why may not a
man be impertinent now and then?

Pretty heart! take breath after all this impertinence.

But if he means (or else he means nothing by this Impertinence) to reflect
upon, or calumniate the Author of the Sermon on -- Curse ye Meroz; I Will give
this plain and true, short and yet full Narrative of Mr. Hickeringill's Life;
which had been as needless, as foolish and impertinent, as his idle Supposal,
if the Observator's Impudence and falsehood had not given this just Provocation,
and occasion to this Vindication.

I have known Mr. Hiokeringill since first he came to the University of
Cambridge, where he was admitted Pensioner in St. John's College at fourteen
years of Age; he got not, nor possibly could get his Tutor's Fellowship, for he
was made Fellow of Gonvile and Cajus College, when he was eighteen years of
Age, and junior Bachelor, Anno Domini 1650. He never swallowed nor gobled up
the Covenant in his Life, not but that perhaps he might have had stomach enough
to it, but it was off the Stage before he came on; yet both he and the whole
University were (sufficiently) of Fanatical, Rebellious, Anabaptistical and
Factious Principles and Practices, as all men living are (in their Infancy) of
that Religion alone in which they are educated; and he when he was a child, did
as a child, nay, as wiser men than he did; and if he had been educated at Rome
or Constantinople, in the National Religion there professed, he had also
certainly been a Papist or Mohammedan without a Miracle.

Thus St. Paul by Education became a Jewish zealot; Luther, Calvin, Beza, and
our Forefathers, all Papists: upon better Information they became Protestants,
as St. Paul, a Christian: The Devil and Devilish men raged, and called them
Apostates, but the Saints said, He that persecuted us in times past, now
preaches the Gospel, and they glorified God, in me, says St. Paul; they did
not rail, rage, upbraid, and calumniate, as Devilish men do: The Strength, the
Spirit and Activity (with which God and Nature had blessed Mr. Hickeringill,
inclined him to a Military, rather than a Colledge-life; he therefore visiting
the English Army, (and some of his nearest Relations) in Scotland, first
accepted of a Commission to be a Lieutenant; but after some few years he
resolved to see the Wars in Foreign Countries, none whereof was then so famous,
as the Wars of Carolus Gustavus, King of Swede, whose Fame persuaded him to
accept a Captains Commission in Major General Fleetwood's Regiment, then
Swedish Ambassador in England: carrying six score brave Englishmen to the
Swede's Service; where he continued till the Peace concluded between the Swede
and Dane, when he returned to his Native Country in Yorkshire, where he raised
his Company, and soon after was Gaptain of a Troop of Volunteer-Horse that rise
under the Lord Fairfax and Duke of Buckingham, declaring for a Free-Parliament,
the happy Prologue to His Majesty's Restoration. After that, he had the
Command of a Man of War under the King of Portugal, as he formerly had been
Commander of the North-Star, a Man of War, under the Swedes King; afterward,
his desire of Travel, and seeing Foreign Countries, made him visit the Indies,
Surinam, Barbados, St. Christophers, Jamaica, etc. from which last-mentioned
Island, he brought the Governor Doyly's Letters to His Majesty and Duke of
Albemarle, with a Map of the Country, and Description of that Island, which he
Printed and dedicated to His Majesty. And having rambled enough, (by the Bishop
of Lincoln, Dr. Saunderson) he was both persuaded to be (and made) a Priest,
and his first Preferment Eighteen years ago (was what he now enjoys) the
Rectory of All Saints in Colchester; a place that perhaps has more than any
other exercised his Patience, and other Virtues; they that know Fanatics, they
that know the men and their Communication, must believe that a man of his
Integrity, Loyalty, and plain dealing must meet with Calumnies and Opposition
enough; he was indicted for a Common-swearer, and perhaps may be indicted for a
Common-Barretor, and what not? But for a Commonswearer he stands now convict in
the High-Court of Chancery, and that never a word comes out of his Mouth, but
an Oath comes out, attested and sworn by three Colchester men; and yet it is as
certain and commonly known for an undoubted Truth, that he never swore a rash
Oath in all his Life time, or ever took the Sacred name of God in vain, which
scarce one man in Colchester can say, except himself, and yet he is the only
man that stands convicted as aforesaid for a Common-swearer; but it is his
Portion, Innocence, the most sacred Innocence and Integrity is no Fence or
Skreen against Malice. But that he should by Flattery or baser means hunt after
Preferment, is so senceless a Calumny against the Plainness and Austerity of
his Conversation, (even unto Morosity,) (as some construe it) is a Supposal so
ridiculously suggested, that none can believe it that knows him; and that large
and plentiful Temporal Estate of Inheritance, that God has blessed him with above
all or any of his Neighbor-Ministers; and how smilingly, careless, and
unconcerned he is at the foolish and malicious Attempts of his Adversaries,
which hitherto has always ended in their own Shame and Confusion. And why may
not a man that was a Soldier in his juvenile years, accept of an Ecclesiastical
Office, and be a Clergyman in his graver Hours, and when he has sown his wild
Oats, rather than bring them up into the Pulpit with him?

St. Ambrose was first Governor, then Bishop of the same City; St. Peter was a
Fisherman and then a Divine, and after that followed the old Fishing trade
still. St. Paul was a Weaver and a Tailor, (for a Tent-maker employed both these
Trades) and then a Divine; and whilst he was so, he sometimes fell to his
Needle and Shuttle again.

Here Is a Do with what men have been; certainly, if every man's Faults were
exposed and writ in their Foreheads, few men would look with any better
Complexion than this so slandered Author. And certainly, if Mr. Hickeringill
had still been a Fanatic, he had been cried up as much for a precious godly
Man, as any Spiritual Pick-pocket amongst the Crew; and as much as the
Noyse-Makers now cry him down for a Villain.

Methinks I see how zealously and devoutly those holy Juglers rate and set on
their silly Votaries to bawl and bark against the Author of that Sermon, that
discovers and bewrays the Craft by which they get their Wealth, when they see
that almost the Hopes of their Gain is gone. And if his Sermon and Comment on
that darling Text of Curse ye Meroz -- which has done such Feats, had been
Stylo vetere, interpreted against all Sense, Reason, Religion, or the Context,
not a Conventicle in the Nation, but by this time had made Boonfires for Joy of
that, which (as now it is) they would gladly make a Bonfire on, and another of
him, if they had their Wills. But let them proceed as far and as fast as their
old Father drives them, He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh them to
scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision.

Nor could they readily have had a man to be the object of Fanatick-wrath, who
is more cheerfully Armor of Proof (by long and large Experience) against it,
than he: for the more they have raged and ray'ld, slandered and calumniated,
fretted and fumed, Almighty God has blessed him the more with Mercies both of the
right hand and the left, having given him so many comfortable and promising
Heirs for his Estate, and so comfortable and plentiful an Estate for his Heirs;
whilst his Adversaries grin and rail, snarl and show their Teeth, and pine away.

In a little time it will be no Apocrypha, that Truth is strongest, and no
weapon formed against it shall prosper.

Indeed the silly Observator nibbles, p. 6. at that Passage in the Sermon, p.
17. (namely) That all men's Faith must bottom upon some Humane Authority or
other.

The Sermon does not assert, that the Top and Bottom of all men's Faith is
Humane Authority; for the Top of a man's Faith is the Grace of God. So p. 19. of
-- Curse ye Meroz -- you find these words -- Through the Grace of God enabling
us to believe, what such good men and true did depose upon their own knowledge;
Faith is the Life of a Christian, etc. And p. 17. All true Faith is the Gift of
God as all other Gifts and Graces are, for without Gods special Grace no man
can believe the truest Humane Authority or Church upon Earth to be true.

Now where was the Observator's Eyes that he could not see those Passages of
the Sermon, and where was his honesty to expose some bit of the Sermon, without
what went before and after; and then too not to have one word to say by way of
Answer, but only holding up his hands, and falling to his Prayers, and wishes
that the Parliament might sit as soon as may be, to authorize the Bible by an
Act, and furnish People with Bottoms of Faith.

If the Observator was not very illiterate in the Laws of the Land, he might
find Acts of Parliament enough, (before he was born, and almost as old as Paul's,
for England was the first Christian Kingdom) to make the Bible Canonical, and
to furnish People with Bottoms of Faith.

For though the Holy Bible was and is the Word of God, though never a King or
Parliament had told us so, yet it does not become Canonical, (that is, a Canon,
or Law to Subjects) till it be commanded by Lawful Authority; and therefore our
Holy Bible is not only the Word of God, and so Sacred, but also the Law of the
Land, and so Canonical; and all the Laws of the Land, lawfully made, and by
lawful Authority, are also the Laws of God, to which we ought to submit, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

And then where would there be place for Mutinies and Rebellions, for the
Spirit of Popery or Spirit of Foppery? This makes that Devil rage at Mr.
Hickeringill, having great wrath, because his time is short: but to attacque or
answer him or his Sermon only with Calumnies, Lies, and Slanders. Is this
Scholar-like, Man-like, or Christian-like?

Truth is Truth, whoever proclaims it, and it is a base Requital of Ingenuous
men, only to load them with false Invectives, and Hatred instead of good Will;
such Returns will make men of more than Vulgar Learning and Seize, say,
with the Popish Cardinal, -- Si Populus vult decipi, decipiatur: If the Pople
have a mind to be blockish, so let them continue, for all me.

Yet the Observator seems to be in great trouble of mind that the Sermon should
p. 38. call the English (the most Generous and ingenuous Nation (ah,
Sycophant!) in the world) the blockish English.

Was it not greatly done of our little Observer, to reflect so severely upon
that innocent Passage in the Sermon -- The most loyal Text in all the Bible.
Whereupon he very gravely observes, p. 4. in these words -- Comparisons are
generally odious, especially when between things incomparable.

Why? Are they so indeed, Beloved? Some of the blockish English (that are not
so concerned to lessen the Reputation of the Author or his Sermon,) would have
past by so innocent a Passage, and never have knit their brows at it, nor yet
have marked it with so sharp-pointed an Asterism.

Whilst you live, look to your hits, and place your words in order, when you
come within ken of a little Observer.

Such a Fool was I, that I had thought a man might be very innocent, though he
had said (by way of comparison) more Spiritual knowledge and comfort is to be
had from the New Testament than the Old, and from some Texts and Verses therein
than from other, and from the latter end of the first Chapter of St. Matthew,
than from the middle or beginning, and yet the Holy Bible is Incomparable (that
is) above all other Books, but not when compared within its self. I never, till
now, knew where or how much St. Paul was a Sinner, and to be blamed (by the
Observator) for saying -- (I thought harmlesly) 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more
abundantly than they all: namely, All the Apostles.

Happy St. Paul, that never met with such an Observator amongst all the
Corinthians! that had a Design to lessen the Reputation of him and his
Writings; if he had, how might they have descanted upon him, in the words of
our Observator -- Comparisons (Paul) are generally odious, specially when
between things incomparable.

Surely the Corinthians were very blockish Corinthians, that could not spy
faults, at least, not so ill natured and malicious as our Observator, and
willing to spy faults, and expose them, to lessen men's Reputation: or else our
Observator is as blockish as envious, to make such severe Observations upon so
innocent an Expression; and more blockish to imagine, that any of the Generous
and ingenuous English can be such blockish English as not to see that, whilst
the Observator is so trivially and keenly busy to lessen the Reputation of Mr.
Hickeringill. He has only thereby lessened his own (if ever he had any) amongst
the generous and ingenuous English, at least.

This Trifler is, (I say) like Mercury in the Planets, good with the good, and
bad with the bad; sometimes he cokes's the Clergy, sometimes the Fanatics, as
p. 7. because Mr. Hickeringill says, p. 23. If there was not a Papist in
England, yet they would fright the People with fears of Popery. --

Now, for my part, such a plain blockish Englishman was I, that I could not spy
where the Mischief, or the Popery lay in that harmless and true Expression. --
But comes me our Observator, and very gravely and formally, (as he never opens,
but he makes up his Mouth in Mood and Figure) nay, you 'scape well, if he does
not gore you with one or other of his dilemma's, a keen tool, with which (just
such another, W.S. galled him that writ concerning the Contempt of the Clergy)
sagely observing, That -- This Aphorism is but borrowed from another Brother of
the Quill.

Now if the Observator had not a mischievous Design to spoil Mr. Hickeringill's
Credit for ever borrowing any more, he need not have told every Body how much
he was indebted and did borrow of a Brother of the Quill --

But, (dear Sir) why may not one Brother borrow of another, but that the
Observator must be concerned? I dare say, that neither of the said Brothers of
the Quill, (nor are there any other Brothers of the Quill in England) but would
make shift with their own Pittance and scanty Store, rather than go a borrowing
to our little Observator; and if they should, he would tell all he met, and
lessen their Credit, spoil them for ever borrowing any more.

But as honest and Loyal Hearts may join, so good Wits may jump, as well as bad
ones; and if so, then (though the Observator would seem to tell Tales out of
School) it is but a Tale, and a Story of his own making, like all the rest of
the Sham's he would gladly put upon the Author of that Sermon, with Design to
make them both odious; but such a Rayler will but be the black-patch to --
Curse ye Meroz. And most People think that the Author has hired this Zany to
set him off with greater Luster; and provoke him or his Friends to a
Vindication of himself and his Sermon, both which (but that Comparisons are
odious, except when a man's Credit and Reputation lies at stake) may possibly
appear in good time, as innocent, polite, unblemisht and unreproveable, as any
other of his Coat; let Liars and Slanderers vent their utmost Gall and
Bitterness; our blessed Savior, the holy Apostles, pious King Charles, the
greatest Innocence cannot escape them.

Nor can the worst of the Authors Adversaries be able to prove in any the worst
Instances of his whole life, that any Infirmity, Sin or Temptation has befallen
him; but such as is common to all men, to all men, to the best of men, and
common to the times wherein he was educated: which if so, the graceless Villain
has as good Company as any in England, which is more than modestly should ever
have been said, except on this Occasion, when vile men (not for the Evil he has
done, nor because he was bred up a Fanatic and in fanatical times, but because
he and the times are not still so, and therefore) would render him odious and
contemptible above others, because above others he does so sharply take away
their Weapons, (in such a beloved Text,) that has done great Service, and more
than ever it will do again; thanks to the Book called Fides Divina, (says the
Observator) but let who will go away with the Thanks, I dare say, Mr.
Hickeringill has as much Thanks for his great Pains, as he cares for, or needs,
or did, or could expect from the Blockish English.

And now I am quite tired with this Observator, and weary with having to do
with such an impertinent, (as he justly styles himself,) happy both you and I
if we could say with a safe Conscience, we had done with him; (this Aphorism
also was borrowed from another Brother of the Quil.) But his sharpest Thrust is
yet behind, and if that can be put by, I hope he is foiled.

Observe his Observation p. 7. -- A Frighr is a scurvy thing, and therefore
there are some that would have the most frightful and notorious Popish Treasons
hush't up, and go Scotfree, rather than fright People with Fears of Popery.

What cannot a Schollard do and an Observator? He shall make you white, black;
and black, white; it is such a Proteus and a Changeling, and would have all
others so.

In this same 7. page, he makes the Author kiss the Mass Book, and then (by
Consequence he is) a graceless Villain; but here he hooks and draws him to be
guilty of the Plot, the Popish Plot, at least Misprision of Treason, a
Concealer, and one that designs to have the most frightful and notorious
Treasons hush't up and go Scot-free.

This is a deadly Thrust; well, I see there is no escaping him, the man has
discovered Gall in his Ink already against the Author, but here he mingles it
with Blood; open him, and I Will lay an even Wager, there is Blood in the very
Heart of him, but it is insipid, and without Salt.

I think he has fairly observed and observed, till at last he has observed
(instead of the old Presbyterian Plot) a plain Popish Plot in -- Curse ye Meroz.

And I suppose in his next Observations (for tell him I expect them, but I fear
his Taplash wants tilting, and is drawn dry) the next News (I suppose) he
cheerfully intends to tell you, and also observe when and where this graceless
Villain was hanged, drawn, and quartered and that Jezabel-like, when Naboth is
dead, he is (what he gapes for) his Successor in the Vineyard.

Well then, so let it go, dye men must, and as good at first as at last, rather
than an Observator of so much Merit should be disappointed. There Is Difficulty
in making escape, the Judges (nay better men than Judges) cannot escape the
Lash of such Jehu's, if they do not drive as furiously, (as these men) like
mad; They also would have the most frightful and notorious Popish Treasons
hush't up, and go Scot-free; They, even Privy-Counsellors, some have sworn it.

Ay, but the said Sermon was indeed to some purpose brisk against the Spirit of
Popery, but was not this all Umbrage and Color, and though not discernable by
the Blockish English, yet comes me the Eagle-ey'd Observator, and anatomizing
it without Fear or Wit, most cruelly rips it up, and taking out his Jack in a
Box pores into it with his two Eyes, and spies Treason, a Popish Plot, at least
a Design of hushing it up, and that is Misprision of Treason.

Some there are too that have declared that Oliver Cromwell and his Army that
invaded Scotland Anno 1650 were bejesuited and influenc't by the Pope and
Papists to that March and War. Mr. Love that zealous Presbyterian and Mr.
Gibbons (that were beheaded on Tower Hill for prosecuting the ends of the
Solemn League and Covenant, by the Rump-Parliament, who all of them had taken
that solemn Oath and Covenant) tells us thus much in their dying Words See Mr.
Love's clear and necessary Vindication written by himself, p. 33. His Words are
-- But Cromwell (through the Counsel of the Pope, King of Spain and the Jesuits)
had rather fight with the Protestant-covenanting Party, than with the Rebels of
Ireland. By this means most grievous and burdensome Taxes are continued and
increased. I shall mention one thing which to the vulgar may seem incredible,
viz. That the Juncto (meaning the Rump) at Westminster have (by the Excise,
Customs, Sequestrations and Taxes) received more Money in one year than all the
Kings of England, put them all together since the Conquest, did raise upon
their Subjects for such a space of time, yet the Kings called Oppressors, and
these called Saints, etc. And so on at a great Rate, making them all Sons of
the Whore of Babylon.

And in Mr. Gibbon's Speech upon the Scaffold I find these Words Printed with
the said clear Vindication. -- But yet a more joyful sight do the Eyes of
Antichrist behold, such an one (I dare say) as he never saw in England before,
that is, a most faithful Minister and blessed Servant of God (meaning the said
Mr. Love) put to Death by Protestants, and such as call themselves the most
Pious, Religious People upon Earth. Next to him, I am brought upon the Stage to
encounter with Death, and fight the bloody Battle; the Lord knows how many may
follow. I pray, that I may be the last. But is not Joab's hand in this? Are not
the hands of Papists and Jesuits in all this? I need bring no Arguments to
persuade you to believe it; I think, very few but are convinced, that they both
sit at the Stern, and are the chiefest Actors, etc.

So that in all our Age, all Rebels and Designers of Innovation, have made
Popery, Jesuitism, Popish-Plot, and Popishly affected, to be the Common
Bear-skin to clap upon any man or Party they had a mind to worry.

Thus all the Cavaliers and the Royal Party were made to be all Papists, or,
(which will equally do the Feat) Popishly affected; and when they had thus
arrayed them in every Church and Market, they clapped their hands, and cried
Hallou, setting the People on them; and this did their Business, and made the
Presbyterians Rampant, till the Independents with the same Stratagem pulled
them down, making the People believe, that between the Equivocating,
Covenanting, Makebate, Rebellious Presbyterian, and the Equivocating,
Covenanting, Makebate, Rebellious Jesuit, there went but a Pair of Sheers;
whilst the Presbyterians echoed the same scolding Cramp-word into their Teeth
again, saying, all the Fry of Sectaries and Independents were but the Spawn of
Popery, and that they are all Sons of the Whore of Rome. And a notable man
tells us (and I believe he will take his Oath upon it too) that Lambert has been a
Papist, I know not how many years, and that there are Jesuits and Papists in
all the Conventicles and Field-meetings in England and Scotland, that craftily
stir up the People to Discontent, Mutiny and Tumult; Prologueing their
Popish-Plot with encouraging them to despise Dominion, and speak Evil of
Dignities: And whether this Observator be not also set on to lie, rail, and
find Fault with so innocent a Sermon, and it is Author, that only detects such
Jesuitical and Fanatical Plots is a fit Quere; and though he dare not show his
Head, I doubt not but I shall prove e're long, he is e Societate Jesu.

And if so, I think he has observed, and observed at a fine Rate, till he
himself is observed, and Popishly-suspected, if not Popishly-affected; This
it is, to bring the old House over his own Head: and who will be the Graceless
Villain then? But since we are got into the supposing Vein, for once I Will
suppose another graceless Villain, who has also less Wit than Grace, that was
basely bred, and worse born, being the Son of a Blacksmith, and kept at School
by the Alms of the Parish, whose chiefest Qualification for admittance in the
University was his Dexterity in wiping his Fellow-Commoners shoos, and his best
Accomplishment to capacitate him for a Degree, his dexterity in making
Coal-fires, that got a Fellowship amongst the Jesuits, by the Tuneableness of
his Throat in crying Adsum, and the glib Voracity of it, in swallowing all the
Oaths that came to hand, whose Lust lost him his Fellowship, in exchange for an
over-worn Widow, and got a Vicaridge by the Symony of Flattery, and by the same
Methods of backbiting, lying and slandering. still keeps himself in plight to
write Observations, to lessen the Reputation of his Betters, etc. Nay, if he be
for Supposals, I Will fit him in my next, for at present I am quite tired with
thinking thus long upon this Threadbare Levite, that would wheedle himself into
some Reputation, by making himself a Kin to the Author, as if they were both of
a Tribe (forsooth,) The Tribe of Levi, p. 7.

The Author, on all accounts, but more especially for his sake, disclaims the
Kindred, and the whole Jewish Tribe: if he were in Spain, this his Folly, as
well as Ambition, would bring him into the Inquisition: But in England the
Clergy are all of them as much (and some of them much more) of the Tribe of
Simeon rather than Levi.

Could any, without impudent Cavil and Forgery say, as the Observator does, p.
3. That All, and every bit of the said Sermon that is worth reading, is Printed
before in three or four octavo pages, by N. Brook, with very small variation of
words, from that preached at Guild Hall?

It Is very strange then there should be such a pother about the latter, if it
only contain three or four octavo pages, and most of them too Ryme Burlesque?
as he calls it.

The Author does not say, he never read the Verse before, or never spoke a word
of it before, but never preached upon it before; for, insisting upon a Text in
a Pulpit, is certainly all one with preaching upon it.

No doubt but multitudes have found out the true meaning of that Text before we
were born, there is more wonder any man should miss of the meaning thereof, than
not find it. The Author does not in the least recommend himself as the first,
or only Finder and Discoverer; but humbly supposes that other men (besides
Columbus) may Trade in the Indies. How fearful the Observator is, lest the
Author should get any Reputation by the said Sermon, how early and carefully
does he bestir himself to lessen it?

But if he knew the Author's temper, as well as I know it, he should not need
thus to afflict himself: The Author never daign'd to stoop to such Methods and
Arts which some men take to be the Common Road to Preferment, but leaves them
to supple pick-thanks, Dissemblers, Symonists, and Flatterers, whilst the
Author thinks he scapes fair, if great men do him no mischief, no wrong, nor
Injustice; further Favor he never did, nor, I dare say, ever will crave; but
had always rather have gone ten miles another way, than meet any Great man, and
Lordly. Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos.

Preferment is only for men of more pliant, suppliant, cringing and crouching
Arts, and great Aims and Abilities; why should men trouble their Heads with
him, that troubles his Head with no man in particular, but only studies the
quiet of himself and Mankind, if they would take his Advice.

But hereafter, who (that is wise) will trouble himself with the Rabble? Is this
the Reception, this the Entertainment and Encouragement? Then, Si populus vult
decipi, decipiatur. I say again, let them run as fast as they have a mind, to
their Ruin, Mutiny, Tumult, and Destruction: Let them run and be hanged, and
let the Spiritual Free-booters in the mean time wheedle the Coxcombs, and pick
their Pockets, till they leave them as empty as their pates. Here Is a do with a
pack of sneaking Vaux's, Observators and Dark-lanthorn-men, underminers of men's
Reputations; nay, it is a baser Employ than Vaux's, in one sense, namely,
insomuch as a man's Reputation is and ought to be dearer to him than his Life:
These same Slanderers, amongst the Lydians were adjudged Felons, and punished
with Death, as Murderers of men's Names and good Fame.

And justly, for they make thousands to hate a man mortally, and to Death, whom
yet possibly they never saw, but in the false and ugly colors they pourtray
him, nor ever knew any harm in him, or by him, of their own Knowledge.

But, you will say, none but Knaves and Fools will judge and condemn when they
hear but of one Ear, when they hear the Plaint only, much less hate a man they
never knew, nor saw no hurt in; but only by Fame, which is commonly a Liar.

I grant it; But, is not the World well stock't with Knaves and Fools, and
England with Blockish English enough? Facile credimus quae volumus; if any man,
(how worthy, how innocent soever,) do but speak against or thwart our darling
Lusts, or beloved Opinions and darling Sins, we are apt to believe the worst of
such an one that Malice can forge and invent.

Thus it was of old, the old Cry was -- Away with such a Fellow from the Earth,
for it is not fit that he should live; when perhaps the most of the People knew
not for what, nor wherefore they were met together.

Thus the Observator rayles and lies, without the least color or resemblance
of Truth; for how is it possible a man can by any Stratagem get his Tutor's
Fellowship, except he be Fellow of the same College where he had a Tutor? or
how is it probable that the Tarpaulins should be so All-Devout upon the sudden,
that they should kick their Captain from aboard, lest he should tempt them to
Debauchery with a Dram of the Bottle?

For the aforesaid Graceless Villain was never at Sea since he was a
Clergyman, but once (sixteen or seventeen years ago) when the late Reverend
Father in God Gilbert Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, with great Importunity,
prevailed with him, and overperswaded him to accept of the Honorable
Employment of Chaplain at Sea to his Highness Prince Rupert, contrary to the
mind and Petitions, and Endeavors of the Parishoners of All-Hallows-Barking,
Tower Hill, London; where the said Graceless Villain was Lecturer; many
Boats-full of the chief Parishoners, rowing to Lambeth to beg of the
Archbishop, that Mr. Hickeringill their Lecturer might not be taken from them;
but not prevailing, they promised (and performed faithfully) never to choose a
Lecturer till he returned, but hire one from Sunday to Sunder where they could;
and his Return was sooner than any of them did expect, he voluntarily and with
much a Do, got Leave to leave that honorable Employ, chiefly, because the
Tarpaulins were so irreclaimably debaucht.

Some People then of the most eminent City of England, and all the most eminent
of that famous Parish of the City, were many years ago, as well as the said
Archbishop, enamored with that same Graceless Villain; and yet knew all the
Passages of his Life, a thousand times better than the lying Observator; I
scorn to write any thing but what is Truth to a Tittle.

And the Author had (in all Probability) been Lecturer there at this day, (for
he is no Starter, nor Shifter, nor Swapper of Livings) but for one peevish old
man, whose name I spare at present, because he is dead and gone: the Bishops
have hindered Mr. Hickeringill, but they never furthered him in their Lives,
nor ever will, I dare say; plain Dealing is a Jewel, but it prefers no man,
though it beggars many. It Is Justice (not Favor) that is required for a man in
Mr. Hickeringill's Circumstances, and they wrong him that gives him less; and
if they do, he knows how to right himself upon them.

What? Cannot a man be naturally of a cheerful ruddy Complexion, but he must be
forthwith proclaimed -- Debaucht? Cannot a man be merry and wise? Can no man be
religious, but he that interferes Sighs and Groans with his Words, and
disfigures his Face and Voice with Snivels and Tones? that he may appear unto
men to be devout, precise, and religious? A Religion unworthy the Author, and
fit only for a Spleenatick and Hypocritical Observator, who would make every
man a Pulpit-Droll, that puts a little more Wit in a Sermon, than he is guilty
of, though but just as much as should keep up Attention, and keep men from
sleeping.

But, Why should observing Black Coats endeavor thus to lessen any man's
Reputation, especially of their Brethren, when there are enough to pick Holes in
the Coats of all of them, though there be none? Where is the Wisdom, the
Prudence, the Religion of it the while? I see a man's chief Enemies (as our
Savior says) shall be them of his own Household, of his own Coat, of his own
Neighborhood.

But let the Observator proceed, (I cannot bid him -- God-speed in such an
unchristian, unmanly, unscholar-like, uncharitable, lying and slandering
Attempt, but) let him go on, and if in Conclusion he comes off boasting of his
Gettings, he is the first man that did so, that either here or beyond Sea ever
grapell'd with that same graceless Villain he so calumniates, and falsely
reviles; creeping behind the Loyter, and dare not show his Head, nor justify
his Words; whereas my Bookseller has Order to make known my Name on just
Occasion, if the Truth of any Word in this Reply be lawfully questioned, it is
due Modesty, not Fear that conceals it now.

And whereas the Observer says, that the Author was of Anabaptistical
Principles, I dare say, it is true, and the only Truth in all his Observations;
and every man has Ground enough from the Letter of Scripture, to be either Pro
or Con, so that till the Restoration of our Laws in his Majesty's happy
Restoration to his Rights, in the sole executive Power of the Laws, and the
Settlement of the Church by Act of Parliament, any man might be an Anabaptist
without Sin: For as the Learned Dr. Saunderson, de Sabbatho, in his Cases of
Conscience, well does distinguish betwixt Jus Divinum positivum, and Jus
Humanum Ecclesiasticum: of the first Divine Right, and strict sense, namely,
things that are enjoined by the express Commandment of God in his Holy Word, or
may be deduced therefrom by necessary, evident, and demonstrative illation;
there are not many things de Jure Divino under the New Testament.

But for Divine Ecclesiastical Right, it suffices that it may be by Humane
Discourse upon Reasons of Congruity probably deduced from the Word of God, as a
thing most convenient to be observed by all such as desire unfeignedly to order
their ways according to God's Holy Will.

This Distinction of Jus Divinum is to be observed the rather, because it may
be of very good Use (if rightly understood and applied.)

1. For cutting off the most material Instances, which are usually brought by
the Romish Party, for the maintenance of their unwritten Traditions. 2. For the
clearing of some, and the silencing of other some Controversies in the Church,
which are disputed pro and con, with much heat, as, viz. concerning, 1. The
Government of the Church by Bishops. 2. The Distinction of Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons. 3. The Exercise of Ecclesiastical Censures, as Suspension,
Excommunication, etc. 4. The Building and Consecrating of Churches for the
Service of God. 5. The assembling of Synods, upon needful occasions, for the
maintenance of the Truth, and for the settling of Church Affairs. 6. The
forbidding of Marriages to be made within certain degrees of Consanguinity and
Affinity. 7. The Baptizing of Infants. 8. The maintenance of the Clergy by the
Tithes of the People, and sundry other things.

None of all which, to my understanding (says that Learned and Good Bishop of
Lincoln) seem to be de Jure Divino, in that first and proper sense, but yet
all, or most of them to be de Jure Divino in this latter and larger
signification.

So that in the Judgment of this (I would say unparalleled Bishop, but that
Comparisons are generally odious, especially about things and men incomparable)
these latter are Moot-cases, and only in Abeyance, and in nubibus, till the
Law decides them, and turns the Scales; till then they are in equilibrio and
suspense; and a man may be a good Christian, and go to Heaven, and believe
either way, or neither way, either any of them, or none of them.

And this, Mr. Observator, I dare say, the Author will be ready to vindicate
against you, or any of your Jewish Tribe of Levi. And why beholdest thou the
Mote that is in thy Brother's Eye, but considerest not the Beam that is in thy
own Eye?

The man from first to last, it seems, stares all the Sermon over, to spy
faults, or any thing that looks but faulty, by his dis-joynting it from the
rest of the Sentence, to lessen the Reputation (as he used to phrase it) of the
Sermon and the Author; and therefore tells the most Generous and Ingenuous
Nation in the World, that there is a Plot, a Popish Plot, or a Plot by one that
would (as he phrases it page 7.) kiss the Mass Book, and all against their
Generosity and Ingenuity, and make them Blockish English.

Sure the Observator has got the Sermon printed for his own turn, for that
printed for J. Williams has not one word in it of a Plot against Generous and
Ingenuous English; but only those English that were gulled, (that surely was
not all the English) nor any part of the English that were either generous or
ingenuous, but only such blockish English, as in spite of all Sense, Grammar,
and the Context, by wresting the plain and easy sense thereof, were gulled to
their destruction; these are the very words of the Sermon.

And is not this Observator also a keen Sophister, to impose upon men that in
sensu diviso, which is and ought to be taken in sensu composito? to pick out a
word and a scrap of a Sentence, here and there, and then expose it, not in its
own colors, but even what he is pleased to bedaub it with; and whether this be
like a Member of the most Ingenuous and Generous English Nation, or more like
the Knavish and Blockish English, judge you.

Has he not cause to wish in all haste that the Parliament might sit, to make
Bottoms for Ingenuity, Truth and Honesty, as well as Bottoms for his Faith; for
by his Discourse, his Honesty as well as his Faith is bottomless, I having been
searching for a little of either of them, either Honesty or Faith, and cannot
yet find a Bit; (sure then it is so, his Honesty and Faith is bottomless.

I wish he would read St. Austin, and he will tell him, his Faith was not
bottomless, but bottomed on Humane Authority; nay, says he, I would not
believe, nor had not believed the Scriptures, but for the Church that handed
them to him, of which Church he had a good opinion.

The bottom of a man's Faith must be either private or public; if private, then
his own or other men's private Dreams, Fancies, Madness and Enthusiasms may as
well be obtruded under Pretense of Divine Testimony, for ought any man knows to
the contrary, excepting only where there is supernatural and miraculous
Revelation (in the case) to convince others, as was in the Apostles. Nay, at
this day, if there should come an Angel from Heaven, or a Worker of Wonders,
endeavoring to stagger or alter the Faith held out unto us by the holy
Scriptures, infallibly as they are interpreted to us by the Laws of the Land,
and by them only, the Lord our God does it to prove us, as Moses said, and we
are not to believe him or them, contrary to our said Laws; much less should we
believe the Comment and Interpretation of every Jugler, that cannot work any
one Miracle, and is so far from the Gift of Tongues, that he has scarce one
Tongue that can speak Sense or good English, though he may, like other Hocus's,
speak hard Words, and new Words, or instead of old Jingo, Tanutus, etc. cries
Incomes, Outgoings, etc. which are indeed Nothingnesses.

For all men that believe, either believe with or without Reason; either they
do know, or they do not know wherefore.

He that believes and knows not wherefore, is an Ass or a Beast, not a man; at
least, a very silly man with a bottomless Faith, like our Observator, and then
at best, is but an Enthusiast or Dreamer, a Fanatic or Frantic, alias a
Madman, and knows not why nor wherefore he thinks so and so; and no man in
England can have a certain humane Authority to trust to, but only our sacred
Laws.

The Church of England and People of England are (or should be) one and the
same, of and over which, under God and Christ, the King (in the executive
Power) and the King and Parliament (in the Legislative Power) is the Head; and
all Canons and Laws that are not confirmed by Acts of Parliament are not Canons
nor Rules to an English Christian, nor bottoms of any godly and wise
English-mans Faith or Works.

And People for want of being thus truly taught, are led to follow blindly a
Stranger, whose own the Sheep are not; as the English Papists who have nothing
to do with the Laws of another Country, another Bishop or Potentate, nor can
never be True and Loyal Subjects whilst they think themselves under such an
Obligation.

Neither can a Fanatic be a Loyal Subject and a good Christian, if he thinks
he may without Sin transgress and disobey the Laws of the Land; for passive
Obedience is no Obedience (that will justify a Man) it is but
Gallows-Obedience, and the Obedience of Devils, for they obey Gods Laws
passively.

But to pursue this Discourse will raise as much Discourse as did that innocent
Sermon, and the unblemisht Author, I mean, (justly and truly unblemisht) and as
for Fools and Knaves, that will hear but of one Ear, and being credulous to
believe any Slander of one they hate; though perhaps they hate (but as they
believe) not knowing wherefore; for the Judgments or condemning Sentences of
such men, the Author is so much placed above them, and as little concerned, as
the Moon is, when the Dogs bark. -- And all the Dirt and Stones which Malice
has (now on this Occasion) cast upon Mr. Hickeringill, will have no worse
Effect than those Stones which the Jews and Mahometans (as their Custom is to
this day) do cast upon Absalom's Pillar, as they pass by, namely, to build him
a fairer (that is) a greater and a more lasting Monument.

In a little time -- graceless Villain, spightful Rascal, popishly affected,
Masse-book-kisser, and jesuitical Dog, etc. (as the Fanatics are old excellent
at calling of Names,) will be accounted but words of Course, and only the
familiar Results of frenzical Wrath, and of a silly Observator; and will rather
heighten than lessen Reputation amongst the generous and ingenuous English.

If the Sermon on -- Curse ye Meroz -- had only spoke against Popery, Arbitrary
Government, etc. the Fanatics had made a precious godly man of that same
graceless Villain, all England over before this; and if it had only smartly
checked Fanatical-plots and designs, another sort of People would have almost
canonized and besainted the Preacher: but to be such a plain-dealer, and to
spare neither Papist, Fanatic, nor cursing Debauchee (which three include a
great part of the Blockish-English) That, That makes the Sermon on -- Curse ye
Meroz, the common-eye-sore to some, as well as the common-Talk to all.

But if no man can answer, nor save old Calvin's-Ears, with Scholar-like,
Man-like, and Christian-like Attacques, they seem to yield the Cause, the
Cause; or at least, make it very precarious, if they can only justify it by
stiling the Preacher graceless Villain, Mass-book-kisser, etc. whilst the said
Sermon will so much the more carry the Vogue still, notwithstanding all the
Dirt endeavored to be cast upon the Author, which like Dirt and Stones thrown
at Heaven will neither hurt nor endanger any thing but their own Pates; and
(observe it,) none rail so busily, and concerned both against the said Sermon
and its Author, as those that are Demagogues and Partisans, men of Designs, as
desperate as their Fortunes; being afraid -- any man should clarify the Waters,
and spoil their fishing, which never thrives but in troubled Waters.

In the Name of God, What would men be at? Ought any thing to be grateful and
acceptable to men, if Physicians be not so, especially such as bring certain
and sound Medicines to cure and prevent the Distempers of Soul and Body,
chiefly the Body Politic, and all this without a Fee?

Is he not a Friend that saves men's Lives, and saves some from the Gallows?
such, such a dear Friend is Mr. Hickeringill to mad Fanatics (they are not all
so mad, God forbid) and by them he ought to be hugged and esteemed for the
Physic he prescribes them, it is so good and wholesome, though it be not so sweet
and toothsome to Flesh and Blood, the old man, and the old Principles and leven
within them.

By the false Comments -- on Curse ye Meroz, thousands and multitudes, nay the
Kingdom has been ruined; -- By this true Interpretation and Prosecution,
thousands and Multitudes may be kept from Ruin, Arms, and Civil-War: and is he
a Physician of no Value (but to be railed at, threatened and reviled) that can
stop a breeding Plurisie in a Body rank of Blood, before it come to the last
Remedy, breathing a Vein, and Blood-letting?

Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse pium?
Since some (to Sin) plead Libetty,
Why (to reprove it) may not I?
But the sagest of all his Observations I had almost neglected, p. 6.
concerning the cutting in two the man of Sin, or Son of Perdition (by
contradistinguishing him, as he calls it) into the Spirit of Popery, and the
Spirit of Foppery, as if any thing in the World could be more a Foppery than
Popery, and thus he bestows upon us most liberally at once a Taste of his
Logic, (as good) as his Rhetoric.

I thought a man might have divided a Crab into Two, very Logically and
Mathematically, and yet it was not very necessary that those Two (Parts) should
be contradistinguish'd.

But the aptest Reply (if such Observations require any other Reply, save
Neglect and Scorn) is an Aphorism too, borrowed from a Brother of the Quill;
namely, -- Comparisons are generally odious, especially betwixt things
incomparably good, namely, Popery and Fanaticisme, Popery and Foppery.

I am in the Observator's Debt, (I confess) thus by borrowing of him, but if he
will take my word, (though I am now (like a Great man when his Creditors dun
him) in great haste, and cannot stay) yet, upon my Word and Honor, I give it
here under my hand, that I Will pay him off in my next; if it be but for belying
Mr. Hickeringill so impudently out of his own Book, Greg. Gray-beard, when
every Body can contradict and convince him of his Lies in Print.

I would call them Frailties, if the Observator was only flesh and blood, but
his Brow is Brass, or else he durst not say, p. 3. That All and every bit, that
is worth the reading, in this Elaborate Sermon, and with very small variation
of Words, we have in the said Book, Greg. Gray-beard; whereas there is not one
word in that Book concerning -- Curse ye Meroz, -- but the Interpretation of
it, every word whereof the Observator has Reprinted, (picking it here and
there) in his p. 3. And is all that is worth the reading in the whole sheet.

I wonder he did not also Re-print his Brother Hugh Peter's Sermon there also
in Rhithm-Burlesque, as well as in Print, and so have served up also more
Cold-pye, with his additional Oleo's, that are only for show not Use: How
concerned the Poor-man is, to undervalue Mr. Hickeringill's Treat to the City?
But Envy never speaks well, and seldom true; How early he bespeaks their
Ingratitude? But (God be thanked) there are more Generous and Ingenuous; they
are (not all) blockish English, though (you know) in the days of yore (and
darkness) multitudes of them were such blind and tame things as to be led by
the Nose to their Ruin, with Foppery and foppish Comments on -- Curse ye Meroz,
-- to that height, that England became a Lamentation as well as a
Laughing Stock to all Nations.

Till our vertiginous Roundhead, giddy-crown-tricks and various overturnings,
overturning of Governments, (as if we had a mind to show tricks in Politics,
and the double-Sommerset with our Governors) convinced our selves at long run,
as well as all the World, how ridiculous and blockish the Generous English were
become; and that instead of Gospel Light, we had been gulled with Whimsies,
Fancies, Fopperies, and Phanatismes, by Jesuits, or (their Apes) the
Presbyterians; and so, at last were willing, in the Restoration of His Majesty
and his Laws, to be also restored to our Wits.

But some men would persuade us, we have yet only our lucida Intervalla, and
that there is some fear of a Midsummer Moon.

HVGH PETERS's SERMON UPON Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz -- Represented, like it
self, in this Drolling Pulpit-stuff.
HID in these words, it plain appears,
Lie Men and Arms, against Cavaliers:
I see them clear as any thing,
Both Foot and Horse, against the King:
Couchant, I grant, Perdue they lie,
Nor seen indeed by Carnal eye;
Because they lie in Ambuscade;
But ready are for a Parade:
Armed Cap-apee; and One and All,
To come when we do beat a Call.
Drum-major I, on Pulpit Drum,
Am therefore now, beloved, come
With Bible in Geneva Print,
To turn up All, this Text has in it.
In which, two Parts, at least, I count,
Here Is Gerazim, there is Ebal Mount:
Here lies the Blessing, there the Curse:
Take you the better part; the worse
Is good enough for Cavaliers;
And such as dare not show their Ears,
As Roundheads do, in Good Old Cause,
For Liberty, Religion, Laws:
For which, who dies, is cursed never,
From which, who flies, is cursed ever.
For which, who dies, is blessed ever,
From which, who flies, is blessed never.
Since I was with you last, I Have been,
To tell you Truth, in Hell and Heaven:
You Will say, perhaps, it is a great way,
Yet to the first, it is a neat way;
And to be found out very easy,
And down-hill always to it, an't please ye:
Nor is it far off, ye may come to it
In one day, though ye go on foot:
And Barefoot, without shoes or hose.
Of all days in the Week, I chose
The Sabbath (taught by Master Gurney;)
To speed the better in my Journey:
For one may Preach, and Cant, and Pray;
Yet never be out of the way:
Gallants may whore, and roar, and play,
Yet all the while Post thither may:
Others may whine, snivel, and fast,
And yet may thither come at last;
Still the more idly men live,
With greater speed they thither drive.
When I came there, who (do you think)
I spied, as I stood at Pit's brink?
Except the Cavaliers, not one:
And only one Committee-man,
With Sequestrators three, at the door;
Only condemned for being poor,
And balking of a Bishop's Land,
Sentenced for ever there to stand.
My foot stood just at brink of Pit,
A little more I Would been in it:
Truly, I durst not come too near,
As I good reason had to fear:
Long Prayers there are no assistance,
I therefore still did keep my distance:
And loath to stay, the Fiends to shun,
Like Hare before the Hounds, I run,
And I, though fat, away did hie,
To see what I in Heaven could spy.
And to that purpose I did gather
In Arabs a great Phoenix feather
To fly withal, a pretty thing,
Daedalus never imp'd such a Wing;
Resolving with my self to fly
Above the Clouds, and Starry sky;
Hoping the better to get in,
Because my Namesake is in Heaven,
St. Peter at the door: yet I,
Thinking on it better, (loath to fly
So high a Pitch) had cause to fear
I never should find Entrance there,
On that account (but was to blame)
Peter was not my Christian-name.
Besides, I feared St. Peter should
Owe me a Grudge, because I would
Often (for which I now am vex't)
Make a bold sally from my Text
Against the Pope, who is allied
To Peter by the surer side.
Fearing Success, and loath to climb,
I put off till some other time
The Journey: I desisting then
Can tell you no great News from Heaven.
Therefore I Will keep me to my Text,
That with some doubts is much perplexed;
But I Will resolve All out of hand,
And first,i n order as they stand,
Curse ye Meroz -- What is Meroz?
Some Infidel will not come near us,
Nor to us will Horse and Arms bring,
But rather send them to the King,
And go himself, and men to boot;
But for the Cause not stir one foot.
This is that Cursed Meroz, that
To the Parliament will send no Plate,
But from us if he can, will lock it,
And keep his money in his Pocket.
So much for that. Another word
There is to clear: -- Help of the Lord.
Help of the Lord! What Is that? Lord Bishop?
Or House of Lords? Not so, I hope:
Nor Lord Newcastle, nor Lord Goring;
(With whom the Wicked go a Whoring;)
Help of the Lord, is One and All
Help the Lord Essex, General.
But that is not All, for Moneys are
The Nerves and Sinews too of War;
For Powder must be had for Gun;
(We had as good else never begun;)
If the Red-Coats have not their Pay,
They Will from their Colors run away;
Nor will they willing be to die:
Nay, and perhaps may may mutiny
For want of Pay; where are we then?
We may go hang our selves for men,
Except we money have. The Gold
Must here be found, as I Will unfold;
Help of the Lord then, is, Dear Honeys,
Help the poor Red-Coats with your Moneys.
Down with your Dust then; come be nimble,
Plate, Bodkins, Tankards, Spoon, or Thimble:
All these (then as if at a stand,
And into Pocket putting his hand)
All these (like Barber's Teeth, being strung
On red Cloth, ready as they hung)
(Holding forth, said, All these (good People!)
From Colchester, St. Peter's Steeple
Are all clear gains; and I assure ye
As many more I got at Bury.
Then (lest the People should discover
His sleight of hand, and so give over,
Finding the Juggle out, and mock it)
He put his hand in the other Pocket,
As feeling for some other strings:
(But in the interim slily flings
His right hand into the left behind,
And then the better them to blind,
His hands met under's cloak, in brief,
As the Receiver with the Thief)
He held it out then to be seen,
(As if some other string 't had been,
And said) This other string of Plate
I, from the Wives of Ipswich got.
The Butcher's Wife did freely give
All the poor Soul had, I believe:
I got all to her very Plackit,
And can have more still when I lack it.
Help of the Lord then, is, Dear Coneys!
Help us, dear Petticoats, with moneys!
List; for I hear this Text plain lie,
Fine Ends of Gold and Silver cry:
(Beggars must be no chusers) whether
Silver broken or whole; bring 't hither;
Good Wife or Wench; the Widows mite:
Oliver C. shall you requite;
If you will not credit what he says,
I Will give you then the Public Faith.
Methinks I hear the Proverb started,
A Fool and's Money is soon parted:
That Proverb does belong to those
That part with money to our Foes.
Help, who? the King? No. No such thing,
Help Parliament, not Help the King:
When we say King and Parliament,
The Parliament alone is meant.
So much for this time then I say.
Desiderantur Caetera.
Let all Ingenuous English judge, if this Burlesque Sermon, and that preached
at Guild Hall, be the same, with very small variation.

But I must withdraw my Pen, and not transgress at this Rate the bounds of a
Letter; wherein, if I have given you but slender Entertainment, attribute it to
my great haste, that forces me to write off-hand, having not time to Copy it
more fair and dexterously, being diverted also by more necessary Employes, but
chiefly ascribe it to that slender occasion that is given by this Bo-peep
Observator, and they must be very blockish English that have not observed the
false Quotations, Calumnies, sly Insinuations and Reproaches, yet crafty
Evasions, if he should be discovered, in that his so putid and impertinent
Scribble.

Whilst in the Interim I thus prove how ready I am to take all occasions to
approve my self,

May 28th 1680. Your Servant A. B.

FINIS.

