THE QUAKERS APPEAL ANSWERED, OR A FULL RELATION Of the Occasion, Progress, and
Issue of a Meeting held in Barbican, the 28th. of August last past.

Wherein the Allegations of William Pen, in Two BOOKS lately Published by Him,
against Thomas Hicks: were Answered and Disproved*

And Tho. Hicks, his Quotations out of the Quakers own Books, Attested, by
several, as being appealed unto.

Published for Common Information.

Deuteronomy. 19.16. etc. If a false VVitness arise against any man to Testify
against him that which is False: Then both the Men between whom the
controversieis, shall stand up, before the Lord, before the Priests and the
Judges which shall be in those days: And the Judges shall make Diligent
Inquisition, and behold, if the Witness be a false Witness; Then you shall do
unto him as he thought to have done unto his Brother: So shall you put the Evil
away from you.

LONDON, Printed for Peter Parker, at the Leg and Star in Cornhil, over against
the Royal Exchange, 1674. Where are Sold the three Dialogues between a
Christian and a Quaker.

To the Reader.
WHereas there have been several Books published of late, by Thomas Hicks, by
way of Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker, Against which the people
called Quakers have manifested great offense, G. Whitehead calls the First
Dialogue a malicious Forgery, and Fiction, stuffed with manifest slanders against
persons and principles, Dip. pl. p. 1. To the first and second Dialogues
William Pen wrote an Answer, Entitled, Reason against Rattling, and Truth
against Fiction, etc. -- Unto which Thomas Hicks replied in a Third Dialogue,
Entitled, The Quaker condemned out of his own mouth. To this last William Pen
says something, in his Counterfeit Christian Detected, etc. Wherein he does
charge Thomas Hicks with vile Forgeries, and black slanders, etc. By way of
Appeal to all sober people, especially those called Anabaptists, in and about
the City of London, And at the end of which book we have these words, by way of
appeal:

A Postscript by another hand.

We expect to hear what the Baptists in and about London, will say, (as being
appealed to;) concerning their Brother Tho. Hicks his proceeding in his three
Dialogues, and whether they approve thereof, or of such Play-Books or Romances
about Religion, yea or nay: For they are highly concerned to give Judgment,
and to be plain to the world herein, as they tender the Glory of God, and the
Reputation of Religion, etc.

Now if you the Teachers and Elders etc. among the Baptized people, do not
publicly clear your selves of Tho. Hicks, and these his unjust proceedings
against us, and hereafter he further persists therein, we may take it for
granted, that you own his work, and may justly deal with him, and pursue him,
not only as Tho. Hicks, but as the Baptists great Champion, peculiar Agent, or
Representative; But if you ingenuously clear your selves of him, and his
corrupt perverse work, then his future miscarriages will be chargeable only
upon Tho. Hicks himself, and you shall appear to the world so far clear
thereof, and approve your selves the more honest and sincere toward God,
Truth, and Religion.

The aforesaid book of William Pens was distributed, at the doors of some of
our Meeting places, the second of August last, Though some of us met not with
it, till several days after.

Upon the reading of this Appeal we were concerned to examine the several
things charged by William Pen against Tho. Hicks, and the rather, because the
said Appeal signifies that if we did not deal with him, as such a person
therein represented, they would interpret his proceedings as the Act of the
whole Baptists, etc. Now forasmuch as Thomas Hicks is a member with us (and one
whose conversation has been honest and unblameable to the best of our
knowledge:) having so heavy a charge exhibited against him, viz. A Forger, and
a Liar, we could do no less than desire Tho. Hicks to give us a
Publick-meeting, that we might hear what he could say hereunto: and if he had
done them any wrong either by misquoting of them in any of their books, or
slandering of them in any thing he had charged them with, That we might, if any
such thing appeared, discharge that duty toward him as becomes us (viz.)
either to bring him to acknowledge his evil as Publicly as he had wronged
them, or to have disowned him, as a person unworthy of countenance amongst us:
in case he should refuse so to do: It being altogether contrary to our
principles and practice, to allow any amongst us, that shall either in word or
deed wrong any sort of men.

Hereupon a Letter was sent to William Pen as follows; William Pen,
Whereas an Appeal has been made to us in a Book lately published by thee,
Entitled, The Counterfeit Christian Detected, etc. That we should clear our
selves of Tho. Hicks, and (As the Appeal expresses it:) of his unjust
proceedings against the Quakers: These are therefore to acquaint Thee, that we
have desired Tho. Hicks to give us a public meeting, that we might hear his
Answer both with respect to those Doctrines and matters of Fact which he in his
Dialogues has laid to the Quakers charge. At which meeting, thy self with some
others of thy friends are expected to be present: And we do also entreat and
expect from you, that as you have in Print accused him of Forgery and lying, so
you would suffer him withou interruption to make his own defense, otherwise we
shall not be able to give Judgment whether he has wronged you or not.

William Kissen. Han. Knollys. Tho. Paul. Lawrence Wise. Henry Forty. James
Jones.

London, 15th. of August, 1674. The meeting will be on the 28th. instant, at
Mr. Gosnels meeting place in Barbican, at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.






This Letter was sealed and directed to William Pen at his house at
Rickmansworth or elsewhere, and left with Phillip Ford for conveyance: Who
presumed to break open the letter, and accordingly returned this Answer, to the
persons before named.

Yesterday I received a Letter from you, directed to William Pen, concerning a
meeting to be the 28th. instant, at which you say you expect him: This serves
only to give you notice, that he was gone into the East of England about three
weeks ago, and when his return will be I know not: neither do I know how to
give him notice hereof: and therefore I do not see that he is likely to be
there, except you had been pleased to have appointed a time when he was in the
City, or so near that he might have had timely notice of your intentions. If
this be designedly done, it is not fair; but if not, the debate must be
suspended till a time in which the parties concerned with you, by mutual
consent, agree upon a time. This I thought good to let you know, and do judge
you ought to let others know it, that so vain boasting may be prevented as much
as in us lies, which is all at present from your Friend.

Phillip Ford.
London 20th. 6/mo. 1674.

Another Letter of the same import with that before to William Pen, was sent to
G. Whitehead, sealed and directed to him, at his house, at the Wheat-sheaff in
Houndsditch or elsewhere.

Whereupon this following Answer was returned by G. Whiteheads Wife.

I did presume to open my husbands Letter, lest I might prejudicially keep it,
now finding the consequence, requiring my husband and William Pen, at such a
day and time, which in all likelihood they are incapable of answering, being
very remote from this City. And the truth is in plainness, I know not when nor
where to send to either of them; so did think it best to return the Letter with
this plain information.

That I am thy Friend. Ann Whitehead.


Hereupon another letter was sent to John Osgood to the same purpose, as to
William Pen and G. Whitehead, with this addition, That we understand, that
neither Will. Pen, nor G. Whitehead were in the City, and it is not known where
they are, nor how to direct our Letters to them, of which we were wholly
ignorant when those Letters were sent. However since the matter depending
before us, is only matter of Fact, and not of Dispute, we conceive we may
proceed to hear Tho. Hicks his Defense; His Charge being already in Print
exhibited against him: therefore we do now acquaint you of our intentions; that
you with some others of your Friends, may be there if you please, etc.

Dated 23d. of Aug. 1674.

This Letter was accordingly delivered into John Osgoods Hands, the very next
day.

Thus far did we proceed to prevent any pleading of a surprise; Though it was
more than we were in strictness obliged unto Forasmuch as we (with other sober
people;) were Appealed unto: And we are not to suppose, that the Quakers did
this, to them who are not fit to give a certain judgment. For William Pen
says, That to which an Appeal is made, must be capable of giving an Infallible
Judgment; and so a true Judge: Or the Appeal is foolish: Spir. of Truth. vind.
p. 78. Consequently We must be infallible Judges in this Case: or otherwise
they have made a foolish Appeal. Though this might have been sufficient to us,
had we Privately examined what Tho. Hicks had writ, comparing it with the
Quakers own Books: and if we had found he had not wronged them, would also have
justified us in the clearing of Tho. Hicks: nevertheless we were unwilling to
be single Judges in this matter; therefore thought it convenient to make it so
Public as we did; To the end that they themselves, and all others that
pleased, might hear and judge, as well as we: Hence could not think it
reasonable, to put off the meeting (being so generally known;) merely for the
absence of William Pen and G. Whithead; in regard the matters objected against
the Quakers, especially with respect to their opinions, did concern the whole
party: and therefore there was the more Reason, that those of them who could,
should have come; that they might be Witnesses whether there was any wrong done
to them or not.

According to the time appointed we did meet; Tho. Hicks charged them with
several opinions, and produced the Books of such as have been, and now are
chief Leaders amongst the Quakers: for his own discharge from Forgery. And that
all plainness might appear, We ordered another person in the meeting, to read
the said Books, according as they were Cited by Tho. Hicks. Upon the reading of
which, we found them to agree, with what he had laid to the Quakers charge,
which the following Narrative will give you a more full account of: so that
hitherto we see no cause of just blame to be laid unto Tho. Hicks.

And whereas there is a late paper Printed by way of complaint of several
scandalous reports in City and Country against William Pen and G. Whitehead, as
if they purposely neglected to meet the day aforesaid: To which we say, that
for any such Reports, they came not from any amongst us, as we know: But some
there were who did affirm, that W. Pen was not far from London several days
before the meeting, and after our Letter was given to Phillip Ford, to be sent
to him. Yea, others do report, That William Pen was at his own house, (not far
from London) the day before the meeting: Though William Pen says, he heard not
of it Directly nor Indirectly, till about ten that very night the meeting
ended. Now if those Reports be true, That William Pen was at his own house the
day before, etc. It must be left to men's Judgments; whether William Pen did
not know of the meeting till afterward; especially since it is not improbable,
but that a man who will with the highest confidence deny what he knows to be
true, may also as confidently affirm that which he knows to be false.

That William Pen is guilty of the First, the Relation following may put you
beyond doubt: As for the Challenge which William Pen gives on the behalf of
himself, G. Whitehead and the rest of his friends to give us a publick-meeting
etc. We say, that if Will. Pen or G. Whitehead or any other Leading-Quaker have
any new matter to object against Tho. Hicks, of which he has not cleared
himself publicly: If they please to signify the particulars thereof to us in
Writing, with their hands to it, we shall return such answer thereunto, either
by a Publick-meeting or otherwise, as to us may seem just, and that may also be
to the satisfaction of all indifferent and unprejudiced minds. For we hope that
nothing shall lie upon us in point of Duty toward Tho. Hicks, but that by the
Grace of God we shall be ready to do it.

William Kiffen Dan. Dyke Tho. Paul Han. Knollys Henry Forty.


A NARATIVE OF THE Method and Proceedings at the Meeting held in Barbican, the
28th of August, 1674.
After Mr. Kiffen had given an Account of the Occasion hereof, by Reading the
Quakers Appeal; (wherein Tho. Hicks is Accused of Unjust and Perverse
Proceedings against them:) He signified, That the Business of that Day was not
to Dispute, but only to Hear and Examine Matters of Fact, viz. Whether Tho.
Hicks was Guilty of that which is Objected against him.
Tho. Hicks. THe things whereof I accuse the Quakers, are Reduced under Two
General Heads. (1.) Such as respect their Opinions. (2.) Their Practice.

Their Opinions, I shall give you in these following particulars,

(1.) That the Light in every man, Or the Light wherewith every man is
Enlightened, is God. Dial. 1. page 3. Dial. 3. page 2.

(2.) That the Soul is part of God, and of Gods Being; without Beginning, and
Infinite. Dial. 1. page 16. Dial. 3. page 2.

(3.) That Jesus Christ is not a Distinct Person without us, Dial. 1. page 1.
Dial. 3. page 2.

(4.) That Christ Redeems himself. Dial. 1. page 47. Dial. 3. page 2.

(5.) That the Scripture is no Rule of Faith, and Practice unto Christians.
Dial. 1. page 1. Dial. 3. page 2.

(6.) That the Speaking of the Spirit in any, is of greater Authority than the
Scriptures. Dial. 1. p. 48.

(7.) That Is no Command from God to me, which he Commands to another. Dial. 2.
page 59.

(8.) That Justification by that Righteousness which Christ fulfilled for us,
wholly without us, is a Doctrine of Devils. Dial. 1. page 48.

(9.) That Justification is by Works. Dial. 2. page 31. 51.

(10.) That Christ fulfilled the Law, only as our Pattern or Example. Dial. 2.
page, 52.

(11.) That the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is Irreligious and Irrational.
Dial. 3. page 3.

(12.) That this Body which Dies, shall not rise again. Dial. 3. page 3.


William Pen. Whether these Doctrines and Expressions, charged upon the
People, called Quakers, by Tho. Hicks, in both his Dialogues, be really the
Doctrines, and Sayings of that People, or not? Reason against Rayl. page 6.


Tho. Hicks. That these are their Doctrines and Expressions, I am now to prove.

(1.) That the Quakers do hold, that the Light in every man; or the Light
wherewith every man is Enlightened, is God. This Particular needs not to be
Insisted on, for as G. Whitehead, and Will. Pen, deny not the Quotations
produced for the Proof hereof. Will. Pen expressly clears me from Forgery in
this Particular: Says he, Where we have never charged Forgery upon him; He
(viz. Tho. Hicks,) has taken the Opportunity, and that with confidence of an
Innocent, to cry out: Is this candid to call me a Forger, when you confess the
things? Examine, says he, Dial. 3. page 4, 5, 6, 9. Thus Will. Pen,
Counterfeit Christian Detected, page 9. If you please to Read my Book, and the
Pages Will. Pen refers to; You will find, that the very Point now in Hand, is
there Discoursed of: Though this might suffice, for my Vindication, yet for the
sake of others, I crave Leave, that some Quotations may be Read.

In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men.

If the Life be the Divine Essence, the Light must be so also: For such as the
Cause is, such the Effect must be: Thus G. Whitehead in a Manuscript.

The absurdity of this Argument being showed in my First Dial. page 3, 4. Will.
Pen, answers thus. G. Whitehead, inferring from John 1. That if the Life was of
the Divine Being, the Light must be the same; for as the Cause, so is the
Effect: It was never Geo. Whiteheads principle, or words, That the Life which
is the Light of Men, is but in it self a mere Effect: For he owns it, in its
own Being to be no other than God himself. And values not the Counterfeits, (i.
e. Tho. Hicks's quarrel:) Counterfeit Christian detected, page 56. Margin. We
assert the true Light, with which every man is enlightened, to be in it self
the Christ of God, and the Savior of the World, Will. Pen. Reas. against Rayl.
p. 56.

All men are enlightened, etc. This Light is Divine, because it is the very Life
of the Word, which is God: Not an Effect of his Power, as a created Light, as
some men fancy, Will. Pen, Quakerism a new Nickname, page 9, 10.

To call the Light in every man a mere creature, is contrary to John 1. In him
was Life, and the Life was the Light of men; which Light is Divine and
Increated. G. Whitehead, Dip. Pl. page 13.

Some call the Light Conscience, etc. Which Light was, before Conscience was,
or Creature was; or Created, or made Light was: He made the Sun, the Moon, etc.
And the Light was before these were made. G. Fox, Gr. Mist. p. 10.

Some call it a Natural Light: Which Light was before the word Conscience was,
or a Natural Light; The Sun, Moon and Stars either: For all things that were
made, was made by it. The Natural Light, or made Light, are created Lights. He
made the Sun, the Moon, and Stars. They were made. And here as the Natural
Light to the Natural Eye. And the Light that every man is Enlightened with,
that comes into the World, was before these were made: Glorified with the
Father before the World began. G. Fox, Gr. Mist. page 23.

The Light which every man that comes into the World is Enlightened withal, is
Christ; by whom the World was made. G. Fox, Gr. Mist. page 185.

The Light which every one that comes into the World is enlightened withal, is
not Conscience: For the Light was before any thing was made, or Conscience
named. G. Fox, Gr. Mist. page 331.

The words of the Everlasting and true Light, who is the Eternal Living God,
and the King of Saints; which he gave unto me his Servant, to Declare to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, etc. -- Hearken, O ye Nations, etc. Thus says the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, whose Name is the Light, I am the Lord, and there
is none else can save: I the Light created all things, and Formed, and made you
all of the Dust.

I the Light gave unto every one of you Life and Breath; and you and all things
are upheld by me the Light.

You scorn me the Light in you, and count me a Low, Poor, weak Thing, not worth
taking notice of: You have disobeyed me, and dishonored me, and called me a
Natural light: You fight against me, the Light and Life within you. And I the
Light, have been oppressed in you, and by you: But verily my Spirit shall not
always strive with you: For verily, I the Lord God Almighty, who am the Light,
which have made manifest your Iniquities to you, which some of you call
Natural. And say, That those who are led and guided by me the Light within,
which makes manifest sin: That they are guided by the Spirit of Error and
Delusion: Mark; I will make you know your Blasphemy; and you shall know and
feel to your everlasting Destruction, if you speedily repent not, That I the
Light which lets you see sin, and reproves for it, am Spiritual; and am the
Spirit of Truth: Mark, I the Light made you all of one Blood, etc. But many of
you have slighted me, the Light in you: I will make you bow, at my Name, the
Light; and you shall feel it is not Natural, (as some of you have said of it:)
For it shall break you to pieces, and all your Professions, and Wisdom, which
is out of the Light. I the Light in you, will confound it all. I Will break all
Sects, Opinions, and gathered Churches, so called; which are not in me. I the
Light in you, will take away all Peace from the Earth: Yea, I Will bring you to
your Wits end: I Will burn your Heavens; all your Joy, your Peace, your
Righteousness, which stand in the power of Darkness. I the Light in you, will
consume it all. I Will burn Heaven and Earth; I Will burn within and without: I Will
strike with Astonishment, with Fear and Amazement; with Madness and
Destruction: I Will bring Plagues within and without, until I have consumed all
you my Enemies, who will not own me, the Light within. Thus G. Fox, the
younger, in a Collection of several of his Books, page 47, 49, 50, 51, 52.

All mind that Gift of God in your selves, which makes you sensible of your
present condition: You must receive the living Principle of God, in your own
particular Vessels. Which Principle, I call the Light; it being a proper Name
for it: But I shall not desire to Tie up any of you, to give this principle of
Truth, only the Name of Light, I shall not matter if you call it, the Truth:
Or, the Gift of God: Or a Measure of the Eternal Being G. Fox, Younger. Ibid.
171.

Many more Proofs might be produced; but I suppose these may suffice to confirm
my first Charge: I shall now proceed to the next.

(2.) That the soul is part of God; of Gods Being; without Beginning, and also
Infinite; See Dial. 1. page 16.


Will. Pen. What so base? What so Irreligious as this Perversion? Men nor
Devils could never study more our wrong, than this pretended Christian has
done. If this be his Christianity: The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
preserve my Soul for ever coming within the Borders of such a Religion.
Christianity is absurd by such Traducers; and Gods Spirit grieved by such
Injustice: I would not use the worst of Men, no, not Devils at this unequal
rate, he deals with us: Who both Mis-cites his words, and abuses the true
meaning of what is truly Cited. Reas, against Rayl. page 65.


Tho. Hicks. You have heard what Will. Pen, has said touching this Charge: Be
pleased also to hear my Quotations: Read at length, and then Judge.

Is not the Soul without Beginning, coming from God, returning into God again?
Who has it in his hand: And Christ the Power of God; The Bishop of the Soul;
which brings it up into God, which came out from Him: Has this Beginning or
Ending? And, Is not this Infinite in it self? G. Fox, Gr. Mist. page 90.

Magnus Byne, says, The Soul is not Infinite in it self, but it is a Creature:
And Rich. Baxter, says, It is a Spiritual substance: Now consider, (says G.
Fox,) What a condition, these called Ministers are in. They say, That which is
a Spiritual substance is not Infinite in it self; but a Creature. That which
came out from the Creator, and is in the hand of the Creator; which brings it
up, and to the Creator again: This is Infinite in it self. Gr. Mist. page 29.

God breathed into man the breath of Life, and he became a Living Soul: God who
has all souls in his hand. And is not this which comes out from God which is
in Gods hand, part of God? of God, and from God, and to God again. Which soul
Christ is the Bishop of: And is not this which came out from God, which God
has in his hand, taken up into God again: which Christ the Power of God, is
the Bishop of: Is not this of Gods being? Gr. Mist page 100.

Is not this of his Being, the Soul which he has in his hand. This is that G.
Fox, to whom Josiah Coal, an eminent Quaker, has written thus:

Dear, G. Fox, who art the Father of many Nations, whose life has reached
through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off; to the begetting of many
to a lively Hope: For which, Generations to come shall call thee blessed: Whose
being and habitation is in the Power of the Highest; in which thou Rules and
Governs in Righteousness; and thy Kingdom is Established in Peace, and the
Increase thereof without end. Dat. 21st. day of the 12th. Mon. 1658. See Tyr.
Detected. page 19.



G. Fox, Gr. Mist. p. 68.

I presume you are satisfied that in this particular, I have done the Quakers
no wrong. My next Charge is this:

Charge. 3.

(3.) I do accuse the Quakers, for denying Jesus Christ to be a distinct Person
without us. See Dial. 3. page 2.


Will Pen. Because we assert the true Light with which every man is enlightened
to be in it self the Christ of God, and the Savior of the world. Tho. Hicks,
does infer, That we deny the outward Sufferings of Christ in his bodily
Appearance. Reas. against Rayl. page 56.


Tho. Hicks. Whether herein I have misreported their belief, let these
Quotations be read and considered.

Jesus Christ, a person without us; is not Scripture Language; but the
Anthropomorphites, and Mugletonians. G. Whitehead. Dip. Pl. p. 13.

The Socinian tells us of a Personal Christ; and that the Man Christ Jesus our
Lord, has in Heaven a place remote from Earth; a Humane body: But does he
believe him to be the Eternal God, whilst he Imagines him to be a Personal
Christ? a Humane body so Limited and confined to a Remoteness. G. Whitehead,
Append. to Reas. against Rayl. page 21.

Where proves he by Scripture, that Christ's second coming, without Sin to
Salvation, is a personal coming. G. Whitehead, Ibid. page 24. It Is a design of
Satan to keep men in carnal Imaginations and Dark thoughts of a Humane,
Personal Christ. G. Whitehead, Ib. page 27.

I tell, Will. Pen, that his not speaking to this point, signifies that he is
Pinched: See Dial. 3. page 26. Unto which he returns this answer. Why, are we
Pinched because we say nothing to a Doctrine the Scripture says nothing of?
Give me one place that mentions Christ to be a distinct Person without us. Art
thou so Destitute of common sense, as to think of proving the Quaker no
Christian, because he denies a Doctrine not expressed in Scripture? Will. Pen,
counterfeit Christ. page 77. and in page 78. He calls this, his Disbelief of my
Scriptural belief.

However (says Will. Pen) I hope for our tenderness in this Particular:
Considering that Tho. Hicks his Charge is no Scripture Phrase: And that such
like Expressions occasion People to Retain, Mean and Dark apprehensions of God
and Christ, and his place of Residence; we shall not suffer in the Minds of our
sober Readers as men Undeserving the Name of Christians. Will. Pen,
counterfeit Christ. page 79.

Gods Christ is not distinct from his Saints, nor his Body, for he is within
them: not distinct from their spirits, G. Fox. Gr. Mist. p. 207.

Such are deceived that say Christ is distinct from the Saints, Ib. p. 16.

If there be any other Christ but he that was crucified within, he is the false
Christ. And he that has not this Christ that was risen, and crucified within,
is a Reprobate: Though Devils and Reprobates may make a talk of him without, G.
Fox, Ib. p. 206.

Robert Wastfield, a noted Quaker, being asked this Question, Why they spoke
and writ so darkly and doubtfully of the Person of Christ? His Answer was,
Because you are not able to bear what we have to hold forth concerning him:
Adding, that if they should declare what they held concerning Jesus Christ,
they should be stoned in the streets.

Another leading Quaker being asked What he thought of Jesus Christ, born at
Bethlehem? and dying at Jerusalem? Answered, Jesus Christ at Jerusalem, a type,
a figure, a shadow, that is past away: What have you to do with Christ at
Jerusalem? Have done with him. Both these Instances are attested by Mr. Nath.
Robinson; Minister at Southampton.

The next particular Opinion which I charge the Quakers with, is this.

4. That Christ redeems himself: This I draw as a necessary consequence from
their words: see Dial. 1st. p. 47.


William Pen. This is a stumble and a gross perversion of our words: Reas.
against Rayl. p. 62.


Tho. Hicks. Whether this be a perversion or not, I shall refer you to their
own words.

Few are come to know what it is that wants Redemption; and that the promise is
to: For there is a seed to which the Promise of Redemption is, Ja. Naylor love
to the lost, p. 47.

Christ is the Election, and the Elect seed, Ibid. page 32.

The Promise of God is to the seed that has been laden as a cart with sheaves
by the sinner: which seed is the hope Christ, G. Fox Gr. mist. p. 324.

We do assert the Redemption of the seed: Will. Pen. Reas. against Rayl. p. 62.

It Is no ways absurd that we affirm, That the end of Gods manifesting himself
in the flesh, was for the Redemption and deliverance of His Holy life, that was
in a man as a small seed, even the smallest of seeds, that had been long vexed,
grieved, and pressed down by sin and iniquity; Will. Pen Ib. p. 63. This seed
was, and is pure for ever, Ib. p. 64.

That which was lost is still in man's heart, and there it must be sought, for
it remains still in the house, that is, man's heart, this is the thing to be
sought, This Christ came to seek and to save, And all his ministers preached
people to this, the lost in man, a lost God, a lost Christ G. Keith. In a
meeting with me a few weeks since, told me, That he added these words, (viz.)
That they might find a lost God, a lost Christ whom they had lost, I then
answered, it is true, those words were added, yet were they no otherwise
serviceable to him, than as a blind, to deceive his unwary reader; For, First,
By lost in his whole discourse, in that book cited, is intended of God and
Christ, which he there calls, The principle, Kingdom, or Appearance of Christ
by his light in man's heart. And as Jesus Christ came to seek, and save the
lost, so all his ministers preached people to this, The lost in them.

Secondly, The sense I put upon the word lost, is no other, Than what, William
Pen allows; lost, says he, As taken by Tho. Hicks, is meant of man's lost
condition, And as there used by G. Keith, is understood of God and Christ, whom
man had lost: Rea. against Rayl. page 61.

Thirdly, I further said that the sense, in which I represented him, was
according to the opinions of others of his friends.


, This was the sum and substance of their Doctrine, G. Keith. Immed. Revel. p.
75, 76.

When God created man, He put his Image, Christ the express image of himself,
in man. He breathed into him the breath of life, He lived in God, And Christ
the light of men, was his life, lived in him: then the Lamb was not slain,
Christ, the Lamb, the life of man -- But when man sinned -- so the Lamb came to
be slain in him from the foundation of the world, That Holy, meek, harmless
nature: The Lambs nature was slain in him -- Now the bowels of the Fathers
love, stirred in compassion to the work of his own hands, that of the pure
creation in man, which though shut up in death, yet it remained and perished
not, as to its being, It did not become a nothing, but remained a being, And
this is the lost, which God sent his son into the world to seek and to save,
not to seek and save the old Adam, that birth of the Serpents begetting, but to
destroy it; for it is not capable of Gods salvation, But that, which Christ
came to save, is that of God, which proceeded from him, The seed of God in man
Judge Reader whether I have wronged G. Keith or not.
, The seed of Abraham, whereof Abraham's old decayed body, as good as dead, and
Sarahs barren womb was a type, G. Keith Immed. Revel. p. 44. 45, 46. of this
seed, he elsewhere, speaks thus; what the seed, and birth of God in us,
Judges, or discerns, or does is ever infallible, the eye of the seed,
always sees infallibly, This Book Entitled Immediate Revelation, G. Keith
affirmed to me, (in the hearing of many credible witnesses) that it was written
by the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit of God.
Its ear, always hears infallibly, its hand always acts infallibly, Ibid,
p. 23. This seed, and birth of God in man, is that which Geo. Keith says,
Christ came to seek and save.

These instances considered, I shall leave it with you to Judge, whether my
consequence was not proper from their words, my next charge is this.

(5.) That the Quakers do deny the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith, and
Practice unto Christians:

Proof.

We deny the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith and Practice: In honor to that
Divine Light that was the Author of them, etc. Will. Pen. Reas. against Rayl.
page 48.

There is nothing in the Scripture that is a duty upon me, or which I am
obliged to obey, because there Recorded: Whatsosoever is a Command to me, I
must not receive from any man or thing without me; nay, not the Scripture it
self: Yea, it is the greatest Error in the world, that ever was Invented, and
the ground of all Error, to affirm that the Scripture ought to be a Rule to
Christians. Ben. Furly, a noted Quaker, in a Letter. See Dial 1. page 79.

He that persuades people to let the Scriptures be the Rule of Faith and
Practice, would keep People in Darkness: For whosoever walks by the Rule
without them, and teach men so to do; would make void the Covenant of Life, and
Peace. Edw. Burrows works. page 62.

G. Whitehead, accounts it Idolatry to call the Bible, a Means of our knowing
God. Dip. Pl. page 13.

To such as say the Scriptures are the Rule, G. Whitehead writes thus: Poor
men, you have shown your selves sufficiently herein: And what an Empty,
Implicit Faith you are in; and how void, both of the Knowledge of God, Christ,
and Salvation you are: And how yet in your sins; having denied Christ and his
Light within to be your Rule, and Way, and Foundation; as he is to his
Followers: And so you are walking by your Fancies, and Imaginations; who set
the Scriptures in the place of Christ, as your only absolute Rule; and ground
of your Faith and Knowledge. Christ ascended, page 11.

Charge, 6.

(6.) That the speaking of the Spirit in any, is of greater Authority than the
Scriptures. See Dial. 1. page 28.

Proved.

This Question was put to a Quaker, as G. VVhithead, confesses: Do you esteem
of your speakings to be of as greater Authority, as any Chapter in the Bible?

To which his Answer is, That which was spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any,
is of as great Authority as the Scriptures, and Chapters are, and greater. G.
VVhithead, Serious Apol. page 49.

Charge. 7.

(7.) That is no command from God to me, which God has given by way of command
to another. Neither did any of the Saints Act by the command which was to
another: Every one obeyed their own command. See Dial. 2. page 59.

I prove this.

That is no Command from God to me, which he Commands to another: Neither did
any of the Saints we read of in Scripture, Act by the Command which was to
another, etc. They obeyed every one their own Command: And thou J. Turner, or
any other who goes to Duty, as you call it, by Immitation from the Letter
without, which were Commands to others; in your own Wills and Time; your
Sacrifice is not accepted; but is an Abomination to the Lord. Edw. Buroughs
works, page 47.

You take up a Command from the Letter, and Imitate the Apostles, in that Mind
and Nature, which in the Apostles was Crucified; and you say Christ Commands
it; when the Letter does but declare it, you say, in such a verse of such a
Chapter: Such a Command is, not having received the Command by the same Spirit.
Here you are proved to be them which use their Tongues, and say, He says it;
when God has not spoken to you; but as you read it, without you: As the False
Prophets may do the words of the true Prophets: And thus you are in the
VVitchcraft. Edw. Buroughs works. page 105.

These words Edw. Bur. gave out, (as he himself says,) by Order and Authority
given to him, by the Spirit of the Living God, the 31th. day of the 10th.
Month; in the year of the worlds Account, 1655. about the 4th. hour in the
Morning, when he was upon his Bed in Kilkenny City, in the Nation of Ireand:
Given under my hand, and Sealed by the Spirit of the Eternal God, who lives for
ever; through a Servant of the Lord. Edw. B. see his works, page 96.

Charge. 8.

(8.) That Justification by that Righteousness which Christ fulfilled for us,
wholly without us, is a Doctrine of Devils. Dial. 1. page 38.

Proved.

And indeed this we deny; (viz. Justification by the Righteousness which Christ
fulfilled in his own Person for us, wholly without us:) And boldly affirm it in
the Name of the Lord, to be a Doctrine of Devils; and an Arm of the Sea of
Corruption, which does now Deluge the world. Will. Pen, Serious Apol. page 148.

Charge. 9.

(9.) That the Quakers hold Justification by works. See Dial. 3. page 2. And I
now add, by works in the strictest Notion.

Proved.

God accepts not any, where there is any failing: Or who do not fulfill the
Law, and Answer every Demand of Justice. Edw. Buroughs works, page 33. In
answer to the 14th. Query: Was not Abraham Justified by works? We must not
conceive that his Personal-Offering was not a Justifying-righteousness: But
that God was pleased to count it so. Nor was there any Imputation of another
Righteousness to Abraham; but on the contrary. His personal Obedience, was the
ground of that just Imputation. Therefore, that any should be Justified by
another Righteousness Imputed, and not Inherent in him; is both Ridiculous and
Dangerous. Will. Pen, Reas. against Rayl. page 80.

Charge. 10.

(10.) That Christ fulfilled the the Law, only as our pattern. See Dial. 2.
page 52. Compared with Sand, Foundation, p. 26.


Will. Pen. If he can find the word Only there: Or such an Answer to such a
Question; or the Matter strictly contained in that Question, he has not
wronged me, But sure I am, there is no such Question: and as sure, The
fulfilling of the Law, was not the subject Treated on: And very certain, the
word Only was not there: Therefore a Forger, etc. Will. Pen, Reas. against
Rayl, page 78.


Tho. Hicks. Let the Book and Page referred to by me, be read; and then Judge;
whether Will. Pen was advised thus to answer.

For not the Hearers of the Law are just before God; but the Doers of the Law
shall be justified, Romans 2.13. From whence (says Will. Pen,) how unanswerably
may I observe, unless we become doers of that Law, which Christ came not to
destroy, but as our Example to fulfill; we can never be Justified before God.
Nor let any Fancy that Christ has so fulfilled it for them, as to exclude
their Obedience from being requisite to their acceptance; but Only as their
Pattern. Will. Pen. Sand. Found. p. 26.

Judge now whether the Law was Treated on; or whether the word Only be there.
Both which, Will. Pen you hear denies. Again, let it be noted, That this very
Argument is Printed in Will. Pens Reas. against Rayl. page 94, 95. Whereby you
may be ascertained that he had his Sandy Found* by him, when he charged my
Citation from it, with Forgery.

Charge. 11.

(11.) That the Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction, is Irreligious and Irrational.

Proof.

That this is true, see Sand. Found. p. 22. Where Will. Pen speaks thus.
Consequences; (that is from this Doctrine) Irreligious and Irrational; and
concludes one of his Consequences thus: O the Infamous Portraiture this
Doctrine draws of the Infinite Goodness: Is this your Retribution. O Injurious
Satisfactionists! Thus Will Pen.

Charge. 12.

(12.) That this Body which dies, shall not Rise again.

Proof.

G. VVhithead, asserted in the hearing of many Witnesses, That this Body shall
not rise again.

Such a Resurrection is Inconsistent with Scripture, Reason, and the Belief of
all men, right in their wits. Will. Pen, Reas. against Rayl. page 133.

For shame let us never make so much stir against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation: For the absurdity of that, is rather outdone than equalled
by this Carnal Resurrection. Will. Pen. Ibid. p. 134.

The Change which shall be is not of Accidents, but of Bodies. Will. Pen.
Ibid. p. 136. and in p. 138. He calls it a Barbarous Conceit.

From our denying the Resurrection of the Natural and Corruptible Body, etc.
Will. Pen. counterfeit Chr. p. 32.

I hope you are satisfied, that I have not in any of these 12 Particulars,
either Mischarged or wronged the Quakers.

But, If any should Question the Authority of the Books which I have Cited: I
desire, That Will. Pens Reas. against Rayl p. 185, and 186. may be read.

We shall (says Will. Pen) among the many Books writ by us, in general, in
Defense of our Way we profess, lay these few upon the Heads of our several
Adversaries; as containing much of what can be said, in behalf of our
Principle, and Practices, viz.

(1.) Priests and Professors Principles. (That is the Book Entitled, The Gr.
Mist.) by G. Fox.

(2.) Edw. Buroughs, his Works.

(3.) Divinity of Christ, by G. VVhithead.

(4.) Immediate Revelation, by G. Keith.

(5.) Serious Apology, by G. Whithead, and Will. Pen.

(6.) Christ Ascended, by G. Whithead.

(7.) The Spirit of Truth Vindicated, by W. Pen.

These with our present Discourse: (that is Reason against Rayl.) Let them
Answer: Thus W. Pen.

2. Head, or Matters of Practice.

That it concerns them to render their Adversaries as Ridiculous as they can;
and to make their Friends believe, they do nothing but contradict themselves:
And if this fail, to Insinuate by way of Question, something that may be a
Slander to them: See his Dial. 1. page 72.


Will. Pen. This is a Forgery, O horrible Impiety! God, our God Vindicate our
Innocence from these Hillish Slanders. Reas. against Rayl. page 138. 161. Were
we what he Represents us to be, in this very Matter, the severest Plagues and
Judgments of the Eternal God, we might justly expect to be our Portion. Ibid.
page 4.


Tho. Hicks. Whether I have wronged them or not, in giving such an Answer in
their Names: Let these Quotations be Read, and Considered:

Our Ignorance of his Name, deprives us of that Scope, which we might otherwise
have, for producing perhaps as large a Catalogue of Doctrinal Mistakes; in what
he himself, or those to whom he adheres, have writ: Perhaps also, he was afraid
of such Truth as may be seasonably told of him, to the Discrediting of his
Enterprise. Thus Will Pen, in answer to the Author of the Spirit of the Quakers
tried. Spirit of truth Vind. page 6.

G. Whitehead, in his Answer to Mr. Danson, Insinuates a Slander upon him, by
way of Question: He, (says Whitehead) styles himself sometimes Minister of the
Gospel at Sandwich: But is not rather that Report of him true, that there he
was given to Gaming, Bowls, and Ninepins, etc. See Divinity of Christ, written
by G. Whitehead. page 49.

This Question was put by G. Whitehead, not because Mr. Danson was guilty, but
merely to Slander him; will appear from what Will. Pen says in his Apology for
his Friend Whitehead; in this very thing.

Who knows not (says Pen) That the Priests give themselves a Liberty of more
than that? What Game (almost) do they scruple to play at. And if G. Whitehead,
to detect the Priest, since others gave themselves that Loose, did therefore
make that Query: Must it therefore be taken for granted that he concluded him
such? Spir. of truth Vind. page 137.

Hear the Complaint of another, who very well knows the Temper and Practices of
the Quakers.

If any persons, (says he) Write or Speak their Grief ( that is at the Quakers
Miscarriages;) that the Public take notice of it; they will Represent them
under such Terms, as may render them Odious: And the more Effectually to weaken
their Testimonies, they will Fix upon them, Scurrilous and contemptible
Appellations. And to prevent any Inquisition into the truth of the Matter, they
would make People believe, that they are Envious, Malicious, Dirty, Factious,
and Ranting Spirits. Spir. of the Hat. page 36, 37.

(2.) I accuse the Quakers, for calling such as ask them Questions, Reprobates:
And saying they are in the Sorcery and Witchcraft,


Will. Pen. This is a great Lie. Reas. against Rayl. page 154, 156.


Tho. Hicks. Be pleased to read Edw. Buroughs his Answers to Twenty serious
Questions; and you will find that which is sufficient to clear me from Lying.
His words are these: Thou Reprobate, and child of darkness; the Light condemns
thee, and thy Generation eternally: We witness thee to be in the Sorcery and
Witchcraft: Thou art Darkness it self. Thou Dragon; thy Queries are Conjured in
the Black-art, out of the bottomless Pit: Thou Diviner; we witness thee to be
the Beast, which wars with the Lamb: Thou Antichrist, which looks at Christ's
Death at Jerusalem, alone: Thou art seen with the Light; and with it condemned
for ever. Thou blind Pharisee and Blasphemer: Thou Jesuit art pleading for a
Christ afar off thee: Thou art under the Woe; and from that Woe, thou shall never
flee. Let all People see, whether thou be not a blind Ignorant Sot. Here thou
Reply thy Sottish Queries concerning the Body of Jesus, as the Devil did
about the body of Moses: Thou disobedient one; upon whom God will render
Vengeance in flaming Fire: Thou art accursed: Thou Beast, to whom the Plagues
of God are due, upon whom the wrath of God must be accomplished: Thou art shut
out from God for ever: Thou blind Hypocrite: Thou Cain: Thou full of Subtilty:
With the Light thou art seen, and with the Life thou art Judged and Condemned:
Thou dead Beast; thou art unredeemed from thy vain conversation, and so art not
Justified; nor never shall be. Stop thy Mouth thou Sorcerer: The same that
justifies us, shall condemn thee Eternally. The manner of Christ's being in the
Saints, thou know not; who art a Reprobate; and shall find him to thy
Eternal Condemnation. O thou dark Beast and Conjurer, Querying with thy
conjured words: Thou Blasphemer, thou Serpent, thou dark Sottish Beast, etc.
Ed. Buroughs blessed God, that had discovered the Querist* saying, thy Queries
are answered lovingly and plainly, in Scripture Language and Terms. Ibid. p. 34.
Edw. Burroughs's works. page 29. to 34.

(3.) That Will. Pen, by the sense of the Eternal Spirit, does declare: (That
those Cursing, Railing, and Lying Answers of Edw. Buroughs) were the only fit
Answers to the Priests Trappaning Questions. See Dial. 3. page 80.


Will. Pen. Oh ungodly Slander! the Lord rebuke thy Foul spirit. Counterfeit
Christ. page 44.


Tho. Hicks. These are William Pens words; with respect to the Answers Edw.
Buroughs gave to the 20 Questions, before hinted. I warrant it (says Pen)
from God; and by the sense of his Eternal Spirit, do declare: That it was the
Portion and only fit answer to be given to those Trappaning questions. O horrid
Excuse of such Raylings, which is far worse than the Answers given.
And had Edw. Buroughs gone into a Familiar, opening unto his Vulterous,
Unclean, Serpentine Eye, all the deep things of the Spirit of God, and
Mysteries of Holy Kingdom; who was in that Nature, that Crucified the Lord of
them; Edw. Buroughs had brought the wrath of the Eternal God upon himself,
instead of the Priest. Will. Pen, Reas. against Rayl. page 164.

(4.) Another Evil I accuse them of, is: Preferring their Pamphlets before the
Bible.

This was proved from the Titles they give to their own books; and the Titles
they give to the Scripture, viz. The Voice of Wisdom: Breathings of true Love:
Shield of Truth: A Spiritual Glass: Light risen out of Darkness. These are the
Titles given to several of their books.

But the Scriptures are called, Letter: Dead Letter: Paper, Ink and Writing:
Carnal Letter, etc. It Is easy to judge by these Titles, to which the
preference is given.

(5.) They bid people follow the Light within; and if they do not, they load
them with bitter Revilings.

Will. Pen, calls this a great Lie. Reas. against Rayl. page 154. 156.

Whereas the truth of this is so notorious, that it needs no proof. Witness
their Railings at such, that in Conscience oppose them, and their Errors.

(6.) They say God himself is the immediate Teacher of his People; and yet they
appoint their Ministers to speak in such a place, etc. Dial. 2. p. 66.

Will. Pen, says, this is a very Lie, Reas. against Rayl. page 156.

I answer, Why may they not as well appoint persons beforehand, as they do
Meetings, several days before. This latter was made an Excuse, for Will. Pens
absence from this Meeting. It is usual, said a Friend of Will. Pens, for him to
appoint Meetings some days before; engaging to be there, and he must not break
his promise, etc.

But if this will not amount to a full Proof of my Charge, then let me refer
you to the Complaint of one, that was no stranger to their practices.

And what means, (says he of the Quakers) That certain persons are appointed
to spend the whole time in Speaking in every Meeting; and all the rest to come
as Hearers, neglecting the Gift in themselves; only waiting upon their Lips.
Spirit of the Hat. p. 29.

(7.) I accuse them for Intitling God to sleeveless Errands. Of this I have
given several Instances. Dial. 1. page 27. which cannot be disproved.

(8.) I charge them for refusing a public Meeting, to Debate the chief things
in Difference, between them and others. Under pretense of being cautious of
running themselves into Jeopardies. See Dial. 3. page 88.


Will. Pen. This is a Notorious Falsehood. Counterf. Christ. page 45.


Tho. Hicks. That they did refuse, I can prove by many Witnesses; and that they
excused themselves as before. Tho. Priors Letter to Mr. Haworth, will testify.
His words were these:

It is expected, that the Book styled, The Quakers Converted, be the subject of
the Dispute; and also that equal Liberty be admitted on both sides; And that
the place be free from Disturbance and Molestation: For we understand that some
of the Magistrates have made Enquiry, and are offended. Therefore I find that
my Friends are Cautious, not to run themselves voluntarily into such
Jeopardies, on slight Invitations, etc.

The Reasons why they desired the place to be free from Molestation, was given
in a second Letter, viz.

(1.) That W. Haworth, and his Company might seriously consider of it, as not
to draw and Invite others into Hazard and Danger.

(2.) That they would be no means or Cause of Molestation, directly or
indirectly; giving the Magistrates occasion either by too much noise aforehand,
or by Heat or Passion against us.

But still the Book, Styled the Quaker Converted, must be the subject of the
Debate.

Whereas the Meeting was propounded to Debate the chief things in Difference
between them and others; and the utmost Answer that as yet has been given
thereunto, is this:

After the aforesaid Book has been fully Examined, and Discoursed: Then if W.
Haworth, has not Disputing enough, he has Liberty to propose other Questions
in writing: And if they be such Learned ones as may tend to Peoples
Edification. A A farther time may be granted to Debate them: Thus Tho. Prior in
his second Letter.

Moreover, I did above a Year ago, send six Questions to G. Whitehead,
promising to meet him to Debate them in the most public Place I could get; but
he would not accept thereof. See Dial. 3. p. 86, 87.

(9.) That they own the Scripture as far as it agrees to the Light in them. See
Dial. 1. page 66.


Will. Pen. This is an arrant Forgery. Reas. against Ray. p. 160.


Thomas Hicks. This is before proved in their asserting the Scriptures to be
given forth from the light within.

(10) Did the light within Create the Heavens and the Earth? yea: Is it the
immediate object of Divine Worship? yea.


William Pen. These Answers are Forgeries, Reas. against Rayl. 158, 159.


Tho. Hicks. See this at large proved, under the Head of the light being God.

(11) That if those things objected against the Quakers in two former Dialogues
be true, that then Will. Pen has confessed that a Quaker is quite another thing
than a Christian: Dial. 3d. p. 1.


William Pen. This is a forgery: I never said nor confessed any such thing in
all my life: Counterf. Chr. p. 13.


Tho. Hicks. Will. Pen has written these words. He, (that is, Tho. Hicks) now
to vindicate himself from such Injustice, has given us a second part, wherein
he hopes to make good what he has charged upon us, by Quotations out of our
own Books: which, if faithfully done, I shall freely acknowledge that a Quaker
is quite another thing than a Christian, Will. Pen. Reas. against Rayl. p. 2.

(12) These words; which I relate in Will. Pens name* (viz.) Were we what he
represents us, the severest plagues and Judgments of God would be our portion
Dial. 3d. p. 1, 2. These I say he accounts a Forgery, Counterf. Chr p. 15.

Let Will. Pens own book be read, and you will find these Words there: (viz.)
were we, what he represents us in this very matter, the severest plagues and
judgments of the Eternal God, we might justly expect to be our portion for
ever, Will. Pen Reas. against Rayl. p. 4.

(13) Will. Pen accuses me with a downright Forgery, in giving this Answer
in George Whitheads name, viz. That the plagues and judgments of God will
follow thee, Dial. 2. p. 1. Reas. against Railing, p. 163.

The truth of this Answer see attested to, under Mr. John Gladmans hand, Dial.
3d. p. 85.

(14) That their owning Christ, is no other than a mere Mystical Romance; --
And that the light in them sees no necessity of a Mediator.


Will. Pen. These are lies and slanders, Reas. ag. Rayl. p. 154.


Tho. Hicks. They that deny Jesus Christ to be a distinct person without us,
are guilty of the first: And they that maintain, That God accepts not any who
do not fulfill the Law, and answer every demand of Justice, can see no
necessity of a Mediator.

(15) Another Lie Will. Pen does accuse me of, is this: That the Quakers deny
Christ's visible coming and appearance in the world. See his Reas. ag. rayl. p.
154. where he refers you to Dial. 2d. p, 37, 45.

Be pleased to examine the pages referred unto by Will. Pen -- and then Judge.
The question there is this; Whether Christ did not dwell amongst his Saints
after another manner and more Visible, than now he dwells in them?

To which Edward Buroughs returned this Answer.

For thy word Visible: he is not, nor never was Visible to thee, nor thy
Generation, etc.

Upon this I said, That the Quaker denies that Christ was ever visible to
wicked men, such as he esteemed the Querist to be, etc. See Dial. 2d. p. 37.

(16) That they account the Blood of Christ no more than the blood of a common
Theif. See Dial. 1.


Will. Pen. This is an ungodly Aspersion. Reas. ag. Rayl. p. 154.


Tho. Hicks. See this fully proved, Dial. 2d. p. 3, 4.

(17) That one of their friends bid her husband take another woman, Dial. 2d.
p. 63.

(18) That a Revelation has been pretended to excuse the payment of a just
Debt, Dial. 1. 26.

(19) That some of their Friends have excused some of their Villainies, by
pretenses to the innocent Life, Dial. 3. Epist.

Concerning these three last, I propose this unto the Quakers, that if they
will choose six sober, and disinterested persons. I also will do the like; And
if I cannot give sufficient Reasons for what I have Objected against them, I
will contentedly submit, to what those twelve men shall determine.


We whose names are hereunder written, do certify that the aforesaid
Quotations, are truly recited out of those Books to which they refer, VVitness
our hands.

My occasions calling me from the meeting, before the ending thereof, but
since, having perused the proofs, by comparing them with the Quakers Books
whence they are cited, I find them to agree. Witness my hand.

William Kiffen. Dan. Dyke. Han. Knollys John Gesnell Tho. Paul Henry Forty
John Norcot Tho. Wilcocks Robert Snelling Maurice King Jonathan Jennings Thomas
Plant Joseph Morton Owen Davis John Hunter John Snelling William Dix John
Vernon. Edw. Noble Rob. Maton John Singleton Dr. James Baron.

There are many more both Ministers and others, who are ready and willing (if
occasion serve) to attest the same.

Note also, That those Instances in the foregoing Margents, were added since
the Meeting for further proof.



A Postscript to the Reader.
HAving seen William Pens complaynt, wherein after his idle Excuses, He is
pleased to propose for a public Meeting: To which I answer, That such a
Meeting never was refused, but often has been desired by me, provided, That
the matters in controversy betwixt us, might be the subject of the Debate:
Accordingly, I did long since send Six Questions to G. Whitehead, promising to
meet him in the most public place I could procure, so be it, he would comply
with these Conditions: (1) That I might have liberty to produce their own
Books, to be read openly, for the clearing matter of fact. (2) That we might
agree upon a Rule by which our Discourse may be determined. (3) That he would
speak directly and plainly to the Question. (4) That but one at a time should
speak: and (Lastly,) That any who would might write after us. The Questions
were these: (1) Whether the Light in every man be God? (2) Whether the Light in
every man, be the true and very Christ the Scripture speaks of? (3) Whether
Christ has not a personal Being without men? (4) Whether the Soul be part of
Gods Being, without Beginning, and infinite? (5) Whether none of those things
which God has given by way of Command to others, be a Command to me? (6)
Whether the speaking of the Spirit in the Quakers, be of greater Authority than
the Scriptures? G. Whitehead would not accept hereof; though I told him, These
were some of the things which the Dialogue objects against them; But if William
Pen will engage in the Disquisition of these Questions, upon the Conditions
aforesaid; and also, That no more than three of each side, be allowed to
Debate, and but one of those three to speak at a time, equal liberty being
granted on each side, to those persons nominated and allowed; upon notice of
his willingness, He shall (God willing) be attended: But if he refuse, it is
expected, he give sufficient Reasons why he does so. Forasmuch, as these are
some of the principal matters in difference, every Question having its
Foundation in their own Books, (as the foregoing Narrative will abundantly
manifest,) whereupon, I conceive, he ought not to decline them; yet
nevertheless, if he shall rather choose to insist upon other matters of less
importance, giving his Reasons why these, and not those before propounded,
Then, let him send me the particulars thereof, subscribed with his own hand,
and I will give him a speedy answer.

I have now a few things to add, (respecting matter of fact) which were not
spoken to, in the Public meeting aforesaid, (1) That they (the Quakers) make
use of the Scriptures only to silence them, that plead for it as their rule,
see Dial. 1. p. 24, 25. Will. Pen accounts this, a Forgery Reas. ag. Rayl. p.
158. my answer is, That I have given an instance, (and that of no ordinary
Quaker) By whom, words of such an import were spoken, and withal plainly
intimated to whom he so expressed himself, see Dial. 3. page 36.

Another particular ( which Will. Pen in his wonted modesty calls a lie) Is
that Instance, concerning Nicolas Lucas, Dial. 2. p. 71 -- In this also, I have
been cleared, and vindicated, Inasmuch as the person, from whom I had the
relation, (who heard him speak the words) has Attested it, to Nicolas Lucas
before witnesses, And whereas it is said in the Append. to Reas. against Rail. p.
12. That it was referred to Henry Stout to witness that charge, Reader, I do
assure thee, that no such matter was referred to him.

The next thing, ( which Will. Pen in his haste has branded for a lie and
slander) Is this, That I should say, The tendency of all the Quakers reasoning
about Instituted, Religion, is to Debauch mankind, and to teach men to live in
rebellion against God, Dial. 3. p. 65

In answer hereunto, I shall produce Will. Pen himself for my compurgator, Who,
concerning the ordinances of water Baptism, and breaking of Bread, writes
thus. I would not have any so sottish as to think, That Christ came to abolish
the shaddows of the Jews, And Institute others in their room, He came to
remove, and abolish the very nature of such ordinances, I affirm, circumcision,
is as much in force as Water-Baptisme, And the paschal Lamb, as Bread, and
Wine, They were both but shaddows, and both Elementary, and perishable, And
though the latter were more Immediately forerunning and Introductory of the
substance it self, yet not to be perpetuated; For a continuance of them, had
been a Judaizing of the spiritual, and Evangelicall worship, The Gospel would
have been a state of Figures, Types, and shadows, which to assert or practice,
is as much as in us lies to pluck it up by the Roots, The Appellation
[Ordinances of Christ] I therefore Renounce as unscriptural, and inevangelical
Besides the spirit of whoredom from God Gross Apostasy, Superstition and
Idolatry, yea a spirit of Hypocrisy, persecution, and murder, and all manner
of wickedness has got them, and covered it self with them; And we can testify,
from the same spirit by which Paul renounced Circumcision, That they are to be
rejected, as not now required, And the Lord will appear to gather people out of
them, but never to establish, or keep people in them, Thus Will. Pen Reas.
against Rayl. p. 108, 109.

Now whether I have not sufficiently discharged my self from those things
whereof William Pen has accused me, I shall submit to the Judgment of all
impartial men. And since the Quakers have appealed, whether they ought not to
be concluded by their judgment to whom the Appeal was made, especially this
position of Will. Pens. Being considered, (viz.) That to which an Appeal is
made, must be capable of giving an infallible Judgment, and so a true Judge in
the case, or else the Appeal is foolish, Will. Pen Spir. of Tr. p. 78. Yet
lest Will. Pen (who abounds with shifts) should not stand by his own Doctrine,
but abuse the world with such Glosses, as neither his words nor practice will
in any wise bear, it will not be amiss, to Anticipate such Attempts of that man
of confidence, To give some account of an Appeal, which was once made against
Will. Pen, to the Quakers at the Bull and mouth, The persons appealing, were,
(after some scornful Treats) put off, with this answer, That Will. Pen had
answered it, in his winding sheet, which Answer, I shall give you in his own
words.

Does he own our Authority? Then his Appeal is something, If not, He Appeals
Idly, and unjustly, But since he does seem to Appeal to them, And supposes
them, to have a right to deal with me, It is apparent, That he owns it (that
is, their Authority) so far as concerns Judgment betwixt us, Paul therefore
Appealed to Caesar because of his ability both to know his Case, and to do him
right, And therefore in the case of this man's Appeal, Both the light and our
friends are thereby judged able, and himself, to be concluded by their
Judgment, which is this, That H. Hedworth, first Author of the Spir. of the
Quakers Tried, Then of Controversy ended; Is a busy body, cavilling,
conceited, proud, wrathful, equivocating, slandering, yet cowardly man, That
loves debate, which is both unable to maintain what he begins, and afraid to
own it, when he has done, Will. Pen winding sheet, p. 8.

By this, Reader, Thou may guess, To what little purpose it is, to appeal
against a Qaaker, to the Quakers; who instead of a fair and just hearing of the
person grieved, or examining (as honest men would have done) the matters in
difference, shall, I say, constitute the very person offending, To determine,
give sentence in his own case, such a procedure as this, (I believe) is not to
be instanced (the Quakers excepted) among any sort of men either Christian, or
Heathen.

However, since it is so, That Will. Pen (in his great wisdom,) has published
such a judgment in print, whereby all men may be acquainted, what Justice
there is amongst the governing Quakers, It will be requisite, (and I presume
Will. Pen has not reason to be offended, it being his own method,) for this
once, that a fool be answered, according to his folly.

The Quakers appeald to the Baptists, against Tho. Hicks, I would ask the
Quakers (for so Will. Pen has taught me) whether they own their Authority? if
they do, The Appeal is something, If not, They have Appealed idly and
unjustly, But since they have seemed to Appeal to them, And supposed them to
have a right to deal with Tho. Hicks, It Is apparent, That they own their
Authority so far as concerns a Judgment, betwixt Will. Pen, and Tho. Hicks,
for Paul therefore Appealed to Caesar, Because of his ability, both to know his
case, and do him right: therefore in the case of the Quakers Appeal, The Light,
and the Baptists, are thereby judged able, and the Quakers to be concluded by
their Judgment; which (I may safely say, though not deputed by them to
pronounce it) is this, That Will. Pen, the Author of Reas. against Rayl. Then
of Counterfeit Christian Detected: is a busy body, cavelling, conceited,
proud, wrathful, equivocating, slandering, yet cowardly man, that loves Debate,
which is both unable to maintain what he begins, and afraid to own it, when he
has done.

If against this it be objected, ( as indeed it is by Will. Pen, in his naked
truth) That their Appeal did not intend such a power of Judging in the
Baptists, That they should Try whether Tho. Hicks was Guilty. But for Judgment
against Him, And not that the Quakers would be concluded by the Baptists
judgment Right or wrong. Let all men take notice, of the unrighteousness of
the Quakers, who would have a man condemned, without being Tried, But is it the
part of a just judge to pass sentence upon a man, merely upon an Accusation,
without a legal Trial? certainly had I been Arraigned in the Quakers court,
especially at such a time when Will. Pen, had presided; my Head should not have
gone down to the grave in peace, But if this be the method of proceedings (as
in all probability it is) amongst the Governing Quakers, I do earnestly pray,
from such a Government, and Governors, Good Lord Deliver me

Thomas Hicks.

THE END.

