THE AUCTION: OR, A Catalogue of some useful Books, lately Published, together
with a Summary of what is Treated of in them.
Printed for Robert Hardy, at his Shop in Westminster Hall.
Divinity Books.
The infallible Director of the present Beneficed Clergy's Practices. AN useful
and necessary Book for this Age; demonstrating, that Church-Preferments more
powerfully govern their Actions, and Bias their Consciences, than the Precepts
of our Savior, or the Doctrine of the Apostles; or the Ancient Fathers Canons,
or Constitutions of this Church, subscribed and assented to by all the
Dignitaries, Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, who have been Beneficed these two
years last past.

Sold by Richard Baldwin, at the Sign of the Pilgrim.

The present English Catholic Church. A choice Treatise proving that the
present Beneficed Churchmen of England, concur not only with the Doctrine of
Calvin, Knox, and all the late Fanatics; but even with the Posit one ascribed
to the most biggotted Papists, and Jesuits, in the Doctrine of Resisting,
Deposing, and Murdering of Kings, when they conceive them to be Enemies to the
Religion they profess, or not like to be so indulgent to them, as some
Ambitious Usurpers pretend to be.

Writ by Dr. Burnt, to be sold in the Palace-Yard, Westminster.

The Non-Obligation of Oaths. An Elaborate Treatise, showing that we being
obliged by the Law of Nature to study Self-preservation, and taught by the
Gospel, that he who provides not for his Family is worse than an Infidel.
Therefore whatever Oaths may prejudice us in either of these, are ipso facto
void. And whatever Oath shall be imposed, to capaciate us to live in a State
of freedom from suffering, and enable us to live at ease, and augment our
Estates are lawful, so long as they produce these effects, and no longer; for
this Obedience is more ^^^^ptable to God, than to Sacrifice all our comfortable
Importances, out of an obstinate Opinion, that preceding Oaths, contradictory
to any new Ones enjoined, are obligatory.

Together with an Appendix to prove that by the same Rule, by which we may
dis-oblige our selves from Oaths of State, we may dissolve all private
Contracts, when any present inconveniences seem to attend them.

A Discourse worthy the perusal of all who have digested their former Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and swallowed the New Ones of Allegiance and
Fidelity; and the better to prepare them to take the Oath of Abjuraton; or any
other which may be devised for the security of the Government.

Sold by Algernon Braye at the Sign of the White Dog with the Blue Collar.


Books of Policy and Government.
The right use of Parliaments, after the Modern way in some Countries Or, a
Demonstration that a King who has a well Officer'd and Pension'd Parliament,
can never want whatever Supplies he shall demand, and that none ever had the
true Art of King-craft, who attained not to that persection, showing that the
Laws owning the King to have the Authority of making Peace or War, should be
desicilin if: he had not full and sole Power to settle the same, which can
never be done without a Ductile and Complying Parliament; and that there is no
such effectual way to render them such, as by establishing their absolute
dependence upon him; whereby they may find their own account in Honor and
Profit by serving him. Belides that, it is absurd, a King should be owned to be
Head of the Church and State in the Politic Capacity, and want the like
insluence, the Head, in the Natural Body, has over the Members: Such an Head
being but an empty Scull, filled with a pulp of Sladge instead of Brains, With
a Corrolary proving that it is but a Feather in such a King's Cap, and an empty
Title to style him Sovereign, who is not in reality so, over the Collective
Representative of the People in Parliament, as well as over the Diffusive Body
of them, in Citles and Villages.

Printed by Charles Bill, and Tho. Newcomb, their Majesty's Printers, for the
use of the Lord Almoner, and the Clerks of Parliamont.

The present Bishops the surest Courtiers. A Treatise writ by the Prolecutor of
that Order, to prove the necessity of a King's preserving that Hierarchy,
rather than Presbytery, according to the old Maxim, no Bishop, no King. With
an Appendix deducing, by particular instances in all their Votes, how steadily
the undepriv'd Bishops, scarce two excepted, pursue the Directions transmitted
from the Court, however directly opposite to their formerly avowed Principles,
Preachings, and Practites: To which is added, by way of Advice, that the
Honorable Members of the House of Commens, who chanced to be over-voted in the
Bill for preventing Pensioners and Officers for the future, have a cane to show
their utmost Gratitude to the Right Reverends, who by their Dead Weight cast
the Scales, and restated the Commons in a future Capacity to serve their
Betters and themselves.

together with a serious Bersursive to all the people, who own them to be their
Guides, and Heads of their Commonion, to sollow their Examples and not their
Printed Books, which have declared their contrary Judgments, either before or
since their being chosen into the Order.

Writchy a Rever and Count Palatine, to be sold by Nathanael Dolittle, at the
Sign of the Orange tawny Mitre.

Five to One are odds at (...). Or, a seasonable Treatise, wherein is attempted
to be proved; that Lords, ought to yield to Knights, Knights to Esquires,
Esquires to Gentlemen, Gentlemen to Yeomon, because they are more Numerous, and
are sure to have the advantage at Club Law.

Together with some useful Admonitions, that smaller Numbers never contest with
the greater for Privileges; but rather tamely submit to such as by their
special Grace and Favor they will allow them.

With a Memento not to forget when the Supreme Authority Voted the Lord's House
Useless and Dangerous.

To which is subjoined an Encomium of those Self dying Lords, who will rather
choose to forego their Ancient Privileges, than obstruct Supplies, especially
when they may go sharers in them.

As also a Premonition to several Honorable Commons to be preparing themselves
against the next Session to repeal the Act for Annual Sessions and Trienaial
Dissolutions of Parliaments, and particularly of this present one, lest they
should loose the plentiful Perquisites, which Members of late super-anuuated
Parliaments have been accustomed to enjoy, if the King shall be prevailed with
to pass it.

Composed for Sir Humphrey Lackland, for the use of his Fraternity.

Printed by Thomas Braddyl, in the New Palace-Yard.

Good Wits Jump. Or, a Dialogue betwixt a Member of the Rump Parliament and
the late Convention, proving that the same Principles, Laws, and Counsels,
governed the late, which did the former; and that the late Revolution was
established upon the very same Foundation; and that there neither are nor can
be any Reasons or Arguments produced, to maintain the one, which do not equally
prove the legality of the Proceedings of that black Parliament.

With a Transition to prove the absurdity of observing the Anniversary, on the
Thirtieth of January, unless we will own the Character given our Savior of
those who killed the Prophets, and built or beautified their Sepulchers.

And that instead of celebrating the Fifth of November, for the preservation of
King James the First, his Royal Family, and the Two Houses of Parliament, from
the Gun powder Treason; we should now observe it more religiously than ever,
upon a new Account, viz. for the arrival of the High and Mighty Prince, who
forced from his Throne the Grandson of that King, for whose deliverance the
Anniversary has been kept about 70 years: And that we ought to make a double
Festival, by joining to it the Fourth of November, in memory of a Prince's
Birth day, who has so wonder, fully changed the Hereditary Monarchy of England
to an Elective; and may, in time, either make the Government of these Realins,
exquifitely conformable to that of the Seven United Provinces, or reduce them
to a conformity with his Rulenere.

Together with many solid Arguments to prove, that the Solemnity of the
Restoration of King Charles the Second, celebrated on the 29th of May, ought
by Act of Parliament for ever to be abolished, and the 13th of February be
substituted in its place; being the day of the Proclamation of a greater
Deliverer of this Nation than that King ever was, by restoring us to the Happy
Estate, our selves or Ancestors enjoyed under the Long-Parliament, and Oliver
Lord Protector.

Writ by Will. Prynn the Younger, to be sold at Aaron Smith 's, at the Sign of
the New Exchange.

The Sovereign Power of Mobbism supported by Hobbism and Sherlocism. A Learned
Work, proving that the Common People, are the Original Dispensers of all Power;
for that those who are enabled to advance a Captain Tom, may appoint a King
Thomas, Oliver, Richard or Anthony.

With a Critical Demonstration by the Rule of Consequences, that whoever has
the dexterity to manage this great Bucephalus, so that he can mount him, shall
never want Divines to prove them Supreme Providential Rulers, nor Hobbists to
prove they ought to be submitted to and obeyed.

With a digression showing how easily the Magistrates of Holland, Zealand, and
the other Provinces were changed, or de Wisted, while the Mobb espoused the
Interest of the Stadtholder: But now at Tergow, though the Stadtholder had
power to banish the Magistrates, yet he had not the concurrence of the People,
who gave all the marks possible of their affection to the old Magistrates.

Writ by James Godliman; dedicated to the late Duke of Schomberg; and printed
by Watt Tyler at the Sign of John of Leyden.


Books of War and Military Affairs.
An infallible Device never to want Soldiers. A serious Discourse,
demonstrating that the laying insupportable Taxes and Impositions upon the
Subjects, and not providing for the security of Trade, is a sure way to bring a
Country to such Poverty, that the House keepers will not be able to maintain
their Sons, and Servants, nor Trade smart their Apprentices and Journey men
whereby the young Men can have no means of subsistence, but by listing
themselves to be Soldiers; So that the want of Bread at home, increases the
Nurseries of War.

An Essay, begun four years since and the Author finding it yearly experienced
to be true, has been prevailed with to make it public; and dedicates it to
the honorable Committee (...) referred for the more effectual raising of Seamen
and Soldiers for their Majesty's Navy and Army: Sold (...) Village in England.

The new Project of Kidnapping L^nd-Soldiers. A brief Discourse, illustrating
the latest method, to spirit Men to serve; by impressing them for Sea-service,
which the Law allows, and lodging them more safely than honorably in the Tower
of London, of Goals in the Country, and then telling them that they look not
like Men acquainted with Sea-service, therefore, if they like it, they may be
employed for Land, under worthy Officers who will take great care, that they be
well clothed and paid, either for Service here, or in Flanders; and so
allowing such (...), Plabson's Choice, and having saltned a Shi^^ing in their
Fists, their Service is transferred from Sea to Land.

Dedicated to all Pretenders to the Liberty of the Subject, by proving that an
even Exchange is no Robbery.

Expectancy better than Fruition. An ingenious Tract, proving that allowing
Soldiers bare Subsistence, and never clearing Arrears, though Money is
plentifully granted to discharge both, is (...) way to keep them in the Service
of the Government, least if they should be (...) off, they should desert. A no
where practiced (...).

With (...) how the Officers have this defect in some measure supply (...) the
subsistence Money to their own Pock^^ for five or six Months together, for all
such as have died by Diseases (...) staid (...) provided they can complete
their Number against the beginning of the next.

Translated out of the Dutch (...) and Printed for the Consolation of indigent
Officers and Soldiers; recommended to the Committee, to which is referred the
Bill to prevent False Musters, and to pay the Soldiers according to true (...)
of Effectives Men. In hope they will find out some expeatem to encourage
Faithful Officers, I cast if that rigorous-Bill should pass, they should be
forced to throw up their Commissions.

(...) A Paradox, proving by that of Argument that it is a Masterpiece of
Policy, strequently to borrow great Sums from the Citizens of London, and to
raise the Million of Money, by borrowing upon the Fund of 70000 l. out of the
Excise; for that thereby 10000 Families are engaged and fastened by their Purso
strings to the Government.

Writ by a Primser Minister of State, for his Master's instruction, and by an
add accident procured to be coppied, and now published for the Information of
all whom (...) sold at Guild hall, the Royal Exchange, and Lumbard-street.

Look before you Leap. Or, a necessary Caveat to all who are inclinable to lend
Money on the Public Faith, and especially on the Million-project; that before
they part with their (...), they obtain an Act, not only to per^ this
Parliament; but that no (...) Powers may repeal this Act; or that, since so
many Ensurers are marched oh, that a Committee of Members be appointed to be
Ensuters, at something under Cent. per Cem, lest, such ^calons Servants of the
Government may want encouragement, or a succeeding Crowned Head, or a Supreme
Power, may stand in as much need of the Fund, as this does of the Advance Money.

Writ by an Eminent Scholar, at shutting up the Exchequer, to be sold at all
the Policy Offices in London.

A new Project of Seating Arrears That the Officers and Soldiers, discount,
for the Free Quanter they have had in Ireland, and England, and for the Arms or
Horses they have lost, and the Charges of Transport Ships. To which is added a
Quore, Whether the Country shall be repaid for Free Quarter, or there shall be
and Balance in the Public Accounts, for the Arms, Stores, or Transport Ships,
if deductions be this made of the Arrears due to the Soldiers? And, Secondly,
when they shall he paid them

Writ by the Treasurer of War, for the use of his Clerks Sold by Naaman
Rob-Spitale, at the Sign of the Sponge.

The Magic of Words. A Treatise wherein is irrefragably proved, that in the
Words Religion Liberty, and Property, there are more powerful Spells than ever
were invented by the most famous Magicians of the Ancients: By a Series of
instantes showing, that within the compass of a Century and half of years,
these three Words have slain near a Million of Men, Women, and Children, Great
Monarchs have been Murdered, or dethroned, Kingdoms C^^tonized into
Commonwealths, or some parts of them have been dismembered from the rest; yet
like the Delusion, the Devil is said to use to Witches, in seeming to bestow
Feasts, Banquets, and immense Riches upon them, yet they are found still
miserably poor. So after all the Arts used by those who know how rightly to
apply these Words to put People (in Reality, wanting all these) into the
murdering Frenzy and Fury, to secure them, they never yet produced the
pretended, or desirable effect. But the generality of these Survivors have been
at the upshot, more unsettled in their Religion, more enslaved in their
Liberties, and more endamaged in their Propereies than when the ambitious
Magicians raised the Tempests by the Charms of such Words:

Writ by a learned Historiographer for the use of Associators, Agitators, and
Covenanters. Printed by Ezekiel Firebrand at the Sign of the Crocadile.

An Infallible Cure for a Decayed Memory. Or a true Account of a Cure performed
upon the 9th of January last, upon a Right Reverend old Prelate, who had so
perfectly forgot a Message to him of very Public Concern, and some remarkable
Discourses upon it, that he retained no more Memory of it, than he did of what
he had done when but Three years old, as he himself affirmed. Yet in the space
of one hour, by the good Advice of a charitable Lady who had not a Doit for her
pains, he was in a great measure restored to his Memory, and it is hoped he will
every day more and more recover the use of it.

To which is added by way of Supplement the Resolution of certain Queries, as
1, Whether a treacherous Memory be not not easilier cured than Treacheey in the
Memory; Resolved in the Affirmative. 2. Whether in some Cases Forgetfulness be
not more desirable than a Sharp Memory; the Question being grounded upon the
famous Instances of some, who being cured of depraved Imaginations that they
were Kings, or Emperors, have lamented all their Life after their being
deprived of the Pleasure of that imaginary Greatness, they under that Lunacy
enjoyed: Resolved also in the Affirmative in certain Cases.

As. When the Restitution of Memory is damagable to any more noble Faculty of
the Mind, as when it spoils the Will, or Vivacity, or Gaity of the Soul, and
fills it with Horray, Affrightments, sense of Guilt, and Uneasiness: Which may
happen in many Cases when the Conscience is oritically tend. Upon which the
Author makes very learned Reflections, resolving the Question in general, that
for Men in such Circumstances, who have no farther regard than to the Pleasures
of this Life, they are in a more desirable Condition in the want of such a
restored Memory.

But if they have regard to the Condition of their Immortal Souls, they had
better have a perfect Memory of all things they ought to repent themselves of,
and to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, than to drop with
Stupidity into the place appointed for them tho forget God, and want the
Testimony of a good Conscience.

Writ for the Satisfaction of all those who have forgot their taking the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance to the former Race of Kings, or that have been old
Cavaliers, or received considerable Favors, or Riches from their Sovereigns.
Done by Dr. P -- ce, Chaplain to General Monk, and Author of the History of the
Restoration of King Charles the II. and dedicated to all, who being yet living,
were instrumental in that Restitution, especially so the Earl of B -- th and
the Bishop of W -- ter.


FINIS.

