For the Right Noble and Potent PRINCE JAMES Duke of Buccleugh and Monmouth.
General of His Majesty's Forces now in SCOTLAND.
The Humble Supplication of the Non-Conformists in the West, and other parts of
the Kingdom, now in Arms in their own Name, and in the Name of all the rest of
those, who adhere unto us in this Church and Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
Shows,
THat we the Presbyterians of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, being by a
long continued Tract of Violence and Oppression upon us in our Lives,
Liberties, Fortunes and Consciences, and without all hope of Remedy; and being
cut off from all Access of Petitioning, and that by an Act of Parliament, of
pouring forth our just Grievances and Complaints. And our Lives being made so
bitter by cruel Bondage, as that Death seemed more eligible than Life (the
Causes whereof we have partly mentioned in our Declarations) and being by
unavoidable Necessity driven into the Field in Arms, in our own Innocent
Self-defence; and now looking on it as a most favorable Providence, that your
Grace is come amongst us, at such a time (of whose Princely Clemency and
natural Goodness, and Aversion from shedding Christian Blood, we have so
savoury a Request we accept with all Thankfulness to God of this Opportunity)
to lay before your Grace our sad Grievances, and humble Request; All which we
know will be misrepresented to your Grace, by such as have studiously, yet
without any just ground, except in the Matters of our God, been the Principal
Actors of our sad and Deplorable Sufferings.

May it therefore please your Grace to grant liberty under safe Conduct to some
of our number to address themselves to your Grace, to lay open our hearts in
this matter, that some speedy and effectual Redress, may be by your Graces
favor and authority made to the establishing of the Nations Peace. In doing
whereof your Grace will do that which is most acceptable to the Lord,
commendable Preventor of all Miseries and Ruins that threaten this poor Land.
Yea and we doubt not shall bring upon you the Blessing of many Thousands Men,
Women and Children, though not with us, yet sincere Lovers of us, sympathizing
with us, and favorers of our Religious Cause, That the good Lord may incline
your Graces heart to this, is the humble Request.

Of your Graces Humble Supplicant R. Hamilton, in the name of the
Covenanted-Army now in Arms,


