A RATIONAL DISCOURSE CONCERNING TRANSUBSTANTIATION. IN A Letter to a Person of
Honor, from a Master of Arts of the University of CAMBRIDGE.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXVI.

A RATIONAL DISCOURSE CONCERNING TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
SIR,
HAving lately had the honor of your Company, you were pleased to signify a
particular difficulty which you had, to believe the great mystery of Love, and
grand stumbling block of more ingenious Protestants, the mystery of
Transubstantiation; in which, if I could give you satisfaction, to my best
remembrance, you promised me to reconcile your self to the Church of Rome. Non
ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. My own sad misfortune to have been
Educated in the misbelief of this sublime Article of our Christian Faith, till
the five and twentieth year of my Age, makes me very tenderly compassionate
both to your self and all others whom I see to be involved in the same misery.
The all good and all powerful God (who has so firmly made me to believe this
strange miracle of Love, that had I a thousand Lives, I would most willingly,
through God's assistance, lay them all down to Seal it with my blood) give your
Honor, and all Mis-believers the like satisfaction to your and their Eternal
comfort. What satisfies me, I shall in the best manner I am able, Heartily
propose to your mature and impartial consideration.

Sir, My sentiment concerning the adorable Eucharist, is, that it is neither
less nor more than the Sacred Body and Blood of God; neither less nor more than
whole Christ. God and Man, Soul, Body, and Divinity, though for the love and
service of us Sinners, veiled under the vile accidents and appearances of
common Bread and ordinary Wine. Concerning which mystery my first Assertion
shall be.

Assertion 1. It is possible to the Omnipotent power of God, to change the
substance of Bread and Wine into the substance of our blessed Saviors Body and
Blood. And this our Adversaries generally grant. Whence by the way, take
notice, that all such Arguments, and most of them are such, as pretend to prove
Transubstantiation impossible, even in the judgment of our Adversaries, are
Sophisms, and do not prove their Proposers inintent: Else they must confess
that two Contradictories may be true, and that they can, and do believe them
both. To wit, that Transubstantiation is both possible and impossible, and they
can, and do believe as much. It Is possible that they grant, and it is also
impossible, for that their Arguments attempt to prove. Further. I prove
Transubstantiation possible, thus. What you and I can do, and every day
actually do in four and twenty hours, surely God Almighty can do in a moment.
But you and I in four and twenty hours turn Bread and Wine into the substance
of our bodies, by eating, drinking, and digesting of them. Therefore our B.
Savior in a moment, without eating and drinking, by a mere Fiat, or will, that
the substance of bread and wine be turned into the substance of his Body and
Blood, can effect it. But then you will say, the substance of the bread and
wine must be transferred into Heaven, that it may be changed into the substance
of our Lord's body there. But why so? Is it not sufficient that the substance
of our-Lord's body in Heaven, be made to be under the accidents of bread and
wine here? But how can the substance of our Saviors body be in Heaven under
such a measure of quantity, and such accidents there, and at the same time be
here on Earth under a different quantity and accidents? Why, how is the
substance of the same Air condensed under a lesser quantity to day, which
rarefied yesterday, was under a greater quantity? For the ancient and commonly
received definition of Rarefaction, is: a little matter under a great quantity;
and of Condensation, is, a great deal of matter under a little quantity. For
example: In a Weather-glass, the same air rarefied, fills twice as much space
as did the same air condensed, as is evident to your eye. So that the same
substance of air, when it is rarefied, fills the spaces A. and B. which when it
was condensed filled only the space A. and this without any addition of any new
substance of air, only the same substance by virtue of Rarefaction is under a
greater quantity than it was before. And will you pawn your soul, the
Omnipotent God cannot by Consecration make his own body be present to the
spaces A and B, which before Consecration was only present to the space A. Now
who would ever have imagined such Doctrine as this concerning Rarefaction and
Condensation should have been taught by an Aristotle to explicate Nature, and
not rather have been invented by some Christian Philosopher, to declare the
supernaturality of Transubstantiation, so aptly does it agree with that hidden
and holy mystery? 2. None make difficulty of a spirits being in different
places at once. The soul is generally acknowledged to be all in the head, and
all in the foot: as Almighty God is all in France, and all in England; not one
part of him here, and another there; not one God in France, and another in
England. We indeed, because we never saw the same thing in two places, but
always different things in different places, are apt to imagine it impossible
for the same thing at the same time to be in two different places. Hence it
follows, whatsoever involves not a contradiction, being possible to God
Almighty, let our fancy say what it will, we must follow our reason, and
acknowledge Almighty God can make not only a spiritual substance, but even a
material one be in two places at once, unless we can show it includes a
contradiction. To be here, and not to be here, is indeed a contradiction; but
to be here and there at the same time, is no contradiction; else neither our
soul, nor God Almighty himself, could be all here, and all in another place at
the same time. Now will any one, who is forced by his Faith and Reason to
acknowledge a spiritual substance is actually in two places at once, pawn his
eternal salvation (as he does who purely for this difficulty continues
Protestant) that God Almighty cannot by all his Omnipotency, make a corporeal
substance be here and in Heaven at the same time?

Now that the bread and wine in the Holy Eucharist should affect our senses in
the same manner as they did before their change into our B. Saviors body and
blood, this ought to seem no impossible wonder to a Christian, who believes so
many miracles in our Lords Incarnation, Conception, and Nativity of a Virgin.
Such a Miracle as this our Lord wrought when he appeared to S. Mary Magdalen in
the shape of a Gardner. His face no doubt was his own true face, but it wrought
upon S. Mary Magdalens eyes as if it had been the face of the Gardener.

And here I had thought to have inserted the different ways, which different
Schools of Catholic Divines take, to explicate how this high mystery is
wrought. But my design being to satisfy Unbelievers as to the substance of the
mystery, and not to puzle the Faith of Believers, by making them glare too
wistly upon the manner how this divine secret is wrought, it being more safely
admired, together with the mystery of the Incarnation and ever blessed Trinity,
then curiously pried into; I resolved to draw a Veyl before it, by a profound
silence of the several explications of Divines, and to content my self with
letting you know in general, how different Doctors of different Philosophical
Principles, according to their several Philosophies, differently explicate the
mystery of the H. Eucharist, and defend it differently against Calvinists, as
they do the mystery of the B. Trinity against the Antitrinitarians, and of the
Incarnation of the Eternal Word against the Arrians; some by virtual
distinction, others by real formal, and others otherwise. And yet all hold,
that after Consecration, the bread is no longer bread, but is changed into the
body of our Lord; but how it is done, some say one way, some another, according
to their different Tenets in Philosophy, still all agreeing that this change is
fitly called Transubstantiation, and that with good reason; for the same
remaining the same, must needs be the same, and cannot possibly be made what it
was not, without some change. The bread then that it may become our Savious
body, must have some change wrought in it; but in its accidents its evident
there is none, they remaining the same as before, therefore the change must be
in the substance. And can now the change of the substance of bread, into the
substance of our B. Lords body, be called by a fitter name than a substantial
change, or Transubstantiation? And this some of the Learned of the Church of
England would do well to reflect on; who urged by the clearness of our
Saviviours own words; This is my Body, and the multitude of Testimonies of the
Fathers of the first six hundred years, and the impossibility of such a
Doctrins over spreading the whole Christian world, without any appearance of
its beginning, and the opposition it must needs have found by reason of its
strangeness both to sense and reason, and its engaging the whole Church in a
material, at least, Idolatry, unless it had been taught the world at first by
our B. Lord and his Apostles: I say some of the Learned of the Engglish
Glergy being urged by such considerations as these, confess the Holy Eucharist,
as they begin to call it, after Consecration to be really and truly our B.
Saviors body, and therefore fall down before it, and adore it: and for this
cause disown the new Rubric of the Common Prayer Book, which says our Lords
body is in Heaven, and not upon the Altar. These Doctors will tell you they
acknowledge the thing, only they dare not be so bold as the Romanists, to
determine the manner. And one of the Learned of them, Mr. Thorndike, asks;
why cannot our B. Savior appear to us in what shape he pleases; in the shape
of a Gardener, or if it so please him, in the shape of bread and wine? These
Doctors, I say, would do well to reflect the Church of Rome has not determined
the manner of our B. Saviors bodies being in the Sacrament, and therefore her
Divines, some explicate it one way, some another; but only the thing it self,
the manner how, being left to the dispute of her Doctors.

2. Assertion. If our B. Savior would have left us his sacred body and blood,
instead of all the Sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen, under the Mosaical
dispensation, to be offered up by Christian Priests, and to be fed upon by the
Christian people, it would have been a favor worthy of his excessive love to
Mankind, by reason of the innumerable benefits which would have accrued to us
by the continual oblition and presence of so worthy a sacrifice. What an
incentive would this have been to Christian piety? How would such a Sacrifice
as this have compelled High and Low, Rich and Poor, Learned and Unlearned, with
a strange reverence to have flocked about our Christian Altars, where not a
Lamb or a Beast, but the body of God, and the blood of God, and by concomitancy
whole God and Man, Christ Jesus, should have been offered up by choice Persons
to the Almighty for the good of the World? How would the presence of such an
Oblation have kept them attentive, and increased their servor in their Prayers?
when they should have been able to have said; This before me, which I see with
my eyes, is my dear Redeemer, and God that was Crucified for me, and is to be
my Judge. How earnestly should we have made all our Petitions to him, and how
heartily should we have thanked him for all his Love? To understand this:
Imagine our B. Savior should appear to you in your Chamber every Morning, in
that very body and shape He is now in Heaven; were you assured it was he, and
not an illusion, with what humility would you prostrate your self before him?
How heartily would you cry him mercy for all your sins, and earnestly recommend
all the desires of your soul unto him? And how would this high favor melt your
soul into a most tender affection toward him? But these would have been the
happy circumstances of the whole Christan world, would our Omnipotent Lord, out
of his abundant goodness, have left us his sacred self, under the disguise of
the Accidents of bread and wine. The same Petitions, with a like fervor, would
every Christian have made every Holy Mass, which you would have made every
Morning upon such an Apparition as was supposed.

My dear Jesus, true God and Man, the very same who art in Heaven in all
splendour and glory, art here upon the holy Altar before me, Veiled under the
vile appearances of common bread and ordinary wine; and all this for my sake,
that to my souls health thou might be seen, handled, and tasted by me. Nor
could thou be hindered from this excess of Love to me unworthy Sinner,
although thou did foresee the Revilings thou were to endure for it from
ungrateful Calvinists. Who for this would call thee a Breadden God, and
reproach thy devout Adorers, as more stupid Idolaters than the very Pagan
Worshippers of Sun and Moon. Rather then I should want the delicious comfort of
thy continual presence, the happy pledge of eternally seeing thee face to face:
all this, and yet greater indignities would thou subject thy self unto, by
one to to be reviled by his impious tongue; by another to be trampled under his
foul feet; by a third, to be cast into some Sink or Jaques. O Impiety, O
Ingratitude of finful men! O unheard of goodness of our dearest Lord, thus to
abject himself for our sakes! But what wonder, if when he was in a passible
mortal body he would permit himself by wicked Miscreants to be torn with cruel
Whips, to be bespatterd with filthy Spittle, and to be made black and blew with
ignominious buffets; what wonder now, when he is become immortal and
impassible, and can suffer no more defilement from the basest ordures, than do
the bright Sun beams from the foulest mud when they shine upon it, that he
should permit himself to be eaten by Mice or Dogs, or suffer other viler
indignities, if Sacrilegious Sinners will permit or cause them?

Moreover, such a presence of our great Lord, what an Incitement would it have
been to pious Munificence in adorning our Christian Churches with the richest
Gold and most precious Stones, or what ever else that is rare and splendid,
which Nature or Art does afford, making them little Heavens for luster and
glory, and thereby exciting in the hearts of all that should enter them a due
reverence to the Almighty, whom we worship? If Solomon so adorned his Temple,
where only a Sheep, or a Calf, or a little Incense was offered to the Creator
of all things; what glory could have been thought too rich for our Christian
Churches, where an Oblation, worthy of the great God, should every day have
been Sacrificed unto him; the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world; the God-Man Christ Jesus. In fine, what virtue should not our dear
Savior have given us example of, by such a charitable humiliation of himself?
Obedience, to come down from Heaven to Earth at the voice of every Christian
Priest, though never so simple for his understanding, or never so wicked for
his life and manners. Charity, Humility, Patience, Contempt of the Judgments or
sayings of men, etc.

3. Assertion. The bread and wine in the Holy Eucharist, are by the Omnipotent
power of God actually, and in deed changed into the body and blood of our B.
Savior Jesus Christ: which I prove thus. This was the universal belief of the
Christian world in the nineth Century after our B. Savior, as is evident by
the testimony of all the writings of that Age, and by the universal testimony
of the tenth Age, who profess in all Christian Countries to have received this
Faith from their immediate Ancestors. Nor do our Adversaries deny it, and
therefore appeal to the first six hundred years, in which they say the
Christian doctrine remained incorrupt. But if the doctrine of the real mutation
of bread and wine in the Holy Eucharist into our B. Saviors body and blood was
generally believed in the nineth Age, it must necessarily be taught in the
first Age by the Apostles, to their first Converts over all the world, and
consequently be most certainly true. For it cannot be doubted but that the
first Converts of the H. Apostles, did not only understand what the Apostles
taught them concerning this great mystery, but also did thoroughly believe it,
and highly esteem it (as they did all other doctrines and practices taught them
by the same their first Maffers) as not only of exceeding profit above all the
things of this life, but also as highly necessary to them and their Children to
bring them to eternal bliss. Which being so, none can doubt but that the same
first Disciples, both could and would, and actually did teach the very same
doctrine which they so highly esteemed, as to embrace it with the bazard of
their lives, to their Children and Successors. And this they taught them not as
an invention of their own, but as a doctrine taught them by the Apostles of
Jesus Christ, who confirmed their Mission from the infallible God by evident
miracles. In like manner it cannot be doubted but these taught their Children
also concerning this mystery what they had been taught by their Fathers, and
not as the invention of their Fathers, but as a doctrine taught their Fathers
by the undoubted Messengers of Heaven, the Holy Apostles. The like may be said
of all the intervening Generations for the first six hundred years, which our
Adversaries do not deny, (though it be all one to the force of this Argument,
to grant so much only for the first four hundred years). Now if
Transubstantiation was not taught for the first six hundred years, but the
contrary; whatsoever age, be it the seventh, eighth, or nineth, would begin to
teach the doctrine of the real presence of our Lord body in the Sacrament;
they could not possibly have the impudence to tell their Children the bread and
wine in the Eucharist were turned into the true body and blood of our Savior;
and thus they had been taught by their Fathers and Grandfathers uninterruptedly
from the Apostles. This, I say, it is impossible they could have the Impudence
to assert, when every one must needs know his Father and Grandfather had
believed and taught him otherwise. What must they pretend then, to impose upon
their Children this new and strange mysterious Doctrine? They must tell them
their Fathers and Grandfathers, and other Ancesters, for some hundreds of
years had been in an Error, and had forsaken the Doctrine taught by the
Apostles, and their first Converts as to this mystery, and confirm their
Assertion by the clear words of Holy Scripture, Take and Eat, this is my Body,
etc. and by other testimonies out of the Writers of the first or second
Century. But no History makes mention of any such manner of bringing in the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation in the seventh, eighth, or other Century:
Therefore it was never so brought in, but was always believed; nor indeed could
it ever in any Century be brought in by the Church of Christ, whose custom has
ever been, not only in the seventh and eighth, but in every other Century
before and after, always to teach, and to pretend to teach her Children, not
Doctrins devised or found out by herself by reading the Holy Scriptures or
other means, but what was taught her by her Fore. Elders uninterruptedly from
the Apostles: and still when Heretics, or beginners of any new Doctrine, in any
age, pretended Scriptures for them, she opposed: we have been taught otherwise
by our Ancesters, and to understand those Scriptures in another sense than you
understand them. Which way of Teaching a bringer in of a new Doctrine, its
evident could not use. For if he did not begin to teach his Child otherwise
than he was taught by his Father he should teach no new or other Doctrine. But
if he did begin to teach his Child otherwise than his Father taught him, he
could not at the same time tell his Child, thus he was taught by his Father,
and so upward from the Apostles, when both his own Conscience, and all his
Neighbors would testify the contrary. Calvin, for example, could not tell his
Child that he was taught by his Father to deny Transubstantiation. No more
could the first Teacher of Transubstantiation in the seventh or other Century,
had it been a Novelty tell his Child he was so taught to believe by his Father,
but must have pretended to have more light than his Father and Ancesters, as
our Adversaries did when they began to deny it. Hence it is evident
Transubstantiation was not begun in the seventh or other Century, but was
always believed since the Apostles, seeing that in the nineth Century
Christians universally believed, that in the holy Eucharist the bread and wine
were changed into the body and blood of our Savior; and as such adored them,
and embraced this doctrine of the real presence, not as a doctrine newly found
out by themselves, or their immediate Forefathers by reading the holy
Scriptures or other means, but as taught them by their Forefathers
uninterruptedly from the Apostles; and seeing likewise this has ever been the
way of the Catholic Church to teach and pretend to teach Posterity not new
Doctrines of her own, but what she had learnt from her Ancestors.

Hence S. Vincent Lerinensis, twelve hundred years ago, in his Golden Treatise
against the profane Innovations of Heresies, upon those words of S. Paul.
Siquis, etc. If any one Evangelize to you, besides what you have received, let
him be Anathema. Sed forsitan, etc. But perhaps those things were commanded the
Galatians only. Then those things also which follow in the same Epistle, were
commanded the Galatians only. Be not desirous of vainglory, provoking one
another, envying one another. Or perhaps was it then commanded, if anyone
announce, besides what has been announced, let him be Anathema^ized; but now it
is not commanded. Therefore, and that also which he there says: But I say,
walk in the Spirit, and do not perfect the desires of the Flesh, was then only
commanded, but is not now commanded. But if it be impious and pernicious to
believe so, it necessarily follows, that as these things are to be observed by
all Ages, so those things also which are established concerning not changing
the Faith, are commanded to all Ages. Wherefore it was never lawful, it is not
now lawful, nor ever shall be lawful to Christian Catholics to announce any
thing besides what they have received -- Let him cry and cry again, and to all,
and always, and every where let him cry by his Epistle that Vessel of
Election, that Master of the Gentiles; that Trumpet of the Apostles, that
Preacher of the World, Conscious to the secrets of Heaven let him cry; if any
one preach a new Doctrine let him be Anathematized. And on the contrary side,
let certain Froggs, and Cynifes and Flies that are to perish; such as are the
Pelagians reclame and this to Gatholiks; We, say they, being Authors, we being
Heads, we being Expositors, Condemn what ye did hold, hold what ye did Condemn,
reject the ancient Faith, the institutions of your Fathers, the depositions of
your Ancestors, and receive; but what? I have a horror to mention them, for
they are such proud things, etc. But may not general Councils at least presume
to reach new Doctrines? Hear the same S. Vincent, chap. 32. Hoc semper neque
quicquam praeterea, etc. The Catholic Church excited by the Novelties of
Heretics, by the decrees of her Councils even did this, and not thing more
than this, what she had received by Tradition only; this she consigned to
Posterity by writing, comprehending a great, sum of things in a few letters,
and for the most part for the light of understanding, signing the not new sense
of Faith with the propriety of a new name.

Take notice that the Christian Church using this means to preserve the Faith
first received, its impossible she should ever lose or change it. For if
Fathers from the beginning had resolved to teach their Children what they had
learnt, or even thought they had learnt from their Parents, as to the point of
the Real prefence or other doctrine, its impossible they should teach another
doctrine. For should they teach another doctrine, it must happen, either
because they were ignorant what was taught them by their Parents, which is
impossible, not only to whole Nations, but even to the Inhabitants of one small
Town, or else, because, though they knew what was taught by their Parents, yet
they would teach otherwise than they had been taught; but then they must
forsake their first resolution of teaching their Children what they thought
they had learnt from their Fathers, contrary to the Supposition. But on the
other side let us suppose a book fully written, as to all points to be believed
by Christians, by the first teachers of Christianity. Let them together, with
this Book, give charge to their (...) Converts, neither to add to it, nor to
diminish it, and to believe as in their Consciences they shall think that Book
shall teach them. Though Generation after Generation be never so faithful to
such a charge, yet they may in after Ages come to lose or change their Faith
because the Book may seem to one Generation to bear one sense, and to another
Generation to bear another: Especially if the mysteries, to be believed be very
sublime, and the Book obscure in many places, and admit of diverse senses when
it speaks of those mysterie^. For example, these words, This is my Body, may
seem to one Age to bear this sense, This is a sign of my body; and ^o another,
This is really and truly my body. But no ten Families who have been taught by
their Parents, either to believe our Saviors body is in the Euecharist, or
that it is not there, can possibly mistake what their immediate Fathers taught
them, and frequently inculcated to them, as to this point, both by themselves
and choice persons ordained on purpose for this end to teach what they learnt
from their immediate Masters and Fathers. Nothing can make a change here, but a
resolution to go contrary to what they know was taught them by their Parents.
Wherefore seeing God Almighty is resolved not to teach every Age by immediate
infallible Missionants from himself, but to send inspired Ambassadors to one
particular Generation only, and to leave that Generation to teach their
Children successively till the day of Judgment, what they learnt from the
immediate infallible Messengers of Heaven: And seeing also a Book, with a
charge not to change or alter it, and with a charge also to follow what should
seem to every Generation to be the sense of it, and supposing every Generation
faithful to such a charge, would not have been a sufficient means to keep the
first divine Faith from Corruption, we may safely conclude the Almighty has not
taken that way to teach the world. But seeing Oral teaching by inspired Pastors
at first, with a charge to every Generation to follow what they thought was
taught them by their immediate Parents and Teachers, provided every Generation
were true to this charge, would have kept the first Faith inviolate, we may
also conclude the Almighty has taken this way. Especially finding a
Congregation of so vast a spread in being, who pretends to have made use of
this means to preserve her first Faith, taught her Ancestors many hundred years
ago; nor can she be evinced by any History or Tradition, or any thing but mere
sayings and ungrou^^^d surmises, to have lost or changed her first belief. And
if you (...) make use of a Book to guide you in your Faith, as the Catholic
Church also does, you must resolve to interpret it, (if you will be sure not to
mistake) as she does; that is, in that sense in which it was understood by your
Fathers, and not in that sense it shall seem to bear to you, if contrary to the
sense it seemed to bear to your Ancestors. Pardon Sir, this long digression, I
hope it will conduce to your more full satisfaction.

And take notice, that wheresoever Transubstantiation is believed, the
believers of it profess to have been so taught by their Forefathers
uninterruptedly from the Apostles: and wheresoever this mystery is denied, the
deniers of it do not profess to have been taught to deny it by their Fathers
uninterruptedly from the Apostles, but only by their Ancestors for about a
hundred and fifty years; and that their Ancestors about the year fifteen
hundred, had more light than their Progenitors for about a thousand years, who
were all in darkness, and had left the right Faith taught by the Apostles, and
for the first fix hundred years of Christianity. An evident conviction this,
that the denial of Transubstantiation is a Novelty, and the asserting of it the
ancient verity. For had Transubstantiation been a new Doctrine, and never heard
of before the seventh or eighth Age, the Assertors of it must have been forced
to plead for it, after the manner its Opposers plead against it; by saying
their Fore fathers only for so long, for example, for eight hundred years had
believed it; but in the year eight hundred, their Ancestors had more light than
their Forefathers, and they by reading the Holy Scriptures and Fathers of the
first Century, came to understand that our Saviors true body was in the Holy
Eucharist, and that their immediate Progenitors for five or six hundred years,
had left the first Apostolical doctrine as to this mystery.

If you remember, I supposed from the confession of our Adversaries, that the
Christian Doctrine remained pure and incorrupt for some Centuries of years,
after its first planting; which I now shall endeavor to prove. And indeed
whosoever maturely considers the genius and temper of the Christian Doctors and
Bishops, for the first Centuries after our Savior, will find it impossible for
all the power of Hell to impose a Novelty upon them, especially such an one as
would make them all Idolaters. For they were not like the seeming Zelots of our
Age, pretenders to new lights, but their profession was not to correct
Antiquity, not to deliver to Posterity doctrine of their own devising, but
carefully to keep what they had received from their Forefathers, and
faithfully to teach their Children what they had been taught by their Fathers:
And their great Answer to Introducers of new Doctrirs or Practices, was, Nihil
nouandum nisi quod traditum est: We must innovate nothing, but stick close to
what has been delivered to us by our Forefathers. As for pretenders to
discover new Truths by reading of the holy Scriptures, its easily conceivable
how such persons may be imposed upon by subtle Sophisters, and made to believe
erroneous doctrins; to wit, by bad and new Interpretations of good and ancient
Scriptures. But on the other fide, how shall a Teacher of Novelties deceive a
Christian Country, which is resolved to hold fast whatsoever doctrine was taught
them by their immedate Progenitors, who received the same doctrine by an
uninterrupted delivery from Father to Son, from the Apostles? Let him pretend
Scriptures, and bring a thousand places out of the Law, Psalms, Prophets, and
Apostles; what will the Reply be? The Scriptures you allege we reverence, and
have ever been taught to reverence them as divine; but we have been taught to
interpret and understand them in another manner and sense than you allege
them. Let him pretend Authority of Doctors, as Learned as Origin, as Holy as
Cyprian; nay, if he will, of a whole Provincial Council, as numerous as that in
Africa, which determined Rebaptization of persons Baptized by Heretics; they
Reply, we must not Innovate, we must hold to what was taught us by our
Ancestors. What means then to make persons thus disposed to leave their an^ient
Faith, and admit of a Novelty? You must prove to them, that you and they, and
other Christians in several Countries, have been taught so to believe by your
immediate Predecessors, and uninterruptedly From Father to Son, from the
Apostles: but then you cease to be a Teacher of Novelties, contrary to the
supposition.

Now that such was the disposition of the Primitive Centuries of Christianity,
hear S. Vincent Lerinensis, who lived in the fifth Age; who testifies, that
often asking of very many his Contemporaries, famous for their Sanctity and
Learning, how he might be able to discern the truth of the Catholic Paith from
the falsity of Heretical prayity, he always received this Answer in a manner
from them all: That if he desired to remain sound in his Faith, he must
fortify it; first with the Authority of the divine Law, and then with the
Tradition of the Catholic Church. That is, as he explicates himself
afterward, he must examine what has always, all over the Christian Church, and
by all Christian Doctors, or in a manner by all* been believed, and hold to
that Against all Novelty; though defended by private Doctors, never so Holy, or
never so Learned, or producing never so many Scriptures for themselves, if
interpreted after a new manner. But says the same S. Vincent, chap* 2. Here
perhaps some body may ask, seeing the Canon of the Scriptures is perfect, and
is it self sufficient, and more than sufficient for all things, what need is
there to add to it the Authority of the Ecclesiastical, or Churches
understanding of it? Because the Holy Scripture, by reason of its depth, is not
by all taken in one and the same sense. -- For Photinus expounds it one way,
Sabellius another, Donatus another, Arrius another. And chapter 41. He tells us how
the third general Council held in his days at Ephesus, proceeding according to
this rule, condemned Nestorius. For the Fathers of that Christian Synod, in
number about 200 having consulted the Sentiment of their Predecessors, the
eminent Doctors of the Oriental and Western Churches, S. Peter of Alexandria,
S. Athan^sius, S. Theophilus, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Basil, S. Gregory
N^ssen, S. Felix, S. Julius, S. Cyprian, concerning their controversy in
debate, they resolved to hold their doctrine, to follow their Counsel, to
believe their testimony, to obey their Judgment. Quae tandem, etc What were at
length (says S. Vincent) the Voices and Votes of them all, but that what was
anciently delivered should be kept, what was of late invented should be
exploded? After which we admired and proclaimed the great humility and sanctity
of that Council. In which so many Priests, in a manner as to the greater part,
were so many Metropolitans, and of so great Erudition and Learning, as they
were almost all able to dispute of Dogms. To whom, when their gathering
together in one, seemed to add a confidence of daring, and decreeing something
from themselves, yet notwithstanding they would presume nothing, arrogate
nothing at all to themselves, but took all possible heed lest they should
deliver to their Posterity what themselves had not received from their Fathers;
and not only well disposed the matter for the present, but also gave example to
them that were to come after them, to wit, that they should reverence the dogms
of sacred Antiquity, and condemn (Adinventa) the additional inventions of
profane Novelty. This then was not an Age wherein to introduce new doctrins
into the Church, nor any other before S. Vincent. For he tells us, chap. 9. Mos
iste, etc. That custom has always flourished in the Church, and by how much
any one has been more Religious, the more readily has he opposed new
inventions. We have hereof plenty of examples every where. The same S. Vincent
witnesses, that in the third Age, the Assertors of Rebaptization wanted neither
wit nor eloquence, nor number, nor verisimilitude of Truth, nor Oracles of the
divine Law, but understood in a bad and new manner. chap. 9, and 10. How came
they then to lose their cause? S. Stephen and his Colleagues reclamed, Nihil
novandum, etc. Nothing is to be innovated besides what has been delivered to
us. Agrippinus, Bishop of Carthage, holding Rebaptization against the rule of
the Universal Church, against the sense of all his fellow Priests, against the
custom and institutions of his Ancestors; and hereby (as S. Vincent observes)
giving a form of Sacrilege to all Heretics, this overthrew him.

Had now the doctrine of the Real presence been an Idolatrous Novelty, its
manifest no Introducer of it could have persuaded it to a Christian Church thus
principled as the Doctors of these times were. They would all unanimously have
reclamed; Nothing must be innovated, besides what has been delivered to us by
our Ancestors.

Moreover, that the Christian doctrine remained pure and incorrupt for some
Centuries of years, after its first planting, is further evinced by considering
the state of the Christian Church for the first 300. years; to wit, that it was
severely persecuted all the world over. Now can any reasonable man imagine, that
they who were continually exposing their lives for their Religion, would if
they could agree together, so notoriously to change it, as to make themselves
most gross Idolaters by adoring bread and wine, as the true body and blood of
their Creator and God. Nor can it be imagined when the Centuries of the
persecuted state of the Church were ended, that the Christians now in a full
liberty of professing and practicing their Faith, would all on the sudden so
notoriously change that Faith which had been delivered them by their
Forefathers, who had sealed it with their blood. And this none can doubt of,
who reflects how tenacious all man kind is of that Religion they were bred up
in. In so much, as let any one consult the whole world, and he shall never find
so much as one Nation or Country, to have changed their Religion without a
great deal of ^oise and difficulty, and a considerable length of time; and so
as Posterity could for many Ages give an account of such a change, how and by
what means it happened, so as to satisfy any rational demander of an account
of such a change, without flying to imperceptible mutations, by little and
little, but when or by whom no account is to be given: The usual refuge of our
Adversaries, when we demand of them how not one Country, but all the Christian
Countries in the world, came to believe so universally this strange doctrine of
the change of Bread and Wine into our B. Saviors body and blood. The whole
world formerly in a manner Pagan, except a handful of Jews, is now become
Christians; we give an account of it. Twelve men dividing the world amongst
them by stupendous Miracles a holy life and glorious death, converted great
numbers of several Nations to the Christian Faith; and these taught it their
Children under sharp persecutions for some three hundred years; and after that,
through the favor of Emperors and Kings, Converted to be Christians, it made
that spread we now see. Arrianism overran a great part of the Christian world,
and we are able to give an account how, and by what means, without recurring to
imperceptible growing by little and little. Arrius first broached that Heresy,
and by the favor of Emperors; it got a great footing in Christendom. In like
manner had the strange doctrine of Transubstantiation been a Novel Invention;
it is not possible, but at first teaching, it must needs have been opposed, and
could not have so overspread the Christian world in the nineth Century, as its
evident to any one versed in Ecclesiastical History it did, without great
preaching of its first Abettors, and strange favor of Christian Princes. That
the whole Christian world, for the first six hundred years, should be wholly
ignorant of this strange mysterious doctrine, and so hard to be believed; and
that in the nineth Century it should be generally believed, and not as a new
doctrine neither, which was pretended by that Age to have been found out by
virtue of greater light, by reading the Holy Scriptures, etc. but as a doctrine
they had been taught from their Forefathers by an immemorable Tradition, is
harder to believe than the mystery it self to any judicious considerer; how
difficultly, as I hinted above, we are persuaded to leave the doctrins we have
been taught by our Parents from our Childhood.

In confirmation of this, let but any one consider the state of our own
Country. About the year 1500 we generally believed and adored the bread and
wine in the H. Eucharist, as our B. Saviors true body and blood. Now it is
confessed, we, a hundred for one, believe the contrary. But how was this new
Faith bred in us? By stopping the mouths of all the Preachers of the ancient
mysterious doctrine, and by persecuting with severe Laws, all Professors of that
ancient Faith. And yet you see even all this diligence has not been able to
root out the ancient belief universally neither. Much-less was what has been
done, been effected so without noise; but all our Chronicles mention how our
new belief was wrought. And can any one think that not one Kingdom, but all the
Kingdoms of the Christian world, could be brought so universally to change
their Faith without any mention in any History, how and by whom this strange
change was wrought? Especially if he reflect how hardly human nature does
believe strange things which neither sense nor reason can give any evidence of:
And on the contrary, how easily and gladly we relinquish Beliefs which have
been imposed upon us, when we have, as we think, the evidence both of sense and
reason for our change. All which notwithstanding, you see how that after a 150
years labor, neither eloquence of false Teachers, nor force of civil powers,
has been able so wholly to pervert our Nation as to the belief of that high
mystery of the real presence, but even still there remain a considerable number
retainers of the ancient belief. And can you think that not in a much greater
space of time, to wit, betwixt the sixth and nineth Century all the Christian
world could be persuaded to admit so strange a doctrine to nature and reason;
and yet no man by virtue of History or Tradition should be able to give any
account what Orators prevailed with the world to relinquish the belief of their
Ancestors, or what power of civil Magistrates forced them to it? Especially
seeing there have not wanted Ecclesiastical Historigraphers who have made
mention of matters of far less note than such a change of Faith must needs have
made. But what place will there remain for doubting, that this high mystery was
always believed, if not only all writers be silent as to any change, but also
the seventh and eighth Age; yea, the most Primitive times do positively attest
this very mystery by the pens of the chiefest Champions of the Christian
Church, who have left us any memorials of their learning and piety in their
deservedly admired works? I shall faithfully recount their words; be your own
judge what their sentiment was.

In the first place then, glorious Saint, and great Doctor S. Augustine, tell us
your Faith concerning the Holy Eucharist; Is it Bakers bread, or the body of
our Lord and God? I remember, says the holy Doctor in his 28. Ser. de verbis
Domini, when I treated of the Sacraments, I told you that before the words of
Christ, that which is offered up is called Bread, but when the words of Christ
shall have been pronounced, now it is no longer called bread, but the body of
Christ. And explicating those words of the Royal Prophet, Psalm. 98. v. 5. Exalt
ye our Lord God, and adore his footstool, for it is holy. Now what is this
Footstool of God? why says this great Doctor, The Earth is his Footstool.
But how is the Earth holy, and to be adored by us? The Saint goes on and tells
us how: Our Lord took Earth of the Earth, because Flesh is of the Earth; and he
took Flesh of the Flesh of Mary. And because he walked here in Flesh, and gave
to us that very Flesh to be eaten by us to our Salvation; but no body eats that
Flesh, unless he shall first have adored it. And indeed what could we expect
that S. Austin should teach and believe concerning this divine Sacrament, but
what he had been taught by his Father and Instructor in Christ, the glorious
St. Ambrose. And what was that? Hear his words, lib. 4. De Sacramentis. Thou will perhaps say nnto me, my Bread is ordinary Bread; but that bread is bread
before the Sacramental words; but when Consecration has been made of bread, it
is made the Flesh of Christ. But how can bread be the body of Christ? By
Consecration: Consecration; by what and whose words is it perfected? By the
words of our Lord Jesus. For all other things which are said, Praise is given
to God: By prayer supplication is made for the people, for Kings, for the rest.
When the time is come that the Venerable Sacrament is to be made, now the
Priest does not use his own words, but the words of Christ; therefore the word
of Christ makes this Sacrament. But what word of Christ? That word by which all
things were made. Our Lord commanded and Heaven was made; our Lord commanded
and the Earth was made: Our Lord commanded, and the Seas were made: Our Lord
commanded, and every Creature was produced. Do thou see then how operative
the word of Christ is? If then there be so great force in the word of our Lord
Jesus, that it could make things which were not begin to be; how much rather is
it operative, that those things which were, should be and be charged into
another thing? Heaven was not, the Sea was not, the Earth was not; but hear him
saying: He said the word, and they were made; he commanded, and they were
Created. That therefore I may Answer thee; the body of Christ was not before
Consecration; b^ after Consecration, I say unto thee, that now the Body of
Christ is. He said it, and it was made: He commanded, and it was Created. And
in chap. 5. of the same Book. Before the words of Christ, the Chalice is full
of Wine and Water; but when the words of Christ have bad their operation, then
it is made the blood which Redeemed the people. See then in how many kinds of
things the word of Christ is able to change all things. Moreover our Lord Jesus
himself testifies unto us, that we receive his body and blood; ought we then to
doubt of his testification?

Add to S. Austin and S. Ambrose, the Learned S. Hierom in his Epistle ad
Heliodorum. Far be it from me, says the Saint, that I should speak amiss of
those who succeeding the Apostles, do make the body of Christ with their sacred
mouth. And in his 85. Epistle to Enagrius. By whose prayers the body and blood
of Christ is made. Take notice that these three Holy Fathers lived not four
hundred years after our B. Saviors death. S. Cyprian yet nearer the Apostles
age, does no less clearly nor fully attest the same verity, in his Sermon. de
Caena Domini. That bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, being changed
not in shape, but in its nature, by the Omnipotency of the Word was made Flesh.
And in his Book, de Lapsis; reprehending such as were angry with the Priests of
God, who refused to admit them to the holy Communion of the B. Sacrament, after
they had polluted themselves with the profane Sacrifices of Heathen Idolaters,
expresses their sin in these words. He that has fallen from his Faith,
threatens them that have stood firm. Sacrilegious w^etch, he is angry with the
Priests of God, that he is not prosently admitted with defiled hands to receive
the Body of our Lord, or to drink his blood with his defiled mouth. And this
was the very doctrine of his learned Master Tertullian, who yet nearer
approached the holy Apostles, lib. de Resur. cur. The Flesh is fed with the
body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be made fat with God. And in his
Book de Idololatria, he complains of the prosaneness of some Christians, who
made no scruple to day to be working in their Shops, making Idolatrous Statues
for the Heathens, and yet to morrow would presume to come into the Christian
Congregations, and receive the Sacred mysteries of our Lords body and blood,
and communicate them to others. His words are these; To touch the body of our
Lord with those hands which give bodies to Devils. Nor is this all; their Crime
would be less, did they only receive from the hands of others what they
contaminate and pollute; but moreover they deliver to others what they have
polluted. Makers of Idols are admitted into the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. O
Impiety! Once the Jews laid profane hands on Christ; these daily violate his
body: O hands deserving to be cut off!

But shall we desire a Greek Father or two, to give us their sense concerning
our present Controversy. S. Crysost. ho. 60. ad. pop. Antioch. Because the
Word says, This is my Body, let us assent and believe. And a little after, How
many are there now adays that say, O that I could see his Figure, his
Garments, his Shoes? Lo thou see himself, thou touchest him, thou eatest
him. Thou desire to see his Garments, but he give thee not only to see, but
also to eat and touch, and take himself into thee. And a little after, Consider
what an indignation thou have against the Traitor Judas, and against those that
Crucified him: Therefore consider lest thou also be not guilty of the body
and blood of Christ. They killed his most holy body; and thou receivest it with
a polluted soul after so many benefits. For he was not satisfied to be made
man, to be Buffetted and Crucified: but moreover, he does mix himself with us,
and makes us his body, not only by Faith, but in very deed. And ho. 24. in Ep.
1. ad Corin. Christ has given us his body, both that we might have it and might
eat it, which is the greatest sign of love. Wherefore Job chap. 31. that he
might show the love of his Servants to him, said they oftentimes of their
execeeding great love to him, would say concerning him, Who will give us of his
Flesh, that we might be filled with it. Even so Christ has given us his Flesh,
that we might feed upon it, thereby to allure us to love him very much. This
body the Sages adored in the Manger. -- Thou see it not in the Manger, but
npon the Altar; not a Woman holding it in her arms, but a Priest present. --
Nor do I show thee Angels, nor Archangels, nor Heaven, nor the Heaven of
Heavens, but the very Lord of all these things. -- Nor do thou only see him,
but touch him; not only touch him, but eat him; and having received him,
returns to thy home. And Hom. 60 ad pop. Antioch. and 83. in Math. Let us every
where believe God, and not oppose him, although that which he says seem absurd
to our sense and thoughts; let his speech overcome both our sense and our
reason; which let us do in all things, and especially in the Mysteries, not
only regarding those things which lie before us, but also holding fast to his
words. For we cannot be deceived by his words, but our sense is most easily
deceived: those cannot be false, this is deceived very often. Because therefore
he has said this is my body, let us make no doubt but believe, and see it with
the yes of our understanding. And in his 3. ho. in Ep. ad Ephesians Let us think
that him that sits above, who is adored by the Angels, it is him that we taste,
that we feed upon. And ho. 2. ad pop. Antioc. Elias left his Disciple his
Mantle, but the Son of God ascending, left us his Flesh. But Elias indeed put
off his Mantle, but Christ both left us his Flesh, and retaining it, ascended
with it. Let us not therefore be dishartened, nor lament, nor fear the
difficulty of the times. For he that has not refused to shed his blood for us,
and has communicated to us both his flesh and blood, will not refuse to do any
thing for our Salvation.

Hear another Greek Doctor, S. Cyril of Jerusalem, in his Catechistical
discourses, which are the plainest declarations of the mysteries of our holy
Faith. Catech. 4. Mys. Seeing then Christ himself so affirms and says
concerning the bread, This is my body who after this can dare to doubt of it?
and the same also affirming and saying, This is my blood, who I say can doubt
of it, and say it is not his blood. He changed water into wine in Cana of
Galilee, by his sole Will, and shall he not be worthy whom we may believe, that
he changed wine into his blood? For if being invited to a corporeal Wedding, he
wrought a stupendous miracle, shall we not confess him much rather to have
given his body and blood to the Children of the Bridegroom? Wherefore with all
assurance let us take the body and blood of Christ; for under the appearance of
bread, is given to thee his body; and under the appearance of wine, is given
his blood; that having received the body and blood of Christ, thou may be
made partaker together with him of his body and Blood. So shall we be
Christophers, such as carry Christ in them, when we shall have received his
body and blood into our Members; and so as S. Peter says, shall be made
partakers of the divine Nature. -- Do not therefore look upon it as bare bread
and bare wine; for it is the body and blood of Christ, according to the words
of our Lord himself. For although thy sense suggest this to thee, yet let Faith
confirm thee; do not judge of the thing by thy taste, but rather from Faith hold
for certain, so that thou have no doubt that the body and blood are given to
thee. Knowing and accounting for most certain, that this bread which is seen by
us is not bread, although our taste judge it to be bread, but that it is the
body of Christ. And the wine, which is seen by us, although it may seem wine to
our sense of tasting, that yet it is not wine but the blood of Christ. Can the
holy Council of Trent have plainer words than these, or fuller to our present
purpose. Add the testimony of S. Justin Martyr, who lived yet nearer the Age of
the Apostles, in his Apology for the Christians to Antoninus the Emperor, in
which he gives him an account of the Christian Faith; and where certainly he
would not make it more mysterious than it was, nor more hard to be believed,
according to any part of it, then the truth and common belief of Christians
forced him; but rather would moderate the mysteriousness of it, than increase
it. Hear him then giving an account of the Holy Eucharist. This meat is called
by us the Eucharist, because no body may partake of it, but he who believes
those things to be true which we say, and lives so as Christ has taught us. For
we do not take these things as common and ordinary bread, but as by the word of
God, our Savior Jesus Christ was made man, and had flesh and blood for our
Salvation; so we have been taught that this meat, which is Consecrated by the
Prayers of that speech we received from him, is the flesh and blood of Jesus
Christ, who was made man. For the Apostles in their Commentaries, which are
called Gospels, have delivered that Christ so commanded, and that having taken
bread, when he had given thanks, he said, Do this in memory of me, This is my
Body; and having taken the Cup, when we had given thanks, he said also, This is
my blood, and gave it to them only. Mark how this holy Father says, that what
we have received concerning the holy Eucharist, is, that it is both the flesh
and blood of Jesus Christ, who was made man. Now would any man in his wits have
given such an account of the Christian Faith to an unbelieving Heathen, with a
desire to Convert him, and to recommend our holy Faith to him, had the blessed
Eucharist been a mere sign of the flesh and blood of Christ. This he would
easily have understood to be very feasible, whereas the other strangely shocks
both his sense and reason. For other Testimonies out of these and other Holy
Fathers, I refer you to our Books of Controversy on this Subject, which are
full of them.

And who now that has the least grain of Humility and Modesty, would not blush
to accuse so many and so grave Doctors of Christ's Church of Idolatry and
damnable Error? And here Sir, you must give me leave to bespeak our Adversaries
in the words of S. Augustine, directed by him to Jul^an the Pelagian, after a
like Citation, about another matter, of these very Holy Fathers by me now
cited, as to a good part of them. Tu qui tam crebro, etc. Thou sadly deluded
Calvinist, that do so often object to us Catholic Christians the crime of
Idolatry for adoring the Holy Eucharist; if thou be awake, see what and what
kind of men, and how glorious Defenders of the Christian Faith, thou dare to
be spatter under our names, with so execrable a Crimination. Go now and object
to us the crime of Idolatry, dissemble and feign thy self not to know what they
say in this point; overlook them as it were, and attack us only, as not
knowing that under our name they are reviled; and confidently insult over so
many and so great Doctors of the Church of Christ, who after a most Saintly
life, and having beaten down the Errors of their times, most gloriously went
out of this life before you and your Camerades bubled up. Do thou see with
what kind of men we sustain thy reproaches; do thou see with whom we have
the same common cause, which without any sober consideration thou Calumniates
and endeavors to expugn? Do thou see, proud Calvinist, how pernicious it is
unto thy self, to object so horrible a crime of Idolatry to such men as these,
and how glorious it is to us to sustain the charge of any crime, together with
such Doctors? Or if thou do see, see, and hold thy peace, and let so many
Catholic tongues silence thy Calvinistical tongue, and submit thy brazen
forehead to the venerable mines of so many grave Fathers. The Russian Polemus
to complete his wild ramble, would needs early in the morning, half Drunk with
his Night-Revels, go to the School of the Grave Sophist Xenocrates, to affront
him and his Scholars. But he was no sooner entered the School of that sober
Platonist, but the very fight of the modest and grave Comportment of the
Philosopher and his Scholars did so strike my young gallant, that he was quite
out of Countenance; and ashamed of himself, he pulled off his drunken bays,
and composed himself to modesty, and became his Convert, whom he came on
purpose to deride and scoff at. Such force had the grave Countenances of a
sober Platonist and his School to comp^^at a rude Russian. Finding my
presuptuous Calvinist drunk with pride and self-conceit, I could think of no
better means to reduce him to Sobriety, then to bring him, not into the School
of a sober Ethnic Philosopher, but into a grave Assembly of the most memorable
Bishops and Doctors of the School of Christ. To whom certainly so much a
greater Reverence and respect is due, by how much their Doctor and Master
Christ, is greater then Xenocrates 's Master and Doctor Plato. I desire now my
conceited Calvinist, that thou would think it worth thy while, to eye, to
look upon so many and so grave Prelates of the Catholic Church; and imagine
them to look as it were upon thee, and mildly and gently to say unto thee:
Itane nos fili Juliane, etc. Is it so indeed Son Stilling fleet, are we (...)
Idolaters? What answer would thou give them. With what face would thou look
upon them? What arguments would occur to thee? Would thou dare, would thou
have the face to produce such wodden Daggers as thou art ever and anon drawing
upon us? Or rather would not such pitiful Weapons fall out of thy hand, at the
presence of so great Doctors, and such grave Prelates of Gods Church? Would
thou have the forehead to tell the great S. Augustine our B. Lord said, Do this
in remembrance of me; the words which I speak unto you are spirit and life; I
am a Door, I am a true Vine, etc. As if that great Doctor and his venerable
Fellows could be ignorant of such petty Cavils as those.

Tautumne apud te, etc. Can a Calvin, or a Stillingfleet have so much Authority
with any person of sobriety, that he should for their regards, not only for
sake so many and so great Doctors and defenders of the Christian Faith, from
the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof; but also dare to call them I
dolaters and Abertors of damnable Errors? I desire my conceited Calvinist,
would but consider into what an Assembly I have brought him. It Is an Assembly
of Saintly Doctors, not of the popular multitude: Such as were not only
Children, but Fathers of the Church; famous in their Generations for Learning
and Sanctity, who well furnished with spiritual Weapons, strenuously warred
against the Heretics of their days, and having happily finished the labors of
their dispensation, holily went to rest in peace. Nor was the doctrine, we are
now disputing, any new devised Opinion of theirs; but what they learnt in the
Church of Christ, in the time of their Rudiments, that they taught the Church
of Christ in time of their Honors. That which they found in the Church, that
they held. That which they received from their Fathers, they delivered to their
Children. And if my Calvinist will perhaps say, he does not charge S. Augustine,
or S. Chrysostom with the crime of Idolatry, he must give me leave to tell him,
nor then does he justly charge us, whom he sees in the same cause to have
followed their steps. But if he will only reproach us with such a Calumny, nor
for any other reason, but because we think concerning the holy Eucharist what
they thought, hold what they held, preach what they preached; who does not see
that he openly reviles us only, but secretly has the like judgment of them?
For what they believe, we believe; what they teach, we teach, yield to them,
and you yield to us; acquies^ in their sentiments, and you will cease to condemn
ours. Moreover this grave Assembly of ancient Doctors, to whom we appeal, then
judged concerning this our cause, when no body could say they had favor or ill
will for either party. They had neither friendship nor enmity with you or us.
We did not as yet appeal with you to them as Judges, and our cause was decided
by them. Neither you nor we were known to them, and we recite their sentence
given for us against you. We did not yet contest with you, and they pronouncing
sentences for us, we have overcome you. Or will my Calvinist have the impudence
to accuse (as some do) th^se grave Doctors of blindness? A multitude of blind
men forsooth avails nothing to find out the Truth! and these were the errors
and mistakes of those learned Prelates. What an Age are we fallen into? Truth
must be called error, and error truth, light darkness, and darkness light. S.
Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Crysostom, S. Hierom are blind, but Calvin and
Stillingfleet see.

These Doctors I have called a Council of, were persons of such Learning and
Sanctity, that if a Synod of Bishops were gathered out of the whole world, it
would be much if so many, and such Doctors could be found to sit in it. Neither
indeed were these all at one time, but God Almighty as pleases him, and as he
judges to be expedient, scatters a few more excellent and faithful dispensers
of his mysteries, in several Ages, and distances of places. By such Planters,
Waterers, Builders, Pastors, nursing Fathers after the Apostles, the holy
Church has increased Now what an imprudence, and what an impudence must it be
for any to presume to accuse of the horrible crime of Idolatry, so many holy,
egregious, and memorable Doctors of the Catholic Verity, and moreover together
with them the whole Church of Christ; to which divine Family they faithfully
Ministering spiritual Food, flourished with great glory in our Lord. Nay
further, they who dare to oppose the manifest Sentiment, not of so many
Platonical, Aristotelieal or Zenonical Doctors, but of so many Saints and
illustrious Prelates in the Church of God, and these some of them singularly
endowed with human litterature, and all of them eminently learned in the Sacred
Letters, have reason not so much to fear them as him who made them profitable
Vessels to himself. These Judges, by how much the more desirable they ought to
be unto thee, if thou did hold the Catholic Faith, by so much thou have more
reason to fear them, because thou opposest the Catholic Faith, which they
ministered to little and great, and manifestly and stoutly defended against its
Enemies, yea against you, then not as yet born. For not only when they lived
did they by their words, but also by their writings which they left to
Posterity, did they strenuously defend the Catholic Faith, that they might
break in pieces your Arguments. Hitherto S. Augustine, l. 1. et. 2. Contra
Julianum. I thought fit to adjoyn this Reflection of S. Augustine, though
superabundant to the force of my Argument, it being sufficient for my purpose
to prove that the doctrine of the Real presence was generally believed in the
Primitive Centuries of Christianity, and so much evidently follows from the
Authorities above cited. For though some may be so self-conceited as to confess
that S. Ambrose, S. Crysostom, and the rest of the holy Fathers, Greek and
Latin, believed the doctrine of the Real presence, but they with humble
submission deemed it to be an Idolatrous and damnable doctrine: yet few I think
but have so much regard for th^se Primitive Doctors, as to allow them so much
judgment, as to know what was the belief of their several Churches in their
days, and so much fidelity as to write the Truth as to this particular, which
is sufficient for the purport of my discourse. Unless you can think that these
holy Fathers were of one Faith, and their several Flocks, who reverenced them
as Saints, of another.

An Answer to an Objection.
But you will say, if there be such a miraculous change wrought in the bread
and wine in the holy Eucharist, why does it not appear to our senses, as well
as other miraculous works of our Lord Jesus did? When he turned water into
wine, it appeared such to the sight and taste of the Guests at the
Marriage Feast. He did not barely tell them, the water was turned into wine,
and exact their belief of his word, contrary to the evidence of all their
senses, but convinced them that it was so by their very senses. Why then in our
present case, if he turn wine into his blood, does it not appear to our fight
to be blood? But barely to tell us, that it is his blood, and yet to let it
taste and appear as it did; how is this credible? How is it not contrary to one,
but to all the Miracles that ever he wrought? And this Argument is further
strengthened, for that it would hence follow, we might call in question the
whole mystery of Christianity. For we therefore believing in our Lord Jesus, as
one indeed sent from God, to teach us nothing but Truth, because of his
Miracles, and we having no assurance of his Miracles but from our senses, if
our senses may be mistaken, how can we tell but those who were eyewitnesses of
his wonders were illuded: and water, for example, was not turned by him into
wine, but only seemed wine to the taste and sight of those which were present,
and indeed remained water as before. For why may not water remain water, and
yet seem to my taste wine, as well as wine be changed into blood, and yet seem
to my taste and sight to remain wine?

For Answer to this Objection, we must distinguish two sorts of Miracles, with
the ends for which they are wrought. Some Miracles are wrought by Almighty God,
to draw the world to the Christian Faith; and these must necessarily be the
object of our senses; else it could not reasonably be expected, they should
work their intended effect in them for whose sakes they are wrought. For
example; If any one will by Miracle prove he is sent from God, by raising a
dead man to life, or by turning water into wine; he must make it evident to my
senses, that the man who was dead is alive, and the water now wine, and not
barely tell me so. Else he will be derided as an Impostor and impudent Liar,
instead of being admired and received as a Messenger from Heaven, and Oracle of
Truth. There are other Miracles which are wrought by the Almighty, not as a
motive to induce us to receive the true Faith, but to sanctify us when we have
received it, or for the necessity of working the salvation of the world. Such
are the Miracles of the Incarnation of the Son of God, and all the spiritual
effects wrought in the souls of Christians by any of the Sacraments. Now these
miraculous effects are not the object of our senses, nor is there any reason
they should be. For the Church of Christ does not urge these to persuade
Unbelievers to acknowledge the true Faith; but only professes, that by these
her members are sanctified. For example; we say by Baptism as an outward and
visible sign, is wrought an invisible grace in the soul of the person Baptized.
Though view the Child as much as you please, you can by none of your senses
perceive any mutation to be wrought. In like manner the Church professes to
believe the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God: that our Lord Jesus,
though to outward appearance a mere man, was also true God, and yet by no sense
was the Hypostatical Union of his soul and body to the Second person of the
blessed Trinity, discernable. This was no doubt a great Miracle, yea the
miracle of miracles wrought amongst us; but the end of its working, being not
by it as a motive to draw the world to Christianity, but to constitute a fit
person for the working of the salvation of the world, it was not necessary it
should be the object of our senses. The same Lord and Savior telling us that
he was God, though we could discern no Characters of Divinity in him by any of
our senses, he saying that he was God, and proving by other Miracles to our
senses, that he was sent from God to teach us nothing but Truth; this was
sufficient to secure our belief of his Deity. In like manner, in the mystery of
the holy Eucharist, this miraculous change being not wrought, to allure
Strangers to the Christian Faith, but to sanctify Believers, and to work all
those spiritual effects in them abovementioned, by being received by them, and
offered up in their presence for them, etc. it was not requisite this change
should be the object of our senses. Nay it was necessary it should not be the
object of our senses. For it being wrought to the intent we should eat and
drink our dear Lord his body and blood, it was necessary only the substance of
bread and wine, should be turned into the substance of our Lords flesh and
blood, the accidents of bread and wine remaining; for that otherwise we should
have a horror to eat raw flesh, and drink true appearing blood.

As to the confirmation of the Argument, that hence it would follow we cannot
trust our senses, and consequently not be certain of any miracle wrought by our
Savior. To this I Answer; We may always trust our senses about their own
objects, and in due circumstances, and when we have not positive grounds to
think, either God Almighty by himself, or by an Angel, or permissively by a
Devil, represents things otherwise then they are. The three Children in the
fiery Furnace, might really think themselves in the midst of scorching Flames,
though they felt them not, because they had reason to surmise God Almighty
wrought a miracle; out of those circumstances they had no reason to believe any
thing to be ordinary fire, which should not burn as fire. Nor must they for
this, for ever after be in doubt, whether they were not environed with Flames
of fire or no. Nor must Abram, because once in a particular circumstance he
mistook three Angels for three men; therefore never after believe his eyes,
whether he saw a man or no, unless he first pinched him by the arm, and felt
that he had flesh and blood as himself. Nor must one who in the presence of a
Conjurer had taken pibble stones for grapes, for ever after be doubtful whether
he saw grapes or no, till he tasted them. Nor does it follow, S. Mary Magdalen
could not be certain she ever saw our B. Savior, because once her senses were
mistaken concerning him, taking him for the Gardener. And in our present case,
our B. Savior telling us that the Holy Eucharist is his body, we have all
reason to think that by miracle he makes it to be so, whatsoever it seems to
our senses. Nor do Catholics therefore, out of such a circumstance, doubt of
all the bread they see, whether it be not their Lords body or no? Though I must
tell you, even here your senses are not mistaken; for they do perceive what
they seem to perceive; that is the Accidents of bread and wine, which remain
and affect them in the same manner, as when the substance under them, was the
substance of bread and wine, but now is the substance of our Lords body and
blood. Substances are not discernable by any sense; only we conclude by a
Physical certitude, such a substance is under such a complex of Accidents, when
we have nor positive grounds that God Almighty works a miracle, as here we
have; he saying expressly of this object before us, It Is his body, and it is his
blood.

But if there be so much to be said for this great mystery, how comes it to
pass so many have so great difficulty to believe it? It is not because the
mystery is not highly credible, but it is partly from Nature and partly from
Education, and partly from want of a serious and frequent consideration of
those Arguments which strongly evince the credibility of it, and partly for
want of strange desires of the happiness of the other life, and of a heart void
of inordinate affections to the things of this life, Pleasures, Riches, and
Honors. It Is partly from Nature I say. For it is not more difficult to our
senses to practice Sobriety, Temperance, Chastity and Fasting, then it is to
our understanding to assent to Truths which seem to shock our reason and
senses, though proposed by never so great Authority. Should you have seen our
B. Savior sucking his Mothers Breast in the Stable of Bethlehem, whosoever
should have told you, the little Infant there was God Almighty, the maker of
Heaven and Earth, Nature would have found a great difficulty to believe so
strange an assertion, and no less then it does now to believe that a little
Wafer in the hands of a Priest, is the same Christ both God and man, veiled
under the appearance of the common accidents of bread. But had it been moreover
from your infancy continually noysed in your ears, by such as you reverenced
for their learning and skill in divine matters, that it was impossible for God
to become man; this would strangely have increased your difficulty to believe a
little Infant, in nothing different as to outward appearance from other
Children, should be God. But if to all this you should add, never or very
seldom, and slightly to consider the positive Arguments for the belief of that
mystery of the Incarnation, but were ever still poring upon the difficulty, and
unlikeliness and seeming impossibility of any such thing, it is not possible you
should ever come to the belief of it, though the mystery be never so true in it
self, nor the Arguments to prove it, never so evident and cogent. But this is
the case of us generally in England, as to the mystery of the B. Sacrament, and
therefore no vvonder if generally it be not believed by us: but we rather
wonder at their stupidity and fond credulity, who can believe any such thing.

But to get a right, strong and well grounded Faith concerning this high
mystery, what must we do? First Reflect we are Christians, and as such must
necessarily believe very many strange things, unless we will renounce
Christianity. For example; we must believe that there are three distinct
Persons, and every one of these is God; and yet there are not three Gods, but
only one God. We must also believe this one God is infinitely merciful, and yet
he will permit millions of souls to lament and howl amidst scorching Flames for
ever, though with a word he could ease them of all their pains. Moreover we
must believe that 1600. years ago, one of the three divine Persons was
incarnat, and became a true mortal man, flesh and blood as we are; and after
33. years, which he lived upon our Earth, he was nailed to a Cross, Hands and
Feet, till he died; and after three days came to life again, and after 40.
days ascended into Heaven, where he remains to this day. These would seem
strange things to believe, to one that should never have heard them before; and
yet stranger to one, that from his Childhood should have been taught to laugh
at such stories as mere Fables and idle fictions of cheating Priests, who knew
them well enough to be such; but for their own gain and interest seemed to
believe them, and with a great deal of Confidence, taught them for infallible
Truths to the credulous multitude. Which being so, Reflect 2d y. No Christian
must bogle at any thing as to the belief of it, merely for the strangeness of
it, and seeming unlikeliness to his senses or reason. But must consider what
grounds he has to judge the strange mystery he is required to believe, was
taught his Forefathers by our B. Savior and his Apostles; and if he find he
has good grounds for this, he must immediately submit his understanding, and
believe it. 3dly. Let us reflect upon the state of our own Country, as it is at
present, and as our Annals represent it to have been ever since our first
Receiving of the Christian Faith. At present we have a considerable number of
Families who believe Transubstantiation, and have believed it from their
Forefathers time out of mind, and they say ever since the first planting of
the Christian Faith amongst us. We have also far greater multitudes who do not
believe it, but yet so as there is scarce one who is fifty years old, whose
great Grandfather did not believe it, but when his great Grandfather, or his
great Grandfathers Ancesters began to believe it, we are able to give no
acconnt. Moreover two hundred years ago, in all the several Shires or Provinces
of England we all universally, Bishops, Priests, and People, Rich and Poor,
Learned and Unlearned believed it: And this not as a new Doctrine found out by
themselves by reading the holy Scriptures. No. They were Enemies to all
Novelties, and professed they must hold fast what had been taught by their
Fore-elders, and interpret Scripture in the sense their Fore-elders had done.
Now how is it possible they should come to believe such a strange Doctrine,
unless it had been taught them from their Forefathers, and the first Preachers
of Christianity in our Nation? Especially they not reading the holy Scriptures
as we do now, nor having such store of Bibles, that they might perhaps by their
private reading have come to believe this hard and high mystery contrary to
what had been taught them by their Fore-elders. How came they to learn it then?
Did they some strange morning or other, all awake of a different belief from
what they had been of the Evening before? Or did it come into some Scholars
head by studying the holy Scriptures; reading for example those words, This is
my body, so often repeated in the Evangelists and S. Paul; and he hereupon was
convinced they had all been in an Error for so many years, and by Preaching and
Disputing persuaded others? But how comes it to pass then, we having had
Historians that have mentioned far less Matters, yet say not a word of any such
thing? Or did the Britons before S. Austin the Monk, believe no such thing? How
came they then not to clash about it, or if they did, how comes it to pass
other differences are recorded and this is omitted? Besides if S. Austin taught
it our Ancesters, he confirmed the Religion he taught by miracles, as all our
Stories testify. And also he lived within the first 600 years, to which Dr. N.
N. in one of his Sermons appeals: Nor did that blessed man pretend to teach us
a new Religion neither, newly found out at Rome, but what was always believed
ever since S. Peter.

4. Let us consider why we are Christians, and we shall find if we be so
rationally and groundedly, and not merely because we were so brought up from
our Childhood: I say we shall find our Faith to be grounded upon such
principles, as if we be true to them, they will force us as strongly to believe
Transubstantiation as the Incarnation, the Real presence as the Deity of our
Savior. For example, I believe the man Jesus Christ, who lived 1600. years
ago, was also God. And why? Because he said he was so, and proved by evident
miracles that he was sent to teach the World Truth, and nothing but Truth. And
why all this? Because it could not stand with the providence of God, to suffer
a Deceiver to work such miracles as he wrought, teaching withal, and practicing
such sanctity as he did. For then the most sincere desirers to know the Truth
would be most subject to miss of it. But how do I know Jesus Christ wrought
such miracles? Because I find them Recorded in certain Books, which several
Nations all over the World, have immemorially looked upon as faithful and true
stories, ever since the time the miracles are said to have been wrought. Now
it is not possible but the men then alive must needs certainly know whether he
did work such strange miracles or no. And if they had known no such thing was
wrought by him; but that these things were at first feigned by some of his
Friends, and afterward committed to writing by them, they could never contrary
to the evidence of their own knowledge, have told unanimously such notorious
Lies to their Posterity, and have made them believe them as they did. Nor could
have recommended the Books wherein they were Recorded to their Children, and
have made them reverence them as unquestionable and infallibly certain
Histories, as they did. But how do I know that Jesus Christ taught that he
was God? why certainly the Apostles understood him what he said concerning
himself; whether he were only a holy man like to their great Moses, or else
were true and substantially God, and consequently to be Worshipped by them as
such. And no doubt but they taught their first Converts what they had learnt
from their Master Jesus as to this point, and their Converts their Children
till Arrius; the Church being till then under Persecution, and consequently
cannot be supposed all that while so notoriously to have changed their Faith,
they were every day in danger to dye for. Now finding the whole Christian
World in the belief of the Divinity of our Savior, and Worshipping him as God,
and this immemorially from their Forefathers, and as they professed from the
Apostles. So as Arrius never went about to evince them, that such or such a
Doctor in such an Age since the Apostles, had brought in the new Doctrine of
our Lords Divinity: and finding him also called God in the Holy Scriptures, and
whole Nations of Christians immemorially understanding them in a proper,
literal sense, and not only in the sense which Kings and Princes are called
God; notvvithstanding all Arrius his reasons drawn from the Impossibility of
the thing, or from Scriptures understood by him after a new manner; I conclude
my Savior was true God. In like manner no doubt but our B. Saviviour taught
his Apostles concerning the holy Eucharist, whether it was only a sign of his
body, or else his true body, and consequently to be adored and worshipped by them
or no. And no doubt but they taught their first Converts what they had learnt
from their Master concerning this mystery, and these their Posterity the same
for the first 300. years of the Churches Persecution. Now finding whole
Christian Countries in the time of Berengarius, about the year one thousand und
fifty, unanimously believing the holy Eucharist to be our Lords true body, and
adoring it as such, and this as they professed immemorially from their
Ancesters, from the Apostles, and Berengarius never undertaking to show, when
or how this strange belief was wrought in the Christian Church, nor finding any
beginning of it in any Ecclesiastical History of any one Country; and finding
it also called so expressly over and over our Lords body, and whole Countries
understanding those sacred Texts in a proper sense, and not one Christian
Province understanding them otherwise; for all Berengarius his Arguments, drawn
as he pretended from the impossibility of the thing, or from Scriptures by him
interpreted after a new manner, the wont of all misbelievers, I conclude it is
our Lords true body.

5. Let us consider impartially the testimony of the present Church in
communion with the Sea of Rome, which averrs the Holy Eucharist to be our B.
Saviors true body. Travel in your thoughts, all over Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America, and view well the vast multitudes of Roman Catholics in the present
Age, and by the confession of our Adversaries in the ten last Ages. Take notice
of their circumstances, of Learning, Study, Virtue, Meditation, Retiredness
from all secular encumbrances, as to vast multitudes of them; the prodigies of
Sanctity, we profess to have appeared amongst us in several Ages, like the
extraordinary Prophets of old amongst the Jews, to awaken drowsy souls: Our
Bennets, Bernards, Cuthberts, Bedes, Dominicks, Francis's, Ignatius's, etc. The
miracles we undoubtedly believe in every Century since the Apostles; yea, in
this very Age wrought amongst us. For which we have such Records, as you have
no way to evade, but by saying they are forged, without any further proof then
your own uncharitable surmise. Records of such wonders, so public and
notorious, as had they been false, the Ages wherein they are said to have been
wrought, could not be ignorant of it, und consequently could not unanimously
have told their Posterity such notorious Lies, nor have recommended the Books
to them, wherein they are recounted as true stories. Consider moreover how this
numerous Congregation professes her self to be the Mistress of Truth, the Light
of the World, fitly for this end dispersed in all Countries throughout all Ages,
with indefatigable Industry scattering the rays of the Gospel by her
Missionants throughout the whole Earth, fearing no encounter, but challenging
the whole world to dispute of what they will, and as long as they will, of the
most strange Articles of her Faith. And then think if it could not stand with
the providence of the all good God, to permit one single person, our Lord
Jesus, for three or four years in one small Country, to Alarm the World with
stupendous miracles and doctrins of Sanctity, unless he had been indeed a true
Teacher: Consider I say, how it can stand with the providence of the same all
good God, to permit a Congregation made up of so many thousands, for so many
Ages, so universally spread over the Earth, accompanied with no less wonders,
if any credit can be given to such human testimony as never yet failed
concerning matters of Fact; if all this while this Congregation teaches
damnable Idolatry, and is the greatest Cheat that ever appeared in the World,
and yet that the Divine providence should work nothing like miracles or
singular and over-topping Sanctity, in those who pretend to be raised up by him
extraordinarily, to discover to the deceived World this grand Imposture. How
can this stand with the Almightys desire, that the World should not mistake the
true Religion?

In confirmation of what I have said above, I add these considerations. 1. Let
but any one take the pains to look into modern or ancient Writers of
Ecclesiastical History (which he may do in a little time, and without any great
labor, by looking in the Index the word Eucharistia, or some such head) and he
shall find, that whenever there has been any dispute concerning this mystery,
some one or few opposed it, and all the rest of the Country stood up in defense
of it, as of a doctrine they had immemorially been taught by their Ancestors. An
evident conviction, that the ancient Faith of that Country was, that indeed the
Holy Eucharist was our B. Saviors body and blood, and the denial of this
mystery was a Novelty. For example, let him consult Ecclesiastical
Historiographers, what happened about the year one thousand and fifty, and he
shall find that one Berengarius, Archdeacon of the Church of Angiers oppugned
this mystery, but not as a new doctrine then endeavored by some Bishop or other
to be imposed upon the people, but as then generally believed; a clear sign
that his own Opinion was a new Error, and the common Faith of the Country was
the ancient Christian verity. Now let him in the whole History of the Catholic
Church, Greek and Latin, find me but one instance in any one Christian Country,
on the contrary, and I Will yield him the cause. That is, any one Doctor, Bishop,
or Priest, that about such a year of our Lord, in such a Country, began to
Preach the mystery of the real presence, upon pretense of clear Scripture for
it, or other Arguments, and that he was opposed by the whole Country, as a
Teacher of a new strange doctrine they had never heard of before: or else that
upon such a Doctors appearing they presently yielded to the force of his
Reasons and Arguments, and relinquished their former ancient Faith. Which
notwithstanding certainly must have happened, not only in one, but in all
Christian Countries, were the doctrine of the Real presence a new invention, and
the denial of it the ancient Christian Faith. Else how came all Christendom,
according to the confession of our Adversaries for many Ages universally to
believe it? Now can any one imagine, that the belief of so strange a mystery,
and which in practice makes all the Believers of it Idolaters, unless it be
true; could be introduced both into the Greek and Latin Church, without any
opposition, or if it were opposed, that no one Writer in any one Country,
should make mention who they were that opposed it, and how they lost their
cause? And this, though there have not wanted Writers of what has happened in
the Christian Church, who have made mention of far lesser accidents, in any Age
wherein this belief can be pretended to have been brought in; nay, which have
taken notice in several Ages and Countries, how certain deniers of this mystery
have attempted the bringing in of their new doctrine, and by whom they were
opposed, and how they were silenced. Read our own Chronicles about the year
1370. concerning John Wiclef, and see whether he was not opposed by all the
Bishops and Priests of our English Church as a teacher of a doctrine contrary to
what they had been taught by their Ancestors, when he began to teach our Lord's
body was not in the Eucharist? And then reflect with your self, if the doctrine
of the Real presence was not taught our Nation, when we were first converted to
Christianity, how comes it to pass that all our Chronicles should be silent,
when or by whom we were taught this mysterious doctrine, and what assistance
they had from the civil power, so unversally to impose upon our Country such a
strange belief; which in all reason require; a far greater power to make it
prevail then the contrary doctrine. And yet you see where the contrary doctrine
is believed, it cost no small pains and force, and time to introduce it, nor
has all this neither been able to make it Universal, in so much as in one
Christian Province. Make the like Reflection upon the City of Rome, and consider
that in the Apostles days they believed aright concerning this great mystery,
and for some hundreds of years according to the concession of our Adversaries.
Now this great and Cultivated City, has memorials of what has past in it, as we
have of what has past in London, and yet they make no mention of any one that
ever began since their first Conversion to Christianity, to teach this strange
doctrine and worship of the holy Eucharist, but that they have immemorially from
S. Peter believed and adored it, as the body of their Savior and God. Nor
indeed can it be imagined how they could ever possibly change their first
Faith, having ever opposed all Teachers of Novelties, with that Answer of S.
Stephen Pope to the Clergy of Africa, concerning Rebaptization (never heeding
all their seeming Reasons, or Texts of Scripture understood after a new manner,
as S. Vincent Lirinensis observes) Nihil novandum nisi quod traditum est: We
must Innovate nothing, but stick to the doctrine delivered to us by out
Ancestors. When think you should we in London be brought universally to believe
the Real presence, if we were resolved for ever tenaciously to adhere to the
doctrine taught us by our immediate Predecessors, notwithstanding whatsoever
Argument should be brought against us from Reason or Scripture?

2. Consider how our Adversaries would triumph over us, could they find but one
City in the whole world, which should prosess to have believed immemorially,
since their first Reception of the Christian Faith, as they do concerning the
Holy Eucharist, and all their Cronicles were either silent, or positively
testified as much, and we were not able positively to show when they began
their Faith, but should Answer: their Chronicles were corrupted, or ancient
Records lost, or by little and little they left off imperceptibly believing as
they were first taught. But if to all this they could produce in several Ages,
how such a Doctor upon pretense of clear Scripture, endeavored to make them
leave their ancient Faith, but they still retained it, opposing to all his
seeming strong Arguments, that thus they had been taught time out of mind by
their Ancestors, from their first Conversion to Christian Religion, and to
understand those Scriptures otherwise. But if to all this, they could produce
in several Ages Recorded miracles in confirmation of their Faith, and we should
have nothing to reply but that these miracles were feigned. Think if they would
not return upon us, that such wild Answers opened a way to Atheists to deny all
the miracles of Moses and our B. Savior. And then consider impartially
whether this be not our Case.

3. Consider though our Adversaries but very irrationally deny any miracles to
have been wrought in our Church, yet they cannot deny but we have Records
without number of notorious and most evident miracles, and such Records as in
civil matters no body questions. Men, for example, of good judgment and honest
repute attesting upon their Oaths, that upon such a day, such and such
miraculous events happened, and they were eyewitnesses of them, etc. And then
reflect how it can stand with the providence of God and his desire of mankinds
worshipping him according to his will, to permit even such Records of miracles
in a false Church. For certainly a sincere desirer to find out the Truth, must
needs be strangely inclined to give credit to such Records, and which moreover
he should find to be credited by persons of as good judgment and integrity as
himself in all Christian Provinces in Communion with the Sea of Rome. And
indeed such Records of false miracles would be as apt to deceive impartial
judicious Enquirers, as even the sight of false miracles themselves. For why
are we so assured our senses cannot deceive us? Is it not because we never
experienced them to fail us in due circumstances? and also because if we should
be necessitated by them to judge of things otherwise than they are, God
Almighty, who has so made our senses, would be the cause of our mistake, which
were to tell a real lie? And did Tradition duly circumstantiated, ever yet
fail? And would not God Almighties providence in the government of mankind be
deficient, (it being necessary for us to know certainly not only things that
are present to us, which we do by our senses; but also things that are distant
from us both in place and time, which we can only know by the report of others)
if no assured certain credit could be given to the restimony of men, though
never so many in number, and of never so good repute? Especially when he
obliges us to be of a Religion which was taught our Ancestors 1600. years
before we were Born, and yet we can give no assured credit to History or
immemorial testimonies of whole Countries? Moreover, we finding by the
experience of the Age we live in, that though fabulous stories be told and
printed too, yet we easily distingnish betwixt them and true Histories of the
present times. For that true Histories gain an universal credit amongst persons
of the best understanding, and the Historigraphers that write them, are
commended to Posterity as faithful witnesses of Truth; whereas fables and
fictions, every one of ordinary capacity, looks upon them as such, nor do we
give any other Recommendation of them to Posterity then as of fabulons
Romances. This we experiencing in the present Age, persons of humility and
solid judgment, deem the like to have happened in the days of their
Forefathers; and consequently give another kind of credit to Stories, how
strange so ever recounted by a S. Bernard, a venerable Bede, or a S.
Bonaventure, then they do to the fictions of a Don Quixot, a Guy of Warwick,
etc. And he that will consult what has happened in the World, will find men's
eyes and other senses to have been as often mistaken, as he will find whole
Towns and Countries to have confidently told a Lie to their Posterity, which
they evidently knew to be a Lie.

And this the Atheists of our days would do well to reflect on, when they so
senselesly call in question the History of Moses or Book of Exodus, concerning
the wonders wrought by Almighty God in Egypt. And Dr. N. N. too, must one day
give a sad account for all his Drollery, as merry as he makes himself with the
History of Lorretto, and other stories registered by persons of noted sanctity
and integrity. And would he reflect a little on the difficulty of making whole
Countries believe a Lie, contrary to the evidence of their senses; he would find
it a greater miracle that the whole Territory of Lorretto should so
immemorially believe so great a Lie, as he would make his Reader think they do,
then the wonder it self he sacrilegiously scoffs at: To wit, the Translation of
the House, in which our B. Lord was conceived by his Holy Mother at Nazareth,
out of the Holy Land, first into Dalmatia, and then afterward into Italy. Let
the Dr. cause a house to be built in a Night, in S. James's Park, and then tell
the Citizens of London, it was brought thither by Angels out of a foreign
Country, and see if he can make them so universally to believe it, as they
shall, no body contradicting, make their Posterity believe as much; and I
persuade my self he may with the same ease, bring such a House from Geneva or
New England in a Night, as make the numerous multitude believe such a notorious
Lie.

O England, England, dear Native Soil, at length open thine Eyes, and
acknowledge the illimited goodness of the divine Majesty to be such, that not
contenting himself with giving us prodigies of sanctity for the first Planters
of Christianity, and with confirming their sublime and holy doctrins with
evident signs and wonders, he is ever now and then awakening the drowsy world
with a S. Dominick, a S. Francis, or a S. Xauerius, and ceases not by
undeniable miracles to confirm the languishing Faith of tepid Christians. The
sight of present miracles strangely strengthens our Faith of wonders past and
done long since. And believe it, it is a next disposition to Antichristianism
and Atheism, freely to give our selves the liberty to scoff at all miracles,
though attested by never so grave Authors, except such as are recorded in the
four Gospels: and to laugh at all lives of Christian Saints as ridiculous, but
those of the twelve Apostles; though to an impartial considerer, one Egg does
not more resemble another, then do the persons we so freely deride, express the
first followers of our dear Redeemer, in their holy and divine Conversations.

4. Consider the force of S. Austins Argument to prove the truth of
Christianity. The world has actually submitted to Christianity, as to a
Religion taught from Heaven. From whence the Saint argues thus. The world
believed the high mysterious doctrins of Christianity, either upon miracles
wrought by the first teachers of them, or without miracles. If upon miracles,
then you who doubt have reason also to believe them. Or if the world submitted
their Faith to believe such strange mysteries, without any miracles, this is
the greatest miracle of all, that such vast multitudes, and innumerable of
these, of ripe judgment and quick understanding, should believe such strange
things upon the Authority of the Proposer without a miracle. Apply this to our
present mystery. Two hundred years ago the whole Christian world believed the
H. Eucharist to be our B. Saviors body, and adored it as such. Hereupon I
argue. These vast multitudes, and many of them of great learning and judgment,
began to believe this strange mystery, either for miracles wrought by the first
Teachers of it, or without miracles. If upon miracles then you ought to believe
it also: If without miracles, this is the greatest miracle of all that such
vast multitudes, and these innumerable of them, well cultivated with learning,
besides their natural ripeness of judgment, and sharpness of wit, should
believe so strange a mystery, without any miracles wrought by those who first
demanded their belief of it.

Finally consider with your self how many millions there are who believe this
mystery, and would sooner part with their life then their Faith of it, and
these, if you have the least grain of humility, such, as you have reason to
think them of as good Learning, Wit, and Judgment as your self: Add, as good
Christians as your self, for either piety to God, or Charity to their indigent
Neighbor, or mortification to themselves. Imagine you saw all these, as holy and
as wise as your self in the several Christian Countries of the whole world, all
upon their knees, adoring a seeming Wafer-Cake, as their Creator and God;
Bishops, Priests, Doctors of Divinity in vast numbers, Kings and Princes, Men
and Women of all degrees and condition. And can you now think, all these people
to be in their wits, and not have some strong Reasons and Arguments which
induce them to such a Faith and such a practice? Had you and I been in the
Stable of Bethlehem in the Night of our Lord's Nativity, and S. Joseph should
have told us that the little Infant we saw there sucking his Mothers Breast,
was the Maker of Heaven and Earth; we should no doubt have found great
difficulty to believe him. But should we have stayed there a while, and have
seen the Shepherds come in, and fall down upon their knees before him, by the
admonition as they pretended of an Angel that had appeared to them, as they
were keeping watch over their Flocks; this doubtless would a little have
inclined us to think, that at least there was something extraordinary in the
new born Babe. But had we stayed till the comeing of the three Kings, and seen
them in like-manner fall down before him, making him rich presents upon the
admonition, as they said, of a miraculous Star which had appeared to them in
their own Country; such circumstances as these, would sure have strangely urged
us to the belief of that wonder of wonders. And to make use of a homebred
example. Who would have taken our Gracious Soverain Charles the Second, for the
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, that should have seen him under
the disguise of a Sheepherd, Seaman, or other habit he was forced to assume,
to secure his Royal Person? But could you and I have peeped into this private
Chamber, and seen his small Retinue all bare before him, and some one of them
upon his knees presenting him with a cup of Beer or wine: should we not think
you have begun to suspect: Surely this Person, however and for whatsoever
reasons he may disguise himself, is of another quality then his outward garb
represents him to be? Nor do I less persuade my self, did you and I see the
many thousands all over the world, as well of the Grecian as Roman Church, who
upon their knees with an assured Faith, devoutly adore a Consecrated Wafer as
their Creator and God, if we have any, respect to reason and mankind, and do
not imagine all the world to be Fools except our selves: Such a prospect as
this, would make us suspect in the secret of our hearts: Surely under this
disguise of a contemptible Wafer, there is veiled some hidden Majesty or other,
who forces the highest adoration from such vast multitudes of all Nations, and
many of them so sharp-witted, and of such solid judgments, and such impartial
enquirers after Truth, and of so good and holy lives. Say then, and we have
reason to say it heartily, and without the least scruple or doubt. 'Twas the
same out Gracious Soverain, who lay hid in a common Oak at White-Ladys, under
the disguise of a Peasants weed, who sits now at Westminster in his Princely
Throne invested in his Royal Robes. And it is the same Christ Jesus our only
Savior and God, who under the humble disguise of common bread and wine, is
immolated here below every day upon our Christian Altars, who in transcendent
splendour and glory, sits at the right hand of his Eternal Father in the
Heavens. Sir, I have done my part, the Almighty do the rest, and make you a
happy Child of his holy Church. But Sir, I beseech you give me leave to add

A Postscript to my Fellow Collegians.
My dearest Companions, whom with my soul I wish the same happiness with my
self, both in this Life and the other. I beseech you, before you be engaged in
the world, and hindered from an industrious impartial enquiry after Truth, by
the cares of a Family, and fears of wanting a competent subsistence, do your
selves and your Country that right, as to consider with as little passion and
prejudice as you can, these my scattered thoughts; and do not rashly conclude
against Transubstantiation until you have fully heard what its Affertors, as
well as what its Deniers have to say for themselves. I was once as you are, and
many suspicions of the truth of the Roman Catholic Faith came into my mind,
but still I was hindered from examining of it, with this one thought: If I turn
Papist, I must believe Transubstantiation, but I know that is an impossibility,
and this made me sit down contented with the Religion in which I was educated.
But afterward making it my business more in good earnest to save my soul, and
setting my self impartially to examine what was the belief of the Primitive
times concerning this mystery, and finding mostclear Testimonies for the Real
presence in the most renowned. Primitive Christian Doctors, I was much amazed,
having been always taught they were of a contrary Faith. I read the citations
to a Clergyman of my Acquaintance, I demand of him what he thought their
belief was, who in those words expressed their Faith? He told me, no doubt but
they believed as the Church of Rome believes. I consult the Authors themselves,
read the context before and after the said citations, I am still more and more
convinced, S. Augustine, Chrysostom, Cyril, etc. believed as the Church of Rome
now believes. Hereupon I resolve not to venture my soul upon a point of
Philosophy, for example, whether God Almighty by all his Omnipotency can make a
body be in two places at once or no? I believe two mysteries already, both
which puzzle and shock my reason as much as Transubstantiation, to wit, the B.
Trinity and the Incarnation of the Son of God, why may not I believe a third as
well; especially when I have the same Arguments for one as the other: clear
Scriptures, the immemorial belief of all Nations ever since the Apostle, etc.
And indeed, if God Almighty will oblige me to believe what was taught sixteen
hundred years before I was born, how should he expect I should come to the
knowledge of this, but by such books as were written in those times, and near
those times, and by the testimony of all Christian Countries what has been
immemorially believed by them ever since they were Christians? Now if it be too
long a journey to go over all Christendom, to ask of them, what is, and what
always has been their Paith as to Transubstantiation, and how they have always
understood the holy Scriptures that speak of that mystery go but to the Royal
Exchange in London, and there you may meet with persons, which at least have
been in all or most Christian Countries, and ask of them what the belief and
practice of Christendom is, and you will find they all believe and adore the B.
Sacrament, and have done so, as they say, immemorially ever since they were
Christians, as Roman Catholics do in England; or else if they do for so me
numbers amongst them believe and practice otherwise, it is only since such a
time above, etc. And then reflect how by such an Argument you prove, as you
think, efficaciously against an Antiscripturist, that the Books of the Old and
New Testament are infallible, and you securely believe every particular Story
in them, though never so strange; in like manner the change of Saturday-Sabbath
into Sunday, against the Sibbatarians; and Fasting in Lent as Apostolical with
Bishop Gunning against Non-Conformists. And indeed it is impossible such an
universal effect should ever be without a proportionate universal cause. That
so many several Christian Countries should immemorially abstain from certain
meats on Fridays every week, and in Lent every year, or adore a Consecrated
piece of Bread as their Creator and God, unless they had been either first
taught so to do by the first Planters of Christianity; or by some Preachers
since; or had agreed so to do in some General Council by their representatives,
is impossible. Should we ever think you, even in the single City of London,
have fallen by little and little to have shut up our shops, on the Anniversary
of the death of our gracious Soverain Charles the First, unless we had been
commanded so to do by some Universal Authority, Ecclesiastical or Civil? Take
notice, by this Argument is also proved all other points of Catholic practice,
or Faith, as Purgatory, prayer for the Dead, etc. but especially such as nature
has a difficulty to believe or do. That one man should kill himself is no
wonder, but that all the Inhabitants of a populous City should kill themselves,
would be such a wonder as never yet happened in Nature.

Against all that has been said, I doubt not but you will be apt to reply. We
acknowledge for diverse Ages, our own and other Christian Countries believed the
holy Eucharist to be really and substantially our B. Saviors true body and
blood, and adored it as such, but yet we cannot believe that either S. Peter
and Paul at Rome, or S. Joseph of Arimathia in our own Country taught any such
doctrine, but that imperceptibly by little and little the whole Christian world
changed the Faith that was first planted by the Apostles, as particular men
grow gray, and whole Countries change their Languages imperceptibly. For Answer
to this Reply, let us not discourse in generals, but consider and devise with
our selves how possibly such a thing might practically happen. For example, let
us take the City of Rome into our consideration. Its confessed by all, that the
Inhabitants of that Cultivated City, Priests and People universally do believe,
and have for many generations believed, a Consecrated Wafer to be Jesus Christ,
God and Man, veiled with the outward appearance or species of common Bread: Now
we are to enquire, how they came to this strange Faith? Say then; Rome by
little and little began to believe this mystery, first one and then another,
till at length the whole City was of that belief. But how? without a Teacher,
and all in the same year, or in what length of time? That one man, or some few
in a populous City, should of themselves fall to the belief of such a strange
mystery, contrary to what has been believed by their Ancestors, might be
granted; but that the whole City Learned and Unlearned, Priest and People,
should so change their Faith, and that for such a strange one too, without a
Master or a Teacher, that's wholly incredible: Or if some Bishop or Priest of
Rome since the Apostles, had persuaded the people to believe the strange
doctrine of Transubstantiation, how comes it to pass, seeing the belief of the
doctrine is still retained, that the Authors name is not retained with singular
honor and reverence by the believers of it, as the names of Calvin and Luther
are by Calvinists and Lutherans; and the names of the first Preachers of
Christianity by the several Christian Countries they converted? Besides,
whosoever Priest or Layman should have begun to preach such a strange and
incredible doctrine to nature, must needs have met with great opposition from
all sorts of persons; from good men, because his doctrine tended to make them
all gross Idolaters, and Worshippers of a piece of Bread as God; from bad men,
because his doctrine strangely shocked their sense and reason, which nature and
vicious followers of nature would by no means endure. Now if opposition were
made at the first introducing of this new Faith, how comes it to pass, all,
both Roman and other Histories are silent as to any such thing?

Should I by way of Prophecy tell you, that the great City of London, within
these 300. years, shall as universally, as does now the City of Rome believe
and adore the Holy Eucharist as Jesus Christ himself, and this so
imperceptibly, that neither they, nor neighboring Citys or Countries shall
perceive it, till the whole City be quite changed: Nay 300. years hence, when
they shall be charged with Idolatry and Innovation for such their belief and
practice, they shall profess that they have always so believed and practiced
ever since they were Christians. And all this, though they shall for these 300.
years have Priests and Bishops, whose Office it shall be to teach the quite
contrary doctrine, and these Priests shall be such Zealous retainers of the
doctrine they now believe, that when in the compass of this 300. years to come,
there shall rise up Teachers of new Doctrins, deniers of the Divinity of our
Savior, and the eternity of the torments of impenitent Sinners, etc. and shall
allege strong human Reasons and seeming Scriptures for themselves, these
Priests shall oppose, we must innovate nothing, we must stick to the belief our
Ancestors were of in the year 1675. Then God Almighty testified from Heaven, by
evident Miracles, the Truth of our Fore-elders Faith, and then we had charge
not to change our Faith, though on Angel from Heaven should accuse us of
mistake, and therefore you must pardon us if we adhere to this Faith. Add.
There shall not want frequent Assemblies of the wisest and best Learned in the
City, and they shall meet on purpose to enquire whether the faith and practice
of the year 1675. be kept, and yet they shall never take notice of so gross and
notorious a change, as the believing and adoring a piece of bread as God, till
the whole City be in such a belief and practice, but other mistakes that some
particular men were bringing in, they shall observe and correct. Nay 300. years
hence, there shall rise up a certain Priest, who shall accuse all the Priests
and people of the City for believing otherwise th^n their Ancestors did in
1675, but yet shall not be able by virtue of any History or Oral Tradition, to
show how, or by whom they were persuaded to that strange Faith they shall then
be of; and yet there shall not want Historiographers neither, who shall take
notice of other notorious changes that shall happen both in Church and State in
those 300. years.

Think now seriously with your selves, how impossible it is for any such thing
to happen in nature, and examine impartially whether the deniers of
Transubstantiation be not forced to affirm the like incredible wonder to have
happened not in one City alone, but in many Cities and whole Countries. But the
wonder would be yet greater, if there were not one Believer of
Transubstantiation in the year 1675. in the City of London, nor never had been
one since the first planting of Christianity, neither there, nor in any other
neighboring City or Country: and yet all this must be solved by deniers of
Transubstantiation to be Apostolical doctrine. For, place your self in what Age
of Christianity you please, and suppose the known Cities and Countries of
Christendom to believe universally concerning the holy Eucharist as the
Citizens of London generally do now. Take for example the year 500. after our
B. Lord (though our Adversaries pretend to be willing to be judged by the
Doctors of the first 600.) Add to 500. a decursion of 300. or 500. years; and
then see what Faith the Christian world is of, and you will find they universally
believe and adore the Holy Eucharist as Rome does at this present. Join now
your selves with Berengarius in the year one thousand and fifty or thereabouts,
and see what account you can give, how all your fellow Clergy and Laity came so
to have changed and (...) from what it was in the fifth Century? For you ^^^ll
not think the several Councils gathered against that denier of the Real
presence, the Bishops in them, then first began to believe the Real presence,
and that when they returned to their several Diocesses they taught them a
strange new doctrine, which they by inspiration had newly learnt when they were
Assembled together; but they only gave in their Verdicts what immemorially had
been believed in their several Countries they came from, as to that mystery. As
if, for example, a Synod of all the Bishops in England should meet in the year
1675. to examine concerning the Quakers, whether they Preached false and
Antichristian doctrine or no, in denying Baptism and all other Sacraments; and
they should conclude against those Innovators; would you infer thence, the
Church of England only in the year 1675. and never before, reverenced Baptism
or any other Sacrament of Christ? And yet this is just our case, when our
Adversaries will have the belief and adoration of the B. Sacrament to have not
been heard of before the Councils that condemned Berengarius.

As to your instances of a man growing gray, and whole Countries imperceptibly
changing their language; is it possible think you for any man's whole head by
little and little to grow gray, and neither he nor any other should take notice
of it, till he were as white as Snow, and this, though he and others were
charged to take notice of every hair that should grow gray, and to pluck it out
immediately, and he and others should frequently consult whether any such change
were made in his head or no? Say the same concerning a whole Countries changing
their Language by little and little. Impose a severe penalty against any one
that in writing or speech should introduce a new word, and appoint Officers to
take notice of all such new coined words, and let these Officers have frequent
consults to this purpose. Add a menace of death both to Overseers and people,
if any such alteration through their neglect of their duty should happen. And
then think how it could be possible for a whole Country by little and little
imperceptibly to change its Language? The like change and menace gave Jesus
Christ to the Pastors of his Church not to change their Faith. And yet after
all this can not one Country, but the whole Christian world have so changed
their Faith, as they became imperceptibly most stupid Idolaters? To conclude,
if you examine the matter well, you will find, you must either resolve to
believe the strange doctrine of Transubstantiation, or else something far more
incredible.

Soli Christo Gloria.

