Lacrymae Ecclesiae ANGLICANAE: OR, A serious and Passionate ADDRESS of the
Church of England, To her SONS, especially those of the CLERGY.



Printed in the Year, 1689.

TO THE READER.
THe Church of England ever since its Recovery from the Darkness of Popish
ignorance and Superstition, has been no less the envy of Rome, then the Honor
and Glory of all other Reformed Churches: for its Constitutions are Holy and
Primitive, its Liturgy pious and devout, all her Doctrines consonant and
agreeable to the word of God. She retains the Ancient Creeds, She Rejects all
novel and superstitious Doctrines, that are neither to be found in, nor
warranted by the Word of God: She retains the two Sacraments instituted by our
Savior, and rightly and duly administers them, and that whole and entire
according to Primitive Institution, and that too, neither Superstitiously
advancing them above the nature of Sacraments, nor yet profanely, or
irreverently, detracting from the Greatness and Holiness of their Mystical, and
invisible significance. Marvel not therefore Brethren if the World hate you,
for even our dear Redeemer was hated and scorned and shamefully put to Death,
and shall the Disciple be above his Master? It Is what our Savior himself
foretold, they hate me, they will hate you also: Now although it may be objected,
that there are several scandalous and loose Livers among the Clergy of the
Church of England, what then? does not the Church reprove such? Does it not
correct such? And if they prove obstinate and incorrigible, does she not disown
such? And it is no wonder that among such a numerous Clergy there should be some
ill persons; Our Savior when present upon Earth in his humanity, was not
withcut a Judas among twelve, and no doubt it will be so in all numerous
Assemblies, while the world endures. But this is matter of Compassion, not of
scorn, they are Personal Blots, but does not injure the Constitutions or
Doctrines of the Church. All these things are more amply and fully handled in
the following Book, which was first Printed in 1663. and then humbly Dedicated
to the King and his great Council the Parliament of England; and it having
fallen into my hands of late, after a careful and delightful perusal of it, I
thought it not improper to Reprint in these times, and therefore recommended it
to the Bookseller as a useful piece, and so I do to thee Reader,

Farewell.
Lacrymae Ecclesiae ANGLICANAE:
CHAP. I.
O All you that pass by me, stand and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow; if it has been done to any Reformed or Protestant Church under Heaven,
as it is done unto me! O now my wounds were ready to be closed, my Ruins to be
repaired, my Desolations and Wastes to be finished; when the Barbarous was
checked, the Licentious was restrained, the usurpers were removed, the
professed Enemies of different Interests and Religion which persecuted me, were
subdued, and I ready to settle upon the Eternal Foundations of sound Doctrine,
of Primitive Government, of an holy and pure Worship, of a decent and comely
order, to the amazement of the World, to the honor of Religion, to the glory
of God, to the peace of the whole Earth, and for good will among men! behold!
my Children are discontent, my Government is complained of, my Ordinances are
neglected, my Ministers are despised, my peace is disturbed, and my safety
endangered. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth! What The Churches sense
other r^proach and suffering.
could I have done that I have not done? Have I not taught the truth of God
sincerely, giving Milk to babes, and stronger meat to them that were able to
bear it, and the Oracles of God to all in a Language they best understood? Have
I concealed any part of Gods sacred Counsel from you? Have I not set forth with
all plainness and freedom the blessed fullness and excellencies of my Lord Jesus
Christ, in such a manner and measure as I received from the Word and Spirit?
Have I not administered all the Ordinances of God faithfully? have I not
enjoined and taught all virtue and all grace, carefully recommending to my
Children whatsoever things are good, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; every holy
Duty, every necessary Rule; and every imitable Example; with all the Advantages
of sound Knowledge, powerful Preaching, which at once was able to inform the
weak, to reclaim the most erroneous, to reform the most debauched, to satisfy
the most curious, and to silence the most refractory? Have I not prepared with
much study and industry, with many prayers and tears, with long education, and
diligent care, Reverend Bishops, Orderly Presbyters, able Ministers, workmen
that need not be ashamed, duly ordained, and called after an uninterrupted and
Catholic succession through all Ages, agreeable to that original institution
which was from Jesus Christ, the great High Priest, the true Prophet, the
sovereign King of the Church, the chief preacher of righteousness, and Bishop
of our Souls? Have I Her care.
not, I say, taken an holy care of a succession of Ministers about holy things,
who might divide the Word aright by solid preaching, might wait upon God
solemnly by a devout and discreet Praying, might convince Gainsayers by acute
Disputing, might instruct the world by exact Writing, might maintain peace and
order by wise Governing, might reform the world by holy living? Has it not
been my care and endeavor to keep up the soundness, power and life of
Christian Religion? Have not I labored that my good people might every where
have what is necessary and wholesome for their souls good, in devout Prayers,
in holy Sacraments, in powerful Sermons; whereby I desired (God knows) to
preserve wholesome and saving truth, to promote true holiness, to set up an holy
decency, to maintain the wholesome form and power of godliness, in truth peace,
order and unity? Have not I held forth an holy Light, Rule, and Life, in the
plain parts of Scripture every where read; in the Articles every where
acknowledged, in the Creeds and Catechism every year explained, in the Liturgy
constantly used, whereby poor souls had a plain, easy and sure way to Heaven,
through an unfeigned Faith, sincere Repentance, a Catholic Charity, a devout
humility, a good conscience, and an holy obedience to God and man, according to
the will of God, unto all well pleasing? Do not I take care to instruct the
ignorant diligently, to comfort the weak hearted tenderly, to raise up them
that fall compassionately, to visit those that are sick charitably, to relieve
those that want mercifully, to bury my dead that sleep in Jesus solemnly, to
punish those that do amiss severely, to restore them that have gone astray
pitifully, to instruct them that oppose themselves meekly, to frame a way of
Peace, Order, and Cummunion (in which Brethren might happily dwell together in
unity) prudently, rationally and discreetly? O what failings of mine then have
occasioned these impatient murmers which I hear! What faults of mine have
raised those bitter reproaches which I bear? What enormities of mine have
provoked those imminent dangers which I fear? O why is it that ye who own my
Savior, who have submitted to my Doctrine as your Rule, who have partaked of
my Sacrament as your refreshment and comfort; O why is it that ye hate and
despise me, that ye strip and wound me, that ye tear and mangle me, that ye
impoverish and debase me, that ye make me a scorn, an abomination, an hissing
and astonishment to all that see me, a derision and a mocking to my enemies
round about me?

Alas, all men of weight and worth, for parts and piety, Her Apology for
Constitution.
for judgment and ingenuity, for conscience and integrity, for grace, learning
and renown, know my innocence thus far, that as to the foundation of Faith and
Rule of holiness, I have only adhered to Gods blessed Word: as for the
Circumstances and Ceremonies of Religion, I use in them prudently and
charitably that liberty and power which I suppose is allowed here for peace,
order, and decency, by that blessed God who is not the Author of Confusion, but
of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. If we may believe the integrity
of those Reformers that settled this Church, whose learning, worth, and piety,
has been confirmed by the Testimony of so many wise and religious Princes, by
the approbation of so many learned and reverend Convocations, by the applauses
of so many other reformd Churches: if we may believe the preaching living and
dying of so many hundred excellent Bishops and Ministers, or the Prayers and
proficiencies of so many thousand of godly Christians; or if we may believe the
wonderful blessings and special graces of a merciful God, attesting the verity,
integrity and sanctity of my Christian Constitution for many happy years: or if
you will believe all men in England, who have by oaths and subscriptions, by
Vows and Protestations resolved to maintain the Protestant Religion as it was
established in the Church of England; who despair any where to find the way of
truth and peace, of holiness and happiness, but in the use of those holy means,
and in the exercise of those divine graces which accompany salvation, within me
professed and enjoyed. I know nothing excellent in any Church for outward
policy, inward tranquillity, and eternal felicity; nothing that was pious or
peaceable, moral or virtuous, ritual or spiritual, orderly or comely, or any
way conducing to truth and holiness, to grace or virtue, to the souls
edification and comfort, which was not by me entertained with competent
Maintenance, noble Encouragements, ingenuous Honors, peaceable Serenity, and
munificent plenty; In which I flourished so many years by Gods goodness, and
man's indulgence.

Alas, whatever I have done in the settlements of the Rites, Circumstances and
Decencies of Religion, I have observed that modesty, wisdom and humility that
became a Church of Christ, in discreetly and ingeniously complying with sober,
primitive and venerable Antiquity in the Church, as far as it observed the
Rules of Gods Word, and went not beyond the liberty allowed it in point of
Order and Decency. O you are too knowing to be ignorant, and too ingenious to
be insensible of your duty to God, and your respect to me; who was heretofore
so much loved by my Children, applauded by my Friends, reverenced by my
Neighbors, seared and envyed by mine Enemies for those spiritual Gifts,
Ministerial, Devotional and Practical, which were evidently seen in me, those
heavenly influences which people received from me, those gracious examples and
frequent good works set forth by me, the blessed experiences men enjoyed with
me, the charitable simplicities exercised by my members, the numerous
Assemblies, the frequent Devotions, the reverent Attentions, the unanimous
Communions, the well-grounded hopes, and unspeakable comforts which thousands
enjoyed, both living and dying, in obedience to, and communion with me; which
to impartial men were most impregnant evidences, and valid demonstrations of
true Religion, and a true Church, settled by the joint consent, and public
piety of a Christian Nation. He was a wise, holy, and reverend Son of my
bosom, who said, That in the greatest maturity of his Judgment, and integrity
of his Conscience, when most redeemed from juvenile Fervours, popular
Fallacies, vulgar Partialities, and secular Flatteries, he declared to the
present Age and posterity, that since he was capable to move in so serious a
search, and weighty a disquisition as that of Religion is; as his greatest
design was through Gods grace to find out and persevere in such a profession of
Christian Religion as has most of truth and order, of power and peace, of
holiness and solemnity, of divine verity and Catholic antiquity, of true
charity and holy constancy: so he could not (apart from all prejudices and
prepossessions) find in any other Church or Church Way, ancient or modern,
either more of the good he desired, or less of the evil he would avoid, then he
had a long time discerned, and upon a stricter scrutiny more and more in the
frame and form, in the Constitution and Dispensation of the Church of England.
No where, says he, diviner Mysteries, no where sounder Doctrinals, bolier
Morals, warmer Devotionals, apter Rituals or comlier Ceremonials. All which
together by a meet and happy concurrence of piety and prudence, brought forth
such Spirituals and Graces, both in their Habits, Exercises and Comforts, as
are the Quintessence and Life, the Soul and Seal of true Religion; those more
immediate and special Influences of Gods holy Spirit upon the Soul, those joint
Operations of the blessed Trinity, for the Justification, Sanctification, and
Salvation of a Sinner.

1. Can you blame my Government, that ancient and Catholic She justifies her
Government.
Government of godly Bishops; which is so agreeable to Right Reason, so
suitable to the Principles of due Order and Policy among men, so consonant to
Scripture-wisdom both in Rules and Patterns, so conform to the Catholic and
Primitive way of all Christian Churches throughout all Ages, and in all places
of the world? Would you have me, against all charity, modesty, humility or
equity, to fall away from the Apostolical way of all Famous Churches and
religious Christians? to cast off the (...), (...), the (...), nec conciliis
institutum, sed semper retentum, and non nisi authoritate Apostolica
institutum; the Apostolici seminis traduces Episcopos, that universam
successionem Episcoporum; those successiones ab initio decurrentium
Episcoporum; that ordinem Episcoporum qui in Johannem stat Authorem; that toto
orb decretum.) Shall I not enquire of the former Age, and prepare my self to
the search of my Fathers? for I am but of Yesterday, and nothing. Shall not
they teach me, and tell me, and utter words out of their hearts? Shall not I
stand in the way, and ask for the old way, which is the good way, and walk
therein?

Would you have me give offense to the whole Christian World, which either is
or would be governed by Bishops, as the most Apostolic, Primitive, and
Universal Way? Would you have me disown the right succession of the power
Ministerial, conferred by Episcopal hands unto this day? Shall the Jewish
Church have the Heads of their Tribes as Bishops and Rulers over their Brethren
the Priests and Levites, and the Christian Church (in imitation of them, as in
other particulars, so in this, have their Apostles, Evangelists, their Pastors
and Teachers, without reproach, and may not I? O it is certain, that what is
once well done, in a regular public way, is ever after done as to the
permanency of that virtue that is always in a great and good example. Shall I
lay aside Primitive and right Episcopacy, which has such grounds from
Scripture, both as to the divine wisdom so ordering his Church among the Jews,
as also by the example, Precept and Direction evident from our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the holy Apostles in the New Testament, who preferred worthy
persons for their Piety Zeal and holy Gravity, to exercise a Christian
authority over Ministers and people for their souls good, which might consist
with charity and humility, for the preservation of the Churches peace and
purity in the best and primitive times; such grave persons as for their Age,
were Fathers; for their innocence, Saints; for their industry, Laborers; for
constancy, Confessors; for zeal, Martyrs; for charity, Brethren; for their
light, Angels; and venerable for all Excellencies* And I own no other Bishops
but such in whom are remarkable the virtues of the most ancient and imitable
Bishops; the Industry of St. Austin, the Courage of St. Ambrose, the Devotion
of St. Gregory, the Learning of Nazianzen, the Eloquence of St. Chrysostom,
the Mildness of St. Cyprian, the Love of St. Ignatius, the Constancy of St.
Polycarp, the Nobleness of St. Basil; and those come nearest the Apostolical
pattern and resemble the most of any Christians or Ministers, the Grace and
Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. I endeavor that my Bishops may be among
Christians the most faithful; among Men, the most civil; among Preachers the
most painful; among Orators, the most persuasive; among Governors, the most
moderate; among pious Men the most fervent, among Professors, the most forward;
among severe Men the most exact; among Sufferers, the most patient; among
Perseverants the most constant: the most complete every way, and perfect unto
every good work. These I take care should be duly chosen, should be esteemed
with honor, and reverenced with love. My Rule to them is, That they should
overruled with vigilance, should rule with joint counsel, neither levelled with
younger Preachers and Novices, nor exalted too much above the grave and Elder.
I allow these men an honorable competencie, with eminency, wherewith they may
exercise a large heart and liberal hand, which may conciliate a general
respect, and deserve the common Love. My direction to them, is, that their
virtue and piety may preserve the Authority of their places; and this is the
order, peace and dignity of the Church, that they may be the Touchstone of
Truth, the Loadstone of Love, the Standard of Faith, the Pattern of Holiness,
the Pillars of Stability, and the Centres of Unity; such as the Erroneous may
hate, the Factious envy, good men may love, and bad men may Fear.

2. Can ye blame my Doctrine, approved by the Reformed, She justifies her
doctrine.
and agreeable with the Primitive Church? a doctrine according to godliness,
teaching all men that denying all ungodliness and worldly lust, they should
live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present world.

3. Do you find fault with my Devotion in the public She justifies her
Devotion.
worship of God, by Confession, prayers, praises, Psalms, and other holy
Oblations of a Rational and Evangelical service, offered up to our God by the
joint piety of all my children, (the (...), the (...), the Communi Oration)
where nothing is expressed as my mind, which I thought not agreeable with the
mind of Gods spirit in the Scripture? nor do I know any part of it to which a
judicious Christian might not in Faith say Amen, taking the expressions of it
in that pious and benign sense which the Church intended, and the words may
well bear. Indeed the whole composure of my Liturgy is (in my judgment) so
wholesome, so holy, so complete, so discreet, so devout, so useful, so savoury,
so welladvised, that I find nothing in the eighteen Liturgies composed in the
Eastern and Western Church, that is excellent, but is in this of mine; and many
things which are less clear or necessary in them, are better expressed or
wisely omitted here; the whole being so ordered, as might best inform all
peoples understandings, stir up their affections and quicken their devotions,
in a wholesome form of sound words; such as Moses, David, the Prophets, and the
Lord Jesus left behind them, solemnly recorded in the Scriptures. So that
according to the primitive care, I first laid down Scripture grounds in the
Creeds and Confessions, and then I enlarged and fixed my Liturgies and
devotions as near as I could to the majesty, solemnity, and exactness,
unanimity and fullness of public Prayers upon all holy public occasions, so
plainly, that the devout soul knows well what it should desire of God; and so
affectionately, that it earnestly desires in it, what it knows God allows;
and so uniformly, that it peaceably goes along with the Congregation, with one
mind and one heart in the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace.

4. Is it the Rites and Ceremonies I impose that displease you? Alas I find the
God of Heaven which we worship in England enjoining more Ceremonies on his own
people, and forbidding no holy custom to any Christians, in order to advance
the decency and order of his service, or Christians mutual edification and
joint devotion under the Gospel. Our blessed Savior has by his spirit guiding
the pens and practices of the Apostles, sufficiently manifested the Power and
Liberty given the Church, and the Governors of it, for the choice and use of
such decent customs, Rites and Ceremonies, (not as divine institutions upon the
consciences, butashumane injunctions* upon the practices) as agree with godly
manners, and the truth of the Gospel, and may best serve for order, decency,
peace, solemnity, and mutual edification of Christians, agreed upon by public
consent; in which every ones vote is personally or vertually included. It Is
true, as the Liturgy, so the Ceremonies have something of Rome in them: for to
deal plainly, I did freely and justly assert to my own use and Gods glory
whatever upon due trial I found to have the stamp of Gods truth and grace, or
the Churches wisdom and charity upon it. I would not refuse any good I found
amongst them, because it was mixed with some evil; but trying all things, I
held fast that which was good, being intent upon the great ends of piety,
devotion and charity. It Is true I enjoin my people an inward worship of soul,
in spirit and in truth, before God; but withal I enjoin outward worship of the
body; (which is but a reasonable service to God that made the body) exemplary
and significant before men, in such habits and gestures as may most conduce (by
the advice of the whole Church; for the private spirit of the prophets, in
those things ought to be subject to the public spirit of the Prophets) to
reverence, devotion and edification, in knowing, humble, meek and quiet
spirits, rightly discerning the innocent nature of such things not prohibited
and so indifferent; and the Christian liberty allowed to them, to use those
things indifferent when commanded, and to lay them aside when not commanded.
However, let the many Obligations to unity by the true Faith you jointly
profess give you more satisfaction, then the occasions of dividing the
Ceremonies in which you differ give you offense: so that you may not upon so
small occasions, in such small matters, sacrifice to your private passion and
persuasion the public Peace and Prosperity of the Church* especially since I
never heard of any sober Christian, or truly godly Minister, who (being in
other things prudent, unblameable, and sincere) did ever suffer any check of
conscience merely upon the account of having been conformable to, and keeping
communion with me* nor did they ever complain of Ceremonies, Liturgy and
Episcopacy, as any damps to their real graces, or to their holy communion with
Gods blessed spirit; but admired them as the united influence, the joint
consent, the combined devotion of all good Christians in this Nation, who
publicly agreed with one mind, and in one manner to serve the Lord, in a way
allowed by the most pious of Princes, practiced by the best Nobility, owned by
the wisest Gentry, maintained by the most learned Clergy, and embraced by the
best sort of Commons. I allow only such Ceremonies as make religious Duties not
more pious, but more conspicuous; not more sacred, but more solemn; not more
spiritual and holy, but more visible, imitable and exemplary; to quicken my
children, to allure others, to instruct and edify all.

5. Are ye offended with my Canons and Injunctions? Is it fit that a few men
whom order and Policy has made inferior to others, as the Rulers and
Representatives of the whole society, should prefer their own private Opinions
and Judgments before the well-advised Results, the learned Connsels, the pious
Endeavors, and solemn Sanctions of so many, eminent for piety, prudence,
integrity, public influence, and just Authority?

6. Are my solemn Fasts and Feasts, your grievances? those solemn remembrances
of Gods Mercy to men in Christ celebrated with prayer, praises preaching and
communicating to Gods glory, and all sober Christians improvement, according to
the known president of the Jews, and the general practice of the Christian
Church? What harm is there if some good men observing a day, observe it to the
Lord; and others not observing a day, observe it not to the Lord?

7. Do you resent my Endeavors for Unity and uniformity? Alas, I desire only
that men sincerely worship one true God, and profess the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that they may be partakers of the gifts and graces of the blessed
Spirit, and may have an holy communion with that adorable Trinity, and with one
another in love and charity, as Christians, enjoying the noblest life, the
sweetest society, and most heavenly fraternity; imitating God, emulating
Angels; Children and expectants of happiness, Partakers of grace, and daily
preparing for eternal Glory: that all men who have been called, baptized and
instructed by lawful Ministers here, in the mysteries and duties of the Gospel,
may make a joint and public profession of the Christian Faith, and Reformed
Religion, in the name, and as the sense of the whole Nation, grounded upon the
holy Scripture, guided also and administered by that uniforme order, due
authority, and holy. Ministry for Worship and Government, which according to
the mind of Christ, the pattern of the Apostles, and the practice of all
primitive Churches, has been lawfully established by the wisdom and consent of
all Estates in this Kingdom, for Gods honor, the Churches safety, the public
peace, and the common good of souls.

8. Do I not allow you a just liberty to do such things constantly and
cheerfully which are most proper and advantageous to the nature and excellency
of men? to think what is true, to do what is fit, and enjoy what is just in
reference to God, others and your selves? I have taken from you no liberty but
that of doing evil: you are at liberty to enjoy all the comforts, privileges,
and Ordinances which Christ has instituted, in an holy order, and regular way,
for private or public good; and to hope for that reward and crown which God
the righteous judge has promised those that persevere in well doing. My
highest aim is, that you may have liberty to exercise a good conscience, void
of offense toward God and toward man, that they may willingly in all things
live honestly.

9. Are ye displeased with my Members? Alas, innocent men, they pursue after
the knowledge of, and communion with God, in order to a rational, religious,
spiritual, gracious, perfect, and unchangeable life; enjoying themselves in the
blessed enjoyment of God, the enjoyment of whom satisfies all their desires,
rewards all their duties, requites all their sufferings, compleats all their
happiness; crowns and perfects true Religion. They endeavor that on earth
which they hope for in heaven; viz. a right knowledge and a willing
performance, which as reasonable they owe for ever to God their Maker,
Preserver, and Redeemer in Christ. With this religious frame and temper, of
which themselves only are conscientious they prepare for a glorious and blessed
immortality, with a sincerity of heart, and uprightness of conversation, which
has no other Rule but Gods Word, no other End but Gods Glory, no other Comfort
but the Constancy of this Disposition to their Lives end. Innocent men, they
look for one common Salvation, they use one common Sacrament, they profess one
Faith and Rule of Holiness, they have one Gracious Temper, the same inward
sense of Duty and Devotion; they walk in the same order with the Catholic
Church over the face of the earth.

10. Do you envy me my Patrimony and Maintenance, what the Law of God allows
me, what the Gospel has provided me, what the Piety of Elder times has
bestowed upon me, what good Kings, Peers and people of their own endowed me
with, freely honoring the Lord with their substance, that they that served the
Altar, might live by the Altar? O why may not my children who attend the
Gospel, live by the Gospel, since they attend a Ministry as venerable in its
Mysteries, as clear in its Doctrine, as glorious in its chief Minister Jesus,
as painful to it is Ministers, and as comfortable to pious and devout souls, as
the Ministry of the Law? Why are you offended that they of my children that are
taught, should communicate to them of my children that teach in every good
thing?

11. Do you envy my just Power and Authority, whereby with the wisdom gravity
and integrity of such men as are invested with that power, I may check all
abuses and disorders in the Church, and by a well-ordered discipline, I may
recover my self to my former glory and renown, for which I was spoken of
throughout the World?

12. Do you except against the private infirmities, the personal failing of my
Bishops and Ministers, as less strict and unblameable in their lives, less
painful in their calling, less prudent in their undertakings, or less
compassionate in their Government? though all the world knows that within me
Learning flourishes, knowledge multiplyeth, Grace abounds, excellent
Preaching thriveth, Sacraments are duly administered, the fruits of Gods spirit
are mightily diffused, hospitable kindness is exercised, Christian Charity is
maintained, plain heartedness and Good works are eminent; though I know the
Christian world cannot show men more eminent then some of my Clergy are for
well-weighed knowledge, for Christian Courage and Patience, for sincere piety,
for indefatigable industry, for Care and Vigilance, for exemplary Virtue, for
sound Doctrine, useful Writing, prudent Governing; for a firm Constancy, for
fatherly Instructions, charitable Corrrections, and imitable conversations; who
guide the people without any allowed licentiousness in conversation, any
undecency in Devotion, any irregularitie in Administration; in all which
according to the sacred direction of Gods Word, according to the heavenly
assistance of Gods spirit through Faith in Jesus Christ, they teach them to
worship the only true God, who is blessed for ever; as the admirable
instruments of Gods glory, and the good of men's souls: teaching them a fruitful
and effectual Faith, a sound and judicious knowledge, an hearty and sincere
Love, a discreet and prudent Zeal, a severe and through Repentance, fervent and
devout Prayers, godly and unfeigned Sorrow, spiritual and unspeakable Comforts,
well grounded and firm Hope heavenly and holy Conversation, a meek obedience
and submission in the general frame of Christian men's carriage. Though I have
men famous for greatness of Learning, soundness of Judgment, gravity of
Manners, and Sanctity of Lives; yet among my ten thousand Ministers, it is
likely some may do amiss. If when there was but three men in the world, one was
a Murderer, if among Noah's sons, one of the three was disobedient; If among
Jacob's children, of two one was profane; if of twelve Apostles, one was a
Devil, another dissembled, and a third denied his Master; if among the Asian
Angels, there is none but was to be reproved; if among the few Primitive
Preachers, there was a Demas that loved the present world, a Diotrephes that
loved the preeminence: among my so many thousand Clergy; it is not likely but
that some may fall short of the severe exactness required in all Ministers, who
ought to be patterns in good works.

Oh my Clergy are not Angels, but men subject to the like infirmities with
other men. If they should say they have no sin, they would deceive themselves,
and the truth would not be in them: but if they confess their sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive them their sins, and to cleanse them from all
unrighteousness. Be Perfection the glory of other Church Members, the glory of
mine is Sincerity. Without all peradventure, the most holy and all-seeing God,
who walks in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks, whose pure eyes are most
intent upon the Ministers of the Church, has found iniquity in his servants
the Bishops, and other Ministers, both as to their persons and professions; all
things being open and naked to him with whom we have to do.

1. He observes how many consecrated and set apart to the service of God and
his Church in the name, place power and authority of Jesus Christ, and
approaching his gracious presence with Aaron in the holy of holies, in the
glorious manifestations of God in Christ to his Church, by public Ordinances
and spiritual Influences, have not so sanctified the Name of the Lord God,
their God, in their Hearts and Lives, in their Doctrines and Duties.

2. The great Searcher of hearts knows how rashly many of his Ministers
undertake, how carelessly they manage that great and terrible work, under which
Angels may swoon, and great Apostles cry, Who is sufficient for these things!
how vulgarly they converse, how lazily they live, how loosely they behave
themselves, how ambitiously they design, how covetously they reach, how
enviously they repine, how unexemplarily they walk unworthy of the favor and
indulgence showed them, to the amazement of their High-calling, the dishonor of
their Profession, to the forfeiture of their Dignity and Plenty, the
endangering of their Peace and Safety.

3. He that is about our paths, and about our dwellings has observed how
unpreparedly, negligently and irreverently, how partially, popularly and
passionately, how formally and vainly, without any power of godliness, Life of
Religion, some perform the work of God, the great work of Eternal concernment
to our own and other men's souls.

4. He whose eyes see, whose eyelids try the children of men, has looked down
from heaven, and observed the iniquity of some men's holy things; their dead and
unreasonable, instead of a living and acceptable service: he has taken notice
of that supine negligence which has sunk some men's Ministrations below the
just majesty, solidity and gravity of Gospel-dispensations; others by an
affected height and depth, for want of plain instruction, and charitable
condescending, amuse the poor people, who know not what they say, nor whereof
they do affirm.

5. He that will reprove, and set men's sins in order before them, has taken
notice of some men's remiss compliance, and others exact rigours, (according to
their private tempers, judgments and passions) whereby they swerved too much
from that just charity, discretion, legality and constancy which my Canons
intented, and my constitution, health and peace required; especially in the
peevish touchinesse of these times, when so many subtle and envious ones lie
in wait to destroy me.

Yet my Church-mens exorbitancies are not my constitutions, their failings are
not my frame, their infirmities are not my nature; their fall is no more mine
who disallows it, then the Angels fall may be the Heavens that forbid it: their
weaknesses are humane, my authority is divine: that charity which thinks no
evil, will not lay upon me those enormities which I forbid by a Law, which I
restrain by Discipline, which I mourn for in mine Humiliation, and
discountenance in those great patterns that show a most excellent way. These
sins (O the Christian world!) are transgressions of my Law, affronts to my
Authority, the baffles of my Cannons and Injunctions. O that my Apology were
written, yea, printed in a book, for the satisfaction of the world, that the
good that I would do, that I cannot do? and the evil that I would not do that I
do! I find a law of my members against the law of my mind: So that it is no more
I, but the sins and the sinners that dwell in me.

4. It Is you, it is you whom I have nourished and brought up as children, whom I
have encouraged as Ministers, whom I have promoted as Governors; it is you that
have brought this reproach and danger upon me. When I had with heroic patience
endured the oppression of adversaries, by a Christian prudence defeated the
attempts of Schismatics, by an exemplary humility and piety turned the hearts
of enemies, and by a miracle of Restoration silenced the mouths of all men*
you my Sons, opened the mouth of scandal, strengthened the cry of reproach,
raised the clamours of the envious. Oh, if an enemy had done this, I could with
the same Christian courage I have suffered these twenty years, have born it;
but it`s you of my own bosom, family and profession: O you, my Clergy, whom I
expected more glorious, more esteemed, more reverenced before all the world,
after your constant sufferings, who coming out of this fiery furnace, might
shine brighter then ever you did with the love of Christ, and of me his Church,
both as to the care of those private charges and public inspections, committed
to you in excellent order, and by due authority: and I expected that neither
pride nor envy, pomp nor popularity, neither covetousness nor ambition, should
distract the thoughts, divide the hearts, exasperate the humors, or provoke
the reproach of an incensed people against my Order and Government, and the
good of all sorts of Christians. Whosoever of you, notwithstanding the miracles
both of your sufferings and relief, at such a time as this, when the mouth of
Hell is open against me, shall open any other mouth to join in the cry against
the Church, give life or tongue to any scandalous sin, and set that to its
clamans de terra, crying from the ground; that by luxury or sloth, by
covetousness or griping, by insolence or pride, by carelessness or looseness, by
disorder and irregularity* shall justify men's malice against me, and by that
means persuade credulous and easy people, that is true that has been said of
me, all is just that has been inflicted upon me; I know not what Woe is heavy
enough for him: O alas, my Brother! O it had been better for him he had never
been born.

5. My Doctrine I can maintain, my discipline I can assert, my constitution I
can vindicate: You, you, O my Sons, I cannot justify: woe is me that I must
hear your reproach, and cannot gain say it. Five things there are that tend
equally to mine and your own ruin, which I must charge you before the world:
Five things that will insensibly undermine my famous Fabric, which has been
the care and labor of so many years when erected, and the miracle of this last
year when restored. These five sad Particulars, are,

1. Undue Ordination.

2. An unconscionable Simony.

3. Careless Non-residence.

4. Loose Profaneness.

5. Encroaching Pluralities.

CHAP. II. The Church of England's resentment of Undue Ordination.
ALthough I am well satisfied (whatever the Romanists and others have of late
suggested) that my Ordination is Authentic, Primitive and proper in the form
of it, is valid in the Author, being by men ordained in an uninterrupted
succession by the primitive Bishops, as they were by the Apostles, and the
Apostles by Christ, and Jesus Christ by God himself; and is regular and legal
in the circumstances of it, being agreeable to the established Laws of the
Realm; yet not without much regret must I confess, that solemn investiture of
men to the great calling of Ministers, fallen much below its native glory, much
shrunk in its Primitive sacredness and reverence, and extremely decayed in its
first esteem and honor, because my reverend Bishops in the great intricacies
of late alterations, are surprised to bestow the honor of that high calling,
1. upon the Young, 2. upon the Unlearned, 3. upon the Debauched; and 4. upon
the Factious.

SECT. 1. Of Young Ministers, whereof I have a Call of above 3000.
WOE is me! when I have those that teach before they have learned; that I have
those that would instruct others, and have need themselves be instructed which
are the first principles of the Doctrine of Christ. Instead of the ancient
Fathers, we have children who are made Priests in all Lands. Former times
honored my excellent Clergy for their age and gravity, reverenced them for
their learning and austerity and esteemed them as the wonder of the World; and
said Ask the Father, and he will show thee; thine ancients, and they shall tell
thee: this age slights them for their youth and weakness, for their ignorance
and unexperience, as persons that are but of yesterday, and know nothing. We
have understanding, says the common people to the young men, as well as you:
we are not inferior to you; yea, who knows not such things as these? As the
Patriarchs separated their firstborn for the Priesthood, and Moses and Aaron
reserved themselves many years for their Ministries, and the Law prepared men
thirty years for the sacred service; and the blessed Jesus, the Preacher of
Righteousness, entered not until the thirtieth year of his Age upon the great
work of Ministry: so my Bishops, knowing how to behave themselves in the work
of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth,
took heed to themselves and the flocks over which the holy Ghost had made them
overseers, that they laid hands suddenly on no man, neither were partakers of
other men's sins, but keep themselves pure, taking care that men be first
proved, and then use the Office of a Deacon, being found blameless; and then
when they had used the Office of a Deacon well, and purchased to themselves a
good degree of a Priest or Bishop, then they took care that they should be
blameless, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to
teach: -- not Novices, lest being lifted up with pride, they fall into the
condemnation of the Devil. -- Moreover they took care they might have a good
report of them that are without, lest they fall to reproach and condemnation of
the Devil. But now since the looseness of these late times, there are admitted
to the Priesthood of the meanest of the people, who are not the sons of Levi:
as in Jeroboam's days, every one that will, is made a Priest, that he may have
bread to eat. Those Pulpits that were filled with ancient Fathers, are now
Desks for young children: those solemn Assemblies that were rapt up into the
third Heaven with pious Sermons and devout Prayers, hear the late pedantique
Herangues and juvenile* Orations with scorn and laughter: those people that
thronged to hear the wisdom of God delivered in the demonstration of the Spirit
and with power, are quite weary of that true foolishness of Preaching, that
consists only in the childish wisdom of words, and in the trifling enticing
words of man's wisdom, I had reverend men that showed themselves a pattern of
good works* in Doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, sound speech
that cannot be condemned; that they that were of The contrary party were
ashamed, having no evil to say of them, when I ordained Elders in every City. I
had men blameless, sober, just, holy, temperate; whose judgments were settled,
whose passions were allayed, whose affections were composed, whose actions were
advised, and conversation exact and uniforme: since, every one did what was
good in his own eyes. My young Ministers have been unstable in all their ways,
unsettled in their minds, rash in their, undertaking, imprudent in their
carriage, weak in their discourses, unexperienced in their behavior, not even,
orderly and stayed in their conversation; to the grief of good men, who esteem
all Ministers very highly in love for their works sake; to the joy of those
evil men that have ill will for Sion, who cry Aha, aha, so would we have it. O
young men, who requires these things at your hands? Why do you run before I am
willing to send you? O how dare you take this Office upon you, until you are
called with solemn preparation, as was Aaron? Are not you afraid (now you have
newly passed the elements of Philosophy, and the first principles of Nature) to
look into those mysteries which the Angels desire to look into, to search into
that knowledge which passes knowledge? Are not you afraid to ascend that
pulpit whither Luther said he never ascended (though very aged) without fear
and trembling? are not you afraid to undertake that dreadful work from which
the Prophets fled, the Fathers avoided, the Primitive Pastors trembled at; Do
you know what you do, when you undertake to be Ambassadors in Christ's stead, to
bring back the world to God, to be Co-workers with God in the salvation of
souls, to be Angels of the Church, to be as Stars in Gods right hand, to be
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, to watch for precious souls as they that must
give an account? -- How can you govern others, who cannot govern your selves?
What power have you over others, who have hardly any power over your selves?
What esteem can you find among them, who will naturally despise your youth? Did
not Philosophy think you fit (O young men) to hear Morals, and shall Divinity*
admit you to read divine Lectures? How can you in the heat of youth, in the
vigor of your lusts, appear in the world persuading men to mortify their
lusts, to crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts? With what hope can
you endeavor to compose the world to that great Rule, to which you cannot
compose your selves? How will you behave your selves as guides among persons
whose years and experience are so much beyond yours* How impertinently will you
converse, how weakly will you discourse, how imprudently will you deal? how
contemptibly will you live among a staid and discreet people, wiser then you in
their Generations?

The goodness of God having furnished* man with two chief Instruments (says an
incomparable man) both necessary for this life, hands to exercise, and a mind
to devise great things; the one is not profitable longer then the vigor of
youth does strengthen it, nor the other greatly till age and experience have
brought it to perfection.

SECT. 2. Of Debauched Men ordained, 1500.
OH, am I, as Juhan blasphemed, the sanctuary of all profaneness? Am I a
refuge for all licentiousness? Whom a strict College expels, whom the severe
University discountenanceth, whom civil men note with a mark of hatred and
abhorrence, must I admit to my sacred Order, and honor with my most solemn
Ministrations? My care is, that each Minister should be of an holy and
unblameable conversation: What have these poor creatures to do to take Gods
word held forth by me in their mouths, seeing they hate to be reformed? O my
reverend Sons, what, do you bring a man to teach the world a God and his
service, Who is without God in the World? -- What, do you send them to speak of
that God who is not in all their thoughts? Why are they employed to propogate
the knowledge of God, who desire that the knowledge of the holy One may cease
from them? To what purpose do they preach an holy Life, who never intend to
live it? Why do they put those poor souls to pray for those things of God,
which they do not desire? to read that Bible which they do not believe, to bind
those heavy burdens upon the people, which they themselves do not intend to
bear? to teach that on the Sabbath demurely, which they will contradict
throughout the Week profanely? Is there any need of authorizing public
patterns of impiety? Do you intend to destroy what ye have built? I know you
not. Why then do you send lewd Ministers to teach men by an evil example that
profaneness which I have endeavored to reform by my good instructions? Woe is
me, that I see those within me running to all excels of riot, who are employed
to teach a pure Religion, and undefiled before God. You, O reverend Fathers,
taught men to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live soberly, justly
and godly in this present world; and will you suffer men to go from among you,
to teach all ungodliness and worldly lusts? O alas! one man a Divine and a
Beast! What, consecrated to God, and devoted to sin! An abomination in the holy
place! -- Behold, thou art called a Minister, and restest in the Law, and
make thy boast of God, and know his will, and approvest the things that
are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law; and art confident that
thou thy self art a Guide to the blind, a light to them which are in darkness,
an Instructor of the foolish, a Teacher of babes, which have the form of
knowledge and of the truth of the Law, thou therefore that teach another,
teach thou not thy self? thou that preachest a man should not steal, do
thou steal? thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? thou that
make thy boast of the Law, through beeaking the Law dishonourest thou God?
for the Name of God is blasphemed among the people through you.

SECT. 3. Of Unlearned Men Ordained.
I Am ashamed that that ignorance which formerly found preferment, should now
find orders too; and that I should settle them legally in that calling,
whereunto I always said they had illegally intruded themselves. It was too
much to suffer that daring ignorance to Vsurp the sacred Office, much more to
consecrate it to it. The late Miscarriage, want nothing to complete them, but
to be hallowed. The Catholic Church never entertained a Ministry but what was
qualified either with extraordinary gifts from above, or with humane learning
from below: by which the mind being instructed and improved in all the riches
of wisdom and knowledge, which are part of the glory and image of God in man;
by this learning all truths are clearly unfolded. How do you think poor souls
can clear divine truths, lying hid in the depth, darkness and ambiguity of
Original words, without skill in Languages? How can they attain the genuine and
emphatick sense of the Word of God without skill in the Original words and
phrases? How can they maintain the truths I have established, and confute the
errors I have condemned? How can they detect the fallacies with which my poor
people are deluded, and convince the gainsayers with which I am troubled, and
discover those sophisms in which poor souls wrap themselves, darkning wisdom
with words without understanding, without the art of sound reasoning? How can
they convey the holy truths they are furnished with to others, without an holy
Eloquence, a sacred Persuasion and Rhetoric, which may commend them to men's
minds, and enforce them upon their hearts? how can they satisfy themselves and
others in the Controversies of this Age, without the Observations, Histories
and Customs of former Ages; and standing in the ways, and asking for the old,
which is the good way, and walk therein, so find rest for their souls?

How is it possible for those poor creatures to understand sundry passages of
Scripture, depending upon propriety of words and Idioms, or upon the Customs,
Rites, Proverbs, Forms, Usages Laws, Offices and Antiquities of the Assyrian,
Persian, Greek and Roman Governments, without a competent portion of humane
Learning? My Religion was as the Kings Daughter, all glorious within; attended
on by Arts and Sciences, those Handmaids who clothed her with garments wrought
with needle work of diverse colors, embroidering her with pathetick Elegancies,
with solid Eloquence and Orations, with Sublimity and Gravity, with Method and
Acuteness, with excellent Morals, and useful Observations of a very sober
sense. But now, alas, it is exposed to a profane world, with the ridiculous
impertinencies and foolish adventures of men zealous, but not according to
knowledge. What empty discourses do I hear? what incoherent Notions do I read?
what vain trifles am I troubled with? what pilfering learned men's works do I
endure? O what abundance of things should a Minister understand! O what a great
defect is it to be ignorant of them! O how much do we miss a competent
Knowledge in ordinary Ministers, 1. To satisfy themselves and others exactly
in the true and original will of God. 2. To explain and unfould the words in
which Gods will is originally expressed, and to endeavor by all means a right
notion and conception of them* as they are to be understood in the Scripture.
3. To show exactly what are those saving truths* which are naturally contained
in those words so explained. 4. To confirm those truths so drawn out of the
Scripture, by such evident Arguments and powerful Reasons as may establish the
true believer, and convince the Gainsayer. 5. To press those truths so made
manifest upon men with that power that they may have their proper influence and
efficacy upon men's hearts and lives. The honest men that are industrious, I
would willingly encourage, provided they have (what I wished always, and shall
now expect in all my Priests and Deacons) solidity, gravity, modesty, piety,
and some savor of Learning, joined with humility and zeal, with humanity; some
methods of intelligible Reason, and profitable Scripture-Divinity. -- The Law
was published by Moses, learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians: The
Gospel was propagated by St. Paul, bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, in all the
varieties of Heathenish and Jewish knowledge? the Primitive Fathers (as Clemens
Alex. Eusebius. Tertul. St. Aug. St. Ambrose Min. Fell. Lactant. and others)
maintained the Faith so propogated, by their comprehensive Learning. Therefore
I have taken care that none should be admitted to Orders, but they who are
approved by sober and wise men, as who have given themselves wholly to these
things; that their profiting may appear unto all as men of whom there is some
hope, because of their promptness of wit, quickness of conceit, fastness of
memory, clearness of understanding, soundness of judgment, and readiness of
speech; that they may in time, by art, industry, experience and observation,
become skilful Linguists, subtle Disputants, copious Orators, exact Critiques,
comprehensive Historians, profound Divines, and powerful Preachers; that
throughout the three Kingdoms I may have those that may settle the people
rightly, instruct the ignorant clearly, satisfy the doubtful fully, meet with
the seducers skilfully, and promote piety and peace succesfully. As the times
now are, wherein Learning abounds even unto wantonness, and wherein the
world is full of Questions, Controversies, Novelties and Niceties in Religion,
and wherein most of our Gentry and people are (by the advantage of long peace,
and the customs of modern Education, together with a multitude of English
Books) are able to look through the ignorance of a Clergyman, and censure it,
if he be tripping in any point of History, Cosmography, Moral or Natural
Philosophy, Divinity or the Arts; yea, and to chastise his very method and
phrase, if he speaks losely or impertinently, or but improperly. I, as these
times are, must not admit any Clergymen without a competency of Learning; as
who may endeavor by their prayers, care and industry to improve the Learning
they have, so as they may be able upon good occasion to impart a spiritual gift
to the people of God, whereby they may be established, and to speak with such
understanding, sufficiency and pertinency, in some good measure of proportion
to the quickness and ripeness of these present times, showing in their Doctrine
uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, sound speech which cannot be condemned; that
they which are of the contrary party may be ashamed, having no evil to say of
them. I, whose Clergy professed to use, and prayed to God to bless their long*
Preparative Studies, Meditations, Writings, Readings, habitually to fit them
for that dreadful work, and for every actual discharge of it; I am ashamed of
those poor Smatterers, who have gathered a few raw and indigested Notions,
either by superficial reading of the Scriptures, or by hearing some Sermons or
by gleaning a little here and there from the plainest Writings, (without any
Critical, Historical, or Polemical Learning) who are fit implements to bring in
such ignorance, irreverence, Atheism, Superstition and Confusion, as shall
quite put out the Christian and reformed Religion in this Nation, (reducing all
to the ancient darkness, looseness and barbarousness) which has been
established by persons of real abilities, of good Learning, sound knowledge,
sober Judgments, orderly Method, grave Utterance, and weighty Eloquence; which
all wise and sober Christians expect should appear in every true Minister of
the Church of Christ, in such a competent measure and evident manner, as they
may be able comfortably to discern them and usefully to enjoy them. I am
ashamed to see a Roll of four hundred and six and twenty Tradesmen, who, 1. out
of desultory restlesness, 2. out of covetousness and ambition, 3. out of
sullenness and discontent, 4. out of pride and envy, having intruded in former
years into the sacred Calling of a Minister, are now ordained to it. I am
ashamed that my Authority should consecrate their Extravagancies* and that what
I looked upon as the misery of late times, should be allowed in this; that I
should countenance vain men that run from that Calling wherein they are called,
and usurp the Office, Honor and Authority of that sacred Priesthood and
Evangelical Ministry, instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ, as sent of God the
Father; a mischief that greatly threatens the Church and State, Faith and good
Manners, all things Civil as well as Sacred. O what wise and honest-hearted
Protestant (that has any care of Posterity, or prospect for the future) finds
not a sad dispondency, with an holy impatience arising in his soul, while he
sees so many weak shoulders, such unwashen hands, such unprepared feet, such
rash heads, such empty souls, publicly intruding themselves upon all holy
Duties, all sacred Offices, all solemn Mysteries, all divine Ministrations,
with equal insolency and insufficiency, being for the most part so much the
more impudent, by how much they are grossly ignorant; in whom you cannot discern
any either rational or religious, orderly or honest expressions in any degree
proportionable to what was observable in my most solid Ministers, my most acute
Scholars, and most profound Divines, who have been hitherto my support and
Ornament. Certainly (Reverend Fathers) you will not so debase and undervalue
the Evangelical Offices of Christ, as to admit every self flatterer and
Obtruder presently to officiate, without any due examination or approbation
from those with whom that commission and power has been ever deposited in a
regular and visible succession from Christ, the great Examplar or Original:
although (duly considering the diversities of gifts from the same Spirit) you
are not to exclude any modest, person though of meaner parts and less improved
education (if he be of ingenious education, of pious affections, and an orderly
life) from a place in Christ's Ministry, where one may sow, another may reap,
according to the several dispensations and gifts of the same God, who works
all in all.

SECT. 4. The Church of England's resentment of the thirteen hundred forty and
two factious Ministers that have been lately ordained.
YEt I will justify you (O ye my reverend Sons) in this, that though you were
surprised to ordain young men, yet you hoped that years might improve them; and
debauched, yet you may hope that Discipline may reform them; and unlearned men,
yet you may hope that time (with Gods blessing upon their private industry and
studious piety*) may instruct them; but I cannot with patience see your hands
laid upon their heads so suddenly for their Ordination, who laid their hands
lately upon you for your ruin. O that mine head were waters, that mine eyes
were a fountain of Tears, to weep for the unhappiness of the daughter of my
people, that must needs unadvisedly authorize men principled against its
Government, prejudiced against its Order, prepossessed against its Liturgy, and
privately practicing against its peace and happiness! In vain does Authority
silence your old adversaries, if you consecrate new ones: in vain do they
suppress the former race of Non conformists, if you raise up a new Generation,
a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters. -- Shall we perpetuate our
miseries, and keep up our unhappiness? Must a sad race of Dissenters run
parallel with the Orthodox succession to the end of the world? whereby I must
languish and die, my reformed Religion must decay, my piety and charity must be
weakened, and my Authority and discipline languish. What eye will pity me, when
I have raised those men that shall ruin me, when I have commissioned those men
that shall oppose me, and given them an opportunity for popular applause who
shall use it against me? without my leave no Ordination; no Ordination, no
pretense to preach; no preaching, no public opportunity to seduce whole
multitudes against Doctrine and Discipline, against Order and Government. My
safety is now in mine own hands: If I take care whom I prefer, I need not care
whom I may fear: If I carefully choose my Ministers, I need not offensively
suspend them: If I took care whom I ordained, I might without any noise put an
end to all my trouble: Mortality would silence those Ministers that now disturb
my peace, and my care may prevent any more. How ominously do some men
discourse? how popularly do they endeavor to preach? what dangerous
intimations do they make? how untowardly do they confirm? how auckwardly do
they use my Ceremonies? and read my Liturgy? when I consider the general
approbation and submission to my Government and Discipline before the Wars, by
all the Clergy and Layty of these Kingdoms; and withal, remember how contrary
to true Learning and honest Integrity, as if they understood not what they did,
or that they did conform contrary to their conscience, contrary to their former
oaths and practices, against their obedience to the Laws in being before the
points in controversy had any free and impartial debate, these men cried down
the established Government and Religion, and approved and encouraged the
violent and most illegal Extravagancies, tending to the utter ruin of Religion
and Government.

Indeed I must confess that most of all sides who have thought or done amiss,
have done so not out of malice or wilfulness, but out of misinformation or
mis*apprehension of things: and therefore I charitably think none will be more
faithful then those persons who upon mature deliberation being made sensible of
their errors, do feel in their hearts most vehement motives of repentance, and
earnest desires to make some reparations for former defects. Yet such sincere
Converts are they, who are not so much frighted with the sudden miscarriages,
as convinced of the continued error of their ways; who are rather persuaded by
the truth and reason I always urged, then awed by the authority and power I now
enjoy* and so are not blindly carried on by that Providence that advances me
now, as it did, and may again overturn me; but are rationally wrought upon by
the pregnant evidence of the Word, the clear practice of the Catholic Church,
the best Comment upon that Word, and the irresistible strength of Reason for
Order and obedience, upon which I was always Established, which they have not
rashly complied with, until they had examined all Allegations impartially,
surveyed the merit of the Cause leasurely, waited upon God by prayer humbly,
searched the will of God and the constant practice of good men diligently and
sincerely, conversed with good and knowing men profitably and satisfactorily,
and denied themselves in all worldly respects most Christianly. The Lapsed were
not formerly admitted to the communion of Christians, much less to the honor
of Ministers, without that discreet delay wherein they might have time to
satisfy themselves in the reason, and others in the sincerity of their
repentance and conversion. With that caution, was the Jewish Proselyte received
to the synagogue? with what care ought a Christian be brought to the Pulpit? Do
they serve God in this compliance, or do they serve the time? If they serve
God, he was the same as yesterday, so to day, and for ever. Do they serve the
times? God forbid that they who teach a Religion whose interest is in another
world, should yet own no more Religion then may consist with their interest in
this, Alas, (say poor souls, distracted with alterations of times and men, to
their unconstant Ministers) is this way lawful, you submit to? why then did you
declare it superstitious, Popish, and intolerable these twenty years, before
God, Angels, and Men? Is it unlawful? why do you practice it now? was it
against your Consciences all the while it was discountenanced, and is it
agreeable to your Consciences now it is upon a sudden countenanced? Oh have you
persuaded us these twenty years to venture Lives and Estates against those
things you now allow and practice? Is it for this you prayed? Is it for this we
fought? is this the issue of all our blood and treasure? etc* Oh it is a sad
thing to see men in the same Desk reading Common Prayer in a Surplice, where
they preached against both Common Prayer and surplice. Oh it is a sad thing to
see men build up in a day, that which they have destroyed these twenty years.
It Is intolerable to see men keep their places by Conformity, which they gained
by Nonconformity; when they turned out honest men by crying down my Government
and Worship, now they keep them out by compliance with my Government and
Worship. Alas, to see men Presbyterian in the beginning of the War, Independent
in the end of it, and now Episcopal. Where shall we stop? Where we are now, we
know; where we shall be a year hence, God knows. Alas, is a good Living the
only Creed men have? and Preferment their only Confession of Faith? It was a
miracle that St. Peter could convert three thousand at one Sermon, It Is nothing
now that his Majesty has converted ten thousand Ministers with one glance of
his eye. Ah, blessed Hammond, thou did write rationally; excellent Gauden,
thou did persuade powerfully; devout Tailor, thou did urge pathetically:
honest Nicholson, thou did answer satisfactorily: solid Sanderson thou did
state clearly: holy Usher and Hall, you did offer moderately, heartily and
learnedly. -- But who O ye worthies! believed your report? who would hear you?
who was convinced by you? The King is restored, I flourish, and dispose of all
Preferments, and my Converts are innumerable. Well, I have but two Wishes; the
first is, That all who are gone astray may be reclaimed to the way of truth;
the second is, That all who are reclaimed, may be reclaimed from mature
deliberation, and a serious consideration of all that can be alleged on all
hands, trying all things and upon good grounds holding fast that which is good.
Give me the men who conform upon the conscience of my principles, and not upon
the prosperity of my Cause -- who can neglect the most successful error, and
own the most afflicted truth; who are settled my principles which are constant,
and not upon upon my preferments which are uncertain. Is it the Kings Majesty's
favor they depend upon? he may fail. Is it the Church Government they depend
upon? that may fail, Is it Church-encouragement they stick to? that may fail.
Is it the ancient Truth and Faith they comply with? that has never failed, and
that will never fail. Give me Ministers who as they preach, so live upon the
things which are not seen, and not the things which are seen; the things which
are seen are temporal, the things which are not seen are eternal.

And must I have a Samaritan of Religion? serve the true God in the Temple, and
the Calves at Bethel? Must I have a sound form of words in the Desk, and an
extempory effusion in the Pulpit? must I have the same man read Episcopally to
walls, and preach factiously to a throng? use the Ceremonies, and say to his
confidents, they are a burden to him? use the Mr. H. Mr. M. Dr. J* W*
Surplice, yet unwilling to give offense? use the Cross in Baptism, yet say, I
wish it were forborne? Well, I shall never forget the words of a wise and
judicious Father, now with God: They themselves (meaning the Non-conformists)
when time was seemed to be, and if they dissembled not, which we are unwilling
to believe, were indeed reasonable well affected: for they submitted to
Government, used the Lyturgie, and observed the Ceremonies appointed according
to Law and order: and gave their own professed approbation of the same as well
by express words from their mouths, as by subscription under their hands, yet
remaining upon record: what has wrought this change in them, ( evidence of
reason, or worldly interest) and how far it has wrought upon them (in reality,
or but in compliance) and in what order too, (by immediate assault upon their
judgment, or by dealing underhand first with their affection) themselves do or
should best know. It highly concerns them* as much as the peace of their
conscience are worth, (and much more then so) to be well assured that their
hearts are upright in this affair: and in order thereunto, not to content
themselves with slight and overly examination, (there is more wickedness and
dedeceitfulness in the hearts of all men, then most men are aware of) but to
make the more diligent, district and impartial search possible in the true
Causes and Motives of this Change; (and for so much as fears and hopes have
been ever found the fittest engines to work such feats) to enquire particularly
what influence or opperation either the fear of loosing what they had, or the
hope of getting more might have in this work toward the producing such an
effect. It will best become others to judge as charitably as they may; but
doubtless it will be safest for them to be very jealous over themselves, lest
so great a Change could not have been wrought in so short a space, without a
strong infusion of the one, or of the other, or both, into the Medicine that
wrought it; especially since the conjuncture of time wherein this change
happened, may very probably raise some suspicion that a visible hope and
advantage had some cooperation at the lest with whatsoever was the principal
cause of this so sudden an alteration. If not so, nor so, but that they find
themselves clearly convinced in their judgments of their former error, and
that they are fully persuaded that they are now in a better way then that
wherein they formerly walked, it is happy for them, and I doubt not but that
they will find matter of rejoicing in it if they be not mistaken (a thing not
impossible) in the trial of their own hearts. O that I had men that in the
change of times were unchangeable in their mind and opinion, and to hold to
their former and well grounded Principle, so long as they can neither apprehend
any reason of sufficient strength to convince their understandings that they
are in the wrong, or to manifest unto them the necessity of making such a
change.

CHAP. III. The Church of England's resentment of scandalous Profaneness.
OH you, my Sons, why do you these things? for I hear of your evil dealings by
all this people. Oh, Sirs, my God above looks upon you, and is provoked, the
blessed Angels see you their fellow servants, (for you area spectacle to God
and Angels) and are grieved; wicked men observe you, and blaspheme God, good
men behold you, and are ashamed. Is it for this that you are delivered, that
you may work wickedness? Has God punished you, and will you yet sin more and
more? Will not twelve years sufferings reform you? will not twenty years
reproaches awake you? will not miracles of judgment deter you from evil? will
not miracles of mercy oblige you to good? Oh, despise you the riches of Gods
goodness toward you, not knowing that the goodness of God should lead you to
repentance? But after your hardness and impenitency of heart, will you treasure
up more wrath against another day of wrath? Is this the return you make to a
gracious God, to dishonor him? Is this your kindness to me, to undo me? Is
this you gratitude for the public favors of King and Parliament, to be
utterly unworthy? Religion has honored you with a high Calling; you betray
it: your Prince vouchsafed you Royal Favors; you shame him; honest people
afford you their pity and compassion; you deceive them. Is this your kindness
to your friends?

I saw indeed the late scandalous Centuries, but I neglected them as slanders
and calumnies: I heard the late complaints and outcries, but slighted them as I
do envy, malice and hatred. Dreadful things were daily suggested against you;
great things were daily offered for you: the Faction reviled, the Orthodox
maintained you: sober men writ for you; but now you consute them: holy men
excused you; but you contradict them: good and great men spoke for you; but who
will now believe them? Must you needs justify Malice it self? Must you needs
justify what Uncharitableness it self durst not suggest against you? Do you
hear what they say, -- There, there, go your Ministers? If you hear not what
they say, see what you are: You are the salt of the earth; if the salt now
loose its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for
nothing but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. You are the
salt; yet, how unsavory? you are the light of the world, and do you walk as
children of light? are you burning, are you shining lights? Oh your
carelessness, Oh your indifferency in matter of Religion! Oh how negligently you
do the work of the Lord, while you know God is serious in the Word he speaks,
in the Judgments he aflicts, in the Mercies he bestows! when you know Christ
is serious in redeeming souls, the holy Spirit is serious in sanctifying them,
the Devil is serious in undoing them; the whole Creation is serious round about
you. How you Triffle with immortal souls! how you play with the great and
terrible work of the Ministry! how formally you do pray! how nnconcernedly you
do preach! how vain and unprofitably do you discourse! how unevenly do you
walk! What, do you speak for Eternity? do you preach for Immortality? Are you
sent of God? Are you here to save souls? and yet Gallio-like, care for none of
those things? Woe is me, to see you walk in the counsel of the ungodly, stand in
the way of sinners, and sit in the seat of the scornful; whose delight should
be in the Law of the Lord, in whose law you should meditate day and night! What
the same man laugh at Religion and preach it! the same soul Droll upon serious
Holiness in company, and yet urge it in the great Congregation! What, persuade
men to virtue in the Pulpit, and laugh men out of it in the Parlour! Where is
that serious Holiness that crowned, that solemn Gravity that adorned, that
severe Virtue that advanced my sober Ministers, my Reverend Pastors, and holy
men? Where is thy pious Spirit, devout HALL! where is thy gracious Temper,
excellent USHER! where is thy even and settled Frame, serious HAMMOND! where is
thy virtuous deportment, Famous MORTON! where is thy rational, well-weighed,
and stayed soul, O venerable SANDERSON! In England, as in Rama, there is a
voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning; I as Rachel weeping
for my excellent children; but they are not. Woe is me for your Covetousness, O
ye my sons, that you instruct men for another world, yet look not beyond this;
that you who are sent to teach men to live by faith, should yet live by sense;
that you who teach faith the evidence of things not seen, should yet eye only
the things which are seen. O shame! self-denial is the great duty you enjoin,
self-seeking is the great sin you are guilty of. Love not the world, is one of
the most remarkable Axioms of our Religion; Love the world, is the
considerablest rule of your lives. I have coveted no man's silver or gold, says
the Apostle: Oh what say you? I seek not yours, but you, says he: I seek not
you but yours, says you, Neither at any time used I a cloak for covetousness,
God is my witness, says the Apostle: Oh, what you have done, God and men are
witness. Give me the souls (says Abraham) take thou the goods: give us the
goods say you) take you the souls. Is to live to Christ in this sense, thy
gain? is to die to him, thy advantage? Alas! Alas!

Oh your debauched courses, (you vile and sordid souls) An holy Calling, and an
unholy Life! Spiritual persons, and yet live after the flesh! a clean Garment,
and an unclean heart! servants of God, and yet servants of sin! reverend in
your Function, and yet shamefully in your Lives! a Minister, and yet given to
Wine! a Priest, and yet wanton! in holy Orders, and yet in riotous Disorder!
walk circumspectly and yet reel! a man devoted to the Study and the Closet, in
chambering and wantonness! conversation in heaven, and in Alehouses and
Taverns! study Eternity, and yet trifle away time! stand at the Communion of
Saints, yet sit down in the company of scorners! Oh these things ought not to
be.

Thus vile you are, and yet you are proud; thus dishonouring your selves, and
yet ambitious. Learn of me (said Christ) for I am meek and lowly: Look upon
you, you are proud and Lordly. I made you Ministers for the service of souls,
you advance your selves to be Rulers. I taught every soul of you to be subject;
you are impatient of subjection. Humility and meekness was the glory of my
Ministers; haughtiness and pride is your shame. Were you raised by the favor
of God and men lately, to be high now? God remembered, and man pitied you in
your low estate; God will remember, and man will punish you in your high
estate. You humbled your selves, and you were exalted; you exalt your selves,
and you may be made low. Oh the pride that composeth your Sermons, that
contrives your designs, that fills your thoughts, that forms your
countenances, that puts the Accents and Emphasis on your Words, that
orders your Habit, modelleth your Gestures; that makes you aim at your selves
in all you do, and forget God; when you should aim at God and forget your
selves. Shall Ministers that bring men to Heaven, live in pride, that cast
Angels to Hell?

You are proud, poor souls, and ye must be contentious too: Ambassadors of
peace ye are, yet in strife and envy: you profess a Gospel of peace, yet what
emulation? what wrath? Christ left peace among you when he went to Heaven,
shall he find peace when he returns from Heaven? Oh no: though Religion
Obliges you to peace, although divisions have undone us, although Truth be
almost lost, the power of Godliness be decayed good men be grieved, I be
endangered; though enemies be encouraged, and Atheism be promoted by your
unhappy differences; yet still you quarrel, still you dispute. Why do you
strive, seeing ye are brethren? Have you not one God? have you not one Faith?
have you not one Baptism? have you not one Hope? O why do you not keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace? why these jealousies, these fears,
these distances, these bitternesses? I mark them which cause divisions contrary
to the truth and peace; I always owned, and shall avoid them. Bishop Usher
proposed what was moderate, you hearkened not; Bishop Davenant writ peaceably,
you read him not; Bishop Sanderson offered modestly, you regarded him not: many
sober men offered healing Principles agreeable to the Concessions on all hands,
yet they are neglected: God himself united you in your miseries, yet you
disagree in your judgments; he joined you in sufferings, yet you divide your
selves in his service. O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in Askelon, --
that Ministers of the Gospel disagree among themselves, and head and lead their
people to disagreements. What, shall a Ministers live and not love? How do you
Read? How is it written? Is it not, Follow peace with all men as much as in you
lies, if it be possible? Do not you read, do not you Preach thus? Oh why do
you not live thus? Yea, there is utterlie a fault among you, that you fall out
with your Neighbors. Now there is utterlie a fault among you, That you go to
Law one with another, I speak this to your shame, Why do not you rather suffer
wrong? why do not you suffer your selves to be defrauded? How Preach you, how
read you, is it not, that ye resist not evil? and if any man shall sue thee at
the Law, and take away thy coat, give him thy cloak also. Who is a wise man,
and endued with knowledge among you? Let him show out of a good conversation
his works with meekness and wisdom: but if you have bitter envyings and strifes
in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth. This wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish; for where
envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work: but the wisdom
which is from above, is first pure, and then peaceable, gentl, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good works, without partiality, without
hypocrisy: and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
peace.

Well, if you go on professing Religion indifferently, doing the work of God
negligentlie; if you carry on only a form of godliness hypocriticallie; if you
live without the grace of God within you prophanelie; if you live without the
fear of God before you looselie; if you live without the love of God
uncharitablie; if you live against your profession shamefully: farewell the most
flourishing Church, farewell Ordinances, farewell Ministry, farewell Comforts,
farewell Blessings, farewell our Glory, farewell our God; and woe unto us when he
is departed from us.

Oh my Sons, hearken to this one Wish; and Oh that it be not my last! -- For
Gods sake, for our own sake, for my sake, for three Kingdoms sake, for our
gracious Kings sake, for the sake of late Posterity.

TAKE HEED TO YOUR SELVES.

1. That you want not that grace you offer others; that when you save others,
you perish not as Cast-aways your selves. Oh feel the power of that Religion
you preach, and preach the power you feel: Be what you persuade others to be.

2. Take heed to your selves, and consider what manner of men ye ought to be in
all holy conversation and godliness.

3. Take heed to your selves, that you pull not down with a wicked life, what
you build up with an holy Doctrine. If there be no such thing as Religion,
preach it not; if there be, live it; if a loose life may be allowed, do not
preach against it* and if it may not be allowed, do not live it; be not
deceived and deceive not others. Do you know the Judgemenr of God, that all
that commit such things as you do, are worthy of death? then why do you do
them? if not, why do you preach the other? Oh preach exactly, and live exactly:
as you think all the week how to speak upon Sunday, so resolve upon Sunday how
to live all the week. How curiously you preach! O how carelessly you live!

4. Take heed to your selves, and walk wisely toward them that are without;
that whereas they speak evil of you, they may be ashamed, considering the
nature and end of your conversation.

Oh take heed to your selves: You have many eyes upon your infirmities; you
have many spectators of your falls, to find to aggravate, and to publish them:
God forbid that you should do evil in the eyes of the whole world; the good
part whereof watches on your Virtues, to imitate you: the evil part watches
on your Vices, to traduce you; you are as lights upon a hill, O walk as in the
light.

Take heed to your selves* if not for others, yet for your own immortal souls.
Oh preach not of Heaven, and fall short of it: Oh preach not of Hell, and fall
into it; of grace and duty, and yet live without them.

Oh take heed to your selves. Vigilant is your Tempter, great are your trials,
many are your temptations much the opposition you will meet: for weighty is
your work: you destroy the power of Satan: you engage the power of hell: Oh
take heed to your selves.

Oh take heed to your selves. You have the same nature with others, but you
commit not the like sins with others* the sins that dwell in you are th same
with other men's, the sins that are committed by you are greater then other
men's* Oh watch then over your evil nature, take care of your great
transgressions: 1. Against knowledge, willfullie: 2. Against your truth
unfaithfully: 3. Against your profession, hypocritically: 4. Against others
very offensivelie; against the honor of God and his ways, very dangerously;
who is blasphemed by the ignorant and ungodly through you.

Take heed to your selves, that you may be blessed in your undertaking. Let
your ways please God, as you hope God will bless your ways. -- If not for
your own, yet for other men's souls sake take heed to your selves: speak from
your hearts to their hearts: be not entangled by sin, that you may be able to
speak against sin. Oh do as you preach, that the world may see you mean as you
preach.

Oh reverend Fathers, enjoin my wholesome Canons severelie, visit men's lives
and carriges exactly, oversee the flocks over which the holy Ghost have made
you overseers, carefully: Pity Religion that is a dying; pity me that am
decaying, pity your selves that are again falling. Reform my Clergy and you
are safe; neglect them, and you perish: keep up the ^^^e and practice of
Religion, and that will keep you, if the power of Religion be lost, the
profession of it will; your Calling will fail, your Order will fail; and God
knows what will be the end thereof: I fear nothing but sin, I want nothing but
true grace eminent in all my Ministers, whereby they may please God, adorn the
Gospel, convince Gainsayers, and reform the world.

Have you not enjoined, That no Ecclesiastical persons shall Can. 75.
at any time, other then for their honest necessities, resort to any Taverns or
Alehouses, neither shall they Board or Lodge in any such place? Furthermore,
they shall not give themselves to any base or servile labor, or to Drinking or
Riotting, spending their time idly by day or night, playing at Dice, Cards or
Tables, or any other unlawful Game; but at all times convenient they shall hear
or read somewhat of the holy Scriptures, or shall occupy themselves with some
other honest Study or exercise, always doing the things which shall appertain
to honesty, and endeavoring to profit the Church of God; having always in
mind that they ought to excel all others in purity of life, and should be
examples of the people to live well, and Christianly, under pain of
Ecclesiastical censures to be inflicted with severity, according to the
qualities of their offenses.

CHAP. IV. The Church of England's Complaint against Unconscionable Simony.
IN your other courses, O ye my Sons, fear of Authority may deter you,
Conscience may check you, strict Laws may restrain you, a severe oversight may
reform you: in this strange, in this sad miscarriage of Symony, I have made
Laws, yet you transgress them: I have enacted, 31 of Q. E. 6. That if any
persons, bodies Politic or Corporate, shall or do at any time for any sum of
money, reward, gift, profit or benefit, directly or indirectlie, or for or by
reason of any Promise, Grant, Bond, Covenant, or other assurance of or for any
sum of money, reward, gift, profit, or benefit whatsoever, directly, or
indirectlie, present or collate any person to any Benefice with cure of souls,
Dignity, Prebend, or Living Ecclesiastical; or give or bestow the same for or
in respect of any such corrupt cause or consideration; that then every such
Presentation, Collation, Gift, etc. should be utterly void, and of none effect
in Law; and that any person accepting of any Ecclesiastical promotion upon such
sordid accounts, shall be judged a disabled person in Law to have or enjoy any
Benefice, Dignity, Prebend, or Living Ecclesiastical. -- Yet still you truck
for Livings, you market for Benefices; still you buy and sell in the Temple:
this abomination is still forbidden, and yet still allowed: my Cannons tie from
it by an Oath, yet you venture. You swear thus:

I, N. N. do swear that I have made no Simonical payment, contract or promise,
directly or indirectly, by my self, or by any other to my knowledge, or with my
consent* to any person Can. 40.
or persons whatsoever, for or concerning the procuring and obtaining of this
Ecclesiastical Dignity, place, preferment, Office or Living, nor will at any
time hereafter perform or satisfy any such kind of payment, contract or
promise made by any other without my knowledge or consent. So help me God
through Jesus Christ.

Yet you do it. Oh you men of God, can you forswear this abominable sin, and
yet commit it? Will you publicly disown it before God and the Church, and yet
own it between your selves and your Patrons? Shall not God search out this?
These things you do and God keeps silence: you think he is altogether such a
one as your selves. Ah, he, will reprove you; he will set your sins in order
before you. Oh consider this, ye that in this forget God! Oh be sure your sins
shall find you out. Shall a man take the name of God in vain, and be guiltless?
Shall a man break his solemn Oath, and be delivered? Shall he escape that does
such things? Shall he prosper? How will you look that God in the face in
Prayer, whom you have blasphemed in your Oath? How can you behold that
Congregation that knows you are forsworn? What Preach the Word of God, and
regard not the Oath of God! What, gain a Parsonage, and loose thy soul! to
attain to a Preferment, shall you hazard more then the whole world?

1. Have you never read that in Acts 8. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. And when Simon
saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands the holy Ghost was given, he
offered them MONEY, saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay
hands, he may receive the holy Ghost. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish
with thee, because that thou have thought that the gift of God may he purchased
with money. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not
right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this wickedness; and pray God,
if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. For I perceive that
thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. You will say,

Object. You buy not any gift of grace, as Simon would have done; but some
encouragement to exercise your gifts and your graces.

Sol. Alas! is it not the gift of God you buy? are Tithes of God, or are they
not? if they are not why do you challenge them? If they are of God, why do ye
buy them of men? Shall a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me, even this whole
Nation. They say wherein have we robbed God: in Tyths and Offerings. The
Lay-patron takes from God, and you take from him: he steals from God, you
receive from him. Is it his? why do you say Tithe belong only to Ministers? Is
it the Ministers? why do you pay him for it? why do you justify his
encroachment, betray Gods right, wrong me and undo your selves? Who goes to
warfare at his own charge? You do it. Do ye not know that they who minister
about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and that so the Lord has
ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel?

Object. I deal not with the Patron himself, you will say.

Sol. Oh be not deceived? God is not mocked: what you do by others, you do your
selves: Simon himself went not to God, whose the holy Ghost was, but to Peter,
one of the Stewards of the manifold gifts of God.

Object. I am civil to the Steward.

Answ. How read you. 2 King 5. 20. etc. Gehazi the servant of Elisha the man of
God, said, Behold, my Master has spared Naaman the Syrian, in not receiving at
his hands that which he brought; but as the Lord lives I will run after him,
and take somewhat of him. So Gehazi followed after him: and when Naaman saw him
running after him, he lighted down from the Chariot to meet him, and said, Is
all well? and he said, all is well: my master has sent me, saying, Behold,
even now there be come to me from mount Ephraim two young men of the Sons of
the Prophets: give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver, and two changes of
garments. And Naaman said, Be content take two talents; and he urged him, and
bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of Garments, and laid
them upon two of his servants, and they bare them before him. And when he came
to the tower, he took them from their hand, and bestowed them in the house; and
he let the men go and they departed. But he went in, and stood before his
Master: and Elisha said unto him, Whence come thou, Gehazi? And he said, Thy
servant went no whither. And he said unto him, Went not my heart with thee,
when the man turned again from his chariot to meet thee? is it a time to
receive money, and to receive garments, and Olive-yards, and vineyards, and
Sheep, and Oxen, and menservants, and maidservants? the Leprosy therefore of
Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for ever. And he went out from
his presence a leper as white as snow.

Object. Yes, let Gehazi look to that.

Sol. Is it a sin in him to receive a gift, and is it not a sin in you to give
it?

Object. I only laid a wager, bought a horse married my Patrons daughter, or
gave bond to refigne.

Sol. Fie, fie! Are you called to be Ministers? Do your duty, you may look for
your due, and make no terms with men for what God freely gives you. Will you
add a cheat to your Sacrilege? rob God, and put a trick upon the Law? is this,
is this to obey for conscience sake?

Object. I only bought an Advowson.

Sol. If you cannot buy a living when it is void, how can you buy it over
another man's head when it is not? What do you aim at in the Advowson? Do you
aim at the good of souls? those souls are provided for already. Do you aim at
the benefit of the place? O unworthy man! What, embrace the present world! is
the Tithe a Ministers? what need you buy it aforehand? Is it the peoples? why
do you take it at all?

2. And is the Church grown so contemptible, that it may be bought and sold for
money? Is Preferment rather a prize for the Richest, then a reward for the
Worthiest? who will spend their days in serious study, and their life in
wearisome retirement, and their estates in a chargeable education, and at last
must either buy their preferment, or live neglected, and die unobserved? what
ingenious man can endure tedious allowance, unsupportable fees, intolerable
baffles, and not retire to his Closet, and there give himself to dispondency
and despair, cursing the day wherein he was born, and the years wherein he was
bred up; saying, as Elijah secretly to his soul, Lord, it is enough, take away
my life, since I have outlived the glory of the Church, the honor of my
Calling, the encouragements of Parts and Worth? -- I cannot live usefully; O
that I might die comfortably!

3. Have I no true Ministers, but a Generation of Demasses, that embrace the
present world? Have I no Ministers called of God, that will live upon God? none
that can trust God with their maintenance? Will you all crouch for the Priests
office only, that you may eat a Morsel of bread? will you all degrade your
selves, and buy and sell your sacred persons and employments? Justly would the
Catholic Church have degraded you, Can. ap. 10. Conc. Chalc. 2. Conc. Aurias.
14. And will you go on making merchandise of the Word? and will you go on in
the Ministry, out of filthy lucre, and not out of a ready mind?

Thus, thus are my worthy Sons laid aside, the unworthy are promoted: my people
perish, my Religion decaies, my enemies break in upon me, and I have only here
and there one to stand by me. The weak, the scandalous that came in by Simonie,
betray me. Oh sacred Majesty, O ye the honorable Nobility, O ye worthy
Gentlemen, let it be your honor that you can dispose of Livings to the glory
of God, the honor of the Church, and your own comfort: let it be your shame
that you make any advantage of your Livings to the dishonor of God, the danger
of the Church, and the ruin of souls. O ye ingenious Ministers, content your
selves rather that you deserve Preferment, then endeavor to enjoy them in this
vile, unworthy and dangerous way: never stoop to these low terms: be rather
buried in an honest privacie, then appear with a public infamy. Non si nunc
and olim sic erit. Oh sacred and august Authority of King and Parliament, own
your former Laws; vindicate your Authority; meet* meet this threatening
mischief; set a watch upon Patrons and their Stewards; frown upon the reaching
Clergy; find out the Panders of Symonie that lie about town, and set up as it
were an Office for abomination. Take heed. O ye Patrons, how you lay the Child's
portion in a Parsonage, and devour that which is holy, and after make an
inquiry; forcing the hopeful Youth to begin with Perjury, and commence with
Sacrilege. Oh! words fail me: I must leave with you the excellent Jewel's
words to Queen Elizabeth, 1561.

The Livings of such as are in the Ministry, are not in their hands to whom
they are due: they seldom pass now adays from the Patron if he be no better
then a Gentleman, but either for the Lease or present money. Such Merchants are
broken into the Church of God, a great deal more intolerable then were they
whom Christ whipped out of the Temple. Thus they who should be careful for Gods
Church, that should be Patrons to provide for the consciences of the people,
and to place among them a learned Minister, who might be able to preach the
Word to them in season and out of season, and to fulfill his Ministry, seek
their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's; they serve not Jesus Christ,
but their belly: and this is done not in one County, in one place, but
throughout all England. Oh merciful God, whither will this grow at the last?
If the misery which this Plague works would reach but to one Age, it were
intolerable; it will be a Plague to Posterity; it will be the decay and
desolation of Gods Church. Young men see this, and they are weary and
discouraged, they divert their studies another way. I know your Grace hears
not of these matters, and I hope God will work in your gracious heart some
remedies against them: for otherwise the Schools will be forsaken, the Church
desolate, the People wild and dismayed, the Gospel discredited; and this noble
Realm, which ever was famous for the name of Learning, likely to come to such
ignorance and barbary as has not been heard of many memory before our time.
Poor souls are destitute without a Guide, the afflicted in conscience have none
to quiet them; they grow wild and savage as a people that has no God; they are
commanded to change their Religion, and for lack of instruction they know not
whither to turn them* Oh if the Kingdom of God be not worthy to be promoted,
yet the Kingdom of Satan is worthy to be overthrown.

Oh our Posterity shall rue, that ever such Fathers went before them; and
Chronicles will report this miscarriage: they shall leave it written in whose
time and in whose reign this was done. Or if we grow so barbarous that we
consider not this, or be not able to draw it into Chronicle; yet foreign
Nations will not spare to write this, and publish it to our everlasting
reproach and shame. By these means foreign power which by Gods mercy this
Realm is delivered from, shall be brought upon us: the truth of God shall be
taken away; the holy Scripture burnt and consumed in fire; a mavelous
darkness and calamity must needs ensue.

Oh that your Grace might behold the miserable disorder of Gods Church! or that
you might see the calamities that will ensue! It is a part of your Kingdom, and
such a part as is a prop and stay to the rest. I will say to your Majesty as
Cyrillus sometimes said to the godly Emperors, Theodorus and Valentinian: Ab
ea quae erg^ Deum est pietate reip, vestrae status pendet. You are our
Governor, you are the Nurse of Gods Church: We must open this grief before
you, and God knows whether it may be redressed, it is let grown so long, it
is gone so far: but if it may be redressed, there is no other but your Highness
that can redress it.

The Definition of Simonie.
SYmonie is an intentive desire or purpose to buy or sell a spiritual Living,
or any Corporal thing annexed to the Church. -- Great. did. 1. p. 2. 91. Zanch.
de. inter. cultu. Council. compl. Sect. 43. dec. cont. Nic. can. 8. 96.

CHAP. V. The Church of Englands Complaint against Encroaching Pluralities.
IS your portion* oh my Sons in this life, or is it in another* Is the
satisfaction your immortal souls look for in the empty, vain, low and
perishing contents of this world, or in the full, high and everlasting
enjoyments of the other world? If in this life you have hope only, you are of
all men the most miserable, the most contemptible, and most deceitful: if in
another, why so many Imperial Laws, so many Ecclesiastical Canons, so many
Decrees of Councils, so man's severe Reproofs from Fathers and Casuists, so many
Complaints and Reproaches, so many Laws and Injunctions, so many Attempts and
Endeavors in Parliament these sixty years against your Monopoly of Livings
and Pluralities of Benefices? Why do you heap upon your selves this envy? why
do you provoke these Reproaches? I provided for you liberally; I checked those
that opposed your maintenance, seasonablie, I encouraged your Industry and
Merit carefully, beyond any reformed Church in the world; I restored you to
your Rights handsomely, I secured your Rights legallie: will not this satisfy
you? will not this content you?

1. It Is but lately that you were thought incapable of one Living; and now
three, four, five, cannot suffice you. It Is not long since you wanted
necessaries, and do you now heap up superfluities? Lately you could not provide
for your Families Wants, and do you now provide for their Excess and Pride?
have you forgot how lately you grasped all, and you lost all? Alas! Alas!

2. And will you eat bread out of your Brethrens mouths, and will you starve
your fellow servants? Are you Ministers? so are they. Are you Orthodox? so are
they. Are you Loyal? so are they. Have you been constant? so have they. Are you
serviceable to the Church? they more; in labors more abundant. Oh how many
excellent men who outlived the late miseries, Articles, Committees,
Sequestrations, Protestations, Covenants, Engagements, lingering out their
lives, laden, and almost oppressed, worn out, and quite tired with the burden
of years, cares, fears, labors, necessities and afflictions, are now fain to
die in obscurity, want and contempt, as if the Sons of the Church of England
wanted only this to make up the measure of their sufferings, That they should
be undone when the Church is restored! How many hundreds, sober and able men
are laid aside, and contemned by some as Orthodox, and despised by others as
poor? whom the people would relieve, but that they are faithful to me: whom I
would relieve, but that I am swallowed up by you. When you look big with your
abundance and superfluity, and glory in your preferments, how many hundred able
and sober men are ashamed of their Order and Function, are wrapped up in
poverty and discontent, and lost in poor employments? whose faithful labors I
want, whose sober conversations might honor me, whose diligence and care might
restore me, whose reason and learning might uphold me, whose powerful preaching
might establish me, whose self-denial and devotedness to public good might
save me. Alas, Sirs, let none of you think of himself more highly then he ought
to think, but to think soberly according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of faith, for as you have many members in one body, and all members
have not the same Office; so I being made of many, am one body in Christ, and
every one in me is a member one of another. You, my Sons, having then gifts
differing according to the grace that is given you, whether Prophecy, etc. why
shall not they that prophecy be encouraged according to the proportion of
Faith? or Ministry, why should not all be encouraged that wait on the
Ministry? or they that teach, on teaching? or they that exhort, on
exhortation? The body is not one member, but many: now has God set the members
in the body as it pleases him; and if they were all one member, where were
the body? the eye cannot say to the head, I have no need of thee: nor again
the head to the feet, I have no need of you. Nay, much more those members of
the body which seem to be more feeble, are necessary; and those less
honorable, upon these we ought to bestow more abundant honor. And our
uncomely parts have a more abundant comeliness: for our comely parts have no
need, but God has tempered the body together, having given more abundant
honor to that part which lacked, that there should be no schism in the body,
but that the members should have the same care one for another. Now ye, my
Sons, are the body of Christ, and members in particular: and God has set some
in the Church; first, Apostles; secondarily, Prophets: thirdly, Teachers: Are
all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? are all provided for? Oh
covet earnestly the best Gifts, not the best Livings! And yet I could show you
a more excellent way.

Why is that Preferment engrossed by one, which might maintain Twenty? Why are
those Revenues lost upon the folly, vanity and superfluity of one family,
which might provide for the honest occasions of five? Oh Justice, the equal
Distributer of Affairs, whither art thou fled! Oh Equity, whither art thou
retired!

3. If you consider not the sin, do you consider the consequences of these
miscarriages: the envy that you already sink under, the occasion given unto
them that seek occasion, which has already disgraced you; the great discontent
that already endangereth you. Have not you enemies to your Order, Calling and
Judgment, and must you incense your friends? Must you provoke that God that
has hitherto upheld your Order and Function, by abusing the maintenance he
allows for his service and servants to your own advantage? Must you displease
his sacred Majesty, by appropriating to a few ill beloved persons, for whose
sake his Majesty is thought the worse of, that encouragement which might be
equally bestowed upon well-deserving and well-beloved, who might in each Parish
teach his subjects their duty faithfully, persuade them to obedience
successfully and settle them in the Doctrine of Government according to the
great Principles of Christianity, most happily? Must you provoke your Brethren
of the Clergy to discontent, by taking up all the encouragements of their
Studies, all their employments and hopes? How many hopeful young men in City
and Country are forced either to want, or, which is worse, to live upon your
small Pensions, and scant allowance; and, what is natural for parts, and
ingenuity, in want to despair their fortunes, and envy yours? How readily do
they now, hopeless of any regular favor, apply themselves to popular applause,
that their compliance may gain that among the people, which their merit could
not among you? Do not you see how the people forsake you, as Self-Seekers? how
the Gentry censure you, as Unconscionable? how the Clergy abhor you as invaders
of their places and preferments? Do you not see that the Law can hardly secure
you? that authority can scarcely defend you from all the affronts and baffles
that Malice do suggest to an incensed people? the adversaries triumph, the many
friends I have weep, the Sober and Serious are amazed, to see fourscore or an
hundred odious men filling up a whole Church. Do you imagine those many active
men will rest in a dispirited, poor, mendicant, decayed, dejected and vexatious
condition? Do not you fear their melancholy thought, their retired contrivance,
their forlorn meetings? You know there are none so dangerous as the
Discontented Scholars. Monopoly is the Ruin of the State; Pluralities are the
ruin of the Church; the one necessitates the indigent Subject to dangerous
courses and practices; the other, the poor Scholar to as dangerous discourses
and thoughts.

Is it not enough that men's late malice and insolency against the Ministry,
reduced them to want and contempt, but that (to my shame, who am blessed of God
with abundance and honor) one small part of the Ministry should reduce the
other to small Contributions, poor Dependencies; so uncertain and so base, that
men of ingenious spirits and learning must detest them, who cannot endure when
they do their work to beg for their wages, not without forbid compliances and
flatteries with vile men in their vilest humors? Oh look upon the poor
Curates, and their Families; what is their portion of the prosperity we now
enjoy? Alas, they live by Gods mercy, and men's charity. How despicable is their
Calling? How little their Authority? how inconsiderable their Instructions? How
successless their Doctrine? how uncreditable their Lives? Do not you see that
your fellow-Ministers under these necessities will not long be able to assert
the honor of their Calling; and that no after-Generation will succeed to
inherit their poverty and pains, unless such as will further debase the Dignity
of the Function? What, must all the ingenious Ministers be Stipendaries! The
Faction threatened no more. Must they have only their allowances? Anarchie could
have done no more. Are you restored to reduce your fellow servants to that
penury by Law, which Fanatics would have brought them to without Law? they
wanted only this misery, to be undone by their Brethren, and perish by them of
their own profession.

Obsect. These poor men, you will say, are provided for answerable to their
Parts.

Answ. Have they Parts for the Calling of Ministers, and have they not Parts
for the Maintenance of Ministers? Can they preach the Gospel, and can they not
live by the Gospel? Are they worthy to discharge your Cures, and are they not
worthy to enjoy them?

5. Do you desire the advantage of so many Benefices, or do you desire the
charge? if the advantage, then the poor Separatist was in the right, when he
called you Hirelings; then indeed you make merchandise of Souls; then you are
the greatest Juglers and Deceivers in the world; and you laugh among your
selves, (as the Tuscan Soothsayers) and confer Notes, as that Pope with his
Cardinal, saying* How much gain does this fable of Christ bring us? -- and poor
souls should avoid you as the shadow of death. What, shall I hear him whose
godliness is gain! whose God is his belly! whose faith is his advantage! whose
hope is only in this world! His watchmen are blind, they are ignorant, they are
all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber: yea,
they are greedy dogs which can Never have enough, and they are shepherds that
cannot understand: they all look for their own way, every one for his gain from
his quarter. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves
with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundantly, Fsai. 56. 9, 10, 11, 12.

If the Charge, do you know what you do? do you know that you must watch over
the Congregation as they that must give an account? so many Benefices, so many
more hundreds of souls that you must answer for? Do you know what it is to
answer the great God for an immortal soul? do you know what it is to give an
account of the purchase of Christ's blood? do you know what is the work, what is
the charge of a Minister? Oh poor souls! you consider not whether some have not
accused you to God, whom you never saw; whether souls under your charge are not
daily going to another world, with doleful complaints against you, whom you
never knew; whether any in Hell do not cry out against you, whom you never saw:
thousands have appeared before the Judgment Seat of God, excusing themselves
with your faults, though you lay it not to heart; alleging, that they saw no
more Religion in the world then Interest and Gain, they knew not what to do to
be saved. Alas, you are not sensible that there may be hundreds in Hell that
you looked not after, cursing the day that ever you were born, that ever you
were sent into the World, that there should be so many Wretches that lived only
to damn men. If it be a Charge you desire, why do you not attend unto that
flock over which the holy Ghost made you overseers? Why do you not in that
calling wherein you are called abide with God? Is it possible for you to serve
two Cures? you will hold to the one, and despise or neglect the other: and is
it possible for you to be saved? Lord, what if you gained the World at the rate
of undoing souls? Do you consider that the bread you eat is the price of souls?
How can you eat with comfort, and think Oh some of my charge may be now going
to Eternity, and I prepared them not? How can you sleep securely, and think,
Some of my charge may awake to morrow in another World, whether of Woe or Well I
know not? How can you die peaceably and think, Where shall we meet the many
souls that have gone before us out of our Congregations? Oh where are ye, O
immortal souls! with God, or for ever departed from the presence of the Lord!
Oh did you ever read that of St. Bernard, Qui non unus sed plures in
beneficiis, non unus sed plures in suppli^iis? If you pity not me once again by
these courses decaying, if you pity not poor souls by this means perishing, Oh
pity your selves* and have mercy upon your own fouls: Alas, that men should be
educated chargeably, should study diligently, should be ordained solemnly to
delude souls, to mock God* to deceive the world, and undo men, for two, or
three, or four hundred pounds yearly, during a short life! that you should
appear in a Pulpit (if yet you do appear in a Pulpit) for a little Maintenance!
that you should appear very solemnly every Sunday, only to put a trick upon God
and men! I hope better things of you, and things that accompany salvation,
though thus I speak. In the Primitive times every Church of so many souls as
are of your Parishes, had many Ministers, whereof the ablest speakers did most
in public, and the rest did the more of the less public work, (which some
mistake for ruling Elders) but now one of you takes the care of many Churches.
The Popish times, I mean years 632. could divide England into Parishes, for the
better discharging of the cure of souls: our times unite those Parishes again,
for the better maintenance of pride and vanity. Is it for this that we are
reformed? is it for this we are Protestants? then each Parish had their
Ministers to pray with them ferventlie, to teach them faithfully to comfort
them seasonablie, to converse with them usefully. Ah! in quae nos reservamur
tempora! Now, now my people are neglected, my buildings are ruined, my
hospitality is lost, my authority is shrunk and fallen, and the Church of England
is thought to be nothing else but the interest of a few crafty Clergymen,
ordering all things to their best advantage.

Though Envy may know, and Prejudice it self may consider, I am a Church made
up of godly and religious men: Princes, Nobles, Gentry, Bishops, Ministers and
people maintaing an Orthodox Doctrine, a Primitive Government, a pure and
orderly Worship, a severe Discipline, and a Christian Communion in Word and
Sacrament; who have forbid these extravagancies by wholesome Laws, checked them
by severe Canons, and disallowed them by fair and just means imaginable. In the
darkest and most superstitious times, I ordered, That no Monks, i. e. idle
persons, should take Livings of Bishops, or appropriate the Revenues of them to
themselves; but that the Priests serving those Cures, and the Churches, might
be provided with necessaries.

Do you know why Monks were pulled down in H. 8. time? Lay it to heart, I
beseech you, for many look for your fall too.

1. They were accused for engrossing Wealth and trade; and do you hear what the
world says of you? 2. They were accused for impoverishing Parish Priests, and
decrying Preaching, as ministering Matter of Schism and Disputes, and magnifying
their own performances of Prayer and Devotion: by which and other Artifices,
they undermined the poor Priests, and procured that many Churches presentative,
with their Glebes and Tyths, were appropriated to their Covents, leaving but a
poor pittance for the Parish-Vicar. This was the occasion of the first
Impropriations, I pray God your carelessness does not occasion another.

Oh remember Robert Whitgifts, the Abbot of Wellow's speech, who was wont to
say, That they and their Religion could not long continue, because (said he) I
have read the whole Scripture over and over, and never found that Monasteries
(and I may add pluralities) were founded by God: for (said the honest Abbot)
every planting which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up.

Do you remember that Lay-parliament in King H. 8. his time? wherein the Nobles
and Commons assembled signified to the King, that the Temporal profession of
Abbots, Priors, etc. vainly spent, would suffice to find 150 Earls, 1500
Knights* 6200 Esquires, 100 Hospitals? do you remember those Mock-Parliaments
that often considered how many 1000 men your Tithes (ill bestowed upon you, as
they thought) would maintain? You were once undone, -- now are you made whole:
I beseech you, my sons, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto you.

Bishop Jewel on 1 These. p. 71.
Forasmuch brethren as we were kept from you for a season concerning sight, but
not in heart, we are enforced the more to see your face with great desire.
Therefore we would have come unto you, I Paul, at least once or twice, but
Satan hindered us. Such a zeal and care had he over the people of God. Oh in
what case then are they that are careless, and have no regard of the people of
God! which hunt after Livings, and bend not themselves to do good! which serve
their own belly, and seek to be rich, and eat up the people of God as if they
were bread! they cannot say they have a desire to see the face of their flock,
and that their heart is with them: howsoever they find time for other matters;
they can never take time to know their sheep, and they do the work of the
Ministry among them: they care not for them, they think not of them; they plant
not, they water not, they watch not, they give no warning of the dangers at
hand: they teach them not to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. It were happy if all
such were removed out of the Church of God: they destroy the souls and lead
them to destruction by their negligence. What account shall they give unto God
for the souls of their Brethren? Where shall they stand? or what will they say
when he shall bid them make a strait account? this is the practice of Satan, he
uses all means to snare us, and withdraw us from that blessed hope: sometimes
he lets the increase of the Gospel, by raising up tumults; and disquieting
the Church of God, and stirring the heart of such as are in Authority to
persecute by all means the teachers of the Gospel of Christ. Again, when God
gives peace and quietness to his Church, he leads the Overseers of the people
to a forgetfulness of their duty, to seek the pleasures and delight of this
life, and to have no regard of the work of the Lord: such* occasion the Devil
seeks to hinder our salvation, and to withstand the truth and glory of God.

CHAP. VI. The Church of England's resentment of Non-residence.
OH* my Sons, I have no pleasure in exposing you; yet have I no power to excuse
you: you know that I have charity for you, that suffers long, that is kind,
that is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, bears all things, believes
all things, hops all things, endures all things. Alas! what shall I do now
my people complain, my adversaries reproach, my Sovereign is displeased, my
Nobility and Gentry are incensed; and wherever I turn my self, Complaints are
made, Petitions are drawn up Jealousies are whispered, and Fears are murmured!
If I should hold my peace, I should be thought altogether such a one as you
are: if I should speak, my tongue fails me. I am in a great strait; yet you had
better hear your miscarriages faithfully reproved by me, to your reformation,
then maliciously aggravated by others to your destruction. My words may be
smart, yet they are wholesome; severe they may be, yet kind; you hear me with
sorrow, but not with more then I speak to you with.

1. It Is sad that after so many Councils, Decrees, (as Carth. 6. Tol. 6. Chalc.
7. Nic. 15. Sardic. 14. after so many Fathers charge, as Hier. com. 2. p. 111.
Aug. 7. 4. in B. 16. Athan. in Jo. 7. Naz. apol. p. 16. Cy. Ep. 8. Greg. de
cura pastorali passim) after so many provisions of Parliaments, as 30 H. 8. 4.
32. El. 6. so many complaints from friends and foes, as 31 Q. El. 3 K. J. 12.
K. Chapter a sin so dishonorable to your profession, so dangerous to Church and
State, so clearly repugnant to your Callings as Nonresidence is, should yet be
named amongst you.

As, 1. Do you read that in Act. 20. 25. Take heed to your selves, and to all
the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church
of God which he has purchased with his own blood? etc. Take heed, be not
absent, neglect not. Do you consider where you are, what you have taken upon
you? Over which the holy Ghost: has the holy Ghost set you over your flocks,
and do you forsake them? has Heaven entrusted them to you, and do you neglect
them? Overseers and yet come not near your flock? Bishops, and never visit
them? To feed the Church of God, that Church for whose sake the world is
upheld. Oh what a charge have you undertaken! and will you be unfaithful to
this charge? are you Stewards of Gods own Family? Oh it is required of a Steward
that he be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2. Have you the conduct of those Saints
that must live for ever with God in glory, and will you neglect them? Are the
souls of men thought meet to see his face in Glory, and are they not worthy of
your utmost care and pains? Oh if you keep beasts you might say they are scarce
worth looking after; but do you think so of the souls of men, of the Church of
God, the peculiar people, the holy Nation? Which he has purchased with his
blood; God the Son has purchased the Church with his blood, and will not you
look to it? What, Sirs, will ye despise the blood of Christ? Shall the price of
his blood be lost? Has Christ died for souls, and shall I not sweat? Are my
people they which Christ came from Heaven to save, and shall not I go from the
City, from the Court, etc. to save them? Oh what do I hear, may you say, when
it may be one of my poor flock perishes, for whom Christ died?

After my departing (says the Text) grievous Wolves shall enter in among you,
not sparing the flock. Oh, Sirs, do you not know that the Jesuit is busy,
that the Seducers are many * Why do you forsake the flocks? are you resolved to
ruin me? First, you displease the people, then you leave them open to any
seditious or factious persons that will improve their prejudice, discontents
and weakness, to their own advantage. It Is true, you substitute your Curates*
but alas, poor men, they are hardly able to live, much less to dispute: they
are hardly able to furnish themselves for Sermons, much less for Controversies:
besides that, they are so contemptible, that I may here very pertinently
allege that of Eccles. 9. 13.

Oh that you should betray his Majesty's interest and my cause, and leave his
subjects and my people to the temptations of those men who with good words and
fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, with feigned words making
merchandise of them! Can you stay in Court or City, and leave poor Neighbors
perverted, honest men deluded, good subjects debauched, and a Kingdom almost
overturned? As Augustus said to Quint. Varus, Quintili Vare read Legiones; so
his Majesty, so I (if yet you will hear me) say unto you: Oh restore us the
many souls which by your neglect we have lost! Oh restore that peace which by
your carelessness we want! Oh restore us that purity of Doctrine and Worship,
which by public and private diligence you might have secured? while you are
asleep, the enemy sows his tares; while you sleep, your ruin slumbers not:
while you ride to and fro seeking that preferment your ambition may pitch upon,
your adversary the Devil and his Emissaries goes to and fro seeking whom he may
devour. You compass Sea and Land for Wealth, your adversaries compass Sea and
Land for Proselites.

And did not the late times slander you? and are you Hirelings indeed? He that
is an Hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees the
wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and flees, and the wolf catches them, and
scatters the sheep. The Hireling flees because he is an Hireling, and cares
not for the sheep, Joh. 10. Oh of your own selves do men arise speaking
perverse things to draw away Disciples after them. Therefore watch; and
remember, that in the Primitive times for the space of many years the Ministers
ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears: and they could say to
their Congregations, We take you to record that we are pure from the blood of
all men, for we have not shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel of God.
We have coveted no man's silver or Gold, nor apparel, Acts 20.

2. Are not you them that watch for men's souls? and do you not look after them?
Are you to watch over them so as to give an account? and do you leave them? are
you the Angels of the Church, sent forth to minister to them who shall be heirs
of salvation, and to behold the face of their father which is in Heaven? and do
you not regard them? Angels and earthly? Angels, and yet worldly? Are you the
Soldiers of Christ, and do you entangle your selves in the affairs of this
life? Are you ordained to preach the Gospel? a necessity is laid upon you, and
woe is you if you preach not the Gospel. Are you Stewards of the manifold gifts
of God, and do you not remember that you must give an account of your
Stewardship, for you shall be no longer Stewards? Are you in Christ's stead, and
yet so careless of his people? Ah if Christ had served you so, what had become
of you? what had become of the world?

3. Do you love the Lord Jesus Christ, and yet not feed his flock? Simon Peter,
love thou me? feed my lambs. Simon Peter love thou me? Thou know, O
Lord, that I love thee: feed my sheep. Have you any kindness for your peoples
souls? Do you not hear them cry, Come and help us? Are they your joy, your
Crown, your rejoicing? Oh have mercy upon them! Do you not hear them say,
Master, carest thou not that we perish? We have immortal souls to loose, and
Eternity to hazard; carest thou not that we perish? Do you wonder that your
people desert you, when you have forsaken them? Can you blame them that they
separate from you, who have no care of them? They must needs forget their duty
toward you, when you have forgotten yours toward them. No wonder if they
cleave to their Pastors and Teachers: for they find none like minded, who
naturally care for their state.

O Sirs, the harvest of souls at this time is great: Bishop Jewl*
the Prebends are many, the Priests are many, the Deans are many -- the
Laborers are few: Shall I pray the Lord of the harvest to turn you out, and
send forth Laborers into his harvest? the souls that would be saved are many;
but they die in ignorance, and you are not among them to instruct them? they
die in doubt, and you not near them to satisfy them; they die in despair, and
there is none to comfort them; they live in disorder, and there is none to
guide them; they are in state of nature, and there is none to reclaim them*
they are weak and there is none to strengthen them; they are liable to
temptation, and there is none to assist them to manage their Temptation; they
go astray, and there is none to seek them that are lost; they are in the gall
of bitterness, and there is none to relieve them; they are under the power of
Satan, in darkness, and there is none to turn them to God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among them that are sanctified
by faith in Christ, if God peradventure might give them repentance to the
acknowledgement of the truth, that they might escape out of the snare of the
Devil; that so they might be converted, and their sins be forgiven them. Fain
would they hear, that their souls might live; but you are not among them to
preach; willing are they to receive the Sacrament, but you are not among to
administer it. They are declining in grace, and there is none to recover them,
or in the spirit of meekness to restore them, they are at a loss* and there is
none to advise them; they miscarry, and there is none to oversee them, to watch
over them, to look to them; they are sick, and there is none to visit-them, to
instruct and comfort them; they are unruly* and there is none to see that
Church discipline be exercised upon them.

4. Will you receive the tyths of God, and not do the work of God? will you
live of the Gospel, and not preach the Gospel? will you live of the Altar, and
yet not serve the Altar? will you eat, and not work? will you receive tyths
given to Melchizedec, and yet bless not the children of Abraham, that pay it!
will you receive the Levites portion, and yet not wait on the Tabernacle, nor
serve the Sanctuary? will you have the double honor of Reverence and
Maintenance, and yet not labor in the Word and Doctrine? Must he that is
taught communicate unto him that teaches him not in every good thing? -- How
can you enjoy these Donations our forefathers made to Ministers for teaching
the Word of God, for praying, etc. and yet neither teach nor pray? Vid. Spel.
conc. Br. p. 29. Vid. Illyr. cent. 8. c. 9. Col. 316. Ed. 1624. Bid Hist.
Eccl. l. c. 16. sin. Lamb. Arch. p. 22. Bonif. Ep. p. 24. Polyd. Virg. l. 5. p.
89. 90. Stow. p. 99. vit. Eg. Ingulph. Sect. 6. 7. Mat. West. Gest. Br. 2. 2
Tilsl^y anim. sed p. 173. Speed Hist. 7 c. 32. Fox Martyrol. 3. p. 136 Praefat.
in Leg. Alfredi. c. 38. Leg. Eccl. Alur. Athelstan. Mulinesb. de Gest. Br. 2.
c. 11. Gemel. l. 6. c. 9. Seld. Eadm. Hist. p. 171. R. Bastingst. 3. p. 186.
How will you look your Ancestors in the face, when you have taken their gifts,
and neglected their desires? What, take the tithe they gave, and leave their
posterity destitute!

Ob. You will say, We have Curates and they perform our duty.

Ans. 1. Curates? what new generation of men are these Curates? We have indeed
some Prophets, some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Doctors: but
no Curates. Your Commission (O my Sons) is, Go ye, and teach all Nations; not
Go ye, or send your Curates to teach all Nations. Has your Servant liberty to
bring whom he will to your service, while he takes his pleasure; and have you
liberty to bring whom you will to Gods service, while you take your pleasure?
Oh Sirs, the Scriptures run thus: Son of Man, I have made thee a watchman to
the house of Israel: therefore hear the word of my mouth, and give them warning
from me. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, and thou give him
not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his
life: the same wicked man shall die in his iniqnity, but his blood will I
require at thine hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his
wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou
have delivered thy soul. Again when a righteous man does turn from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before him, he
shall die: because thou have not given him warning, he shall die in his sin,
and his righteousness which he has done shall not be remembered, but his blood
will I require at thine hand. Nevertheless, If thou warn the righteous that the
righteous sin not, and he does not sin; he shall surely live because he is
warned; also thou have delivered thy soul. I charge thee therefore before God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach the Word be instant in season, out of
season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. For the
time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own
lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears. And they
shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned into fables: But
watch thou in all things endure afflictions do the work of an Evangelist, make
full proof of thy ministry. If you would be saved only by Curates, then serve
God by Curates: if you may be damned only by Curates, then trust your charge to
Curates. But how do you read? Son of man prophecy against the shepherds of
Israel, prophecy and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God unto the
shepherds, Woe be to the shepherds of Israel, that do feed themselves: should
not the shepherds feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the
wool ye kill them that are fed: but you feed not the flock. The diseased have
ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick neither have ye
bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was
driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost: but with force and
with cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were scattered, because there is no
shepherd: and they became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were
scattered. My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high
hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did
search or seek after them. Therefore ye shepherds hear the word of the Lord: As
I live says the Lord God, surely because my flock became a prey, and my flock
became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither
did my shepherd search for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves, and feed
not my flock: Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord, Thus says
the Lord God, behold, I am against the shepherds, and I will require my flock
at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, neither shall
the shepherds feed themselves any more, for I will deliver my flock from their
mouth, that they may not be meat for them.

2. Are Curates Ministers, or are they not? if not, why do you employ them? if
they are, why do they not live upon that maintenance that God has allowed
Ministers? You could not endure rationally in these late times to hear of
Stipends yet now your Brethren must be content with Allowances: and besides, if
they are Ministers, then either they have cure of souls, or not: if they have
cure of souls, why do they not attend their own charge if they have no cure of
souls, how can they exercise any Ministerial act, seeing they have none to
exercise it upon? no people being obliged to attend any but their own Minister:
yea, all people being obliged to attend only their own Minister. If you will
say, He is your peoples Minister, then you must say, You are not. -- One people
can have but one Minister at a time.

3. Do you, who are non resident expect tithes by man's Law only, or Gods? No by
man's Law only; for you have said, and must say against the Anabaptists, That
they are of Divine right; otherwise they will say, What man has given, man may
take away; nor must you look for it by Gods Law, which never allowed the
maintenance of a Minister to any but such as did the work of the Ministry. The
Labourer, and he only, is worthy of his hire.

4. Cannot the State keep Curates as well as you: If this be all, may not the
Commonwealth allow Salaries and Stipends as well as you, add so remove the
burden of tithe? O Sirs, you know not what to do; when the King, Lords and
Commons observe how much tithe goes to maintain your pride, vanity and folly,
and how little to maintain the service of God, they say, what need this waste?
why do ye throw away so much of the public Revenue, as amounts to two million
and a half, whereas half a million may maintain men to read prayers, and do all
the duties of Ministers? A Gentleman has a Parsonage of 200 l. a year in his
gift; why, says he, shall I part with so much of my Estate? cannot I give 20.
or 30. l. to a Curate as well as a Clergyman? You will tell him, Sir, you Rob
God. He will say, no more then you: you know God only has tithes when they are
employed in his service; and I shall allow so much more to Gods interest then
you do. Obj. Why should you being a Layman, meddle with tyths which belongs to
Gods service? Answ. I do not meddle with any which belongs to Gods service, but
with what is abused to man's wantonness. Obj. I am a Clergyman. Answ. So are
Thousands more; yet none has right to tyth, but he that performs the duty
enjoined them that receive tithe: tithe is not so much the maintenance of
Ministers persons* as their wages for their work: but a little of the tithe may
suffice him who does the work, as we may observe from what you allow, and
really I do not know by what Law of God or man a Clergyman may turn his tyth
to private advantage, any more then a Layman. O Sirs, if you neglect your
Calling when you have maintenance, what will you do if you had none? Oh you
that condemn Sacrilege, do you live by it? You that say a man should not rob
the Church, do you rob it? You that preach and write against taking away
Ministers maintenance, do you take away Ministers maintenance? Is it for this
the Nation upheld tyths against all oppositions, to have a few Readers and
Curates? what, have we saved them from the Factious, to be swallowed up by the
Covetous! Oh you are men born to undo your selves, to ruin your calling, and
to tempt a greedy world to take away all your maintenance. Do you read History?
(Alas, I am afraid that a spirit has seized you.) Do you observe what was
written in Ead. 10. chapter p. 279. and Chartres de nug. ^ur. 7. 21. They (the
Priests) grew scandalous: -- they neglected their Cures; they resided not upon
their Livings; -- they went to and fro for their pleasure; the people arose up
against them, the Noblemen withdrew their tyth from them; -- the whole kingdom
cried, No service, no maintenance: -- Yea, the poor, people burned the tyths,
being loath the unworthy Ministers should have any benefit by them, though
loath themselves to meddle with them* -- Thereupon it was agreed among the
Thanes, that there should be no maintenance given to Parsons, but to Churches,
which might allow them to such persons as did them service; and that none
should live by Church-allowance, but they that did Churchduties. Seld. ibid.
Excerpt. Egbert. can. 100. In continuance of time the Lazy and the idle had
engrossed almost all Churchpreferments; then the tithes were alienated and
impropriated as it is at this day -- whereupon the Clergy awaked a while, and
followed their business diligently in K. Ed. 6. and the beginning of Q. El.
Reign. Yet men are men still: for about the 30. of Q. El. the remainder of
Church Livings that had escaped the Impropriators, was engrossed by a few
Pluralists and Nonresidents: in so much that the Commons in the Parliament of
that year petitioned the Lords earnestly, argued rationally, concluded
peremptorily against these miscarriages, as they did in all Parliaments until
the 12. of K. Chapter when the scandal of this usurpation was so great, the odium
so general, the clamor so universal, the juggle of the Non-residents (in
holding tyths under the pretense of the Ministry for nothing, and in receiving
a million of the National Revenue for nothing else but that they were in
Orders) was so apparent, that the whole maintenance of Ministers was
endangered, all Church-preferment was threatened. And you who now cannot content
your selves with handsome and honest competencies, were like to be brought to a
morsel of Bread. O Sirs, give not occasion to them that seeks occasion: let the
world see that duty is more your care then Maintenance; that you do not work to
eat, but that you eat to work; that to maintain the English Clergy, 1. to
uphold Religion; 2. to advance Gods Name? 3. to promote the salvation of souls,
to support the glory and interest of the Kingdom, together with the peace,
civility, and happiness of this Age and Posterity.

FINIS.

