A NARRATIVE OF THE Proceedings and Trial of Mr. Francis Johnson a Franciscan,
at Worcester, last Summer-Assizes, Anno Dom. 1679. Written with his own Hand as
follows. To which is annexed His SPEECH at his Execution, August 22. 1679.
I Being at London on All-Saints-day, when the Proclamation came forth to
command all Catholics to depart from thence by the Friday following, I
obeyed, and came to a Friends house in Worcestershire, not intending to stay
there; but the King's second Proclamation being presently published, That no
Catholic should walk above Five miles without being stopped, and carried before
a Justice to have the Oaths tendered, I asked Counsel of the wisest I could,
both of Protestants (whereof one was a Lawyer) and another a Constable, as also
of Catholics, Whether that Proclamation did so strongly oblige, that it
permitted me no longer to go further? They all concluded it was not secure to
go, so I resolved to obey, and stay where I was, and with good reason.

First, Because all Catholics are obliged to obey the King's Commands in all
things that are not against our Religion and Conscience, and His Commands in
this nature are against neither.

Secondly, Should I have disobeyed, and have been taken, in Penalty I should
have suffered, which would not have been so directly for my Conscience and
Religion sake, as for disobeying the King's Command; because in case I should
be taken by staying there in obedience to the Proclamation, and be carried
before the Justices to have the Oaths offered, whatever I was to suffer for
refusing them, I should have this double comfort before God, and the King;
before the King, because I rather chose to stay there, than remove against His
Command; before God, because I rather chose to go to Prison, than to remove
from his Law, by taking the Oaths against my Conscience -- Therefore I was
taken and put in Prison.

The manner of my being taken was as follows.
The Sheriff's Deputy came to the House where I was with six or eight men, to
Arrest a Gentleman in the House for Debt: The Officers coming into the House in
the morning, and not finding the person they came for, broke down all the
doors, and among the rest mine, before I was out of Bed, and by a mistake
Arrested me, instead of the other Gentleman; and although the Deputy, coming
into my Chamber, looking on me, told them they were deceived, for I was not the
man they came for; yet other Soldiers coming into my Chamber, one of them said
he knew me: It seems he had been a Servant in the House seven Years before,
therefore he said he would have me to the Justices, and bid his Companions
secure me, and so they did, and would not let me go out of their sight, until
they carried me before the Justice; And this they did, without either
Constable, or Warrant; Law or Justice.

When I came before the Justice of Peace, I told him the occasion that had
brought me to him; and if I would have taken the Oaths, I had been presently
freed. But I told them that persuaded me to take the Oaths, That it was against
the Faith and Religion I professed, and against my Conscience, and I would
never offend against either, by so complying, whatever I suffered for the
contrary.

The Justice's Wife was compassionate toward me, and desiring to speak
privately with me, she used her best persuasions to me to comply with what was
desired of me concerning the taking the Oaths, for fear of further trouble or
danger. I answered her with thanks, and told her, That I was sorry she had no
better opinion of me, than to think I had professed such a Faith and Religion all
my lifetime, and now upon the trial could be moved with any fear or danger
(which God forbid.) I told her it was such a Faith, that in it I deposed my
Soul, my Confidence, Heaven and Eternal Life, and therefore I never did, nor
(by God's grace) never would fear to suffer for it what pleased God; For who
could fear even Death itself of the Body whose life is momentary, for
Profession of that Faith wherein he deposes the Eternal life of his Soul?

This Answer satisfied both her and my self, for I was resolved to make a
public Profession of my Faith and Religion; upon which I returned to the
Justice, who thought fit I should go to another Justice, who was Sir John
Packington, whither also he went with me.

When I came to Sir John, he asked me who I was? I answered him, I was a
Gentleman sufficiently known for these 20 Years in Worcestershire to all sorts
of People. He asked me of what Calling I was? I answered him, of none. He asked
me what Estate I had? I answered, I was no Landed-man. Then he asked me, If I
would take the Oaths? I answered, I understood them not. He replied, Will you
take them, or will you not? I told him if he pleased to let me see them, I
should return him my Answer.

Now the reason why I desired to see the Oaths, was, because I was resolved to
make a Public Declaration of my Faith, that they were against my Conscience,
and therefore by declaring publicly the Reasons why I could not take them, it
should be publicly known, that whatsoever I was to suffer for not taking them,
was for no other cause but for my Faith and Religion, because I would not swear
against my Conscience -- For, would I have taken them, I had been there also
freed.

When the Oaths were brought to me, they told me I must read them out aloud,
but I told them that because it was a public place, and many there present of
several degrees, as well of the Householders, as Strangers, I feared least
reading them aloud, some that heard me might think I swear what I read, and so
might go and report they heard me take the Oaths before the Justices. But they
declared they would not think so l so I read them over and over, which when I
had done, I said aloud, God save the King; and then declared to both the
Justices, and all the rest, in this manner.

I am ready to swear as follows:
That I ever all my lifetime have been, and now am, and ever will be to my
last breath, as faithful a Subject to the King, as any Subject whatsoever, and
as faithful as if I should take the Oaths now offered by them to me an hundred
times over; but as for taking these Oaths offered me, I could not take them
whatever I suffered, and the reason was, because I understood what an Oath was,
and the conditions which God has prescribed to us, before any could call him to
witness lawfully in taking of any such Oaths.

The Conditions which God has prescribed I told them were these.
Thou shall swear the Lord lives in truth, and in judgment, and in
righteousness; so that in every Oath, the life of God, the truth of God, the
judgment of God and his righteousness, are included by all which we swear, and
the Oath we take is to have all these Conditions, truth, judgment, and
righteousness, Jerem. 4. -- Therefore if I should take these Oaths which are
concerning damnable Doctrines and Heresies, I must call God to witness that I
no more believe him to be a living God and true God, a just and righteous God,
than I believe these things contained in the Oaths to be true, just and
righteous, to swear to which Oaths I do not nor cannot in my Conscience believe
to be so. For, before I or any man else can understand the Contents of these
Oaths to be true, as to call God to witness that I believe them to be as true,
just and righteous, I must be able to define what is Faith or Heresy in these
Contents I swear to, and I must know the full extent of all cases of this
nature that God has left to all Temporal Princes and their Power; I must also
understand the full extent of all cases of this nature of power spiritual which
God has left in his Church in or over Christian Kingdoms of Temporal Monarchs,
which power in these Oaths I am to swear on the one side, and forswearing the
other.

I told them I was not of capacity nor knowledge to set the Confines to each
Power, or to determine or define the extent given by God to all in this nature,
so as to swear and call God to witness I am as sure of it, as I am sure he is a
living God, as I must do if I take these Oaths, the extent of which I did not
understand in my Conscience to be so as to believe them; Therefore I could not
nor would not swear to them. I having spoken these things, no body said any
more to me, but the Justices going out of the Hall made my Mittimus and
Sentence for Worcester Prison, because I would not take the Oaths they tendered
me.

I have been since called to the Bar at the Sessions, where I spoke to the same
effect before Judge Street, and the Justices, as I had spoken before to Sir
John Packington, having first asked their leave to speak, which they gave me
for a little time, and then bid me return to the Prison. -- But first they were
urgent with me to answer positively, Ay or No, was I a Jesuitical Priest, or
was I not? To which I answered, It was an easy thing for me to say No, but by
saying No, I might prejudice others, who hereafter being asked the same
question, if they did not answer No, it might be an Argument that they were
guilty, if they did not deny it, as others before them had done. -- Therefore I
desired that what proof could be brought against me, might be produced against
me, and I would answer for my self: But I desired I might not be urged to
answer Ay or No, to any thing, before some Witness or Argument came against me;
for, I told them in such Cases, neither Law of God nor Man obliged any one
(although he was guilty) to bear witness against himself without some proof
were alleged against him, for, that was no less than to be his own Executioner.

The Judge answered there were Witnesses would swear against me.

I answered if Witnesses could make out what they swear of me, then my life was
at the King's mercy: But in the mean time I told them I remained guiltless,
though I did not answer them to their questions Ay or No, because I told them
that being my saying No in my own behalf would not be sufficient testimony to
acquit me, therefore there was no reason why any man should be urged to say Ay
to accuse ones self though he was guilty.

Upon this the Judge sent me to Prison again at Worcester, where now I am,
which Imprisonment, in these Times especially, when none can send to their
Friends, nor Friends come to them, is the best means to teach us how to put our
confidence in God alone in all things; and then he will make his promise good,
That all things shall be added to us, Luke 12. which Chapter, if every one
would read, and make good use of, a Prison would be better than a Palace; and a
Confinement for Religion, and a good Conscience Sake, more pleasant than all
the liberties the World could afford. As for my own part, God give me his
grace, and all faithful Christians their prayers, I am happy enough; And as for
others, I beseech God that the evil example of those that swear against their
Consciences, may not be Guides for the rest to follow, nor their Deeds a Rule
to their Actions. We all ought to follow the narrow way, though there be many
difficulties in it: It Is an easy thing to run the blind way of liberty, but
God deliver us all from broad, sweet ways. We know what Job says of
Libertines, They lead their lives in the goods of this world, and in a moment
they descend into Hell. But, as our Savior says, What does it profit a man to
gain the world, and lose his soul?

God gave Job a goodly increase for all the riches he took from him, and blessed
his latter end more than his beginning, and gave him an Hundred and forty years
of flourishing life for his short affliction, in which, his constancy and faith
in God was tried; and our Savior promises an Hundred fold to all that leave
Goods, and every thing willingly for his sake. -- Who well considers this, will
be content to leave both Friends and Fortunes, and Freedom by Imprisonment, for
their Faith and Religion-sake, till such time as it shall please God and the
King (in obedience to whose Command they suffer) to release them. And in the
mean time they will have this comfort, That they give a Testimony they fear
God, and honor the King; They fear God, because they choose rather to suffer
Persecution, than swear against their Consciences; They honor the King, because
they are willing to suffer the Penalties He commands, and yet remain faithful
Subjects to Him, whom God long preserve, with His Parliament and People, in all
happiness.

On Tuesday, April 15. 1679. I came before Judge Atkins at Worcester, to have
my Cause tried at the Sessions, having been Committed five Months before to
Worcester-Castle by two Justices of the Peace, Sir John Packinton, and Mr.
Townson, because I refused the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and therefore
was suspected to be a Jesuitical Priest.

The manner of my Trial was as follows.
Four Witnesses were brought in against me; Three of them were forced by
Warrant to come in, whether they would or no, from several Towns, and were
forced to speak all that they knew, had heard, or seen, concerning me; neither
I, nor any of my Friends knowing, that any would be compelled so to do, before
the time of my Trial was come. The fourth Witness came of his own accord for
Lucre sake, who, the same day that I was first brought to Worcester Prison,
offered himself to swear before the Mayor of the Town, that I was a Priest,
before ever he came to see who I was.

The Testimony which he gave against me before the Judge, was this.
He swore he had been at Confession with me, and that he had received the
Sacrament at my hands about two years before at his Fathers house, whilst he
was a Catholic; and after he became a Protestant, he said I told him
afterward he should turn back from whence he had fallen, else he would be
damned.

The other three Witnesses that were forced to come in against me, when they
came before the Grand Jury, and were urged to take their Oaths, to tell that
which they never had known nor seen concerning my being a Priest, they all
unanimously declared, That they had nothing to say against me, and that they
were by violence forced to appear there, and therefore they said they would
never swear nor say any thing against me, for they knew nothing to accuse me
of: which when the Jury heard, they called for the Jailer to take the Party
that first denied to swear to Prison, thinking by this violent way of
proceeding so to afright them, that they should say something, out of which
advantage should be taken against me; which the better to effect, they made
them first lay their hands on the Bible, and then kiss it, which they did. Then
the Jury told them, that now they were to tell all the truth according as they
were asked. -- First they asked whether any of them had ever heard me read? One
answered, yes, the Bible, and sometimes any other Book. Then they asked,
Whether they had ever seen me pray? It was answered, yes. Then they asked what
Clothes I had on when I prayed? And whether I used to change my Clothes when I
came to pray? In these and other like questions they sifted them, to get out
any thing that might do me burt.

But how Charitable or Christian-like these Proceedings of the Jury were, let
the World judge Now, as God will Hereafter; For, if this be a charitable way of
proceeding among Christians, that our Neighbors should by such strange
violence, as by Warrant and Oath be brought against their wills from any part
of England, to swear whatever they have seen, heard, or known of their
Neighbors, what horrid Confusions and Odium's must this make among all sorts of
People both Friends and Foes? -- But I do not blame those three Witnesses,
after they had been inconsiderately induced to lay their hands upon the Bible,
and kissed it; I suppose they judged themselves bound to say what they did.

After this, when the Jury had got out of them what they could, the four
Witnesses and I were called before the Judge. *The first Witness that came to
swear against me, as the custom is, repeated his testimony over again before
the Judge, and so did the other three that were forced; which when I heard how
absurd and insignificant some of their testimonies were, I inconsiderately
smiled, at which the Judge being offended, I humbly begged his Pardon, and told
him I was sorry for it. -- But forasmuch as laughing or smiling were passions
of Nature, over which no man had a free course or power, I hoped and beseeched
him not to impute it to me; he told me he would not be displeased at me for it.
Then he asking me, whether I was guilty, or not guilty of my Accusations? and I
answering, Not guilty, he bad me show it, by answering for my self; I told him
I was ready to do it; but told him first, I had an humble Petition to his
Lordship, which was, that I desired a full and free liberty without hindrance
to answer to every Objection, and plead for my self; I also desired he would
reflect in my behalf, that as he was to be my Judge, so he was to be my
Advocate. And forasmuch as all earthly Judges were to imitate the heavenly
Judge, who as Advocate ten thousand times mitigates the severity of a Judge,
whilst his hand of mercy is infinitely stretched forth beyond the hand of
judgment. And therefore I begged of his Lordship, that I might find the favor
of an Advocate from him, rather than the tigor of a Judge, especially in those
things which according to Law may be advantageous or disadvantageous to me,
which I understanding not how to make the best use of them, desired his
Lordship would vouchsafe to do it for me; which that the better he might be
moved to do, I desired he would be pleased to consider that this my Life and
Concerns were (in comparison of others greater) not so much considerable, I
being but a private person, yet my Little was to me Much, because my Little was
my All; and my Life to me were as much as Caesar's or Solomon's were to them; and
as great a gift from God to me, as theirs to them; and therefore God has laid
as great an obligation on me to desend my self and my life, as he had on them
for theirs, and also had given to every one a strict command not to impair or
prejudice me in the least, no more than the greatest Potentate. Therefore being
I was now brought before him in a Case, where the World as much as concerns me,
lay at stake, and my Life, and my Credit, I did humbly beseech his Lordship to
proceed accordingly with me, as I presumed according to his prudence and worth
he would. He assented to what I petitioned, and did bid me speak for my self.

In answer therefore to the first voluntary Witness against me, I told his
Lordship it was true, I had been at such a night at his Fathers house, and
accordingly, as I was desired by him, I staid all night. -- But as for this
Witness, I was a stranger to him, and he to me, as he confessed himself. Then the
Judge asked him, Whether he knew me before or no? For he declared publicly,
That he never knew me, nor saw me before or since, till he saw me at Worcester,
and yet he said the next morning he made his Confession to me, and I gave him
the Communion at Mass as he supposed in my Chamber; but he said that none of
all the Family was present at that time, only he and I alone; whereupon I
desired the Judge to consider what possible likelihood could be of the truth in
this his affirmation, that I should come to a house where I was acquainted with
them all, Father, Mother, and Children, with all but this Witness who as he
declared knew me not, nor ever had seen me before, what likelihood is there I
should say Mass before him alone, hear his Confession, and give him the
Sacrament, and so go away without any one of the Family (with whom I was so
well acquainted) hearing, seeing, or knowing the least of this that past
between him and me. -- I therefore desired my Lord to ask him, Whether I spoke
of Confession or Communion? or what I said to him when I gave it him? or
whether I told him I would give him the Sacrament? which when the Judge had
asked him, he answered, That indeed I never had spoken to him either about
Confession or Communion to come to either; neither did he know what I said to
him, when I gave him Bread like a Wafer; but he of his own accord did desire me
to hear his Confession, and give him the Wafer which he took. -- Whereupon the
Judge asked how it came to pass that he, never having known nor seen me before,
nor I spoke with him about Confession or Communion, how could he now tell who I
was, or how could he desire such a thing of me who was a mere stranger to him,
neither of us knowing any thing of one another condition; sure, said the
Judge, we do not give the Communion on such terms. -- To which he answered,
that his Father had told him, that if he would he might confess to me, and that
I would give him the Communion. -- So although he had sworn before, that none
in the house was witness, or saw him confess or receive, yet rather than be
confounded, he would bring his Father into confusion, and accuse him as guilty
of being the cause of what he did, which might be the ruin of his Family.

But the Judge taking no notice of what he had accused his Father, spoke to me,
and told me, by this it might appear, That I had taken upon me what belonged to
the Priests Office, by hearing his Confession, and giving him the Wafer. To
which I replied, that with his leave, I would make it appear, that all which
this Witness had said against me, did not at all prove me to be a Priest, or to
have taken the office of a Priest upon me; for all he said I had done, I might
do it lawfully though no Priest, so might other men that never were nor would
be Priests do the same, as many thousands had done and did do through the
world. He asked me how I could prove that? I answered, as to his Confession he
spoke of, in the nature he declared it, it was only an act of charity for me to
do as I did, and every Christians duty obliges every man to do the same that he
said I had done for him, and the same was practiced by all Sects whatsoever,
that never knew what belonged to Priesthood; For, if our Neighbor have any
thing that perplexed his mind, there is no better way to ease it, than by
speaking of it to any whom he supposed might know how to take away or mitigate
his Grievances by counsel or advice; And therefore this Witness having
understood something from his Father, that might move him to confide in me,
came of his own accord, as he said he did, to impart his mind to me, and
therefore I should not have fulfilled Christian duty, if I should have slighted
his trouble, and not have given him leave to ease his mind to me, and, in the
best way I could, endeavor to assist him, and divert his trouble, though I was
a stranger, being that he of his own accord, as he said, came to me for that
intent, and therefore I desired the Judge to ask him, if it were otherwise than
what I had told his Lordship?

The Judge replied that I went further; for, as he says, I gave him the Wafer
or Communion. I answered, that suppose I had given him the Wafer or Communion
(which whether I did or no I was not certain) yet according to his own word,
this could no way prove that I gave him the Sacrament; for, let him speak if I
told him it was so; or let him declare if I said any thing to him concerning
the Communion, or what I said; he could not say I did, only I gave him
something; therefore I told the Judge, that if he pleased to give me leave, I
would tell his Lordship what practice ever had been, and is constantly used in
the Catholic Church throughout the world, in giving hollowed bread or water,
which is nothing belonging to the Communion or Sacrament; for, I told my Lord,
as there was holy water kept in all private houses, as well as in the Chapels,
and places of Prayer, so there was also holy bread, and sometimes of the same
nature as the Wafer or the Communion, and of this as well as of the other sort
of bread, was on Sundays, and other certain days, not consecrated as the
Communion, but only blessed as holy water by the word and prayer, and so
distributed to men, women, and little children, of two or three years old; and
such like hallowed bread thousands of men, women and children, take, and may
carry about them, and keep in their houses, and eat it at any time, and give it
when, and to whom they would, to children, or others; and for my part, I have
many times in my life taken it from others at any time; when I had it, or was
in any private house where I found it, I have taken it to eat my self, and
given it to any man, woman, or child, sometime they desiring it, sometime of my
own accord I gave it, and so possibly I have given it to the man that
witnesses here against me; and if he know the contrary, but that it was as I
said, I desire that he would speak: But he had nothing to say of me to the
contrary.

I appealed to my Lord to judge whether this testimony, or any other testimony
this Witness brought against me, were of any force or value to make me guilty
in this matter, which no ways could be made out against me.

I proceeded therefore to answer his third Accusation against me, which was,
that I should have told him, that if he did not return to the Faith from whence
he had fallen, he would be damned. To this my Answer to my Lord was, That I had
all my life time been so fearful of such rash Judgment, that I do (...) it in
the presence of God, as I did before him, that I had rather dye, th^^ ^^sume to
pronounce the sentence of damnation against any man; but I told his Lordship,
that if he pleased to give me leave, I would relate what I had said to him, and
others, upon the like occasion, which the Judge being willing to hear, I told
him, that I being at this man's Mother-in-law's house, who was of no Religion,
no more than this Witness, and the Mother desiring to hear what Catholics
held, and the reasons for which we believe such points of Faith, I told her
what we held, and showed her the proofs for what we held in her own Bible, and
when she made any difficulty whether such texts of Scripture were to be
understood as we understood them, or in any other sense, I showed her out of
the Protestant Practice of Piety, and out of the Protestant Common Prayer Book,
that not only Catholics, but all Protestants understood them in such a sense;
and she having those Books by her, I turned those places to her to read in her
own Books, and so she did, and yet neither the Bible, nor Common Prayer-Books,
nor Practice of Piety, could satisfy, or make her believe; whereupon I told
her, that if she were a Christian, she must believe something; for, as she
believed, so she should be saved: -- I told her also what the Bible declared to
her, That without Faith it was impossible to please God, and I bad her consider
the text that says, Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin; as also the text that
says, The just man lives by Faith, and desired her to read those words of our
Savior, where he says, He that believes shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned; which she did read; and this Witness being then
present, and I saying the same then before him, I suppose, from this text, he
accused me that I should say, he would be damned, because I repeated, and
showed them our Savior's words, as they appear in that place of Scripture.

I having thus answered all the testimonies this Witness could bring in against
me, I referred my self to his Lordship, and all the Bench, to judge whether any
thing this Witness had said against me, would make me guilty: The judge said
but little to it, but called for the next witness (who was Father to this
first) who was so much grieved at the proceedings of his ungracious Son, that
he could not forbear to shed tears all the time that his Son produced such
Accusations against me; so that he appeared more witness against his Son's
ungodliness, than a Witness against me: Yet the Judge asked him many questions,
whether he had ever heard, seen, or known any such or such things of or from
me: To all which questions he answered, No, he knew nothing against me; so that
the Judge seeing he showed so much kindness, he asked him what he was? He
answered, a Catholic; whereupon the Judge bade him go away, saying, He was too
much my friend, and therefore he would not accept of him as a witness, but
called the third. This witness was an old man, and very deaf, who was forced to
come against me by a warrant, swore against his will: The Judge asked him
several questions, whether he heard me say any prayers; he answered, yes, but
he could not well understand or hear what they were, because he was so deaf; he
asked them whether they were English or Latin? he answered, he could not well
tell, he thought it was both; and, I think, it might be neither, for ought he
could hear, he was so very deaf: Then he asked him what clothes I had on? he
answered, he could not well tell; I had something on that was white, a Surplice
he thought; and the Judge was willing to suppose this to be a Priests habit at
Mass, or when he gave the Sacrament; but I told his Lordship, that this could
be no proof of any such matter, because, all over the world, among Catholics,
such Garments were worn by thousands in time of prayer, who never were, nor
will be Priests, as is well known to those that have been Travelers: And I
told his Lordship, that if he pleased to call for them, there may be several
Travelers, of several Sects and Opinions present in the Hall, that would be
sufficient witnesses as well of this, as of the holy bread and water, which the
other witness as well as this old man said I had given them, which they suppose
to be the Sacrament; but the Judge would call for none, but called for the
fourth witness. -- This witness was a young woman, who was also by violence
forced to come and swear what she had heard, see^ (...) me about the matter in
question. The Judge asked her whether I had taught her any thing, whether she
had been at Confession or Communion, what I said to her, what penance I gave
her; and he asked also the like questions of the old man, the former witness,
to all which they were both very unwilling to answer; for which some of the
rude people cursed the old man for an old do^^^g fellow, and were as much vexed
at the young woman, because she was so ^^^ected, that she could not speak, but
looked like one that was half dead, as some of the people said in anger she was
so. The Judge perceiving in what condition she was, said aloud, what men are
these Priests that have such power over people, that they are not able to speak
against them; he therefore bid them remember they were in the presence of God,
and were bound in conscience to speak the truth of what they had heard or seen;
so at last they owned that I had read in the Bible, and other Books to them,
and that they had confessed what troubled them, and had received something like a
Wafer from me, and that they had believed what I read to them; yet they both
declared publicly, that I did not bid them come to Confession, or take the
Wafer or Bread; and when they took it, that I did not tell them it was the
Sacrament, neither did they know whether it was or no: By all which it appeared
according to the letter of the Law, and in conscience, that none of these
testimonies were of sufficient force to make me guilty. A man's life is not to
be taken away upon surmises, or possibilities, that this might be the
Communion, as well as other holy Bread. For, the Law requires, that it must be
proved that there was an Administration of the Sacrament by one that had taken
Orders from a Foreign Power; of taking Orders there was not the least
Accusation mentioned against me by any of the witnesses, much less could it be
proved, no not so much that I pretended to give the Sacrament any more than it
might be holy water, or holy bread, as I desired my Lord to consider; neither
was it the wearing of a Surplice that could prove I said Mass; for Priests
never wear Surplices at Mass: And if a man's wearing a Surplice at prayer, prove
him a Priest, then all the Singing-Boys in every Protestant Cathedral Church,
and in all other Churches in Christendom, all those Boys, though but of ten or
twelve years of age, must be by consequence all Popish Priests; and all Jews
who constantly in their Synagogues put on a white Garment like a Surplice, as I
and all Travelers have seen them do when we have gone to see them pray* At
these Jews must be Romish Priests: -- Out of all which it evidently appears,
that none of these testimonies the witnesses brought against me, were any way
concluding according to Justice to make me guilty of being a Priest.

As for my reading the Bible to them, or in satisfying them in what they
doubted, or bidding them say their prayers, and particularly the Lord's Prayer,
which the last two witnesses told the Judge I had done, and the like (he
fearing to answer to all the questions he asked them) To these I answered, that
I own I had done so; whereupon the Judge said, that out of this it appeared,
that I had taken upon me the Priests Office. I told him, that with his leave I
would show how it did no ways follow; for, out of this it only followed, that I
had done the duty of a good Christian, and every man in the like circumstances
is bound as a Christian to do the like that I had done: I told him, that they,
doubting of such things, and desiring me to show them if such places were in
the Bible, or not, and desiring to know what I did believe of those points, and
the reasons why I believed them, I turned to such places in the Bible, and read
it to them, and bid them read the same themselves, which they did, and so were
satisfied. And I told my Lord, for what I had done, I had the Scripture
warrant, and Scripture command also to do it, and so had every Christian
command to do the like; for the Scripture commands all to be ready to give an
answer to every man concerning the reason of the hope which is within us, and
this I had done to them, or to any other that had asked me as they did. But I
told my Lord withal, that I knowing the Statute of persuasion, had always so
much regard to that, when any would discourse with me concerning my Faith, or
theirs, I told them, that (being there was such a Statute as the Statute of
persuasion) though I was bound to give them an account of my Faith and Hope, if
for conscience sake they asked me, yet I told them I would not incur the
penalty of that Statute by using any force or persuasion against their
consciences; for violent forcing of consciences was against the Law of God; yet
I told them what I did believe, and showed them the places of Scripture on
which my Faith was grounded, according as they desired me to do for them, and
then I would leave it to God and their own consciences; and if they did not
believe those texts, I had no more to say to them; and if they did believe
them, they best knew before God and their consciences what they had to do; so
that it was not my persuasion, but God and their souls salvation that was to
determine them in the belief of what they read in the Bible: And I bade them
bear witness that I told them thus, if in case we should ever be called in
question before any Judge; and thus I have discoursed, as several would bear
witness for me. I told his Lordship this was true, and so did those witnesses;
for, they declared publicly what I said was true, whereupon I did appeal to my
Lord, if I was not innocent in this point; and as for my bidding them say their
prayers, or when they desired to ease their minds by declaring what troubled
them, I desired to clear my self by asking my Lord, with his leave, what Nation
or Sect in the world ought not, and did not counsel and wish their Neighbors
in their troubles to ease themselves by prayer to God; and much more every good
Christian ought, when he understood that his Brother had acted the Prodigal
Son, offended his Heavenly Father, and therefore was troubled in conscience,
ought, I say, to persuade him to return by repentance, and beg mercy of our
Father which is in Heaven: I having done no more but this, have only done a
pious Christian duty to my Neighbors, which any man, though no Priest, may and
ought to do the same. I having pleaded these things for my self, the Judge was
pleased to tell me, I had a nimble tongue, and wit, and that by those
discourses I strove to make the Jury attend more to my pleading for my self,
than to the witnesses Arguments against me: To which I replied, I spoke nothing
but truth, which I ought to do to defend my self against my enemies, therefore
I hoped his Lordship would not be offended: But if I have exceeded (as his
Lordship said I did) because I hindered him from speaking, I humbly craved his
pardon, and hoped I should obtain it, being my Concerns and Reasons to plead,
as I did, were of no less consequence than Life and Death.

But for all this the Judge told the Jury, that they were to consider the
Accusations of the Witnesses against me, as having done such and such things
which Priests use to do; neither was it necessary that the Witnesses should
prove me to have taken Orders from Foreign Power, and so to prove me positively
to be a Priest; For, that (they not having seen me take Orders) they could not
do, but it was sufficient they had seen me do such things, by which it might be
presumed it was so. Whereupon I answered, That there was never a Proof yet
alleged, that did or could make that appear, or be sufficient to conclude me
to be so, and therefore I was no more guilty than many thousands, of whom all
these things alleged against me might be verified, who never were nor would be
Priests, as I had sufficiently showed, why therefore should they be thought
sufficient to conclude against me. I therefore desired the Judge, before he
sent out the Jury, he would give me leave to speak a word or two to them. He
answered No, he would not. I then desired his Lordship would give me leave to
speak again to him before them, ere they went out; to which he assented: I
therefore desired his Lordship to give me leave to ask this question of him,
which the Jury might hear. -- Suppose all the Proofs which had been by all the
Witnesses brought against me, were to be (...) against the Jury, or some of
them, so that if the Arguments were judges (...) to be of force or concluding,
some of those of the Jury should lose part (...) Estates and Credit, and being
in some danger of their lives, who of all (...) whom this peril were like to
fall, would judge those Arguments alleged (...) me, sufficient to condemn them
to the loss of part of their Estates, or part of their Credit with some danger
of their Lives? I therefore desired it might be (...), that my All lay at
stake, all my Concerns in the World; Credit and Life not only in some danger,
but certainly to be Condemned, if these Arguments brought in by them against me
should be judged to be of force. Therefore I desired they would deal by me as
if it were their own case, according as I had proposed it to them, and so I
should give no further trouble in speaking, being it was not judged fit I
should say any more (as I had desired) to the Jury.

I had only one Favor more to beg of the Judge before they went out, which was,
that his Lordship would read a Paper before them which I had ready, whereby I
could prove, that the first and chiefest VVitness against me, which was Rogers,
ought not in justice to be admitted as a competent VVitness against me, as the
VVriting I offered the Judge would show; which VVriting I gave to the Judge,
and he read it over privately to himself, and seeing the hand of him that wrote
it at the bottom, who offered to swear for me against Rogers, the Judge asked
where this VVitness for me was, and why I had him not ready? I answered he was
hard by in the Prison for Debt, if he pleased to send for him; but the Judge
would not send for him. I then desired the Judge that at least I, or any else
here present, might read my Paper publicly, that all might know it was true,
that I had such a sufficient VVitness for me against Rogers; but the Judge
neither would let me, nor any else read it openly, but however I made bold to
tell publicly all the Contents of the Paper, which were word for word as the
VVitness wrote it with his own hand and name at the bottom; thus --

Memorandum, That upon the 12th of December last past, or thereabouts, came
three men to the Castle of Worcester, and as they came up the stairs, Rogers
desires one of them to call for one Mr. Johnson, and see if he would answer to
that name or not; and entering into the Room, he asked where was Mr. Johnson,
and which was he, though he was at that time present in the Room, and none else
but one man and my self drinking at the door, and in my Conscience knew him not.

In witness to this I Will lay down my Oath.

Henry Holland.

By this it may appear, that if the Judge would let my Witness appear to have
sworn, I might have cast Rogers, the chief Witness against me; and why it was
not granted, let all that hear it judge. However, I still continued to plead,
that all Proofs alleged against me were insufficient, which I can make appear
even in the Judge's own opinion, though I did not tell him so; For you must
know, that before in his Circuit, though Witnesses swore against a Gentleman
(whom they would have proved a Priest*) that they saw him marry People and
Baptize, which are the Actions of a Priest, yet the Judge declared, that
because these Actions might be done by such as were no Priests, as well as by
Priests, as it appeared, because Justices of the Peace married People in
Cromwell's time, and any Man or Woman might at some times Christen Children;
therefore such common Actions, as he declared, could not prove the accused
Gentleman to be a Priest for doing them, and thereupon the Judge freed him.

Whereupon I infer, That all the Actions the Witnesses swear they saw me do, as
wearing a Surplice, giving the Wafer, exhorting to Prayer, showing Points out
of the Bible, hearing others Grievances, which they of themselves declared to
me, and the like, being these are things done as well by those that were no
Priests, as by Priests; according to the Judge's own opinion, these Actions
ought not to have been judged sufficient Proofs against me, no more than such
Actions were judged sufficient against other Gentlemen; although I did not
allege this to the Judge, yet it was sufficient he knew it, and might, if he
had pleased, done with me accordingly, though he did not, but sending the Jury
out, sent me from the Bar.

I being afterward called again to the Bar, and it being declared unto me, that
the Jury had found me guilty, the Bill was read against me; and then I was
asked what I had to say for my self, why I should not dye, that I might speak
before the Sentence of Death past against me. To which I answered, I only
desired to know for what I was to dye; for I have showed that all things
alleged against me heretofore, were insufficient to prove me a Priest, or take
away my Life.

The Judge answered, That the Jury had found me guilty and that now there was
no more to be said concerning the Proof, but that I was to be Condemned as a
Priest.

To which I replied, That though the Jury had found me Guilty, yet I was still
Innocent from any guilt of Death, and with his Lordships permission I would
prove it. He asked me how? I answered, thus; I had not been out of England, to
take any Orders from Foreign Power since the King's Restoration to His Crown,
neither had I any opportunity to take any Orders in England; therefore if I
were a Priest, I was so before His Majesty came into England: But whatever I
had done before the King came into England, cannot make me now Guilty,
supposing I had transgressed the Law before because His Majesty before His
Return, put out several Proclamations, that none should ever be troubled for
their Religion, or Conscience Sake; and since His coming into England, He had
done the same by several Proclamations: and what was yet more, not long since,
had set forth His Declaration, that every one should freely practice his own
Religion of what Sect or Persuasion soever, which Declaration, if I were a
Priest, I might safely rely on, as well as all others. To which the Judge
replied, Where had I the Seal to that Declaration? I answered, I never
questioned but that a Subject might take his King's Word declared in His
Public Proclamation without His Seal. The Judge answered, However if I were a
Priest now in England, I was guilty. I replied, That supposing I had formerly
taken Orders before the King came to England, I could not altogether degrade my
self, or be otherwise now, than what I was ordained then; therefore if I were a
Priest, I cannot now be guilty for it, because all that ever was done before
the King's Restoration, in what respect soever, was all forgiven and blotted
out by the King's General Pardon to all Subjects, even to those who had a hand
in the death of His Royal Father, and so the Catholics for their Religion were
not excluded out of the General Pardon; wherefore I told his Lordship I was not
guilty.

Whereupon he told me I was guilty, and presumed far to plead so resolutely,
and with such confidence before him and all the Bench.

I craved his pardon for my Fault, but desired his Lordship to consider, that I
was bid speak if I had any thing to say for my self, before the Sentence of
Death past against me, and therefore I had reason to plead home, since this was
the last time I was like to speak for my life in this world, which I hope his
Lordship and the Bench would consider; but if notwithstanding so many
Proclamations, Grants for Liberty of Conscience, and His Majesty's General
Pardon to all who had relied on them, if all this would not secure me, but my
believing those things had caused me to err, and my Error must cause me to lose
my Life, I had no more to say.

So the Judge sat down, and pronounced against me the sentence of Death, That
I should be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, Disbowelled, my Intrals burnt, my
Head cut off, my Body to be cut in four quarters, and my quarters to be at the
King's disposal.

Which Sentence being pronounced, I bowed, and said aloud, Thanks be to God,
God save the King; and I beseech God to bless your Lordship, and all this
Honorable Bench.

The Judge replied, You have spoken very well, I do not intend you shall dye,
at least not for the present, until I know the King's further pleasure.

I was not, I thank God for it, troubled with any disturbing thoughts either
against the Judge for his Sentence, nor the Jury that gave in such a Verdict,
nor against any of the Witnesses; For I was then of the same mind, as by God's
grace I ever shall be, esteeming them all the best Friends to me in all they
did or said that ever I had in my life, or ever shall have, except upon the
like occasion. And I was, I thank God, so present with my self, whilst the
Judge pronounced the Sentence to deliver me to Death, that without any concern
for any thing in this world, I did actually at the same time offer my self and
the world to God.

After the Judge was gone from the Bench to the other end of the Hall, I stayed
with the Keeper in the Hall, where several Protestant Gentlemen, and others,
who had heard my Trial, came to me, though Strangers, and told me how sorry
they were for me. To whom, with thanks, I replied, that I was troubled they
should grieve for me, or my condition, who was joyful for it my self; for I
told them I had professed this Faith and Religion all my lifetime, which I was
as sure to be true, as I was sure of the truth of God's Word on which it was
grounded, and therefore in it I deposed my Soul, and Eternal Life and
Happiness; and therefore should I fear to lose my temporal life for this Faith,
whereon my Eternal life depends, I were worse than an Infidel; and whosoever
should prefer the life of their Bodies before their Faith, their Religion, or
Conscience, they were worse than Heathens. For my own part I told them, I was
as ready by God's grace to dye to morrow, as I had been to receive the Sentence
of Death to day, and as willingly as if I had a Grant of the greatest Dukedom:
So we sat talking half an hour, and I returned to the Prison, there to remain,
as long as it pleased God and the King, whom God long preserve in all happiness.

There was another Objection which I forgot to put in, until I had finished the
former Writing, and it was an Objection which the Judge was pleased to put
against me himself, and it was that I had changed my name, and went in several
places by several names.

To which I answered, the reason was, Because in Cromwell's time, in the great
Troubles, our Family suffered much, my Father was imprisoned, and a
Fellow-Prisoner with Sir Thomas Ashton, both confined together, which Sir
Thomas is now one of His Majesty's Admirals of the Fleet. And for my own part,
I going Beyond Sea to Travel, I changed my name; and then coming into England
again, before the King's Restoration, I was glad to conceal my self, and go by
several names, as many others of the King's Loyal Subjects did, the better to
be able to do His Majesty the best service I could, which, according to my
small ability, I did endeavor both before and since the King came into England,
like a dutiful Subject, and like the rest of our Family, who all endeavored to
serve His Majesty: For I have two Brothers served Him, the one a Voluntier at
Sea in Sir William Reeve's Ship, which Sir William was killed in the last
Engagement with the Dutch; and the other Brother had a Command under his Royal
Highness the Duke of York at Land: therefore I hope the changing of my name on
such an occasion as I did, could not be imputed as a guilt upon me, nor speak
me other than a dutiful Subject; which I could have made further appear before
the Bench, but I did not judge it convenient to say any more to the Judge there
in public. But before his Lordship went out of Worcester, I presented him
with a Petition, to acquaint his Lordship, that I having had the honor to kiss
His Majesty's Hand, before His Restoration, in the Low Countries; as also I
have had the honor to be one of those whom His Majesty was pleased to grace
with being entertained by us, His then best Subjects; His Majesty was pleased
to make us a Gracious Promise, that when it should please God to restore Him to
His Crown, we should not live so in Banishment as then we did. Of this in my
Petition I did acquaint the Judge, and beseeched him that he would be pleased,
by declaring this to the King, to endeavor to obtain some gracious Favor from
His Majesty for me, my condition now being such, that I could never have
greater need to be Partaker of His gracious Promise and Clemency.

The Judge promised me he would make an Address to His Majesty for me in this
behalf, which whether he has done or no, I wish some body may put him in mind
to do it for me. I do not here mention the place where in particular, nor the
other persons to whom His Majesty made that Promise, but if you remember, you
know I did tell you, with several other particular circumstances, which I need
not here make any further mention of.

THE Last SPEECH OF Mr. Francis Johnson Priest, of the Order of St. Francis,
who was Executed (as a PRIEST only) at Worcester, upon the 22d of August, Anno
Dom: 1679. Which he spoke, for the most part, upon the Ladder, immediately
before his Execution, (but being interrupted) and that which he did speak,
being taken by an unskilful Scribe, was Printed by the halves, and so
imperfect, that it was in some places Nonsense. To correct that Abuse, this
which he left ( written with his own Hand) is published by Friend.
ALmighty God, out of his infinite Goodness to this World, through the merits
of his Son Christ Jesus; ordained or made choice of three Virtues whereby we
must walk, which are these, viz. Faith, Hope, and Charity. First, by virtue of
Faith, we are to believe all things that are done in this World; Secondly, by
virtue of Hope, we are to believe and hope for all things in another World. And
the reason why Christians do believe this Hope, is to bring and conduct them to
salvation in the other World. And if we hope in God, we cannot but believe God;
for with the mouth Confession is made, but with the heart (and through Faith)
we must believe unto salvation; so that Faith is not to be troaden under foot,
or to be hid under a bushel, but to be set upon a candlestick, Luke 12*
Whosoever does confess me before men, him will I confess before the Angels of
God; And therefore all are bound to believe that there is but one Faith; and if
but one Faith, then but one Christian Faith. There is but one Faith, one Lord,
one Baptism; if it be so, how can this stand with so many Sectaries as there
are? If there be but one Faith, how can this be?

I believe the Creed of St. Athanasius, ( which is in your Common Prayer Book)
there it is said, That whosoever will be saved, it is necessary before all
things that he hold the Catholic Faith; and that if he keep not that Faith
whole and undefiled, he shall perish everlastingly. And as St. James says,
Jam. 2. 10. He that keeps the whole Law, and yet offends in one point, is
guilty of all; so they that believe, must be all of the same Faith. And that
this ought to be done, I appeal to all the Saints that are gone before, of whom
it is said, That their Faith was such, as by it they stopped the mouths of Lions,
they turned the edge of the Sword, and caused the Fire to cease that it should
not burn; so they were oppressed, they wandered about in Sheepscloathing and
Goats-cloathing, Heb. 11. Therefore I say there must be an unity of Faith.

I desire all Catholics to consider this, That it is better to be reviled by
man now in this World, than be reviled by God in the World to come. Mat. 16. it
is said, The Catholic Church is built upon a Rock. And Mat. 18. He who will
not believe the Church, let him be as a Heathen and Publican.

This Faith must be established so in every one, because Christ said, He would
send the Holy Ghost, and he will show us (or them) what to do. This is the Rule
of Faith: This Faith was published at Rome. And St. Paul writing to the
Christians there, rejoices that their Faith was renowned in the whole World.
Go ye therefore, Baptizing all Nations in the Name of the Father. And this is
the Faith I confess and believe in, and which I dye for.

I come now to speak of the second Virtue, which is Hope. I hope I shall have
such Reward, that neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into
the heart of man to conceive. Those that have Hope, shall be as Mount Sion,
that shall not be removed; Those that have firm Hope, there is nothing can
disturb them; as David faith, God is round about those that do hope in him, as
the Mountains are round about Jerusalem.

I come to the third Virtue, and that is Charity. It Is true, now this Body of
mine in this shipwreck is full of sin, but when that shipwreck is over, I shall
come to inherit that Rock that shall never fail. Now welcome shipwreck that
makes the Body suffer, but brings the Soul to that Haven which is joyful.

Now many there be that talk much of Charity, few understand it, and fewer that
practice it. This is the greatest Virtue, 1 Cor. 13. Though ye speak with
tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, it avails nothing. So then
we ought to have Love and Charity, or else it prevails nothing.

It Is expected I should say something of the Plot. As to this, I shall declare
two Points of my Faith.

First, I believe that all are bound to obey the King's Laws.

Secondly, I do declare, That those that do break the Law in word, or any
action, or that do act any thing against His Majesty's Life, that is a Sin unto
damnation, as much as it was a Sin in Judas to betray Christ.

An Oath is a taking God to witness, and is as much as if he took his Life and
Justice to stake. So that he who takes a false Oath, is guilty of destroying
the Life of God and his Justice, and of his own Damnation. And if I were but
guilty of this, I do declare, That all the Sin of Damnation would fall upon me,
because I denied the Truth, and so struck at God by my Sin, in denying the
Truth; that is one Damnation.

A second Damnation is, That if any man know of an Evil against His Majesty,
His Kingdom and Nation, and to hide and not discover it, he shall answer for
those mischiefs that come thereby; so that a man would have made and committed
as many Sins, as there be men in England that had suffered.

A third Damnation, is to dye in this Lie and with this Perjury in his mouth;
whereby he loses Heaven, and all its enjoyments, and dies in greater Sins than
the Devils themselves.

Fourthly, I should have been guilty of my own Death; For that Judge Atkins
offered me my Life if I would confess what I knew of the Plot, which had I
known, and not discovered, would have made me the cause of my own Death, which
would have been a fourth Damnation.

I would have said more, but that I gave my Speech to a Friend to be Printed.

Mr. Sheriff. I pray Sir speak on what you have to say, and none shall
interrupt you.

Mr. Johnson. Now I have no more to do but to make my Address to Almighty God,
with all the powers of my Soul, that I may have his mercy and pardon of my
Sins; And therefore I beg that all Catholics who join in union of this same
Faith, would make an address unto God for me, that we may receive pardon for
our Sins. -- I have nothing now but wishes left. -- I wish I may imitate David
in his Repentance, and that my eyes may run down with tears, because I have not
kept God's Law. I wish with the Prophet Jeremiah, That Rivers of waters may
fall from my eyes, by reason of sin, Lam. 3. 48.

But Tears will not be proper for me at this time; I have kept my self from
them, lest by shedding Tears, some might say I was unwilling to dye, or feared
Death: But instead of Tears, I offer all the Blood in my veins, and I wish
every drop were an Ocean, and I would offer it up to God. I wish I might become
a man like David. I wish I had Mary Magdalens penitential Tears; I wish I had
her arms to embrace the feet of mercy. I wish I had all the graces of Saints
and Angels, I would offer them all to God for the remission of my sin. This is
my desire, and this I wish for as much as is in me.

I offer first my Life, and I beseech and desire of God to turn his Face* from
my Sins, but not from me. I offer up my Life in satisfaction for my Sins, and
for the Catholic Cause. And I beg for those that be mine Enemies in this my
Death, and I desire to have them forgiven, because I go to that world of
happiness sooner than I should have gone. And I humbly beg Pardon from God and
the world: And this I beg for the merits and mercy of Jesus Christ.

I beseech God to bless His Majesty, to give Him a long Life, and a happy Reign
in this world, and in the world to come.

I beseech God to bless all my Benefactors, and all my Friends, and those that
have been any way under my charge.

I beseech God to bless all Catholics, and this Nation, and His Majesty's
Privy Council, and grant that they may Act no otherwise than what may be for
the glory of God, who will bring to light and to judgment all both good and
evil, Luke 12. So I beseech God that he will give them grace to serve him.

I beseech God to bless the Parliament that is now in Election, that they may
determine nothing, but what they themselves do hope to be judged by at the last
day.

I beseech God to bless all that suffer under this Persecution, and to turn
this our Captivity into Joy; that they who now sow in tears, may reap in joy.

I beseech God to accept the death of my Body, and to receive my Soul.

I have no more to say.

Mr. Sheriff. I give you no interruption; but only whereas you said, that you
dyed for the Faith, that is not so, you do not dye for that, but because you,
being His Majesty's Subject, received Orders from the Church of Rome Beyond the
Seas, and came again into England, contrary to the Law.


Mr. Johnson. That was pardoned by the Kings Act of Grace.


Mr. Sheriff. That Act pardoned only Crimes committed before the making of it,
but not those done since, as your continuance in England was.


Mr. Johnson. I am sorry if I have given offense in any thing I have said; my
reason for it was, because when I was sent for to the Judges upon Sunday night,
Judge Atkins told me, I dyed not for being concerned in the Plot, but for being
a Priest.


Mr. Sheriff. No, but for your continuance in England against the Law (being a
Priest.)


Mr. Johnson. God receive my Soul.


Mr. Sheriff. Sir, You may take your own time, and you shall have no
interruption; Sir, will you be pleased to have your own time?


Jailer. Sir, pray give the Sign when you please to be turned off.


Mr. Johnson. I will give you no Sign, do it when you will.


And so he was Executed.

Mr. Johnson was of an Honorable Family (in Norfolk) born to an Estate of 500
l. per Annum, (All which he left for the sake of Religion) his third Brother
now enjoys the Estate.

FINIS.
Mr. Johnson's Speech Which he delivered to his Friend to be Printed (as he
mentioned at the place of Execution.)
ADVERTISEMENT.
Mr. Johnsons' s Trial, and what he spoke at his Execution being finished, there
came to the Printers hands his Speech at large (of which his foregoing words
are only the heads) as the Reader will see, and as Mr. Johnson also mentions,
viz. ( I would have said more, but that I gave my Speech to a Friend to be
Printed) therefore his Friend has now faithfully published it accordingly, being
written by Mr. Johnson himself, as follows.

GOD Almighty (honored Friends) having been pleased of his infinite mercy
through the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ, to bestow on all Christians the
Theological virtues of Faith, Hope and Charity, by virtue of Faith all are to
believe whatever God has revealed to us in this world, and by hope all are to
expect what he has promised we shall receive in the world to come.

And because, where God bestows such a Faith and Hope, it is in order to bring
all to a true charity and love of him; for who can have Faith to believe an
Infinite Goodness, in which he hopes, but he must (...) that Infinite Goodness
in whom he hopes, which bestows on him such gifts? therefore all ought to
honor God, and show their love to him by a due profession, and a due practice
of this Faith, this Hope, and this Romans 10. 10.
Charity, otherwise they cannot believed, because, as St. Paul says, With the
heart it is believed to righteousness, but with the mouth confession is made to
salvation, Romans 10. 10.

For those that will not show their Faith, which is a light not to be hid under
a bushel, but to be set in a Candlestick, to give light to all, such can never
have neither true Hope for themselves, nor true Charity toward God, or their
Neighbor, nor God to them, because our Savior says, Luke 12. He that
confesses me before men, him will Luke 12. 8.
the Son of man confess before the Angels of God; but he that denies me before
men (as those do that act or swear against their conscience) him will the Son
of Man deny before the Angels of God.

And as all are bound to confess him, and his Faith; so likewise all are
obliged to own Ephesians. 4. 4, 5.
and profess that this Faith can be but one only Faith, as we are taught,
Ephesians* 4. where St. Paul declares, There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God, even as you are called, says he, in one hope of your calling. This
being most true, let every rational Christian, in his most retired thoughts,
consider how this Unity of Faith, and this Hope of our Calling can stand with
such multiplicity of Sects and Opinions, all so diverse one against the other,
with which the Nation now so abounds: For according to the Text, a man may as
well say, there are diversities of Gods, or diversities of Christ's, as that
there are diversities of Faiths, because Faith is nothing but the truth of one
God, which Truth or Faith he has revealed, which none can alter.

We are all therefore bound to believe alike, in one Faith, and in one holy
Catholic Church, as our Creed teaches us; we are all obliged to believe in
one Catholic Faith, as the Creed of St. Athanasius in the Protestant
Common Prayer Book declares, saying, Whosoever will be saved, it is necessary
before all things, that he believe in the Catholic Faith, which Faith, unless
every one keep whole and undefiled, he shall without doubt perish
everlastingly: All and every one are to keep this Faith whole, because as it is
writ, St. Jam. 2. v. 10. Whosoever keeps the whole Law and yet offends in one
point, is guilty of all. Jam. 2. 10.


All are to keep the whole Faith, because our Savior says, Matthew. 16. 15. Go
ye into the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature: All are to believe
alike the whole Faith of the Gospel, else they shall perish everlastingly;
because our Savior says in the same place, v. 16. He that believes shall be
saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. We all must keep the Unity of
Faith whole and undefiled, because our Savior also says, St. Matthew. 5. 16.
Heaven and Earth shall pass, but one jot, or one tittle Mat. 5. 16.
of the Law shall in no wise pass, till all be fulfilled; as well the Law of
Faith, as the Law of Works.

In confirmation of this, I appeal to the Faith, and Works, and Sufferings of
all the Saints from the beginning, who to keep their Faith whole and entire,
have made such profession and practice of it, and confirmed it by such works as
are recorded in St. Paul, Heb. 11. where first he registers the Faith and Deeds
of the Believers in particular, and Heb. 11.
then in general, of what they did and suffered by virtue of their Faith, as
there you read; By faith they stopped the mouths of Lions, extinguished the force
of the fire, repelled the edge of the sword; they were racked, they were tried
by mockings and stripes; they were in chains and prisons, they were stoned,
they were hewed, they were tempted, they died in the slaughter of the sword,
they were so persecuted and impoverished, that they were fain to go about in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, needy, in distress, afflicted, wandering in
deserts, in mountains, in dens, and caves of the Earth.

Dear Catholics now in your present persecution, think of this, and be willing
to follow these examples, that you, as in the same place it follows, being
appointed, as they were, by the testimony of your Faith, may receive, ere long,
those better things which God, as it is there writ, provides for you: Happy
those that have this Faith, but thrice more happy those that suffer these
persecutions for Faiths sake, because by this Faith, as St. Paul says; Gal. 3.
11. the just man lives, and those that have not this Gal. 3. 11. Heb. 11. 6.
Faith, are dead to God, because, as it is written, Heb. 11. 6. Without faith
it is impossible to please God; and yet though we have this Faith, except we
join, when God requires, our works of sufferings to this Faith, both we and our
Faith are dead to God, because, as St. James says, chap. 2. ver. 17. Faith is
to be showed by works, because Faith Jam. 2. 17. Jam. 1. 25.
without works is dead. And he further shows us in his first chap. v. 25. it is
the works make a man happy, although there can be no good work without a firm
Faith in nothing doubting, as he says, ver. 6.

Christian Faith is a firm, established, and an infallible Faith, because it is
grounded upon a Rock, against which the gates of Hell shall not prevail, Matthew.
16. v. 18. This Faith is firmly established by such Authority of God and his
Church, that he that will not own the Authority, is as a Heathen and a
Publican; God has declared him so; and what the Church binds on Earth, God
binds in Heaven. This Church and Faith is firmly established, because our
Savior has promised, That the Holy Ghost, the Mat. 18. 17. John 14. 16.
Spirit of Truth should teach the Believers all Truth, remain with them for
ever, show them things to come to be believed, and should cause the Believers
to remember all things which Christ had already taught, which you read in John
14. and 16. chap.

This Faith is firmly established, because it was believed and published from
the beginning, throughout the whole world, as St. Paul proclaims, Romans the
first, where he speaks thus to all that be in Rome; Beloved of God, called to
be Saints; first I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your
Faith is published throughout the whole world. Finally, this Faith is
established and infallibly confirmed, that it can never decay till the worlds
end, because our Savior has promised to be with the Believers unto the worlds
end, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and
behold I am with you always even to the end of the world. Thus much briefly
concerning my Christian Faith in which I truly believe in all points
infallible, and in confirmation of which one only Faith and Catholic Church, I
will and do lay down my life; and whosoever will as he ought consider the Text
that proves this Faith and Church of the Living God, to be the pillar and
ground of Truth, as it is evident it is, 1 Timothy 3. 15. I question not but who I
say considers this, will believe the same, our Faith being assisted by our
second Divine Virtue, which is our Christian Hope.

This Hope is that Virtue which assures us, that for the reward of our Faith,
and the profession and due practice of it, as we ought, there are those
heavenly gifts laid up for the Christian Believers, which neither eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, nor the heart of man can conceive or comprehend, as
St. Paul declares: This Hope gives such confidence, that death cannot overcome
it, because, as the Prophet says, Although he shall kill me, yet I will hope
in him. Why then shall any fear to die for his Faith, having this Hope? It Is
for want of making due reflection and use of this Hope that causes so many to
be fearful to suffer, and makes them fly the field of persecution, and forsake
the banners of their Christian Faith, that all ought to fight under, and would
still fight under, would they make use of the divine hope of Gods promises,
which are such, that as David says, Psalm. 125. That he that hopes or trusts in
our Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but remain for ever.
As the Mountains, says God by the mouth of David, are about Jerusalem, so the
Lord is round about his people; that is, such as will place their hope in him,
as the Prophet did, and exhorts Psalm. 130. 5, 6.
us to do the same, saying, Psalm. 130. 5, 6. My soul has hoped in our Lord;
from the morning watch, even until night, let Israel hope in our Lord; that is,
from the beginning of the day of our life, till the night of death; as well in
the morning of prosperity, as in the evening of adversity: because it is also
writ, God is my Hope for ever; and whosoever can truly say with David, Psalm.
31. 1. In thee, O Lord, have I placed my Hope, shall be assured of what there
follows, Not to be confounded for ever, because, as St. Paul says, Hope
consoundeth not.

There is a contrary Vice to this Virtue, a worldly Fear that brings all things
to confusion; it makes Worldlings swear, and forswear, and perjure; For which
Perjuries and False Oaths, as the Prophet says, Judgment springs up as Hemlock
in the Furrows of the Field. And therefore Dr. Thorndick, in his Book of just
Weights and Measures, says, That Coaction of Oaths is the crying Sin of this
Nation, to call down the wrath of God upon the Kingdom.

What better remedy than to secure our selves against all worldly Fears, and
these ensuing Dangers, but by relying on the hope of future blessings, which
God, if we fight and suffer for his sake, has promised. God is the God of
Hosts, and we fight under him, and if we trust in him we are happy, as David
says, Psalm. 84. 5. O Lord of Hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee, in
whom to hope is to be secured; and therefore David Psalm. 84. 5.
also says, Psalm. 91* He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his
wing shall thou hope, especially if we fight for our Faith; and therefore he
adds in the same verse, His truth shall be thy shield and buckler, if we will
hope in him and his reward; For if we hope for our great wages, we shall easily
undergo our little work: As for example, if we hope to drink of the torrent of
pleasure, as God has promised we shall in his Kingdom, who will fear to taste
now of the Chalice of some small Persecution? If we hope hereafter to be
numbered amongst the Sons of God, as he has promised we shall, and have our
lot among the Saints, why should we now fear to be reviled of men, or be
reputed ignominious, as our Savior and his Apostles were? If they have, so
will they do you also; the Scholar is not above the Master, nor the Servant
above his Lord. If they called the Master of the Family Beelzebub, so will they
do his Servants; therefore we must with the Apostles rejoice, as you read in
the Acts they did, because they were accounted worthy to suffer contumely and
reproaches. If contumely and reproach seem so hard for us to undergo now for a
good Cause, as is our Conscience before a few Enemies, what contumely must
those undergo who for now acting against their Conscience, shall undergo at the
great judgment before God, Angels, Saints, Devils, and all the Damned in Hell?
if for our reproach now we hope that after a short sorrow, God will honor us
so, as to wipe away with his own hand every tear from our eyes, as he promises
in the Revelations he will; and that henceforth there shall be neither grief,
nor labor, nor pain, or the like; why should any* now grieve either to see
himself or others suffer? It will not last, this Tempest will soon be over, and
if now in this Storm the small vessel of my Body suffer shipwreck, or some
others the like vessels, if our Souls can but carry off our goods of Faith,
Hope and Charity, all is very well; For as soon as the vessels of our Bodies
sink, our Souls will come to shore at the Land of Promise, and we shall be
secured in the Rock which is Christ, and ever remain safe in the eternal Hills,
where neither winds nor waves of Persecution can ever reach to assault us: then
welcome shipwreck, that sinks the vessel of the Body, to bring the Passengers
and their Goods so happily to the Haven, the Heaven of Bliss.

Let us therefore weigh these things in a prudential Balance, and see which
Scale is the heaviest, of present Fears, or future Hopes; of present
Sufferings, or future Glories. Let us remember our Saviors words to his
Apostles, You are those that remained with me in my temptations or trials; for
which, said he, their reward was, he disposed the Kingdom of Heaven to them;
Partners in Sufferings, Partners in Glories: which if well considered, we shall
say with St. Paul, The sufferings of this present time are not condign, or of
equality to the future glory which shall be revealed in us; and we shall with
his joyful Spirit say, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works in us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. It Is a
happy weight that lifts both Sufferings and Sufferers up as high as Heaven, to
eternal Crowns, of which we are all assured of as a reward for our Faith, if we
will make good use of our Christian hope; which that we may the better do, let
us endeavor to help our selves by the third and greatest Virtue that follows
our Faith and Hope, which is Charity.

This is that greatest Virtue of which all sorts of Christians speak much,
understand little, and practice less; though without the practice of it* it is
in vain for any to pretend 1 Cor. 13.
to have a saving Faith, or Hope; For as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 13. Though he
speak with the tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, he is but as
sounding brass; and although he should know all Mysteries, and have Faith to
remove Mountains; and though he should have such hope, understand for reward,
that he should give all to the Poor, and deliver his body to burn, and yet not
have charity, it profits nothing. Charity, as he says, ver. 7. suffers all
things, believes all things, hops all things, bears all things.

Do all that pretend to Charity do thus? If to speak with the tongues of Angels
without Charity be nothing but vanity, what Charity is there in those that
speak with the tongues of Detraction, Scandal, Slander, False-witness and
Perjuries against their Neighbors? If those that give all to the Poor may want
Charity, so that all which they give profits them nothing, what Charity is
there in those that take all from their Neighbors, to force them to forsake
their Faith? If Alms profit nothing without Charity, can such Injuries profit
Persecutors, that take all away against Charity? If a man may give his own Body
to burn, and yet be cold in Charity, what Charity is there to kill others
Bodies, take away their Lives with ignominy and violence, because they will not
kill their own Souls, by acting against God and their Conscience? If Charity
consists only in those that suffer all things, believe all things, hope all
things, what Charity is there in those who will make their Neighbor suffer all
things of Persecution, because they believe and hope according to their
Conscience, and profess their Faith and Hope as they are bound before God upon
their salvation so to do?

It Is certain, that though men may pretend persecution of others for Gods sake,
to reduce others to him, yet it is evident that for any Kingdom to persecute
any, merely for Conscience Sake, is against the Law of God; and therefore
whilst they would seem so zealously to keep the first Command, of loving God
above all, and force others to conform to their opinions, they break the second
Command, because they do not love their Neighbor as themselves, because they
persecute them, and so they dash one Commandment against the other, and so
crack both Commandments together: For wheresoever the second Command is broke,
by not loving our Neighbor as our selves, the first is broke with it, because
did they love God above all, they would do better by their Neighbor.

But I do not come here to beat down others pretense to Charity, but endeavor
to advance Charity in my self and others; and the way to do this, is not to
reckon what others have not done according to Charity, but to call to mind what
others have done to raise Charity toward God and their Neighbors.

We read in Holy Writ, that Moses love was so to God and his Neighbor, that to
repurchase a Peace and Charity 'twixt God and the People after they had
offended, he desired that his own name should rather be blotted out of the Book
of life, than that the Peoples names should not be put in, by obtaining
Forgiveness; and therefore he says to God, Either spare the People, or blot me
out of the Book which thou have writ.

How superlative a Motive is this, to move Christians to a perfect Charity
toward their Neighbors; well may a Christian be willing to lay down his
temporal life for good example sake, rather than offend God, and scandalize
others by deserting his Faith; since others could be willing to hazard their
eternal lives, to reduce their Neighbors to God by Charity.

The like examples of love to God and his Neighbors, we have in St. Paul, in
his manifold expressions both toward God and men; first to God, as Romans 8.
where he makes this Proclamation, Who shall, says he, separate us from the
Charity of Christ? Shall Romans 8.
Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril,
or Sword? As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are
accounted as sheep to the slaughter. He adds, I am certain that neither Death
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And for this Charity in order to his Neighbor, let what he suffered to serve
them testify, as he relates, 2 Cor. 11. by being in Labors and Stripes, in
Prison, in Death, in Scourgings, in Shipwracks, being day and night in the
bottom of the Sea, in Perils, in 2 Cor. 11.
Weariness, in Painfulness, in Hunger, in Thirst, in Fasting, in Cold and
Weariness, besides what he suffered through his care of all Churches, ver. 28,
29. where he says, Who is weak, and I am not weak? understand by compassion,
as Fellow-sufferer; Who is scandalized, and I burn not? understand by zeal. Let
those now consider this, who never more rejoice than now, when they see their
passive Neighbors scandalized, and were never better content in their own
apprehensions than now, when they behold us suffering, though before God we are
innocent. Were St. Paul on earth again, he would rather give himself for
others, to ease them of their sufferings, according to his wonted 2 Cor. 12.
15. Coloss. 2. 4.
charity expressed, 2 Cor. 12. 15. saying, I will very gladly spend and be spent
for you: and he would rejoice to suffer in charity for his Neighbor, as he
abundantly declares, Colos. 2. 4. saying, I rejoice in my sufferings for you,
and fill up that which is wanting of the passions or afflictions of Christ in
my flesh for his bodies sake, which is the Church, and this example is given
for us to do the like, and therefore he says, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 4. 9.
4. 9. We are made a spectacle to the World, to Angels, and to men; and
therefore God forbid but some of us, if we be Christian men, should endeavor to
imitate some of his examples, though we cannot all; For he ascended to so
superlative a degree of Charity toward his Neighbor, that he declares to the
World, that he could be a Castaway himself to save others; for thus he says,
Romans 9. 3. I could wish my self were Romans 9. 3.
accursed from Christ for my Brethren.

Christians do not then henceforth so easily ruin your Neighbors, neither in
their Lives, nor Estates, or Credits, by Persecutions and Scandals, the
Scripture holds forth no such Doctrine, nor gives any such examples, but, as
you see, the contrary; but if our Persecutors will not imitate these examples,
let us that are persecuted and suffer endeavor to imitate them, by choosing
rather to lose all we can call our own in this World, and Life also, rather
than to break Charity to God and our Neighbor, either by denying or dissembling
our Faith, and scandalizing the Church, or bearing false Witness against our
selves, or our Neighbors, to save our Lives or Fortunes, or enrich our selves
by false Witness.

And if we will put in practice the Virtues of Faith, Hope and Charity I have
spoke of, we ought to do it thus; what we profess by words, we must confirm by
deeds and actions. Our profession of Catholic Faith is this, I believe all
Divine Revelations delivered to the Prophets and Apostles, proposed by the
Catholic Church in Her General Councils, or by Her Universal Practice to be
believed as an Article of Catholic Faith, knowing this to be our Faith, the
confirmation of this knowledge, or the practice of this by our deeds, is, as
St. Paul teaches, Ephesians. 3. 8. To esteem all worldly Ephesians. 3. 8.
things as dirt, in respect of this eminent knowledge of Christ and his Faith;
and therefore for my own part, I now being ready to leave all in the World, and
my Life in testimony of my Catholic Faith, which I profess I desire and hope
to manifest to all, I value my knowledge of Christ's Faith, more than I value
the universal World.

And as for my Christian Hope I profess to have, the confirmation of it, or the
practical 1 Pet. 3. 15.
part is to be fulfilled thus, being that we must, as St. Peter says, 1 Pet.
3. 15. Be always ready to give an account to every one concerning the hope
which is in us. I have already by words expressed it, and by deed I express it
thus; That whereas I do believe that God, as the Scripture says, kills, and
brings to life again; carries down to the depth, and brings back again; so
now I do by this my present Execution, which I am now to undergo, willingly
give my Body to be mortified in death for my Faith, hoping in Gods infinite
mercy he will restore my Body and Soul to eternal life; and I do willingly
resign my self to be carried down to my Grave, hoping by my Saviors Cross and
Passion, Death and Burial, he will raise me up again to a glorious Resurrection.

And as for the confirmation of my Charity, to show by deeds, the love I owe to
God and my Neighbor, it has pleased my Savior by his own words to declare
which is the best proof or practice of Charity, where he says, No man has a
greater Charity, than he that lays down his life for his Friend. I therefore do
willingly undergo this death I am to suffer now, to testify I love my Friend,
my Neighbor as my self; whilst I undergo this death for my self and them, that
seeing it is for the profession of my Faith I dye, they, whilst they live, may
the more happily serve God in the same belief; and I testify I love God above
all, because I forsake the World and my self in death, rather than offend him
by doing any thing against my Conscience.

And forasmuch as for these many years I have had occasion by discoursing and
reading the Holy Scriptures with others who desired to find out the true Faith,
I have by words declared what Faith I did believe, and what Faith they ought to
believe; I now declare that for every Point of Faith that ever I believed my
self, or read to others, or told them that they might believe as a Point of
Faith; for all and every such Points of Faith, in confirmation of them, as well
to my self as others, I here lay down my Life; and omitting all other
particular Points, I believe Obedience to our King to be a Divine Law, and that
we are bound to obey His Commands in Temporal Laws; and I believe it too a sin
of Damnation, for any Subject of His to Rebel against Him, or His Kingdom; and
I believe it as certain a sin to Damnation, for any Subject to endeavor, either
by thoughts, words or deeds, to take away His Life, or act any thing of that
nature, either by himself, or any others, or other against His Sacred Majesty,
as I believe it was a sin in Judas to Damnation to betray Christ. And I do
declare upon my salvation that I never did, nor do know any Catholic, that
ever was or is the least guilty, either by thought, word or deed, by any Plot
or otherwise, to have any design or concurrence to kill His Sacred Majesty, or
rebel against His Kingdom, whom God long preserve with his Subjects in all
happiness in this World, and crown Him in the World to come with eternal glory.

And now it remains, that with all the powers and forces of my Soul, I make my
address to God for mercy ere I appear before him for Judgment; and you, dear
Friends, here present, who believe in one Holy Catholic Church, and Communion
of Saints, be pleased in charity to make the same address to God with me, and
for me, that we may obtain true sorrow and repentance for all our sins, and a
merciful forgiveness; and first let us wish from the bottom of our hearts, that
we could express and make good Psalm. 119. 8.
our sorrow, as David did, Psalm. 119. Whilst rivers of waters run down our
eyes like his, because we have not kept according to our faith Gods commands;
for which had we that Fountain of tears which the Prophet wished for, we ought
spend it all; we ought with Jeremy, Lam. 3. 48, 49. to weep till our eyes, as
his, failed, and as his eye with tears afflicted, as he says his heart, so
ought ours to do, because we have made so ill use of that Faith, Hope and
Charity, which God has bestowed upon us.

But forasmuch as Tears now at this present, and in these circumstances of rash
censuring times, Tears, I say, from me, might seem to some, either the
offspring of Fear to dye, which God forbid I should have in so good a Cause as
my Religion; or least others might judge my Tears might fall by reason of some
other guilt, of which I am free and innocent, I have endeavored to stop the
course of Tears, and instead of drops of waters from my eyes, I Will spend the
drops of blood from every sorrowful vein of my heart, and my whole body, that
God may please to wash away the sins of all my life past, and I wish each drop
an Ocean for my self and all the World, because I have nothing now left more
than wishes, which I beseech thee, O gracious God, of thy mercy to accept of;
and if you will vouchsafe to accept of wishes to supply the deeds, by wishes I
offer up all that is good to you, that ever you gave to any since the Worlds
Creation; I offer up David's broken heart, together with my own, that so like
him; after my repentance, I may become a man according to your own heart. I
offer up the sighs of Magdalen, and wish I could make such use of them as she
did, to sob out my sins. I wish her repentant Arms, that I may lay fast hold at
the Feet of thee my gracious God.

I wish I had the longanimity of all the Holy Confessors.

I wish I had the sufferings of all thy constant Martyrs.

I wish I had the lamps of all thy sacred Virgins, that I might offer all to
thee that in them was pleasant in thy sight.

I wish I could offer up to thee, O God, the Sacrifices of just Abel, Lot, Job,
and all other Sacrifices that ever did gratefully ascend up in thy sight; that
thou being pleased by the sight of them, thou might look no more upon my
sins: For if thou will observe mine iniquities, who shall endure? let therefore
thy mercy hide thy face from my sins, but let not the rigor of thy justice cast
me away from thy presence; cast me not away from thy Face, and thy holy Spirit
take not from me, but turn away thy Face from sin, and blot out all my
iniquities, and I will offer my Body as a Sacrifice to thee by death to appease
thy just anger.

I own my sins, and I own your mercies. You gave me Faith to know and believe
what was the Will of you my heavenly Master, but I acknowledge my fault, that
although I knew your Will, I did not fulfill it, and therefore I ought to be
beaten with many stripes, because you foretold me, that many are the stripes of
a sinner; but be pleased, dear Lord, also to remember, that in the same place
you promised, that notwithstanding this, yet mercy should encompass him that
hopes; you have given your Divine Hope, vouchsafe to let this Hope defend me;
and although I know I have not made good use of Hope, and Hope not well used,
of which I am guilty, makes a Sinner defer Repentance, and so puts in danger to
fall into Presumption by long neglect, yet the last hour of calling being not
yet past, and your mercy being above all your works, I hope and humbly beg to
be Partaker with those who were accepted at the last hour.

I humbly acknowledge with thanks, O gracious God, that you gave me Charity as
your Livery, in which I always ought to have appeared in your sight, and never
to have been divested of it; but how often have I been spoiled, through my own
fault, of this garment? how often have I, by descending to Jericho, instead of
going up to Jerusalem? how often, I say, have I been robbed of this garment of
Charity, even as often as I have preferred any sublunary object, and the love
of that before the love of you, and before your goodness, which is above all
goodness, and the object of all Beatitude?

Vouchsafe again, O gracious Lord, to restore in mercy to me this Nuptial
Vestment, ere I dare appear at the Supper of the Lamb. Make me, O heavenly
Father, a penitential Prodigal, and then I shall have put on me again this best
Robe of Charity.

This I beg from the bottom of my Soul for his dear sake, who was divested of
his garments out of Charity, that I might be invested in his Charity, who also
suffered his garments to be divided, that he might purchase grace, that we
might never be divided from the unity of his Faith and Church, but rather
willingly suffer for his sake the separation of our lives from our bodies, the
separation of our bodies from our souls, and the separation of our bodies into
its quarters, that we may the more perfectly by these sufferings and
separations from our selves be united to him.

Therefore in the faithful communion and perfect union of the sufferings of all
Saints that ever have been, or now are, or ever will be, in the union of the
most sacred merits of the life, passions and death of God and man, my dear
Redeemer and Savior Christ, I offer my self willingly to what I am now to
suffer, begging by all that is good in Heaven and in Earth, remissions of sins
for my self and the world, particularly for all that may appear to have been my
Enemies in the concern of my Life, as Witness, Jury, Judge, and others, whom I
do not esteem as Enemies, but as the best of Friends; I heartily forgive them,
and beg the best of Blessings for them all, as being the cause of sending me
sooner than otherwise I might have gone, to the happy state of Hope for the
other World. Whither, before I go, I humbly beg pardon of all in this World,
for whatever in thoughts, words or deeds I have committed to offend them, or
omitted to do for them, by which any thing might have been mended in them, or
my self, I beseech God to bless them all.

I beseech God to bless also all my Friends, spiritual and temporal; all
Benefactors; and all by whom I have received good or evil, by words, deeds or
desires.

I beseech God to bless all those of whom I ever had care or charge spiritually
or temporally.

I beseech God bless his Holy Catholic Church, and our chief Bishop thereof,
with all other Bishops, Priests and Clergy.

I beseech God bless this Nation, and unite all amongst themselves and to God,
in true Faith, Hope and Charity.

I beseech God to bless His Majesty's Privy Council* and make all the secrets
of their hearts and their desires such, as that both Charles our King on earth,
and God our great King in Heaven and Earth, may be served, pleased and honored
by them, that men and Angels may rejoice at it now, and be public witness of
it at the last great day, at the great and last Council Table, where every
secret shall be laid open, Luke 12. as Solomon says, Eccles. ult. when God
will bring into judgment every secret thing, whether it be good or evil.

I beseech God to bless the Parliament now Elect, and be so present with them
when they sit to judge and discuss the Causes of this Nation, they may imitate
the Assembly of those that are to sit upon the Twelve Thrones at the last great
Assembly, that they may now judge or determinate of things no otherwise than
they hope or fear then to be judged themselves, and determined of to all
eternity.

I beseech God to bless all that suffer in this Persecution, and let the
blessing expressed in the 126th Psalm light upon them speedily, that God turning
their Captivity, all mouths may be filled with joys, and tongues with singings.
Convert, O Lord, our Captivity, as streams in the South, that those who now
sow in tears, may reap in joy; and for this temporal death, O blessed Trinity,
give me eternal life; let my Body dye to the World for the love of thee, that
my Soul may live for ever, and love in thee my God and dear Redeemer Amen.
Sweet Jesus Amen*

FINIS.

