A LETTER CONCERNING SEPARATION, Written formerly by a Reverend Author; And
recommended to All (especially the truly Christian and Honest-minded) Members
of the Separation within this Distracted and Divided Kingdom.

Romans 16. v. 17. Now I beseech you, Brethren, Mark them which cause Divisions,
etc.

Jude. 19. These be they who Separate themselves, Sensual, having not the
Spirit.

2. Cor. 13. v. 11. -- Be of one Mind, live in Peace; and the God of Love and
Peace shall be with you.



London, Printed for W. D. 1681.

The Publisher to the well-minded Reader.
THe Demeanor and Language of the Conceited Zealot says, Stand by thy self,
come not near to Me, I am Holyer than Thou: That of the Pharisee, God I thank
thee, that I am not as other men are. The sentiments and expressions of both
combined, make one Modern Separatist. Saint Paul's Dialect on the other hand
is, We beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions, and avoid them.
And his motive is founded on this Reason, That he who Loves not his Brother
whom he has seen (and can hebe said to love his Brother who separates and
divides from him?) how can he love God whom he has not seen? Our Blessed
Savior has therefore (who best might) umpired the business, and assured you,
That by this shall all men know you to be his Disciples, if you love one
another. In the name, and for the sake of our Common Savior, I call upon you
my Brethren of the Separation (unless you value them who abuse the Holy name of
Jesus more than Jesus himself) That you weigh and duly ponder our Blessed
Saviors words, and study the Advice of his Apostle St. Paul. And you will then
upon mature calm thoughts not be so ready to inveigh against the MISCHIEF of
IMPOSITIONS, as to abhor the UNREASONABLENESS of SEPARATION. In a word, since
Charity is the most extensive, and Humility the foundation of all Christian
Graces; whether it be more equal, That the Established Laws Ecclesiastical
should vail to private humor, or you our brethren of the Separation, kindly
and modestly submit your selves to these Laws, let your own private Consciences
be the Sole Judges.

To Mr. Smith and Mr. Rob. Ringleaders of the late Separation at Amsterdam.
Ep. 1. Setting forth their injury done to the Church, the Injustice of your
Cause, and Fearfulness of their Offense: Censuring and Advising them.

WE hear of your SEPARATION, and Mourn; yet not so much for You, as for your
Wrong: You could not do a greater Injury to your Mother than to fly from Her.
Say she were Poor, Ragged, Weak; say she were Deformed; yet she is not
Infectious: Or if she were, yet she is yours. This were Cause enough for you to
Lament her, to Pray for her, to labor for her Redress; not to Avoid Her: This
unnaturalness is shameful, and more heinous in you, who are reported, not
Parties in this Evil, but Authors: Your Flight is not so much as your
Mis-guidance. Plead not: This fault is past excuse. If we should All follow
You, this were the way, of a Church (as you plead) imperfect, to make no
Church; and of a Remedy to make a Disease. Still the fruit of our Charity to
you is, besides our Grief, Pity. Your Zeal of Truth has misled you, and you
others; a Zeal, if Honest, yet Blind-folded, and led by Selfwill.

Oh that you loved Peace but half so well as Truth! then this Breach had never
been; and you that are yet Brethren had been still Companions. Go out of
Babylon, you say; the Voice not of Schism, but of Holiness. Know you where you
are? Look about you, I beseech you, look behind you; and see if we have not
left it upon our Backs. She her self feels, and sees that she is Abandoned; and
complains to all the World, that we have not only forsaken, but spoiled Her;
and yet you say, COME OVT OF BABYLON.

And except you will be willingly Blind, you may see the Heaps of her Altars,
the Ashes of her Idols, the Ruins of her Monuments, the Condemnation of her
Errors, the Revenge of her Abominations. And are we Yet in Babylon? Is Babylon
Yet among us?

Where are the main Buildings of that ACCVRSED CITY? Those high and proud
Towers of that Universal Hierarchy, Infallible Judgment, Dispensations with the
Laws of God, and sins of Men: Disposition of Kingdoms and Deposion of Princes,
parting stakes with God in our Conversion, through Freedom of Will; in our
Salvation, through the Merit of our Works? Where are those Rotten heaps
(rotten, not through Age, but Corruption of Transubstantiating of Bread,
Adoring of Images, multitude of Sacraments, power of Indulgencies, necessity of
Confession, profit of Pilgrimages, constrained and approved Ignorance, unknown
Devotions? Where are those deep Vaults (if not Mines) of Pennances and
Purgatories, and whatsoever else has been devised by those Popelings, whether
profitable or glorious, against the Lord and his Christ? Are they not all
razed, and buried in the Dust? Has not the Majesty of her Gods, like as was
done to Mithra and Serapis, been long agone offered to the public laughter of
the Vulgar? What is this but to go, yea, to run (if not to fly) out of
Babylon? But as every man is an hearty Patron of his own Actions, and it is a
desperate Cause that has no Plea) you allege our comorting in Ceremonies, and
say, still we tarry in the Suburbs. Grant that these were as ill as an Enemy
can make them, or can pretend them: You are deceived, if you think the Walls of
Babylon stand upon Ceremonies.

Substantial Errors are both her Foundation and Frame.

These Ritual observations are not so much as Tile and Reed, rather like to
some Fan upon the Roof; for Ornament, more than use: not parts of the Building
but necessary Appendances. If you take them otherwise, you wrong the Church; if
thus, and yet depart, you wrong it and your self: As if you would have
persuaded Righteous Lot not to stay in Zoar, because it was so near Sodom. I
fear, if you had seen the Mony-changers in the Temple, however you would have
prayed or taught there: Christ did it, not forsaking the place but scourging
the Offenders: And this is the Valor of Christian Teachers: To oppose Abuses,
not to run away from them: Where shall you not thus find Babylon? Would you
have run from Geneva because of her Wafers? Or from Corinth, for her disordered
Love Feasts? Either run out of the World, or your flight is Vain. If experience
of Change teach you not, that you shall find your Babylon every where, return
not. Compare the place you have left, with that you have chosen: Let not fear
of seeming to repent over-soon, make you partial. Lo, there a common harbor of
all Opinions, of all Heresies; if not a mixture. Here you drew in the free and
clear Air of the Gospel, without that odious composition of Judaism, Arrianism,
Anabaptism: There you live in the stench of these and more. You are unworthy of
pity, if you will approve your misery. Say, if you can, That the Church of
England (if she were not yours) is not an Heaven to Amsterdam. How is it then,
that our Gnats are harder to swallow, than their Camels? And that whilst all
Christendom magnifies our happiness and applauds it; your handful alone, so
detests our Enormities, that you despise our Graces? See whether in this you
make not God a loser.

The thanks of all his favors is lost, because you want more: and in the mean
time, who gains by this Sequestration, but Rome and Hell? How do they insult in
this Advantage, that our Mother's own Children condemn her for Unclean, that we
are daily weakened by our Divisions, that the rude multitude has so palpable a
mortive to distrust us? Sure, you intended it not: but if you had been their
hired Agent you could not have done our Enemies greater service.

The God of Heaven open your Eyes, that you may see the unjustice of that Zeal
which has transported you: and turn your heart to an endeavor of all
Christian satisfaction: otherwise, your Souls shall find too late, that it had
been a Thousand times better to swallow a Ceremony, than to rend a Church: yea,
That even Whoredoms and Murders shall abide an easier Answer than SEPARATION. I
have done if only I have advised you of that fearful threatening of the Wise
man. The Eye that mocketh his FATHER, and despises the Government of his
MOTHER, The Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles eat it.

FINIS.

