RESTITUTION TO THE Royal Author OR A VINDICATION OF King CHARLES the Martyr's
most Excellent BOOK; Entitled IKON ASILIK From the False, Scandalous, and
Malicious Reflections lately Published against it.

LICENSED,

May 10, 1691: Z. Isham.



C R
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON; Printed for Samuel Keble, at the Great Turks-Head in Fleet Street,
over against Fetter-Lane-end. 1691.

RESTITUTION TO THE ROYAL AUTHOR: OR A Vindication of King Charles the Martyr's
most Excellent Book Entitled, (...) from the False, Scandalous, and Malicious
Reflections lately Published against it.
MR. Milton's (...) being lately reprinted, the Editor has thought sit, out of
what design he best knows, to prefix the following Advertisement to his Book,

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas a Book, called Eikon Basilike, or King Charles the First's
Meditations, is most commonly reported and believed by many, especially the
Clergy, to be composed by King Charles the First; the following Insertion of
the Noble Lord Anglesey, under his own hand, was found by Edward Millington,
prefixed to one of the Books, reputed to be King Charles the First's.

Which Memorandum, if the Declaration of two Kings may be believed, is
sufficient to satisfy the World, how much that King was imposed upon by Dr.
Gauden Bishop of Exeter,

MEMORANDUM.
King Charles the Second and the Duke of York, did ( both in the last Session
of Parliament, 1675. when I showed them in the Lords House, the Written Copy of
this Book, wherein are some Corrections and Alterations, written with the Late
King Charles the First's own Hand,) assure me that this was none of the said
Kings compiling, but made by Dr. Gauden Bishop of Exeter, which I here insert
for the undeceiving of others in this Point, by attesting so much under my Hand.

Anglesey.

Now to prevent the ill Impressions, which may possibly be occasioned by the
abovementioned Memorandum, and to restore this Incomparable Book to the just
Privilege of its Royal Author, I shall very briefly do these two things.

I. Show some Marks of Suspicion upon the Advertisement.

II. Supposing it had all the pretended advantages, I shall produce such proof
against it, which, the Circumstances of the Evidence considered, must be
allowed an over Balance to his Lordships Attestation.

I There are some things in the Advertisement which render the Credit of it
very questionable. For 1. It calls the Duke his then Royal Highness, the Duke
of York. which was no Court Language in 1675; there being neither Reason nor
Custom for such a length of Distinction at that time. Now its somewhat
unlikely, that a Person of Honor and a Courtier, especially one of my late Lord
Anglesey's Sense, should be guilty of such an Impropriety. 2. We are informed
by the Advertisement, that in the Written Copy of the (...) There are some
Corrections and Alterations written with the late King Charles the first his
own Hand; which is no contemptible Argument, if we had no other, that the King
was the Author; otherwise we shall be at a loss for the reason of his Majesty's
Correcting the Manuscript, and suffering it to pass under the Title of his own
Composure. 3. The making Bishop Gauden the Author of this Book is another
disadvantage to the credit of the Memorandum, for the Style, the Air, and
Thought of (...), is as different from the management of Bishop Gauden's
writings, as it is possible to imagine; But out of respect to the Bishop's
Memory, I shall forbear to insist upon the Comparison. 'Its likely therefore
King Charles the Second and the then Duke, might tell the late Earl of Anglesey
(which his Lordship might possibly forget) that the Manuscript was not King
Charles the First his Hand; but a Transcript of Dr. Gauden's writing, which as
it agrees with matter of Fact; so it gives a fair account of the Alterations in
the Copy, which the Memorandum grants were made by the King.

II. Supposing this Memorandum had all the pretended Advantages; I shall now
produce such proof against it, which the Circumstances of the Evidence
considered, must be allowed an over balance to his Lordships Attestation.

1. We have the Letters Patents of King Charles the Second, dated November the
29th. 1660. In which Richard Royston of London, Bookseller, has the sole
privilege given him of Printing all the Works of King Charles the First,
amongst which the (...) is mentioned, with a particular Character and
Commendation.

2. The same Privilege for Reprinting the Works of King Charles the First, is
granted to the abovementioned Richard Royston by his Pt. Majesty King James the
Second, as appears by his Majesty's Letters dated February 22. 1685/6. Which
grant refers expressly to the first Edition Published by Richard Royston, in the
year 1662, and in which his Majesty declares that all the Works of his Royal
Father were Collected and Published. Which former Impression, as I have already
observed, makes particular mention of (...). Now I leave it to any unprejudiced
Person to judge whether it is in the least probable, that either of their
Majesty's should tell the late Earl of Anglesey, that this excellent Book was
written by Dr. Gauden, since they have both owned it to be their Royal Father's
in so public a manner, so that to use the expression of the Advertisement, if
the Declaration of two Kings, made with all the Circumstances of Advantage, may
be believed before a blind Manuscript, written by a doubtful Hand, and grounded
upon a private Relation, then we have sufficient evidence to satisfy the World
how much this Advertiser has Endeavored to impose upon it. To these Royal
Testimonies, I shall subjoyn that of Sir. Will. Dugdale, who having mentioned
the restless Endeavors of the Rebels to lessen his Majesty's Reputation, as by
other methods of Calumnies and Detraction, so particularly with respect to this
Book, assigning it to some other, though uncertain, Author. Having remarked this
ill usage he delivers his opinion in these words.

But to manifest that these were no borrowed Wares, Sir. William Dugdale's
short View of the late troubles in England, pr. 1681. p. 380.
but by the good and gracious assistance of Almighty God were totally of his
own composure in the midst of his most sad afflictions, besides the
unlikely-hood that any such expressions could flow from an heart not oppressed
and grieved with such a weight of sorrow as his was; I shall make it evident
from the Testimony of very credible Persons yet Living, that he had begun the
penning of them long before he went from Oxford to the Scots: For the
Manuscript it self written with his own hand being found in his Cabinet, which
was taken at Nauesby Fight, was restored to him after he was brought to Hampton
Court, by the Hand of Major Huntington, through the favor of General Fairfax, of
whom he obtained it. And that whilst he was in the Isle of Wight, it was there
seen frequently by Mr. Thomas Herbert, who then waited on his Majesty in his
Bedchamber; as also by Mr. William Levet, (a Page of the back-Stairs) the
Title then perfix'd to it being Suspiria Regalia, who not only read several
parts thereof but saw the Ring diverse times writing farther on it. Add hereunto
the Testimony of Mr. Richard Royston a Bookseller, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane;
who having in those Rebellious times, adventured to Print diverse of his
Majesty's Declarations, Speeches, and Messages; about the beginning of Oct.
1648, (the King being then in the Isle of Wight) was sent to by his Majesty to
prepare all things ready for the printing some papers which he purposed shortly
after to convey to him. Which was this very Copy brought to him on the Twenty
Third of December next following, by one Mr. Edward Symmons, a Reverend Divine,
who Received it from Dr. Bryan Duppa. then Bishop of Salisbury, and afterward
of Winchester. In the Printing whereof Mr. Royston made such speed, that it was
finished before that dismal Thirtieth of January, that his Majesty's Life was
so taken away, as before is observed.

To make the proof more incontestible, if possible, I shall in the last place
insert a Letter, transcribed from the Original, written by Mr. Levet now
Living; the Gentleman mentioned by Sir William Dugdale in the place above cited.

The Superscription of the said Letter runs thus,

For Seymer Bourman, Esquire near the Arch in Lincoln's Inn Fields.
Dear Brother,
YOurs of the 21th. of this instant April I received, and one Letter before
that to the same effect, Viz. To give a true Account of my knowledge of that
unparalled Book, which his Sacred Majesty, of ever blessed memory, King
Charles the First (murdered by his own Rebellious Subjects before his own
Palace at White Hall, with all the violent and malicious circumstances that
wicked Men could invent) which Book, of my certain knowledge, I can depose, was
truly His own, having observed His Majesty oftentimes writing His Royal
Resentments of the bold and insolent behavior of His Soldiers (His Rebellious
Subjects) when they had Him in their custody. I waited on His Majesty as Page
of the Bedchamber in ordinary during all the time of His Solitudes, (except
when I was forced from Him) and especially being nominated by His Majesty to be
one of His Servants, amongst others, that should attend Him during the Treaty
at Newport in the Isle of Wight, had the happiness to read the same oftentimes
in Manuscript under His Majesty's own Hand, being pleased to leave it in the
Window in His own Bedchamber, where I was always obliged to attend His
Majesty's coming thither. But the Treaty being ended in few days after, the
Soldiers with One to conduct them, by name Mr. Anthony Mildmay then
Cup Bearer, came to the Bedchamber, about ii. of the clock in the Night, and
knocked at the door, and one Mr. Herbert, Mr. Kirk, and my self having some
hint of their intentions, were watching in an inward Room, and hearing the
noise, went into His Majesty's Bedchamber, and asked, who they were that durst
disturb His Majesty at that unseasonable time of the Night, who answered, they
were sent to tell the King, He must rise and go with them. We acquainting His
Majesty with their design, He was pleased to command us to tell them, He would
go with them, but it was not His usual hour to rise so soon, we again
acquainted the Soldiers with His Majesty's answer. They instead of complying
with his Majesty, bid us tell Him, if He did not rise presently they must force
Him to it: His Majesty only said, if I must, give me my Clothes, and so He
immediately arose. (Here you may observe a mirror of Patience in a distressed
Prince) During the time of His Majesty's making himself ready, he concerned
himself only how to secure this Book of his, and a small Cabinet, wherein he
secured his Letters to his Queen, who was then beyond the Sea, and his Majesty
having procured a Pass for me from the Governor that I should wait on him
there; He gave me in charge this said Book and small Cabinet, which I
faithfully presented to his Majesty's own hands that Night in Hurst-Castle. But
the Governor, by what information is too tedious to insert here at this time,
and therefore I omit it, did on the Saturday banish me out of the Castle.

I should have sent you a Relation which I had from Royston, the Kings Printer,
for the Printing the said Book by his Majesty's especial Command, brought to
him by a Divine, but not to be By Printed, is to be understood, Published.
printed till after the Kings death, which he observed accordingly, for which
Cromwell sent for him to White Hall, not only promising Rewards, but also
threatening Punishment, if he would not deny, that he printed it by his
Majesty's Order, which he refusing to do did imprison him for about a
fortnight, but seeing he could not work upon him, released him; which is all at
present from

From Savernack Park near Marlborough, Apr. 29. 1691. Your Affectionate Brother
To serve you WILLIAM LEVETT.


These Authorities, together with Remarks upon the Memorandum are, I conceive,
sufficient to clear the Point in hand, and to give the Reader full
satisfaction. I shall just add a word concerning the Prayer, which Milton
pretends the King took from Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia, and so conclude.

I. We may take notice that the Prayer it self is Grave, Pious, and
unexceptionable.

II. This Prayer, as it is observed by the excellent Author of (...), p. 82,
Was neither made by an Heathen Woman, nor to an Heathen God (as the Objection
supposes) but composed, as is believed by the Author a Christian, with out
Reference to any Heathen Deity.

III. This Prayer was not printed with (...) in two or three of the First
Impressions of that Book, which is an Argument it was not used by the King; but
afterward inserted by the Printers for their private advantage. This Inference,
besides the reasonableness of it, is the Opinion of the Learned Person
aboyementioned.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
PReparation to a Holy Life, or Devotions for Families or Private Persons, with
Directions suited to most particular Cases, etc. by the Author of the Weeks
Preparation to the Sacrament, etc. A Collection of Private Forms of Prayer out
of the Common Prayer Book, for Morning, Noon and Night, and other special
Occasions, being in a different method from any former, by the Author of the
Weeks Preparation to the Sacrament, etc. Together with the Holy Feasts and
Fasts as they are observed in the Church of England, explained, and the Reasons
why they are yearly Celebrated. A Table to all the Epistles and Gospels in the
Book of Common Prayer, so that you may find any Texts of Scripture, being
contained in them. Rules of more Devout Behavior in the time of Divine Service
in the Church of England. An Explication of the Terms, Order, and Usefulness of
the Liturgy of the Church of England, by way of Question and Answer,
recommended to be learned after the Church Catechism.
All Five Printed for Sam. Keble, and are to be Sold at the Great Turks-Head in
Fleetstreet over against Fetter-Lane end. 1691.


