THE Present Separation SELF-CONDEMNED, And Proved to be SCHISM: As it is
Exemplified in a Sermon Preached upon that Subject, by Mr. W. JENKYN: And is
further attested by diverse others of his own Persuasion. All produced in Answer
to a LETTER from a FRIEND.

MANTON on JAMES, page 404. True Wisdom, as it will not sin against Faith by
Error, so not against Love by Schism. LONDON, Printed for Edward Croft at the
Seven Stars in Little Lumbard street. 1678.

SIR,
UPon the Discourse that passed not long since betwixt you and me, concerning
the present Differences amongst us in this Nation, and the Difficulties you
then pressed me with, about the Nature and Reasons of Schism, and the Side
which the Sin of it would lie upon; I began to consider of it, and forthwith
resolved to see what I could meet with of that Subject amongst that Party you
so boldly charge with it, especially before their exclusion, when they might be
supposed to speak impartially. And amongst the rest, having procured of a
Friend the Notes of a Sermon long since preached by Mr. Jenkin, I diligently
read it over, and thought it a Discourse very well calculated to bring this
matter to an issue betwixt us: for which end, having compared it with and
corrected it by what he afterward printed upon that Text, I did resolve to send
it to you. This, I confess, I the rather pitched upon, as he is yet alive, and
is able to justify it; and because you also urged me with some Objections
offered in particular against him, and his proceedings in the case, and did
affirm, That he, with the rest of his Brethren, durst not now own what they had
formerly preached, or preach what they formerly did about Separation, lest they
should revive what they hope is by this time forgotten, and disquiet the Ashes
of the old Nonconformists, whose Followers they profess to be, but herein, as
you said, widely differ from.

I must confess my self not to have been a little disturbed at those Passages
that you produced out of some of them, and could not but transcribe that from
Mr. Calamy, in his Apology against an unjust Invective, page 10. viz. What
will Mr. Burton say to old Mr. Dod, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Ball, Mr. Rathband,
etc? Did not these Reverend Ministers see the Pattern of Gods House? And yet it
is well known, that they wrote many Books against those that refused Communion
with our Churches (he means the Episcopal), and were their greatest Enemies.
And I cannot forget another you showed me out of the Vindication of the
Presbyterial Government, page 135. published by the Provincial Assembly of
London, 1650. (of whom you told me Mr. Jenkin was one) viz. There were many
godly and learned Nonconformists of this last Age, that were persuaded in their
Consciences, that they could not hold Communion with the Church of England, in
receiving the Sacrament kneeling, without sin; yet did they not separate from
her. Indeed, in that particular Act they withdrew; but yet so, as that they
held Communion with her in the rest; being far from a negative, much more from
a positive Separation. Nay, some of them, even when our Churches were full of
sinful Mixtures, with great Zeal and Learning defended them so far, as to write
against those that did separate from them.

I do acknowledge, that I am not able to reconcile all things of this nature,
and that it is very hard to show where the difference lies betwixt now and
then, and to find out what the People have to scare them from Communion with
the Church of England now, that they had not in those Times; and why what Mr.
Cartwright, Mr. Dod, etc. wrote then in defense of it, will not still so far
hold good. But I hope you easily conceive, that the Case is not the same with
the Ministers as the People. For the People, it is confessed, and you gave me
an undeniable Proof of the general Belief of the present Nonconformists in this
matter, viz. That when by the late Act of Parliament every one that was in any
Office of Trust was required to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
according to the usage of the Church of England, they that amongst them were
concerned, were generally advised to it by their own Pastors, and few, if any,
were found to refuse it; which doubtless they would have done, if either they
or their Pastors had thought that they had sinned in so doing; and their own
Interest, or the capacity they might be in of doing better Services in their
Places, than out of them, would not have made it lawful, if it had not been
thought lawful in it self.

And therefore I do very readily grant this. But withal I hope you do perceive,
that there is a great difference betwixt the People and their Ministers,
betwixt the Peoples Communicating with, and the Ministers Officiating in the
Church: for the Ministers are in order to this required to renounce the
Covenant, and to assent and consent to the use of the Liturgy. And therefore,
though the People may now Communicate upon the same terms that the People did
before the Wars (when Separation from the Church of England was proved to be
Schism by the great Nonconformists of those Times, as is abovesaid), and the
Ministers may now Communicate upon the same terms as the People, yet they
cannot do it as Ministers; and what reason is there that they should degrade
themselves, who are (as Mr. Jenkin says, on Jude, page 21.) Church Officers
betrusted with the ordering of the Church, and for opening the Doors of the
Churches Communion, by the Keys of Doctrine and Discipline; and be no more than
private Christians, that have no power in these matters, as he there observes?
Is this nothing, to be, from Rulers of the Flock, turned down amongst the
common Herd; and from being keepers of the Keys, to be brought under the power
of them?

But supposing that they could thus far condescend, yet do you make nothing of
the Apostles necessity, and woe is me? or think you it fit, after so sacred a
Character as that of Ordination, that they can clear themselves if they neglect
it? Consider what is written in a Book called Sacrilegious Desertion of the
Holy Ministry rebuked, page 30. viz. Is a Vow and Dedication to preach the
Gospel, no reason to preach it elsewhere, when it is forbidden in your
Assemblies? Is the alienation of Consecrated Persons no Sacrilege? You told me
indeed, That supposing they were under the like necessity (which you said they
were not), yet, that as St. Paul's necessity did not, so neither did theirs
confine them to any particular Place, Time, or Number; that Preaching was not
more so, when it was to many, than to few, in public than in private, in
London than the Country; and that as the Law did permit them to preach to Five
besides their own Family, so it did not forbid them private Conference
elsewhere; a way that the Nonconformists do so much recommend, that one of
them, in his Advice to the rest, says of it, That Public hearing without
Personal conference, seldom brings men to understand well what you say,
(Sacrileg. Disert. page 93.) And therefore that you conceived not how St.
Paul's Woe, or their Ordination, did oblige them to flock up to the Capital
City, or to betake themselves to the chiefest Towns, and to draw great numbers
together; no more than it did before Bartholomew in 62, to follow the same
course.

But, Sir, I will only ask you, whether you think it not better to preach to
many, than to few; and in public, than in corners; and in Towns, than
Villages; and in London, than the Country? In Villages People will jog on in
their old way, they have neither much curiosity nor leisure; or whatever is
there taught or learned, spreads no further: But you know, teach London, and
you teach the whole Nation; thence the Light before the Wars shone forth into
all parts; and after when Heresies were hatched and nourished up under her
wings, from her they spread all the Kingdom over, as is observed by the
Provincial Assembly of London, in their Vindication, page, 119. and the same way
doubtless is still to be observed, if any good is to be done. And it is the
same as to the Places of eminency in the Country. And therefore whatever
becomes of the remote Parts, and the little Places, great care is here to be
taken, that the Souls in Cities and Corporations be not deserted, as the Author
of Sacrilegious Desertion does hint, p. 69. and better leave those to shift for
themselves, than to leave these unsupplied. Which gives a very good account,
why they flock so much from the Country to the Town. And if you still persist
to demand, why it was not thought so before 62? the Answer is ready; for then
London was their own, and the Pulpits were safe, when kept by those that were
of their own Persuasion: But the case being now otherwise, if they should
retire, and not keep up a distinct Party, the City would be another thing, and
the whole Nation be in danger of Infection. And then what would become of them
and their Families? For there are not very many of them that were bred up to
the understanding of Trade, or keeping Books of Account, and that can shift for
themselves as other Men; and if put by that way of Livelihood, where must they
seek for it? As there cannot be a walking, without a moving (as Mr. Jenkin
judiciously observes on Jude, page 447.); so there cannot be an eating without
Food: and how Food is to be had on their part, without Preaching, is not easy
to imagine.

Do you think, if they had betaken themselves to instruct their Flocks, that
they left, by private Conference (as the Author of the Address to the
Nonconformists propounds, page 199.), that those who now support them in point
of Livelihood in the way they are in, would do the same in the other way, as
that Author conjectures? Nay, if they were left to the mercy of the Act of
Parliament, which allows Five beside their own Family, and did govern
themselves by it, can you think that would turn to any account?

Alas, Sir, you know Charity is grown cold in these times; and if they put all
upon that issue, we may say, God help them, for it may be feared the People
will not. We know, Sir, and you cannot be ignorant of it, that it is a Public
way, and the being followed and admired by Multitudes, when the Members have
the reputation of being joined to a numerous and wealthy Congregation, and
where Trade may be promoted, that opens the Purses, and, shall I say, engages
the Hearts of not a few; and therefore if you will not allow them to preach in
this way, you must not allow them to live and eat as other Folk.

Methinks your own experience should open your eyes, and let you see what
difference is made betwixt him that labors in the Word, and him that does not;
betwixt him that preaches at such convenient Seasons, that he may resort to
the Public Worship, and is willing to show, that he and the Church of England
in effect are one; and him that preaches in opposition to it, at the same time
with the Public, and thereby proclaims, that he and the Church are two.
Alas, Sir, the City-Mouse did not more excel the Country, than one here does
the other, in the Provisions of his Table, and the Munificence of his
Benefactors. The one lives by Preaching, and lives plentifully; the other lives
by his Learning, in the sense of the Scholar that sold his Books to maintain
himself with, as some of them whom I know you love and reverence are reported
to do; and others forced to be beholden to Conformists, that have made private
Collections for them. These are they that the Author of Sacrilegious Desertion,
page 111. is to be understood of, when he says, That the French Impression of
the Councils is too dear for the Purse of a Nonconformable Minister. And
besides, Sir, is it nothing, think you, for a Man to walk disconsolately
through the Streets, hardly taken notice of, and his Worth and Learning covered
by his Cloak and Modesty; and another in the mean time sailing along, perhaps
with two or three Attendants, and ever and anon one or other stepping forth to
salute him with a lowly Reverence? And is not this another material difference
betwixt him that preaches, and him that preaches not; betwixt him that
preaches in the one way, and him that preaches in the other before spoken of?
Nay, is it not come to this, that those they call moderate yielding men are
scarcely endured, but even their Reputations are clancularly struck at by their
Brethren; insomuch that they are fain to carry it with more wariness, and
comply more than otherwise they would, that they may not be the Marks of their
Reproaches? Hence, I believe, it was, that after the Book entitled The Cure of
Church-Divisions had exasperated the Party, Anno 1670. the Author, to lick
himself a little whole in their esteem, made some amends for his transgression,
in his thundering Book of Sacrilegious Desertion, in the Year 1672. And I guess,
that it is for the same reason, that when he publicly professed, That the
notorious necessity of the People, who were more than the Parish Church could
hold, moved him to preach at the same hours with the Public; and that he met
not under any color and pretense of any Religious Exercise in other manner
than according to the Liturgy, and the Practice of the Church of England; and
were he able, that he would accordingly read himself: yet that he never had
that read; and since his disposal of that Place, does preach occasionally in
the Meeting-places of the City, at the same hours, where there is none of that
necessity before pleaded by him, and where the Churches generally rather want
Auditors, than Auditors Churches. And so much are they under the awe of this,
that you know, when Dr. Manton himself was asked why he used not the Lords
Prayer, he replied, That he omitted it, not that he thought it unlawful, but
lest by the use of it he should give offense to some of his Brethren, and his
own People. So that you see, Sir, to what a pass things are brought, and that
it is as necessary for them thus to do, as it is to retain the esteem of their
Party; and as necessary to retain that esteem, as it is to have a Livelihood
where it is wanted, or to be accounted Godly and Religious. Now, Sir, I know
not how you may like this, to suffer disrespect, and want, and discouragement;
but if you do, I Will assure you that I know but few that are of your mind. For
is not Respect to be valued before Contempt; providing for a Man's House, before
neglecting it; and especially, when this is consistent with, and obtained in
the Service of God?

And now I am fallen upon the thing that I perceive you would bring me to, when
you charge them upon Mr. Jenkin's Principles, who says, that admiration of
men's persons, and self-conceit, self-seeking, and pride, are the most general
Causes of Schism, as I see that he does, page 26, 27, 28. of this Sermon.
Causes, you said, as evident among them, as their Schism it self, and by which,
with no little art, they bolster it up. Thus they take to themselves the Title
of the Servants of God, and give to the People that of the godly and the
gracious; and for their encouragement, magnify their Numbers, and which they
take all occasions to represent. As, a Nonconformist can no sooner die, but it
shall be spread through all the Congregations, who are told by their Ministers
the Lord's Day before his Interment, that such a one is lately dead, and to be
buried at such a time, from such a place, where he desires them to be, and to
show their Respects by attending his Corpse to its Funeral. In order to which,
his Praises are sounded from the Pulpit, and he Sainted by some little Poet,
and his Sayings, that have either been ordinarily used by him in Discourse, or
frequently dropped from him in the Pulpit, are collected; and then Sermon,
Poem, and Sayings vented amongst the Multitudes crowding from all Quarters of
the Town, and that are as proud to carry one of them home, as the poor Zealots
in the Church of Rome are to get any Rag that has but touched the Relics of
their Saint in a solemn Procession. After which rehearsal, you bid me consider,
how this would look if done in the Church of England.

But, Sir, this is a course that seems to me not at all unreasonable, in their
circumstances; it being very necessary, that they should, above all things, get
the Peoples esteem, and very fit that the People should testify their esteem
of them; and why not in this way of Attendance on them? For, First, It Is a
comfort to the Church under the loss of their Pastor, to see him respected when
dead, as he was when alive. Secondly, By burying their Pastor with honor, and
putting themselves into Mourning, and engaging others to follow him to his
Burial, they do show the respect that they had to him in a day of Persecution
and Distress, when despised by others; and that they continued constant to him
to the death. Thirdly, It Is good to show the World that they are not so
despicable for Quality or Number, as is pretended. And are not these Reasons
sufficient to justify their Practice in this case, and to show, how it would
not so well become you in your Church, as it does them in theirs?

But, I perceive, this that I said last of all stuck most in your stomach, as
you judged it a kind of an open Challenge and Defiance to Authority; and you
thought that you had me at a great advantage, when you so readily brought
Chapter and Page upon me from Mr. Jenkin on Jude, page 623. viz. That miserable
is that Commonwealth whose Manners have brought their Laws under their power.
For you considered not, that this is spoken of Irreligious Persons, and Civil
Affairs; but in the Matters of Religion, I hope, you know better, and that the
more contemptible the Laws about those things are made, and the weaker the
Authority is to put them into execution, the safer they themselves be whom the
Laws are designed against. And besides, do you think, that Men ought not to
make as public a Profession of their Religion as with security they can; and
to let the Power understand, how much it would be for their Safety and Interest
to come over to the strongest Side? And is it not far better for Authority to
depend upon Religion, than Religion upon Authority? Where have you lived all
this while, that are yet to learn in so necessary a Point of Casuistical
Divinity?

As for Mr. Jenkin himself, when you said, that he made very bold with the
Reputation of others, and took as great a liberty to revile, as to commend; and
did produce him against himself, on Jude, page 184. viz. That it is Seducers
policy to asperse the Ministers, to cause a dislike of their Ministry: and
again, page 394. That the great endeavor of Seducers is, to be magnified, or
rather omnified, to have all others debased and nullified: I must confess that
I have nothing to say: and that what you pointed me to in the same Book, page
521. ^ake away this sinful censuring from many Professors, and there will
nothing remain to show them Religious; whereas a just man is severe only to
himself, holds still true. It is a great fault in them, and what, if he has
miscarried in, as I hope he has repented of, so by his silence upon that
gentle Reproof given him in The Vindication of the Conforming Clergy, does
seem to own. I must acknowledge, that my own Temper, as well as my Religion,
has so much endeared me to that most excellent Description of Charity, 1 Cor.
13. Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does
not behave it self unseemly, etc. bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, etc. that were all other things in the Church of England as
agreeable to me, as the Temper of it, it would mightily reconcile me to it. We
find no Martins, no Centuries, no Gangraena's, no Glocester-Coblers, no Stories
or uncertain Reports, picked up, and maliciously improved, by which the
Reputations of their Adversaries are invaded, and exposed to the World;
notwithstanding the Provocations they have received, and the abundant matter
that has been formerly and of late afforded for such an History. And there is
nothing has made me more out of love with my old Friend Mr. J. than a certain
proneness that he has discovered, to make Invectives against others, and to
attend in the mean time so little to himself, as to give occasion to others (if
they would take it) to make them against him. But I hope, how little soever he
respected what in another case he once said, in his Sermon of the Saints Worth,
page 11. viz. If a man takes the Picture of another, he will not take it of his
Backside, Leg, or Hand, or the like; but of his Face, his beautifullest Part:
yet that you and others will observe it, that the World be no more troubled
with such Narratives as can serve to no good End, but will effectually promote
a bad; which is to expose Religion, and make it mean and contemptible.

For my part, I could heartily wish, that all Differences about little things
were laid aside; it being (as he observes, page 252. on Jude) very unsuitable,
that a greater Fire should be employed in roasting of an Egg, than an Ox; and
to be more contentious for Bubbles, than Blessedness. As for greater
Differences, I could as heartily wish they were composed, that the Love of God
did more increase, and that would be the increase of Unity. For what he says,
Vol. 2. on Jude, page 630. is very true; The preserving of our Love to God is
an excellent preservative against Sectaries and false Teachers. He who loves
God, will fear to break the Unity and Peace of the Church.

I cannot conclude better. As for the great Case, I refer you to the Sermon it
self, by which, methinks, I could stand and fall; as being confident, that
either that will justify Mr. Jenkin, or that he will be able to justify that;
and so shall be impatient, till you give your Opinion of it to,

SIR, Your Servant, H. N.

THE SERMON.
JUDE, ver. 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit.
IN the 17 verse Jude produces the Testimony of the Apostles of Jesus Christ,
in confirmation of what he had before said: In which Testimony I note five
Particulars.

1. To whom it is commended; to his beloved.

2. How it was to be improved; by remembering it.

3. From whom it proceeded; the Apostles of our Lord Jesus.

4. Wherein it consisted; in a Prediction, That there should be mockers,
walking after their ungodly lusts.

5. To whom it is opposed, viz. to these Seducers: These are they who separate
themselves.

In which Words the Apostle shows, That these who separate themselves from the
Church, were Scorners; and that these who were sensual and void of the Spirit,
did follow their ungodly lusts. Or, in the Words Jude expresses,

1. The Sin of these Seducers, in separating themselves.

2. The Cause thereof, which was,

1. Their being sensual: And,

2. Their not having the Spirit.

For the first, their Separation; Two things are here to be opened.

1. What the Apostle here intends by separating themselves.

2. Wherein the Sinfulness of it consists.

1. For the first: The Original word may signify the unbounding of a thing,
and the removing of a thing from those Bounds and Limits wherein it was set and
placed, etc. Or it imports, the parting and separating of one thing from
another, by Bounds and Limits put between them; and the putting of Bounds and
Limits, for distinction and separation, between several things: it being (thus)
a Resemblance taken from Fields or Countries, which are distinguished and
parted from each other by certain Boundaries and Landmarks set up to that end:
and thus it is commonly taken by Interpreters in this place, wherein these
Seducers may be said to separate themselves, divide or bound themselves from
others, either first, Doctrinally; or, secondly, Practically.

1. Doctrinally, by false and Heretical Doctrines, whereby they divided
themselves from the Truth and Faithful, who were guided by the Truth of
Scripture, and walked according to the Rule of the Word, etc.

2. Practically; they might separate themselves as by Bounds and Limits,

1. By Profaneness, and living in a different way from the Saints; namely, in
all looseness and uncleanness.

2. By Schismaticalness, and making of separation from, and divisions in the
Church: Because they proudly despised the Doctrines or Persons of the
Christians, as contemptible and unworthy; or because they would not endure the
holy severity of the Churches Discipline, they (says Calvin) departed from it.
They might make Rents and Divisions in the Church, by Schismatical withdrawing
themselves from Fellowship and Communion with it. Their Heresies were perverse
and damnable Opinions, their Schism was a perverse separation from
Church Communion: The former was in Doctrinals, the latter in Practicals. The
former was opposite to Faith, this latter to Charity. By Faith all the Members
are united to the Head; by Charity, one to another: And as the breaking of the
former is Heresy, so their breaking of the latter was Schism. And this Schism
stands in the dissolving the Spiritual Band of Love and Union among Christians,
and appears in the withdrawing from the performance of those Duties which are
both the Signs of, and Helps to Christian Unity; as Prayer, Hearing, Receiving
of Sacraments, etc. For, because the dissolving of Christian Union chiefly
appears in the undue separation from Church Communion, therefore this rending
is rightly called Schism. It is usually said to be twofold, Negative, and
Positive.

1. Negative is when there is only simplex secessio, when there is only a
bare secession, a peaceable and quiet withdrawing from Communion with a Church,
without making any head against that Church from which the departure is.

2. Positive is when Persons so withdrawing do so consociate and draw
themselves into a distinct and opposite Body, setting up a Church against a
Church, or, as Divines express it, from Augustine, an Altar against an Altar:
And this it is which in a peculiar manner, and by way of eminency, is called by
the name of Schism, and becomes sinful either in respect, first, of the
groundlesness, or, secondly, the manner thereof.

1. The groundlesness; when there is no casting of Persons out of the Church by
an unjust Censure of Excommunication, no departure by unsufferable Persecution,
no Heresy nor Idolatry in the Church maintained, no necessity (if Communion be
held with a Church) of communicating in its Sins and Corruptions.

2. The manner of Separation makes it unlawful; when it is made without due
endeavor and waiting for Reformation of the Church from which the departure
is: and such a rash departure is against Charity, which suffers both much and
long, all tolerable things: It is not presently distasted, when the justest
occasion is given; it first uses all possible means of remedy. The Chyrurgeon
reserves Dismembring, as the last remedy. It looks upon a sudden breaking off
from Communion with a Church (which is a Dismembring) not as Chyrurgery, but
Butchery; not as medicinal, but cruel.

2. The Sinfulness of this Schismatical separation appears several ways. I
shall not spend time to compare it with Heresy, though some have said, that
Schism is the greater Sin of the two. August. cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap. 6.
tells the Donatists, that Schism was a greater Sin than that of the Traditores,
who in time of Persecution, through fear, delivered up their Bibles to the
Persecutors to be burnt. (A Sin at which the Donatists took so much offense,
that it was the ground of their separation.) But to pass by these things: By
these three Considerations especially the sinfulness of Schism shows it self.

In respect of 1. Christ. 2. The Parties separating. 3. Those from whom they
separate.


1. In respect of Christ, it is,

1. An horrible Indignity offered to his Body, it dividing Christ (as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1. 15.) and makes him to appear the Head of two Bodies.
How monstrous and dishonorable is the very conceit hereof!

2. It Is Rebellion against his Command, his great Command of Love. The Grace of
Love is by some called the Queen of Graces; and it is greater than Faith in
respect of its Object, not God only, but Man; its duration, which is eternal;
its manner of working, not in a way of receiving Christ (as Faith) but of
giving out the Soul to him: and the Command of Love is the greatest Command, in
respect of its comprehensiveness, it taking in all the Commandments, the end of
them all being Love, and it being the fulfilling of them all.

3. It Is opposite to one great End of Christ's greatest Undertaking (his
Death), which was, that all his Saints should be one.

4. It tends to frustrate his Prayer for Unity among Saints, John 17. and
endeavors that Christ may not be heard by his Father.

5. It opposes his Example: By this shall all men (says he) know that ye are
my disciples, if ye love one another. Love is the Livery and Cognizance which
Christ gives to every Christian. If there be no Fellowship among Christians,
there is no following of Christ. Let this mind be in you, that was in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 2. 5.

6. It Is injurious to his Service and Worship. How can Men pray, if in wrath
and division? How can Christians fight with Heaven and prevail, when they are
in so many divided Troops? What worthiness can be in those Communicants, who
celebrate a Feast of Love, with Hearts full of rancour and malice?

2. In respect of the Parties separating: For,

1. It causes a decay of all Grace. By divisions among our selves, we
endeavor to divide our selves from him, in and from whom is all our fullness.
All wickedness follows contention. Upon the Stock of Schism commonly Heresy is
grafted. There is no Schism (says Jerome) but ordinarily it inventeth and
produces some Heresy, that so the Separation may seem the more justifiable.
The Novatians and Donatists from Schism fell to Heresies. Our Times sadly
comment upon this Truth, they equally arising to both. The farther Lines are
distanced one from another, the greater is their distance from the Center: And
the more divided Christians are among themselves, the more they divide
themselves from Christ. Branches divided from the Tree, receive no Sap from the
Root. The Soul gives Life to Members which are joined together, not plucked
asunder.

2. Schism is the greatest disgrace to the Schismatics. A Schismatic is a
Name much disowned, because very dishonorable: All Posterity loads the name of
sinful Separatists with disgrace and abhorrency. He spoke truly, who said, The
sin and misery of Schism cannot be blotted out with the blood of Martyrdom. He
cannot honorably give his Life for Christ, who makes divisions in his Church,
for which Christ gave his Life.

3. In respect of the Church from whom this separation is made. For,

1. It Is injurious to the Honor of the Church, whose greatest glory is Union.
How can a Body be rent and torn, without the impairing of its Beauty? Besides,
how disgraceful an imputation is cast upon any Church, when we profess it
unworthy for any to abide in it; that Christ will not, and therefore that we
cannot have Communion with it?

2. It Is injurious to the peace and quietness of the Church. Schismatics more
oppose the Peace of the Church, than do Heathens. If the natural Body be
divided and torn, pain and smart must needs follow. The tearing and rending of
the Mystical Body goes to the Heart of all sensible Members. They often cause
the Feverish Distempers of Hatred, Wrath, Seditions, Envyings, Murders. Schism
in the Church, puts the Members out of joint; and disjoynted Bones are painful:
All my bones (says David) are out of joint. Church-divisions cause sad
thoughts of heart. True Members are sensible of these Schisms, though
artificial ones feel nothing. None rejoice but our Enemies. Oh impiety, to make
Satan music, and to make mourning for the Saints!

3. It Is opposite to the Edification of the Church. Division of Tongues hindered
the building of Babel; and doubtless division in Hearts, Tongues, Hands, Heads,
must needs hinder the building of Jerusalem. While Parties are contending,
Churches and Commonwealths suffer. In troublous times the Walls and Temple of
Jerusalem went but slowly on. Though Jesus Christ the Head, be the only
Fountain of Spiritual Life; yet the usual way of Christ's strengthening it, and
perfecting thereof, is the fellowship of the Body, that by what every joint
supplies, the whole may be increased. When Churchmembers are put out of joint,
they are made unserviceable, and unfit to perform their several Offices: They
who were wont to join in Prayer, Sacraments, Fasting, and were ready to all
mutual Offices of Love, are now fallen off from all.

4. It Is opposite to the future Estate of the Church in Glory. In Heaven the
Faithful shall be of one mind: We shall all meet (says the Apostle) in the
unity of the faith, Ephesians. 4. 13. when we are come to our Manly age: Wrangling
is the work of our Childhood. Luther and Calvin are of one mind in Heaven,
though their Disciples wrangle here on Earth.

Observations.
Obs. 1. Naturally men love to be boundless; they will not be kept within any
Spiritual compass. Obs. 2. Our separation from Rome cannot be charged with
Schism. This will evidently appear, if we consider either the ground, or the
manner of our Separation.
1. For the ground and cause thereof: Our separation from Rome was not for some
slight and tolerable Errors, but damnable Heresies, and gross Idolatries: The
Heresies Fundamental, and Idolatries such, as those who hold Communion with
her, cannot but partake of: In respect of both which, the Church of Rome was
first apostatized, before ever we separated: Nor was there any separation from
it, as it had any thing of Christ, or as it was Christian; but as it was ROMAN
and POPISH, etc.

2. For the second, the manner of our Separation; it was not uncharitable,
rash, heady, and unadvised; nor before all means were used for the Cure and
Reformation of the Romanists, by the discovery of their Errors, that possibly
could be thought of: notwithstanding all which (though some have been enforced
to an acknowledgement of them) they still obstinately persist in them. Our
famous, godly, and learned Reformers would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed: Many skilful Physicians have had her in hand, but (like the Woman in
the Gospel) she grew so much the worse. By Prayer, Preaching, Writing, yea by
sealing their Doctrine with their Bloods, have sundry eminent Instruments of
Christ endeavored to reclaim the Popish from their Errors; but in stead of
being reclaimed, they anathematized them with the dreadfulest Curses,
excommunicated, yea, murdered and destroyed multitudes of those who endeavored
their Reducement, not permitting any to trade, buy or sell, to have either
Religious or Civil Communion with them, except they received the Beasts mark in
their hands and foreheads. All which considered, we might safely forsake her;
nay, could not safely do otherwise. Since, in stead of our healing of Babylon,
we could not be preserved from her destroying of us, we did deservedly depart
from her, and every one go into his own Country: and unless we had done so, we
could not have obeyed the clear Precept of the Word, Apoc. 18. Come out of her
my people, etc. Timothy is commanded to withdraw himself from perverse and
unsound Teachers, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 5. Though Paul went into the Synagogue,
disputing and persuading the things concerning the Kingdom of God; yet when
diverse were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of that way, he departed
from them, and separated the Disciples, Acts 19. 9. And expressly is Communion
with Idolaters forbidden, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 17. What fellowship has righteousness
with unrighteousness? what communion has light with darkness? what concord
has Christ with Belial? what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Come
out from among them, and be ye separate. And, Hos. 4. 15. Though thou Israel
play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend; and come ye not unto Gilgal, neither
go ye up to Bethaven. Though in name that place was Bethel, the House of God;
yet because Jeroboam's Calf was set up there, it was indeed Bethaven, the House
of Vanity. If Rome be a Bethaven, for Idolatry, and corrupting of Gods Worship,
our departure from it may be safely acknowledged and justified. In vain,
therefore, do the Romanists, Stapleton, Sanders, etc. brand our separation from
them with the odious name of Donatism, and Schism; it being evident out of
Augustine, that the Donatists never objected any thing against, nor could blame
any thing in the Church (from which they separated) either for Faith or
Worship: whereas we have unanswerably proved the Pseudo-Catholick Roman Church
to be notoriously guilty both of Heresy and Idolatry; and our Adversaries
themselves grant, in whatever Church either of these depravations are found,
Communion with it is to be broken off. I shall conclude this Discourse with
that Passage out of Musculus, concerning Schism. There is (says he) a double
Schism; the one bad, the other good: the bad is that whereby a good Union, the
good whereby a bad Union is broken asunder. If ours be a Schism, it is of the
latter sort.

Obs. 3. The voluntary and unnecessary dividing and separation from a true
Church, is Schismatical. When we put bounds and partitions between it and our
selves, we sin (say some) as did these Seducers here taxed by Jude. If the
Church be not Heretical, or Idolatrous, or do not by Excommunication,
Persecution, etc. thrust us out of its Communion; If it be such as Christ the
Head has Communion with, we the Members ought not by separation to rend and
divide the Body. To separate from Congregations, where the Word of Truth and
Gospel of Salvation are held forth in an ordinary way, as the Proclamations of
Princes are held forth upon Pillars to which they are affixed; where the Light
of the Truth is set up as upon a Candlestick, to guide Passengers to Heaven: To
separate from them to whom belong the Covenants, and where the Sacraments, the
Seals of the Covenant, are for substance rightly dispensed; where Christ
walks in the midst of his golden candlesticks, and discovers his Presence in
his Ordinances, whereby they are made effectual to the Conversion and
Edification of Souls, in an ordinary way; where the Members are Saints, by a
professed subjection to Christ and his Gospel, and happily have promised this
explicitly and openly; where there are sundry who in the judgment of Charity
may be conceived to have the work of Grace really wrought in their Hearts, by
walking in some measure answerable to their Profession: I say, to separate from
these, as those with whom Church Communion is not to be held and maintained, is
unwarrantable, and Schismatical. Pretenses for Separation (I am not ignorant)
are alleged: frequently, and most plausibly, that of Mixed Communion, and of
admitting into Church Fellowship the vile with the precious, and those who are
Chaff, and therefore ought not to lodge with the Wheat.

Answ. 1. Not to insist upon what some have urged, viz. That this has been the
stone at which most Schismatics have stumbled, and the Pretense which they
have of old alleged, as having ever had a Spiritum Excommunicatorium, a Spirit
rather putting them upon dividing from those who, they say, are unholy, than
putting them upon any godly endeavors of making themselves holy; as is evident
in the Examples of the Audaeans, Novatians, Donatists, Anabaptists, Brownists,
etc.

2. Let them consider, Whether the want of the exact purging and reforming of
these Abuses, proceed not rather from some unhappy Obstructions and political
Restrictions (whether or no caused by those who make this Objection, God knows)
in the exercise of Discipline; than from the allowance or neglect of the Church
it self. Nay,

3. Let them consider, Whether when they separate from sinful mixtures, the
Church be not at that very time purging out those sinful mixtures: And is that
a time to make a separation from a Church, by departing from it, when the
Servants of Christ are making a separation in that Church, by reforming it? But,

4. Let it be seriously weighed, That some sinful mixtures are not a sufficient
cause of separation from a Church. Has not God his Church, even where
corruption of Manners has crept into a Church, if purity of Doctrine be
maintained? And is separation from that Church lawful, from which God does not
separate? Did the Apostle, because of the sinful mixtures in the Church of
Corinth, direct the Faithful to separate? Must not he who will forbear
Communion with a Church, till it be altogether freed from mixtures, tarry till
the day of Judgment? till when, we have no promise, that Christ will gather
out of his Church whatsoever does offend.

5. Let them consider, Whether God has made private Christians Stewards in his
House, to determine whether those with whom they Communicate are fit Members of
the Church, or not? Or rather, Whether it be not their duty, when they discover
Tares in the Church, in stead of separating from it, to labor that they may be
found good Corn; that so when God shall come to gather his Corn into his
Garner, they may not be thrown out? Church Officers are ministerially betrusted
with the Ordering of the Church, and for the opening and shutting of the doors
of the Churches Communion, by the Keys of Doctrine and Discipline: And herein
if they shall either be hindered, or negligent, private Christians shall not be
entangled in the guilt of their Sin, if they be humbled, and use all lawful
means for remedy, though they do Communicate.

6. Let them search, Whether there be any Scripture-warrant to break off
Communion with any Church, when there is no defect in the Ordinances
themselves, only upon this ground, because some are admitted to them, who,
because of their personal miscarriages, ought to be debarred? The Jews of old,
though they separated when the Worship if self was corrupted, 2 Chronicles. 11. 14,
16. yet not because wicked men were suffered to be in outward Communion with
them, Jer. 7. 9, 10. Nor do the Precepts or Patterns of the Christian Churches,
for casting out of Offenders, give any liberty to separation, in case of
failing to cast them out; and though the suffering of scandalous Persons be
blamed, yet not the Communicating with them. The Command not to eat with a
Brother who is a fornicator, or covetous, etc. 1 Cor. 5. 11. concerns not
Religious, but Civil Communion, by a voluntary, familiar, intimate
Conversation, either in being invited, or inviting; as is clear by these two
Arguments.

1. That Eating which is here forbidden with a Brother, is allowed to be with
an Heathen: But it is the Civil Eating which is only allowed to be with an
Heathen: Therefore, it is the Civil Eating which is forbidden to be with a
Brother.

2. The Eating here forbidden, is for the punishment of the nocent, not for a
punishment to the innocent. Now though such Civil Eating was to be forborne, yet
it follows not at all, much less much more, that Religious Eating is forbidden.

1. Because Civil Eating is arbitrary, and unnecessary; not so Religious, which
is enjoined, and a commanded Duty.

2. There is danger of being infected by the wicked in civil, familiar, and
arbitrary Eatings; not so in joining with them in an holy and commanded Service
and Ordinance.

3. Civil Eating is done out of love to the Party inviting or invited; but
Religious is done out of love to Jesus Christ, were it not for whom, we would
neither eat at Sacrament with wicked men, nor at all.

To conclude this; Separation from Churches, from which Christ does not
separate, is Schismatical. Now it is clear in the Scripture, that Christ owneth
Churches where Faith is found for the substance, and their Worship
Gospel Worship, though there be many defects and sinful mixtures among them.
And what I have said concerning the Schismaticalness of separation, because of
the sinful mixtures of those who are wicked in practice, is as true concerning
separation from them who are erroneous in judgment, if the Errors of those
from whom the separation is made, be not Fundamental, and hinder Communion with
Christ the Head. And much more clear (if clearer can be) is the
Schismaticalness of those who separate from, and renounce all Communion with
those Churches which are not of their own manner of constitution, and modeled
according to the Platform of their own particular Church Order. To refrain
Fellowship and Communion with such Churches who profess Christ their Lord,
whose Faith is sound, whose Worship is Gospel Worship, whose Lives are holy,
because they come not into that particular way of Church Order which we have
pitched upon, is a Schismatical rending of the Church of Christ to pieces. Of
this the Church of Rome are most guilty, who do most plainly (...), and
circumscribe and bound the Church of Christ within the Limits and Boundaries of
the Roman Jurisdiction, even so, as that they cast off all Churches in the
World, yea and cut them off from all hope of Salvation, who subject not
themselves to their way. Herein likewise those Separatists among our selves are
heinously faulty, who censure and condemn all other Churches, though their
Faith, Worship, and Conversation be never so Scriptural, merely because they
are not gathered into Church Order according to their own Patterns. In
Scripture, Churches are commended and dignified, according as their fundamental
Faith was sound, and their Lives holy; not according to the regularity of their
first manner of gathering: And notwithstanding the exactest regularity of their
first gathering, when Churches have once apostatized from Faith and Manners,
Christ has withdrawn Communion from them. And this making of the first
gathering of People into Church Fellowship, to be the Rule to direct us with
whom we may hold Communion, will make us refuse some Churches upon whom are
seen the Scripture-characters of true Churches, and join with others only upon
an Humane testimony, because Men only tell us they were orderly gathered.

Obs. ult. It should be our care to shun Separation. To this end,

1. Labor to be progressive in the work of Mortification. The less carnal we
are, the less contention and division will be among us. Are ye not carnal?
(says the Apostle): and he proves it from their divisions. Separation is
usually, but very absurdly, accounted a sign of an high-grown Christian. We
wrangle because we are Children, and are men in malice because children in
holiness; Wars among our selves proceed from the lusts that war in our members,
James 4. 1.

2. Admire no Man's Person. The excessive regarding of some, makes us despise
others in respect of them. When one Man seems a Giant, another will seem a
Dwarf in comparison of him. This caused the Corinthian Schism. Take heed of
Manworship, as well as Image Worship: Let not Idolatry be changed, but
abolished. Of this largely before, upon having men's persons in admiration.

3. Labor for experimental benefit by the Ordinances. Men separate to those
Churches which they account better, because they never found those where they
were before (to them) good. Call not Ministers good (as the young man in the
Gospel did Christ) complementally only; for if so, you will soon call them
bad. Find the setting up of Christ in your Hearts by the Ministry, and then you
will not dare to account it Antichristian. If, with Jacob, we could say of our
Bethels, God is here, we would set up Pillars, nay be such, for our constancy
in abiding in them.

4. Neither give nor receive Scandals. Give them not, to occasion others to
separate; nor receive them, to occasion thy own separation: Watch exactly;
construe doubtful matters charitably. Look not upon Blemishes with
Multiplying-glasses, or old Men's Spectacles: Hide them, though not imitate
them: Sport not your selves with others nakedness. Turn separation from, into
lamentation for the Scandalous.

5. Be not much taken with Novelties. New-Lights have set this Church on fire:
For the most part they are taken out of the Dark-Lanthorns of old Heretics.
They are false and Fools-fires, to lead Men into the Precipice of Separation.
Love Truth in an old dress; let not Antiquity be a prejudice against, nor
Novelty an inducement to the entertainment of Truth.

6. Give not way to lesser differences. A little division will soon rise up to
greater: Small Wedges make way for bigger. Our Hearts are like to Tinder; a
little Spark will inflame them. Be jealous of your Hearts when Contentions
begin, stifle them in the Cradle. Paul and Barnabas separated about a small
matter, the taking of an Associate.

7. Beware of Pride, the Mother of Contention and Separation. Love not the
pre-eminence. Rather be fit for, than desirous of Rule. Despise not the
meanest; say not, I have no need of thee. All Schisms and Heresies are mostly
grafted upon the Stock of Pride. The first rent that was ever made in God's
Family, was by the Pride of Angels, ver. 14. and that Pride was nothing else
but the desire of Independency.

8. Avoid Self-seeking. He who seeks his own things and profit, will not mind
the good and peace of the Church. Oh take heed lest thy Secular Interest draw
thee to a new Communion, and thou color over thy departure with Religion and
Conscience.

Thus have we spoken of the first, viz. What these Seducers did, viz. separate
themselves.

2. The Cause of their separation, or what they were, in these words, sensual,
not having the Spirit.

[ This I will only give the Breviate of (still keeping to his own words)
leaving it to his Commentary on Jude, since printed.]

By the word (...) the Apostle seems to me to make their brutish sensuality
and propensions to be the cause of their separation: as if he had said, They
will not live under the strict Discipline, where they must be curbed and
restrained from following their lusts; no, these Sensuallists will be alone by
themselves, in Companies, where they may have their fill of sensual pleasures,
and where they may gratify their genius to the utmost.

The Apostle seems to add this their sensuality, and want of the Spirit, to
their separating themselves, not only to show, that sensuality was the cause
of their separation, and the want of the Spirit the cause of both; but as if he
intended directly to thwart and cross them in their pretenses of having an high
and extrordinary measure of spiritualness above others, who, as these Seducers
might pretend, were in so low a Form of Christianity, and had so little
spiritualness, that they were not worthy to keep them company: whereas Jude
tells these Christians, that these Seducers were so far from being more
spiritual than others, that they were mere Sensuallists, and had nothing in
them of the Spirit at all, etc.

Observations.
Obs. 1. Commonly sensuality lies at the bottom of sinful separation, and
making of Sects. Separate themselves, sensual, etc. Obs. 2. It Is possible for
those who are sensual, and without the Spirit, to boast of Spiritualness. Of
these before. Obs. 3. Sanctity and Sensuality cannot agree together. Obs. 4.
They who want the Spirit, are easily brought over to Sensuality.
To his Worthy Friend H. N.
SIR,
I Heartily thank you for putting me in mind of our late Discourse, and for
giving me so fair an opportunity to pursue it, by the Sermon that you sent me;
which I greedily read, and had no sooner run over, but I blessed my self to
find, that you should put the Cause upon this Issue, and to appeal to that for
the justification of the present Separation. I looked again, and thought that
you might be mistaken, and had sent me a Sermon against Mr. Jenkin, rather than
one for him. It was a Discourse that I do acknowledge my self not to be
altogether a Stranger to, and what I then retained some remembrance of; but yet
wholly to undeceive my self, I sent for the Book which you say you compared it
with, and, to my no small satisfaction, found them (as to what concerns the
matter of our Dispute) honestly to agree; and that you may as well bring the
one to vouch for the credit of the other, as he himself may (if there were
occasion) Mr. Brinsley's Arraignment of Schism (from whence he has borrowed
the substance of this Sermon) in the justification of what he has said here
upon that Subject.

And now, Sir, I am glad that I have brought you thus far; for I desire no
better advantage than what this Sermon will afford me, and shall decline the
Order that we observed in our Discourse, on purpose to comply with it.

You may remember, that I then undertook to show,

1. That the old Nonconformists did themselves hold Lay-Communion with the
Church of England, and accounted those that did not, guilty of Schism, as by
their Writings yet extant does appear.

2. That the present Nonconformists, who are Presbyterians, did plead their
Practice, and use their Arguments, against the Independents, and others, that
did in the late Times separate from themselves.

3. That Lay-Communion with the Church of England, is the same in our Times,
that it was in the Times of the old Nonconformists; and that the Church of
England has as much to say for it self now, as it had then.

4. That therefore the new Separation does not in reality differ from the old,
and is truly Schism, if either they, or the old Nonconformists spoke true.

Now this I look upon as a very covenient Method to bring the Case to a
Decision; but because I will show how willing I am to meet you, and how
confident I am in the goodness of my Cause, I shall take that course which will
more readily lead me to make use of the Sermon, though in the pursuing of that,
I shall also say what will serve for the proof of the Propositions before laid
down.

In the first place, it will be necessary to show what Schism is. Now, that, as
may be collected from Mr. Jenkin here, is a perverse or undue separation from
Church Communion, page 21, 22. or, a voluntary and unnecessary dividing and
separation from a true Church, page 31.

And upon this Definition I shall proceed, and show,

1. That the Church of England is a true Church.

2. That there is a Separation from it.

3. That this Separation is voluntary and unnecessary.

4. That therefore the present Separation is schismatical.

1. That the Church of England is a true Church. But here we are put to it, to
tell what the Church of England is, by the Author of Sacrilegious Desertion,
page 35. We are told (says he) of Schism from the Church of England, when I
would give all the Money in my Purse, to make me understand what the Church of
England is. I might here, without any more ado, refer him to Mr. Baxter for
resolution, of whom, Mr. Hickman says, in his Bonasus Vapulans, printed the
same Year, page 138. That he has Communion with the Church of England in all
Ordinances; who cannot but certainly know what that Church is, or else how can
he hold Communion with it? But because there is so great a Profit like to
attend it, and in compassion to him that has there raised so much dust that he
cannot see his own way, I shall for once tell him what it is by Wise Men
thought to be, viz. That Company of Persons, in this Nation, that does join
together in the Ordinances of God, according to the Laws established amongst us
for Ecclesiastical Matters. It is the joining together in the Ordinances of
God, which makes a Church a True Church, as Mr. Brinsley says, in his
Arraignment of Schism, page 31. And it is the joining together in them,
according to the Laws established amongst us, that makes such a Church to be
the Church of England. I must profess, Sir, to you, That I can hardly forbear
to expose that Book of Sacrilegious Desertion, that as much abounds with
Ill Nature, Self-conceit, Confusion, and Self-contradiction, as any that I have
met with of that kind; but because the Author has been in many things of good
use to the Church of God, I shall not treat him with that rigor such a Book
deserves; and shall therefore proceed to show, That this Church is a True
Church. He indeed, page 43. of that Book, when it had been objected against the
present separation, That their Members are taken out of True Churches, replies,
How many Bishops have written, that the Church of Rome is a True Church, etc.
and must no Churches therefore be gathered out of them? [Her, it should be.]
thereby disingenuously insinuating, That the Church of England is no otherwise
a true Church than that of Rome, and may as safely be separated from. Now how
the Church of Rome is said to be a true Church, Mr. Brinsley will inform us,
page 26. of his Arraignment of Schism: There is a twofold Trueness; Natural,
the one; Moral, the other: In the former sense, a Cheater, a Thief may be said
to be a true Man, and a Whore a true Woman, and (till she be divorced) a true
Wife; yea, and the Devil himself, though the Father of Lies, yet a true Spirit.
And in this sense we shall not need to grutch the Church of Rome the name of a
true Church; if not so, why do we call her a Church? A Church she is, in regard
of the outward Profession of Christianity; but yet a false Church: true in
Existence, but false in Belief, etc. not so a true Church, but that she is also
a false Church, an Heretical, Apostatical, Antichristian Synagogue. But whether
the Author of Sacrilegious Desertion has the same thoughts of the Church of
England, let page 76. show, where he says, As I constantly join in my
Parish Church in Liturgy and Sacraments, so I hope to do while I live (if I
live under as honest a Minister) at due times. And he would by all means have
their Assemblies accounted only as Chappel-Meetings, page 15. with respect to
the Public. Now God forbid that all this should be, and that in the mean time
he should think, that the Church of England is no more a true Church than the
Church of Rome, and not more to be held Communion with. But the contrary is
evident from him, and so his abovesaid Insinuation the more blameworthy. But
however, let him think as he pleases, it is very obvious, that the constant
Opinion of the old Nonconformists was, That the Church of England was a true
Church, and what, as such, they thought that they were obliged to hold
Communion with. So Mr. Baxter, in his Preface to the Cure of Church-Divisions,
says of them; The old Nonconformists, who wrote so much against Separation,
were neither blind, nor Temporizers. They saw the danger on that side. Even
Brightman on the Revelation, that writes against the Prelacy and Ceremonies,
severely reprehendeth the Separatists. Read but the Writings of Mr. J. Paget,
Mr. J. Ball, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Bains, Mr. Rathband, and many
such others, against the Separatists of those Times, and you may read, that our
Light is not greater, but less than theirs, etc. So Mr. Crofton, in his
Reformation not Separation, (though several of them he evidently wrongs, that
were far from any disaffection to the Order and Discipline of the Church, as
Ridley, etc.) page 43. Tindal, Hooper, Ridley, Latimer, Farrar, Whitaker,
Cartwright, Bains, Sibbs, Preston, Rogers, Geree, J. Ball, Langly, Hind,
Nicols, etc. groaning under retained Corruptions, etc. yet lived to their last
breath in constant Communion with the Church.* And this they did, upon the
supposition of this Truth. Nay, so far were they persuaded of this, that they
did prefer it to most Churches in the World. So the Letters betwixt the
Ministers of Old and New England, published by Mr. Ash and Mr. Rathband, 1643.
If we deny Communion with such a Church as ours, there has been no Church this
thousand years with which a Christian might lawfully join. When the Wars began,
there were those indeed that talked otherwise, and then they would persuade the
People, that there was no difference betwixt that and Rome; as Mr. Marshal, in
his Sermon upon the Union of the Two Houses, Jan. 18. 1647. All Christendom,
except Malignants in England, do now see, that the Question in England is,
Whether Christ or Antichrist shall be Lord and King? Then those that were
suspended before the Long-Parliament time, were the Witnesses that were slain,
and the Prelacy was an Antichristian Power; and the taking away of that, and
the Ceremonies, was the tenth part of the City falling, as Mr. Woodcock did
expound it, in his Sermons of the two Witnesses, 1643. page 83, and 86. Then
they were the Amorites, and there was the cup of abomination amongst them, as
you may find it in a Book called The Principal Acts of the General Assembly
convened at Edinburgh, May 29. 1644. page 19. But when the Tide began to turn,
and Presbytery was opposed, and in great danger of being run down by
Independency, they changed their Tune, and began to plead for the Truth of it,
and their Propriety in it. Thus we find Ordination according to the Church of
England maintained by the London-Ministers, in their Vindication, page 143. We
do not deny, but that the way of Ministers entering into the Ministry by the
Bishops, had many defects in it: -- But we add, That notwithstanding all the
accidental corruptions, yet it is not substantially and essentially corrupted:
By Dr. Seaman, in his Answer to the Diatribe; by Mr. Brinsley of Schism, page
31. by Mr. Firmin, in his Separation examined, page 23. Then we are told, That
Preaching and Prayer were kept pure in the Episcopal days, by Mr. Firmin, ibid.
page 29. And to show you how reverendly they spoke of this Church, I will only
quote it from one that must be thought to speak out of no affection, and that
is J. Goodwin, in his Sion College visited, page 26. Doubtless the real and
true Ministers of the Province of London, having such abundant opportunity of
converse with Travelers from all Parts, cannot but be full of the truth of
this Information, That there was more of the truth and power of Religion in
England, under the late Prelatical Government, than in all the Reformed
Churches besides.

But you will say, All this may be granted, and yet nothing said; for the Case
is altered, the Church of England not being now what it was then. This, I
acknowledge, the Author of Sacrilegious Desertion, page 43. does suggest; The
love of Peace, and the fear of frightning any further from Parish-Communion
than I desire, do oblige me to forbear so much as to describe or name the
additional Conformity, and that Sin which Nonconformists fear and fly from,
which makes it harder to us that desire it, to draw many good People to
Communion with Conformists, than it was of old. But this additional Conformity
that the People are concerned in, I am yet to understand; and I fear he had
another Reason to forbear the description of it, viz. because he could not.
However, for once suppose this; yet he grants, that it is only harder; but that
does not make it unlawful: For then what shall we say to Mr. Corbet, that in
his Discourse of the Religion of England, Anno 1667. page 33. does declare,
That the Presbyterians generally hold the Church of England to be a true
Church, though defective in its Order and Discipline, and frequent the Worship
of God in the Public Assemblies? (I believe he speaks of those that he
converses with, for here it is generally otherwise as to the point of
Practice.) What shall we say to Mr. Hickman, that in his Bonasus Vapulans, page
133. says of himself, I profess, wherever I come, I make it my business to
reconcile People to the Public Assemblies; my Conscience would fly in my Face,
if I should do otherwise? What shall be said to that of Mr. Baxter, in his Cure
of Church-Divisions, page 263, 264, 265. where he says, Thousands of
well-meaning People live as if England were almost all the World, and do boldly
separate from their Neighbors here; which they durst not do, if they soberly
considered, that almost all the Christian World are worse than they? And that
the present State of this Church is far better than almost any in the World, he
there does largely prove. So far as the Profession of these Persons does hold
(who both deserve, and I am confident have your reverence) we are safe.

But still suppose the worst, I will be bold to say, and I question not to
prove, that our Church is more a Church, than what theirs was, when they so
briskly assaulted the Independents, and charged them with no less than Schism,
for their separtion from it. For, if you consider, you will find, that their
Constitution was not settled, nor the Church in any order, when this
Controversy began, and was carried on amongst them. How it was in 1642. Sir
Edward Dering, in his Speeches then made and printed, will inform us, page 47.
The Church of England (not long since the Glory of the Reformed Religion) is
miserably torn and distracted: you can hardly now say, which is the Church of
England. A little above, in the same page, he says thus: Mr. Speaker, There is
a certain newborn, unseen, ignorant, dangerous, desperate way of Independency:
Are we, Sir, for this Independent way? Nay, (Sir) are we for the elder* Brother
of it, the Presbyterial Form? I have not yet heard any one Gentleman within
these Walls stand up and assert his Thoughts here, for either of these Ways:
And yet (Sir) we are made the Patrons and Protectors of these so different, so
repugnant Innovations, etc. How it was in 1645. you may guess, when the
Sovereign Argument they had was, That they had hopes of a Settlement. So Mr.
Calamy, in a Fast-Sermon preached that Year, did call upon his People to be
ashamed and confounded, as for diverse other things, so, amongst the rest, for
this, that whilst the Parliament is sitting, and laboring to settle things,
and while the Assembly of Ministers are studying to settle Religion, and
laboring to heal our Breaches, that any should be separating from us: as we
may learn out of The Door of Truth opened, page 5. So again, page 6. They
engage themselves into separated Congregations, and do not wait and tarry to
see what Reformation the Parliament will make. So it is confessed by the
London-Ministers, in their Letter to the Assembly, page 2. Jan. 1. 1645. That
the Reformation of Religion is not yet settled among us according to the
Covenant; and urge it to show, that the Desires and Endeavors of the
Independents for a Toleration at that time, were very unreasonable. How it was
in 1646. you may see in Mr. Brinsley's Arraignment, page 48, 49. It is
alleged, That in this Kingdom at present there is no way laid forth for the
Churches to walk in: And then, why may they not take liberty to set up their
way, as well as others theirs? Answ. Suppose the Church has not her way laid
out, yet it will not be denied, but that she has been all this while seeking
it out, etc. Neither can it be truly said, that the Church is so wholly
destitute of a way to walk in, whether for Worship, or Government; the former
of which is (and for some good time has been) fully agreed upon: the latter,
however not fully completed, yet is it for substance both determined and held
forth. How it was 1656. Dr. Drake, in his Bar to Free admission, does
acknowledge, page 132. How many Congregations have for ten or twelve Years
together assembled constantly at the Word and Prayer, without the Lords Supper,
yea some of them happily without Baptism: A great fault, I grant; but, I hope,
not so great as to unchurch them. To favor whom, he is drove to affirm, That I
dare not say, the Sacraments are essential Notes of the Church visible. This
was that which lay hard upon them, and what the Independents took great
advantage of, viz. That they were some Years without any settled Constitution,
and at last so defective in such a considerable part as Government and
Discipline. So it was urged by the Five Dissenting Brethren, in their
Apologetical Narration, 1643. page, 23. When the others charged them with
Schism, they thus answer: Schism, which yet must either relate to a differing
from the former Ecclesiastical Government of this Church established; and then,
who is not involved in it, as well as we? or, to the Constitution and
Government that is yet to come; and until that be agreed on, established, and
declared, and actually exist, there can be no guilt or imputation of Schism
from it. This was what the Presbyterians themselves lamented; as the
Norwich-Ministers, in their Hue and Cry after Vox Populi, Anno 1646. page 31.
We could wish some Penal Law were against the Independents, Anabaptists, and
some Government settled. And when it is objected there, The Parliament has
given full Power and Authority for Ordination, etc. They answer, For what, Sir?
to Ordain Pastors for each Congregation? or to choose Elders? In what Ordinance
is this Power given to any but the City of London? The want of this, was what
their Adversaries did continually object; and this was what they used all their
skill to refute, as Mr. Brinsley, page 31. Object. We want an Ordinance, viz.
Discipline. So in Knutton's Seven Questions about Separation, 1645. And which
Mr. Firmin is so pestered with, that he answers it after this sort, in his
Separation examined, page 28, 29. But this Objection has no place in these
Churches; for, Prayer, Preaching, Administration of the Sacraments, yea,
Discipline they had in the Episcopal days, etc. As if that were sufficient to
vindicate what they wanted in theirs.

The Case then was plainly thus: That they were some Years without any settled
Constitution; That though the Province of London was by an Ordinance, 1645.
divided into Twelve Classical Elderships, yet after all the Ordinances about
it, the very Form of Government was not ordered to be published till 29 Aug.
1648. nay, nor the Articles of Religion agreed to be printed till about a Month
before: And yet notwithstanding, then the Cry was, Independency a great Schism,
and worse than Popery, (as Adam Steuart in his Zerubbabel to Sanballat, p. 53.)
and Separation from them, Schismatical. Now, if it must be so, when no body
knew what the Church was, nor they themselves knew what Foundation to lay it
upon (if J. Goodwin, in his Sion College visited, page 10. or J. L. in his
Plain Truth, page 6. are to be believed, and as Mr. Brinsley, page 49. does not
deny); then what must it not be, when it is from a Church that is established,
and whose Articles, Constitutions, and Orders are, and have been time out of
mind settled, as ours is? If in 1647. there was a Church, and a Church of
England, as the Ministers sent by the Parliament in that Year to Oxford did
maintain, and as the Form of Church Government to be used in the Church of
England, printed by Order of Parliament, 1648. does acknowledge; then certainly
such a thing there is now to be found.

To conclude this: If the old Nonconformists thought the Church of England to
be a true Church, and what they did think themselves obliged to hold Communion
with; If the present Nonconformists, when time was, did declare as much; If the
Church of England does not now differ from what it was when they so thought of
it; and that it is much more a Church, than what that was that the Independents
were accounted by them Schismatics for withdrawing from: Then I hope their
Separation from us, will be allowed to be unwarrantable.

And now I know not what can be said, unless, with the Author of Sacrilegious
Desertion, page 33. it be said, that this is only local distinction, not
separation. But that is the second thing I shall proceed to show.

2. There is a Separation from the Church of England. If there was no more to
be said in this Case, than what Adam Steuart, in his Zerubbabel to Sanballat,
wrote against the Independents, 1644. it would be sufficient; viz. If ye be not
separated from us, but entertain Union and Communion with us, what need ye more
a Toleration, rather than the rest of the Members of our Church? The pains the
Nonconformists took to compass, and the joy which they expressed at obtaining a
Toleration, shows that they were not of its Communion. But what credit can we
give to such a Declaration? For alas, (as Mr. Brinsley, page 28. says in the
same case) what means the lowing of the Oxen, and the bleating of the Sheep?
I mean, the confused noise of our lesser and greater Divisions? -- Divisions,
not only without Separations, Sects, and Factions; but Divisions of an higher
nature, amounting to no less than direct Separation; and that not barely to a
negative, but to a positive Separation, to the setting up of Altars against
Altars, Churches against Churches. That it is so de facto, I think it will not,
it cannot be denied. For, if Mr. Baxter, and some others, shall profess, That
they meet not at the same hour with the Public, under any color and pretense,
in any Religious Exercise, than according to the Liturgy; and yet in the mean
time use it not: the Dividers will not see (as the Author of Sacrilegious
Desertion says, page, 20.) the different Principles on which they go, while
their Practice seems to be the same. But if we should grant this, to those
that are willing to hold Communion with us; yet these are very few, to what do
wholly decline and deny it. Mr. Jenkin here says, page 22. That Separation
appears in the withdrawing from the performance of those Duties which are both
the Signs of, and Helps to Christian Unity, as Prayer, Hearing, Receiving of
Sacraments, etc. And that Schism is negative, when there is only a simple
secession, etc. without making head against that Church from which the
departure is; or positive, when Persons so withdrawing do so consociate and
draw themselves into a distinct and opposite Body, setting up a Church against
a Church. Now I dare appeal to all that know them, whether Mr. Jenkin, and the
far greater part of his Brethren, have been ever seen in our Congregations
(unless at some times the more adventurous of them have thrust their Heads in
at the Door; when, if they heard all, as it is usually but very little of the
Sermon that they have patience to hear, Mr. Brinsley will tell them, That as
for Occasional hearing, it is agreed on all hands, it is not properly an act of
Church Communion, page 35.) And I will appeal to your Eyes, whether they do not
constantly keep up their Meetings in opposition to those of the Church. But
what need I go so far about, when this is not only acknowledged, but defended?
See Mr. Wadsworth, in his Separation yet no Schism, Epist. to the Reader, where
he puts the Case of the Nonconformists thus: There are some hundreds of true
Ministers of Jesus Christ, -- and there are many thousands likewise of visible
Professors of Christianity, do willingly hear and join with these Ministers in
the Worship of God, and in a participation of Sacraments: -- These meet in
distinct Congregations, separate from the legallyestablished Congregations in
the Land, with whom they will not, because they cannot hold Communion. And now
it is out, and what you see is plainly avowed: So that I have leave to pass to
the next Head.

3. That this Separation is voluntary, and unnecessary. The sin of Schism, will
all say, is very great, and what cannot be blotted out with the blood of
Martyrdom, as Mr. Jenkin here says, page 26. one spoke very well. But, as he
observes from Musculus, page 31. There is a double Schism, the one bad, the
other good; the bad is that whereby a good Union, the good whereby a bad Union
is broken asunder. And of what sort the present Separation is, comes now to be
tried, which I shall do, by making my Observations from what this Sermon will
afford, and by showing from thence, when a Separation is justifiable, and when
not. From all which, if it appears, that the Reasons produced by them fall
within the compass of the Negative, but hold not as to the Affirmative, it will
appear, That their Separation is voluntary, and unnecessary. Now there are Six
Cases, as may be collected from this Sermon, in which Separation is
unwarrantable, and schismatical.

1. It is not to be allowed, when it is by reason of Mixt-Communion, and
admitting into Church Fellowship the vile with the precious. This he handles at
large, from page 33. to page 37. and says, That it has no Scripture-warrant.
And this has been their constant Opinion. So Mr. Firmin, in his Separation
examined, page 40. Corrupt Members there were enough in the Jewish Church, and
so in the Christian Churches soon after, and in the Apostles times; but you
have no example of separating from them. So the Provincial Assembly of London,
in their Vindication of the Presbyterial Government, page 134. Suppose there
were some sinful mixtures at our Sacraments, yet we conceive this is not a
sufficient ground of a negative, much less of a positive separation. -- This
they give the Reason of, Because in what Church soever there is purity of
Doctrine, there God has his Church, though overwhelmed with scandals. And
therefore whosoever separates from such an Assembly, separates from that place
where God has his Church, which is rash and unwarrantable. Mr. Vines, in his
Treatise of the Sacrament, has a whole Chapter, viz. cap. 20. to show the
unlawfulness of it, and says, page, 235. That to excommunicate our selves from
Gods Ordinances (if Men of wicked Life be not excommunicate) for fear of
pollution by them, is Donatistical. So Dr. Manton, on Jude, page 496. The
Scandals of Professors are ground of mourning, but not of separation. And Mr.
Baxter does speak fully to it, in his Cure of Church-Divisions, page 81. If you
mark all the Texts of the Gospel, you shall find, that all the separation which
is commanded in such cases (besides the separation from Infidels and the
Idolatrous World) is but one of these two forts: 1. That either the Church cast
out impenitent Sinners by the Power of the Keys; or, 2. That private Men avoid
all private familiarity with them. But that the private Members should separate
from the Church, because such Persons are not cast out of it, show me one Text
to Prove it if you can. The consideration of this, made the Author of the Book
called Nonconformists no Schismatics, to quit this Argument, concluding, page
16. with good reason, That if one Man's sin desileth another that Communicates
with him, who can assure himself of any Scriptural Communion on this Side
Heaven? All which I have produced (and could indeed tire you with Quotations of
this kind) on purpose to let you see how much the Author of Separation yet no
Schism, does run counter to his own Party, and withal, how little acquaintance
with this Argument will serve to show the weakness and inconsistency of that
Tract. He puts the case thus, page 56. If Ministers, or many of the Members are
much corrupted, or the Members only commonly so, but connived at, it is a
sufficient ground for the sound to withdraw. And for this he gives two Reasons:
1. Lest under the pretense of Peace, they should be guilty of the greatest
Uncharitableness, and that is the hardening and encouraging them in their
abominable Impieties. 2. Because the sound ought, by the Law of God and Nature,
to provide for their own safety, -- for they cannot but be in apparent danger
by Communicating with such. Now granting the Case so to be, yet separation will
not be granted lawful by themselves, upon the Reasons which he there gives. I
shall refer him for an Answer to the first of the Letters that passed betwixt
the Ministers of Old and New England, published by Mr. Ash and Mr. Rathband,
1643. (as thought by them at that time very seasonable). When those of New
England had said, That by joining with an insufficient and unworthy Ministry,
they did countenance them in their Place and Office, page 8. it is answered,
page 11. The Scripture teaches evidently, not only that the People by joining
do not countenance them in their Place and Office; but that they must and ought
to join with them in the Worship of God: and in separating from the Ordinance,
they shall sin against God. From whence you may observe, That the countenancing
of such whom the Word of Truth does condemn, as not approved Ministers of God,
(as it is there said) is no reason to discharge us of our Duty; and if
Separation be not otherwise our Duty, the fear of hardening others, by our
Communion with them, will never make it to be so. Surely this might have been
very well thought to be the effect of the same Practice in the Church of
Corinth, where there was (as the Provincial Assembly of London observes, in
their Vindication, page 134.) such a profane mixture at their Sacrament, as we
believe few (if any) of our Congregations can be charged withal: And yet the
Apostle does not persuade the godly Party to separate, much less to gather a
Church out of a Church: Which yet had been very necessary, if this Author's
Reason had been of any force.

And his second Reason, viz. Care of our own safety, will also have no place
here, if Mr. Jenkin's Authority will signify any thing with him; who speaking
in this Sermon, p. 36. of that Text, 1 Cor. 5. 11. of not eating with a
Brother, etc. shows very well, that it is to be understood of Civil, and not
Religious eating, and gives this as one Reason for it, viz. That there is
danger of being infected by the wicked in civil, familiar, and arbitrary
eatings; not so in joining with them in an holy and commanded Service and
Ordinance. If we follow the Apostles Precept, of having no familiar and
ordinary converse with Fornicators, Covetous, Idolaters, Drunkards, etc. we may
be assured, that we shall be in no danger of Infection by their Company in
Religious Offices and Duties, where there is little or no converse,
opportunity, and way for it. The case, I acknowledge, is sad, when such are to
be found amongst Christians, and that Discipline is not exercised upon them:
but I ought not to leave my Place and Duty, because such do join with me in it;
or to separate from the Church of God, because such continue in its Communion:
For, this is to tear the Church in pieces, and the Doctrine that drives to it
is very pernicious. Take the Character of it from the Provincial Assembly, in
their Vindication, page 124. That Doctrine that cries up Purity, to the ruin
of Unity, is contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel.

But truly, the case is not so bad with us, as it is represented. I know there
are some that do object, as J. Rogers did in 1653. The Parish-Churches are not
rightly constituted, for there is in them ranting, revelling, -- To whom I
shall reply, as Mr. Crofton did then to him, in his Bethshemesh clouded, page
103. O sharp sentence! severe censure! at one word pronounced on all Parishes
indefinitely: the Position whence it flows had need be well proved, and the
Inference well backed. For, I must needs say, that what Mr. Firmin, in his
Separation examined, p. 42. once said of the Presbyterial, is true of the
Episcopal, That there are many Ministers that have as few wicked at that
Ordinance [of the Lords Supper], as ever were in the Church of Corinth. I must
confess, that I was pleased with the ingenuous acknowledgment of the Author of
The Cry of a Stone, in 1642. who says, page 39. I freely acknowledge, that
there are many in the Parishes of England, which are of a very godly Life and
Conversation, and some that go as far therein, as ever I saw any in my life:
And if I should prefer any of the Separated before them in Conversation, I
should speak against my own Conscience: but in the Church State and Order, I
must prefer the other. And I question not, but that the State of the Church is
still as good, in that respect, as it was then; and might have been better, had
those kept in it that are run away from it, and that by their Divisions in
Religion, make many to question whether there be any such thing in the World.
Certainly, were our endeavors rightly placed and united, there is scarcely any
Church in the World whose Temper would promise more success, than that of ours:
And if we would deal fairly (as J. G. in his Cretensis, page 5. once said) in
comparing them together, and not set the Head of the one against the Tail of
the other, but measure Head with Head, and Tail with Tail; I will not say of
our Church, as he did of Independency, That if that has its Tens, Presbytery
has its Thousands of the Sons of Belial in its Retinue: but I will say, That
even the separated Churches, as they now stand, are not without them, as well
as we: And if they would as well look out the Extortioner, and Unjust, and
Covetous, and Railer, (not to speak of others) amongst themselves, as they do
pick out the Fornicator and Drunkard, that are (as they insinuate) with us,
they would find their own Churches not so good, and others not so bad as they
imagine.

But supposing that such are in the Communion of our Church (as it is not to be
altogether denied) yet is not the Church presently to be blamed. Hear what Mr.
Brinsley says, in his Arraignment of Schism, page 39. Supposing such
unwarrantable Mixtures have been, and yet are to be found; yet it cannot
properly be put upon the Churches score. What her Ordinance was touching the
keeping back scandalous Persons from the Sacrament, they which have read her
ancient Rubric cannot be ignorant. And Mr. Vines of the Sacrament, c. 19. p.
233. speaking about the Power which the Minister has of keeping off unworthy
Persons from the Lords Supper, says, I as little doubt of the Intention of the
Church of England, in the Rule given to the Minister before the Communion, in
the case of some emergent Scandal at the present time. The Church has provided
for the correcting of Offenders; and perhaps there may be as good reason why
the Censures of it are not now executed, as there was in the late Times. Mr.
Crofton once told the Independents, in his Bethshemesh clouded, p. 110. The
continuance of our disordered Discipline, is the fruit of their disordered
Separation from us. I would fain be resolved in what Adam Steuart, in his
Zerubbabel to Sanballat, page 70. puts to the Querie: I would willingly know
(says he) whether it were not better for them that aim at Toleration and
Separation, to stay in the Church, and to join all their endeavors with their
Brethren to reform Abuses; than by their separation, to let the Church of God
perish in Abuses? Whether they do not better, that stay in the Church to reform
it, when it may be reformed, than to quit it for fear to be deformed in it? If
they had taken this course, and had given us their help, in stead of
withdrawing from it, doubtless the Censures of the Church would have signified
more, and the Members of it have been in a much better condition than now they
are. I shall conclude this with what is said by a well-experienced Person, in
his Address to the Nonconformists, page 161. If, in stead of this [Separation],
each Christian of you had kept to Parochial Communion, and each outed Minister
had kept their Residence among them, and Communion with them, as private
Members, in the Parish-way; and had also in a private capacity joined with
those Ministers which have succeeded them, in doing all the good they could in
the Parish, -- I nothing doubt, but that by so doing, you would have taken an
unspeakable far better course to promote the Power of Religion in the Nation,
than by what you have done. It Is they that have in great measure weakened, if
not tied our Hands, and then complain that we do not fight. If all things
therefore were considered, I believe that they would have as little reason to
condemn our Churches for Corruptions in this kind, as I am sure, if they will
be constant to themselves, that they have none to separate from us upon account
of them.

2. Separation is not to be allowed for slight and tolerable Errors, which are
not Fundamental, and hinder Communion with Christ the Head; as may be collected
from page 28. and 37. of this Sermon. So also say the old Nonconformists, in
their Confutation of the Brownists, published by Mr. Rathband, page 4. We
desire the Reader to consider, that a People may be a true Church, though they
know not, nor hold not every Truth contained in the Scriptures, but contrarily
hold many Errors repugnant to them. This was the Primitive Opinion and
Practice, say the Provincial Assembly, in their Vindication, page 139. All such
who professed Christianity, held Communion together, as one Church,
notwithstanding the difference of Judgments in lesser things, and much
corruption in Conversation. And now, that the Church of England does hold no
Fundamental Errors, I appeal to themselves. What it was before the Wars, let
the Author of Church-Levellers, printed for Tho. Underhill, 1644. speak: When it
was objected, That the Presbyterians, whilst persecuted by the Bishops, did
hold forth a full Liberty of Conscience; he answers, This is a Slander, -- the
difference between them and the Prelates being not in Doctrinals, but
Ceremonials. And therefore after the Covenant was taken, whilst the Lords had
the Power of Admission to Benefices, all Persons presented were to read the
Articles publicly, and profess their consent to them. And that it is the same
still, is confessed. So Mr. C. in his Discourse of the Religion of England,
page 43. The Doctrine of Faith and Sacraments by Law established, is heartily
received by the Nonconformists. So Sacrilegious Desertion, page 45. We differ
not at all from the Doctrine of the Church of England (till the new Doctrine
about Infants was brought into the new Rubric.) And certainly, that is, if an
Error, no dangerous or fundamental one. So Dr. Owen, in his Peace Offering,
1667. p. 12. The Confession -- of the Church of England, declared in the
Articles of Religion, and herein what is purely Doctrinal, we fully embrace,
and constantly adhere unto. Again, page 17. We know full well, that we differ
in nothing from the whole Form of Religion established in England, but only in
some few things in outward Worship. Herein too we have the concurrence of Mr.
W. himself, in his Separation yet no Schism, p. 60. If you take it [the Church
of England] for such Christians only who are of the Faith in Doctrinals with
those that hold the Thirty nine Articles; here the Nonconformists come in for a
share also, who are of your Faith therein: excepting those which respect
Discipline and Ceremonies. And page 62. It is evident, that some sort of Errors
in a Church, though but tolerated, may be a just ground of withdrawing; though
I do not charge the Church of England with any such Errors.

This therefore being thus acknowledged, one would have thought the Argument
might be fairly dismissed, and that here could be no reason found for
Separation: And yet when we are come thus near, it is like the two Mountains
spoken of in Wales, upon whose tops you may exchange Discourse, and almost come
to shaking of Hands; and notwithstanding all, there is little less than a days
Journey betwixt you. We seem to have brought the Matter to a perfect
reconciliation; but when we least thought of it, we are at open War again: For
the Author last-mentioned grants as much as we can ask; but immediately thrusts
in a Reason or two, that he thinks will maintain their Ground, and vindicate
their Practice notwithstanding. The Doctrine he has nothing against; but yet
the Preachers are -- Sometimes he says, they are contrary one to another; some
are for the Doctrine of Predestination, others against it, etc. and how shall
he then judge of their Faith and Doctrinals? page 60. Sometimes he says, It is
conceived, many of them preach contrary to the Articles, ibid. Sometimes again,
It is conceived, that several of them do not honestly believe those Articles
that they have professed to believe, p. 62. And to make all sure, because it
may be objected, That the People have liberty in this case of complaining; he
answers, To what purpose? when such Errors are publicly professed in printed
Books, and no course taken for correcting or ejecting of the Authors? page 61.
Things as impertinently, as slanderously suggested. For, what though the
Ministers differ among themselves in some Points, as he does after his
Predecessors the Brownists affirm, (as you may see in the Nonconformists Answer
to them, page 4.) is that a reason to forsake our Communion? and does he that
forsakes ours for theirs, find the case much amended? Do not the Nonconformists
as much differ from each other, as any amongst us? If not, from whence proceed
all those Disputes about Communion and Non-communion with us, about the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, the nature of justifying Faith,
lawfulness and unlawfulness of prescribed Forms of Prayer, of God's Prescience,
etc. And why are Mr. How, and Mr. Baxter, etc. so much teazed by some of their
Fellows, and the latter called Slanderer, Dictator, Self-saver, and accused of
Profaneness, Blasphemy, and what not, as you may see in the Antidote to his
Cure, 1670? Is it not because they will not swallow down the absurdest of their
Principles, or do go further toward an accommodation of our unhappy
Differences, than they will allow?

But what are those Points that our Ministers thus differ among themselves, or
from our Church in? Is it about the mode in Imputation, or about the Object of
Predestination? etc. These things the Church of England is not so minute and
positive in. If he will not believe me, I shall turn him over to Mr. Hickman
(who has in several Tracts particularly concerned himself in this Argument,
and may be supposed to understand it). He, in his Latin Sermon De Haeresium
origin, 1659. page 37. undertaking to answer Tilenus about the Doctrine of our
Church concerning the Object of Predestination, whether massa corrupta, or no,
says, Apage nugas; Non solet Ecclesia Anglicana in mysteriis hujusmodi
explicandis vagari in eas quaestiones, quae nimia subtilitate popularem captum
effugiunt. Is it about the special Grace of God in the conversion of a Sinner,
or the influence of the Holy Spirit in it? Then I will dare him to produce any
that are herein Nonconformists to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and
that teach, That there is no special Grace exerted in the conversion of a
Sinner; or, That the Holy Ghost is of no further use in the conversion of Men,
than as he first inspired those that delivered the Doctrine of Christianity,
etc. as he slanderously does say. He may force, and scrue, and wrest; but he
cannot do it honestly and fairly. But supposing there were several that did
thus teach, and that such Books were Licensed where this is affirmed: Does this
presently make the Church Heretical? Notwithstanding this, I believe that the
Church of England is in it self as Orthodox, as theirs was in 1646. when
Shlichtingius his Comment on the Hebrews, or what was little better, came out
thus attested by Mr. J. Downame: I have perused this Comment; and finding it to
be learned and judicious, plain and very profitable, I allow it to be printed
and published. I doubt they would have taken it very ill, to have been then
charged with Socinianism, because that Book came out with such an Imprimatur,
from him that was deputed in those Times to give it: And yet I never heard that
Mr. Downame was corrected or ejected for so doing. And may they continue
Orthodox notwithstanding, and we for such an escape be counted Heretical? But
how far a Church is concerned in such Cases, I think will appear from what is
said in The Divine Right of the Presbyterial Government, page 265. The Church
of Rome (setting aside those particular Persons among them that maintained
damnable Errors, which were not of the Church, but a predominant Faction in the
Church) continued to be a true Church of Christ until Luther's time, -- as the
unanimous consent of the Orthodox Divines confess; yea, as some think, till the
cursed Council of Trent, -- till when, the Errors among them, were not the
Errors of the Church, but of particular Men. Now I hope they will be as
favorable to us, and give our Church as much allowance in this case as that of
Rome, and not count it the Error of the Church, till by some Decree, Canon, or
Article it is owned so to be.

Sir, You may by this time perceive, how hard these Persons are put to it, when
it makes them so quick to espy, and busy to rake all the dirt they can
together, to make our Church deformed, and worthy of all that defamation they
have branded it with, and of that distance they observe and keep from it. How
do they torture Phrases, hale along Expressions, whithout due Process, to the
Gibbet and the Stake, and cry out Pelagianism, and Socinianism, nay Mahometism?
Mr. Jenkin and his Brethren once said, in the Vindication of the Presbyterial
Government, page 140. To make ruptures in the Body of Christ, and to divide
Church from Church, and to set up Church against Church, and to gather Churches
out of true Churches, and because we differ in some things, therefore to hold
Communion in nothing; this we think has no warrant out of the Word of God, and
will introduce all manner of Confusion in Churches, -- and set open a wide gap
to bring in Atheism, Popery, Heresy, and all manner of wickedness. And all
People would be apt to say the same, and could not see into the Reason of this
Separation, if it came to this, Whether the Righteousness of Christ be the
meritorious or formal Cause of our Justification? or, Whether Moral Virtue and
Grace differ in their nature, or only in their cause? It must be somewhat
gross and tangible that they can judge of; and therefore charge them home, That
they hold no necessity of the Righteousness of Christ; and, That Moral Virtue,
as it was in the Heathens, or in Christians without any Divine Grace, will
save; and you do the work: This is a Lord have Mercy wrote upon their
Church-doors; and People will be taught by this, to avoid them as they would
the Plague, and to be as wary of trusting their Souls with them, as their
Bodies with Tigers, Bears, and Wolves. It is truly and well observed by Mr.
Hickman, in his Sermon De Haeresium origin, page 12. Ipsa salus non servet eas
oves, quae aeque metuunt a pastoribus and lupis: Once render their Pastors
formidable to them, and we may know how the day will go. Beat up these
Kettle-Drums, and you may easily gather, and securely Hive the Bees.

I shall conclude this with what Mr. Baxter says, in his Cure of
Church-Divisions, page 393, 394. As I have known many unlearned Sots, that had
no other Artifice to keep up the reputation of their Learning, than in all
Companies to cry down such and such (who were wiser than themselves) for no
Scholars; -- So, many that are, or should be conscious of the dullness and
ignorance of their fumbling and unfurnished Brains, have no way to keep up the
reputation of their Wisdom with their simple Followers, but to tell them, O
such an one has dangerous Errors, and such a Book is a dangerous Book, and
they hold this, and they hold that; and so to make odious the Opinions and
Practices of others. -- And if Ignorance get possession of the ancient and
gray headed, it triumphs there, and says, Give me a Man, that I may dispute
with him; or rather, Away with this Heretic, he is not fit to be disputed
with. How far Mr. Jenkin is concerned in this Character, I leave to his
consideration; but if you have a mind to inquire into it, you may repair to his
Exodus, where he comes like another Samson, shaking his Locks, and rushing
forth with his mouth full of Menaces against the uncircumcised Philistims,
those audacious Heretics that lie sculking in the corners of the Church of
England: but (poor man) meets with the misfortune of that Champion, to be led
away in triumph; and in stead of answering others, is not able to defend
himself.

3. Separation is not to be allowed for the manner of Church-constitution. So
says Mr. J. here, page 37. Much more clear (if clearer can be) is the
Schismaticalness of those who separate from, and renounce all Communion with
those Churches which are not of their own manner of Constitution. For which he
gives three Reasons, page 38. And herein he agrees with Mr. Brinsley, in his
Arraignment, page 32. and in his Church-Remedy, page 51. Now if this Argument
held for Presbytery against Independency, and that the separation of the latter
was for that reason Schismatical, I see not why it should not be of as equal
force to condemn the former, who yet do presume to offer it on their own behalf
against us, and think that they have said enough, when they have been able to
pick some quarrel with the present Constitution.

4. Separation is not to be allowed when it is upon those terms which will make
us refuse some Churches upon which are seen the Scripture-characters of true
Churches. This Mr. J. gives as a Reason to confirm the former, page 38. Now
what those Characters are, he tells us a little before, in the same page, viz.
In Scripture, Churches are commended, according as their fundamental Faith was
sound, and their Lives holy. Nay, he seems to resolve it wholly into the
former, page 34. where he says, Has not God his Church, even where corruption
of Manners has crept into a Church, if purity of Doctrine be maintained? Now
how far our Church has upon it these Characters, I appeal to what is
abovesaid, to show; and for which, I question not but it may contend with any
Church in the World.

5. It is not to be allowed because other Churches are by them accounted
better. So page 39. Men separate to those Churches which they account better,
because they never found those where they were before (to them) good. Which he
there condemns, and as a remedy against it, advises to labor for experimental
benefit by the Ordinances. The reason of this Separation (says Mr. Vines on
the Sacrament, p. 235.) seems plausible to easy capacities, such as the
Apostle calls, Romans 16. 18. the (...), the simple; but if it be urged by the
Standard of Scripture, it will be found too light. But now the case is altered,
and it is become a considerable Argument; A more profitable Ministry, a purer
Worship, a stricter Discipline, an holier Society and Fellowship, are some of
the massy Pillars upon which the weight of this new Separation is laid. Hither
the Author of Separation yet no Schism does with confidence betake himself,
page 65, 66, 67. The Reason supposes that which is not to be supposed, i. e.
That to withdraw from a Church for the benefit of a more profitable Ministry,
is a Crime. Now here I shall consider, whether this Reason will hold, and serve
to justify a Separation from a Church; and, if it were granted, whether yet it
is a Reason amongst us.

Whether it is so in it self, let Mr. Brinsley speak, in his Arraignment, page
47. where the Case is put thus; May not People make choice of what Ministers
they please, putting themselves under such a Ministry as by which they may
edify most? Answ. Suppose it, That a People have such a Power and Right to
choose their own Ministers; yet having once chosen them, and God by giving a
Blessing to their Ministry having ratified and confirmed that Choice,
evidencing that they are the Ministers of God to them; whether they may now,
upon pretext of greater Edification, take a liberty to themselves to choose new
ones as often as they please: this the moderate Author of the late Irenicon [i.
e. Mr. Burroughs] will by no means allow, but condemns, as the direct way to
bring in all kind of disorder and confusion into the Church. This both
Presbyterians and Independents then are agreed in, That Edification alone is no
sufficient Reason to forsake one Church for another; and that a Persons own
Opinion of his Case in that matter, will not make that lawful to him, which
will be the unavoidable means of bringing in confusion to the Churches which he
either leaves, or joins himself to. But the Author of Separation yet no Schism
thinks he has sufficient Reason for his Opinion, who does thus argue, viz. You
call it a Crime, because you suppose it is a transgression the Law of visible
Communion with some particular Church: But I say, That the Laws of visible
Communion with this or that particular Church, are but positive, and therefore
subordinate to Laws more natural and necessary; such is that wherein we are
commanded to take care of our Souls and Salvation: So that if Christians do
shift particular Churches, for the obtaining of very apparent advantages to
their Salvation, above what they have had where they were, I see therein no
Crime at all committed. I grant indeed, that positive Laws must give way to
natural; but then there must be a plain necessity that must intervene, to make
them inconsistent: for otherwise, both remain in force, as I conceive they do
in the Instance here given. If indeed Salvation was inconsistent with, or what
we run the apparent hazard of, in Communion with a particular Church, then
there is sufficient reason for separation from it: but if it be only that I
conceive the increase of Knowledge, or the engaging of my Affections, may be
better attained by separation from, than continuance in its Communion, this is
far from a necessity, and so no sufficient Reason to break it. As it is in a
Family, If the Master takes no care to provide for his Children and Servants
(who of old were esteemed the Goods of their Master) but that they must starve
if they continue with him; or if what he provides, is such as will rather
poison than nourish them, or what is absolutely forbid (as Swines flesh under
the Law): in such a case they may shift for themselves, and refuse to live with
him, till he mends their Condition. But if what he provides is lawful,
wholesome, and sufficient, though not of so good nourishment as might be wished,
they are to content themselves, and to keep within the bounds of Duty and
Observance. So it is here; If we were in a Church that either denied us what is
necessary to Salvation, or that would engage us to do what will bring it into
imminent hazard, we have an unquestionable Reason to forbear Communion with
her: But when the means of Salvation that we enjoy are sufficient to it, and
what we deliberate about is only the Degree and Measure, [what is better and
fitter] we cannot quit a Church without sin, and our departure is unnecessary.
And that will further appear, if we consider,

1. That no further Knowledge or Edification is necessary, than what we can
attain to in a lawful way; and what is otherwise lawful in it self, by taking
an undue course for it, is made unlawful. As, Hearing, Reading, and Christian
Converse, are very fit Means for my Improvement; but if I for it do injure my
Family, and neglect my Calling, it is so far from being my duty, that it is my
sin. So to edify my self, and to acquire a greater measure of Knowledge and
Christian Virtues, is a noble and most excellent End; but if I for it break off
Communion with the Church whereof I am a Member, I make my self a Transgressor.
All which, if well considered, the falacy of our Author's Argument will appear.
For, suppose I reason thus: The Laws of particular Families are but postive,
and therefore subordinate to Laws more necessary; such is that wherein we are
commanded to take care of our Souls: and therefore if I neglect the former for
the good of the latter, I see no Crime therein committed. Would not this appear
very conceited and imaginary? And if it is false here, it is so in the Case that
he offers. The grounds of his mistake herein, seem to be, 1. That he was so
intent upon the positive Laws of particular Churches, that he had no respect to
Church Communion in it self, which is highly necessary; by which means he did
not consider, that this Principle of shifting Communion for the expectation of
further Improvement, is what tends so to the dissolution of a Church, that he
that holds it is capable of continuing in no Communion whatsoever; and what
cannot be put in practice, but confusion in, and breaking up of Churches will
most certainly follow. This was what they of New England had experience of, and
therefore provided against, in their Platform of Church Discipline, cap. 3.
Church Members (say they) may not depart from the Church, and so one from
another, as they please, nor without just and weighty cause. -- Such departure
tends to the dissolution of the Body. -- Just Reasons for a Members removal of
himself, are, 1. If a man cannot continue, without sin. 2. In case of
Persecution. But not a word of a more profitable Ministry, and greater
edification. Now if this be the necessary and constant Effect of this
Principle, it cannot be true.

2. Another ground of his mistake seems to be, That the notion of a particular
Church, led him to think, that their separation into Societies distinct from
our Church, was no more than to go from one Parish Church to another (which is
also the conceit of the Author of Sacrilegious Desertion): This he insinuates
page 66. But this is apparently false, as I have showed in part before; and
which will be further evident, if you observe, that their Agreement with us in
Thirty six of our Articles, makes them to be no more of us (whilst they differ
in the others that refer to our Constitution, and which they separate from us
for, as they profess), than that of the Independents made them one with the
Presbyterians; who in all matters of Faith did freely and fully consent to the
Confession published by the Assembly, the things of Church Government and
Discipline only excepted, as they say in the Preface to the Platform of
Church Discipline in New England. And much to the same purpose is that of the
Congregational Churches met at the Savoy, 1658. But yet for all this, they
neither of them think themselves one with the other; and the Independents, for
their separation, were notwithstanding accused of Schism by the other.

2. This Course is unnecessary, and so unlawful, because even in the way in
which a Person is (whilst a Member of a true Church in the sense all along
spoken of), he may attain to all due Improvement. The Author of Prelatique
Preachers none of Christ's Teachers, page 31. to encourage People rather to sit
at home than hear the Public Ministers, tells them, That they might otherwise
help themselves, and that they had Means sufficient without it, as the
Scriptures, mutual Edification and Conference, Prayer, and Meditation, etc. and
that, though never so few or weak, Christ was amongst them. And if this would
be sufficient when wholly destitute of a Ministry, I am apt to think it would
do as well with one, though not altogether so well qualified as might be
desired. I shall conclude this with what the same Author says, page 28. When
God has vouchsafed a sufficiency of Means, and those unquestionably lawful,
though not of so rank flesh, or so highly promising as some others, for the
attaining of any good and desirable End, a declining and forsaking of those
Means (whether out of a diffidence of the sufficiency of them for the End
desired, or upon any other reason whatsoever) to espouse others pretending to
more strength and efficacy, has been still displeasing unto God, and of sad
consequence to those that have been no better advised than to make trial of
them.

But is it really thus, that there is any such difference betwixt the Abilities
of their and our Teachers? and that the obtaining apparent Advantages to their
Salvation in that respect, above what they could have had with us, is what they
separate for? So they would have it thought, as you may see in the Call to
Archippus, printed 1664. page 20, 21. There is indeed a Ministry, and Preaching
(such as it is); but whether snch as is likely to answer the Ends of it, judge
ye. Are those like to convert Souls, that have neither will nor skill to deal
with them about their Conversion? So again, When there is no better help than
an idle, ignorant, loose-living Ministry, (under which, God knows, we speak it
with grief of heart, too many, not to say the most of those that are of late
come in, may be reckoned) or than the cold and heartless way that is generally
in use, the Coal of Religion does ever go out. An high and daring Charge, which
he will be concerned to make good; or to suffer under the imputation of a foul
Defamer. Have they neither will nor skill to convert Souls? From whence then
proceed those most excellent and laborious Sermons that the Wisest of the
Nation do so extol the present Generation for? Whence was it, that when we were
bewildred with Phrases, and Religion made hard and unintelligible, and Cases
intricate and perplexed, that the things of it were made easy, and to lie near
to Men's Understandings; and that the part of Casuistical Divinity is not near
so cumbersom as it was in the days of some Men? Are they idle and ignorant?
From whence then is it that their Adversaries of all sorts are so well opposed,
not to say confuted, that they are made to quit their ground, and to betake
themselves to new Principles in their own defense; to fall from the
Infallibility of the Person, to that of Tradition, as they do abroad; from old
Nonconformity, to Brownism; and from Presbyterianism to Independency, as some
do at home? In what Age and Church have the great Truths and Principles of our
Religion been more effectually considered, more diligently searched into, more
clearly stated and explained, or more successfully defended, than in ours; and
which I may challenge the whole Party of the Separation to show any thing equal
to? From whence comes all this to pass, if our Church did so abound with
uncatechised Vpstarts, poor Shrubs, and empty and unaccomplished Predicants, as
Mr. Jenkin, with an holy indignation, does in his Exodus, p. 55. complain?
Surely if these Men had but duly weighed things, and had been conversant in the
Writings of our Church, or looked amongst themselves, they would not have dared
thus to reproach the most Learned and Industrious Ministry that perhaps England
ever yet had. Let me recommend to such, what Mr. Baxter says in the like case,
in his Explication of Passages in the Profession of the Worcestershire
Association, printed 1653. page 110. I desire those Brethren that object this,
but to search their hearts and ways, and remember what may be said against
themselves, and cast the beam first out of their own eye; at least to censure
as humble men, that are sensible of their own miscarriages and imperfections.
And if they did according to this advice, I am persuaded that they would think
there were as good and useful Men in the World as themselves. Do we not find
some of themselves forced to acknowledge as much? Consult Sacrilegious
Desertion, page 86. I really fear, lest mere Nonconformity has brought some
into reputation as conscientious, who by weak Preaching will lose the
reputation of being judicious, more than their silence lost it. And a little
after, speaking of their own Ministers, he says, Verily the injudiciousness of
too many among you, is for a lamentation: And, page 88. he adds, Through Gods
mercy, some Conformists preach better than many of you can do. Truly when I
consider what a Stock of worthy and accomplished Persons in that Quality,
whether for Sobriety and Learning, our Church is at present furnished with,
(though it must be confessed, there are that are defective in both; as when
were they not?) I look upon Men of this quarrelsom temper, to be such as are
described in Sacrilegious Desertion, page 91. That having set themselves in a
dividing way, secretly do rejoice at the disparagement of Conformists, and draw
as many from them as they can; and that therefore deserve the Character he
there gives, That they are but destroyers of the Church of God: Such that to
strengthen themselves, and carry on their own Interest, care not what they do
or say; but how worthily, let the Author of the Antidote to Mr. Baxter's Cure
judge, who says, page 20. That to reproach a whole Party, for the miscarriages
of some few, without taking notice how many faults are in those whom they would
defend, is the usual artifice of such that think themselves concerned, upon any
wretched terms whatsoever, to maintain an ill Cause, and have prostituted their
Consciences to defend an Argnment. I will leave such to consider what Mr.
Watson says, in his Sermon of God's Anatomy upon the Heart, page 167. which is
so severe, that I care not to transcribe.

But to proceed: As little reason is there to separate from a Church for
remisness of Discipline. This the Author of Separation yet no Schism says that
he sees no sin in, page 67. for the Reason given before; and to which my
abovesaid Answer, and what I have also said page 66. will be sufficient. I
shall only add, That care is taken by our Church and Constitution (as I have
already showed) for the due Administration of Discipline: And if it be
objected, That it fails in the exercise and application of it; I will answer
with Mr. Jenkin here, page 33. Let them consider, whether the want of purging
and reforming of Abuses, proceed not rather from some unhappy and political
restrictions -- in the exercise of Discipline, than from the allowance or
neglect of the Church it self. If you would see more of their Opinion formerly
as to this case, I refer you to Mr. Brinsley, in his Arraignment of Schism,
page 32. to Mr. Firmin, in his Separation examined, page 28. the Confutation of
the Brownists, published by Mr. Rathband, page 18. and Mr. Vines on the
Sacrament, page 22.

6. We must not separate from a Church as long as Christ holds Communion with
it. So Mr. Jenkin here, page 36. says; Separation from Churches from which
Christ does not separate, is Schismatical. So Mr. Vines on the Sacrament, page
242. If God afford his Communion with a Church by his own Ordinances, and his
Grace and Spirit, we are not to separate. It would be unnatural and peevish in
a Child to forsake his Mother, while his Father owns her for his Wife. Now
whether Christ holds not Communion with our Church, I refer you to the several
Marks given in this Sermon by Mr. Jenkin, p. 32. such as the having the Gospel
of Salvation preached in an ordinary way, etc. which you may compare with what
is said in the Vindication of the Provincial Assembly, page, 141. And so much is
expressly granted by T. P. or rather D. (as Mr. Crofton unriddles it) in his
Jerubbaal (wrote in answer to Mr. Crofton, 1662.) page 18. The Essentials
constitutive of a True Church are, 1. The Head. 2. The Body. 3. The Union that
is between them: Which three concurring in the Church of England, Christ being
the professed Head, She being Christ's professed Body, and the Catholic Faith
being the Union-bond whereby they are coupled together, She cannot in justice
be denied a True (though, God knows, far from a pure) Church. So much is
granted by the Author of Nonconformists no Schismatics, page 13. who having
started an Objection, viz. You own the Church of England to be a true Church of
Christ; and if so, Christ is in it, and with it; and why will you leave that
Church from which Christ is not withdrawn? Replies after this sort: "We
acknowledge the Church of England to be a true Church, and that we are Members
of the same visible Church with them; but it is one thing to leave a Church, and
another thing to leave her external Communion. To leave a Church, is to disown
it, and cease to be a Member of it or with it, by ceasing to have those
Requisites that constitute a Member of it, as Faith and Obedience. I will not
quarrel at this time with the distinction; but I do not understand what service
it can be of to them, when after all the accuracy of it, such that have nothing
more to say, will notwithstanding that be Schismatics, if his own Definition
of Schism hold true; for, page 12. he says, That Schism is a causeless
separation of one part of the Church from another in external Communion. Now if
the Church of England is so a Church, that Christ holds Communion with it; and
they Members of that Church, as he acknowledges: then they that leave her
external Communion are guilty of Schism: and then it is no matter whether there
be any difference betwixt leaving a Church, and leaving her external Communion,
when the least of them makes those that are guilty of it to be Schismatics.

To sum up now what has been said: Though there be Errors in a Church (if not
fundamental); though there be corruption of Manners, mixture in Communion;
though there be not a perfect Constitution and Order, and other Churches may be
thought better: yet if it has the Scripture-Characters of a true Church upon
it, and Christ holds Communion with it, it is not to be separated from, and
Separation from it is Schismatical. So that as far as the Negative part holds,
we are secure.

2. For what Reasons may a Church be separated from, and Persons be justified
in it?

Dr. Manton on Jude, page 496. says, The only lawful grounds of Separation
are three, viz. Intolerable Persecution, Damnable Heresy, and gross Idolatry.
To which Mr. Jenkin does here, page 23. add unjust Excommunication, and a
necessary Communion with a Church in its Sins. All which I shall now consider,
and enquire, whether they are Causes existent at the present amongst us, and
what they of the Separation have reason to plead.

1. Damnable Heresy. This I have before sufficiently acquitted our Church of,
and therefore conceive that I may without more ado proceed.

2. Gross Idolatry. I find those that deny the lawfulness of hearing the
established Ministers, are most forward to charge this upon us. With this the
confident Author of Prelatique Preachers none of Christ's Teachers, that he
might possess the unwary Reader betimes, thought safest to begin his Book, viz.
The Idolatrous madness of the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship, has of late been
made so manifest to all the Household of Faith in this Nation, -- As if it was a
thing so certain, plain, and notorious, that he must not be one of the Household
of Faith that does not discern it, and abhor the Church for it. With the like
boldness are we assaulted by the Author of A Christian and sober Testimony
against sinful Compliance, or the unlawfulness of hearing the present Ministers
of the Church of England, page 55. printed 1664. An Author of great
forwardness, but of intolerable ignorance or malice, that tells you, page 44.
That our Church does own, that Men ought to be made Ministers only by Lord
Bishops; (And then what a breach is made upon our Church by the Bishop of Soder
in the Isle of Man, that takes upon him to Ordain without that Title?) That the
Office of Suffragans, Deans, Canons, Petty-Canons, Prebendaries, Choristers,
Organists, Commissaries, Officials, etc. is not only accounted by us lawful,
but necessary to be had in the Church: And, page 45. That Women may administer
Baptism. And, page 94. reveals a further Secret, That the Reformed Churches
generally renounce the Ministry of the Church of England, not admitting any by
virtue of it to the Charge of Souls. Now do you not think that such as these
are able Champions, and fit to enter the Lists of Controversy, that take up
things by hearsay? By this you may guess to what Tribe they belong; and you
may learn it from Mr. Baxter, in his Cure, page 193. It is an ordinary sound,
to hear an ignorant, rash, self-conceited Person, especially a Preacher, to cry
out Idolatry, Idolatry, against his Brothers Prayers to God. But what occasion
has our Church given for this Outcry? Is it for the Matter, or the Form of
its Prayers? Not the Matter: for Mr. D. in his Jerubbaal, page 35. does thus
say of it, Most of the Matter I grant to be Divine. And Mr. Crofton, in his
Reformation no Separation, page 25. speaks more universally; I confess their
Common Prayer is my Burden; -- yet I must confess, I find in it no Matter to
which (on a charitable Interpretation) a sober, serious Christian may not say,
nay can deny his Amen. Not for the Form: for then it must be either because
every Form is Idolatrous, or that this Form is especially so, or because it is
prescribed and imposed. The first of these is affirmed by the angry Author of
The Antidote to Mr. Baxter's Cure, page 11. who says, We do not think any
thing to be Idolatry, because it has something in it to be amended; but
because it is used in the Worship of God, without any Command from God to make
it lawful: and this we must tell our Dictator, is a species of Idolatry, and
forbidden in the Second Commandment. But this Author has warily declined the
main Argument which Mr. Baxter insisted upon three Pages before, and falls upon
the Rere, and picked up an accidental Expression: for you will find him, page
190. of his Cure, to reason after this manner; Where did these Men learn to
call their Brethrens Worship false, any more than their own, upon the account
that God has not commanded the manner of it; when he has neither commanded us
to use a Form, or to forbear it? Now I believe it would be as hard for him to
find a Command for the perpetual use of a Conceived Payer, as he thinks it will
be to find one for a Form; and then they that pray without a Form, are as much
guilty of Idolatry, as those that use it: Nay, if the Divine Authority has
left it free, these are the Superstitious, that would make that a Duty
commanded, and that a Sin forbidden, which is not; as Mr. Baxter there says,
page 282. But if you would see more of this, I shall refer you to the
Confutation of the Brownists, page 12, 13.

It is not Idolatrous, as this Form is especially so. This indeed some have
ventured to say, as supposing the Liturgy to be taken out of the Mass Book. So
says the Author of the Anatomy of the Service Book: And therefore Mr. Robert
Baily wrote a Book called A Parallel of the Liturgy with the Mass Book,
reprinted 1661. But it shall suffice to say to this, what Mr. Ball, in the Name
of the Nonconformists, replied, in the Letters betwixt the Ministers of Old and
New England, page 14, 15. The Liturgy was not taken out of the Mass Book, in
such sense as you object; but rather the Mass, and other Idolatrous Prayers,
were added to it: for Popery is a Scab or Leprosy cleaving to the Church. --
It is no hard Task to show, that our Service Book was reformed in most things,
according to the purest Liturgies which were in use in the Church long before
the Mass was heard of in the World. And if that could not be showed, yet forms
of Speech generally taken (we speak not of this or that special Word or
Phrase), is no more defiled by Idolatry, than the light Air, or Place where
Idolatry is committed. It is not unlawful to pray, Lord help, or Lord have
mercy; or to give Thanks, Praised be God; because the Papists say, Lady help,
or Praised be God and the Virgin Mary.

Lastly, It is not Idolatrous as it is a Form imposed. So much indeed is said
in the Christian and sober Testimony, page 68. To pray by an imposed Form, is
Idolatry; and therefore does not spare to say, page 70. That Latimer, Ridley,
and Hooper, and many other Martyrs, were Idolaters: and yet in the mean time
grants, That they were such eminent Witnesses of Christ, that they shall come
with him, and sit upon Thrones. But I cannot understand how Imposition can
alter the Nature of Things, and make that unlawful which was otherwise in it
self lawful; and I see it is as little understood by the better part among
themselves. So the Nonconformists Confutation of the Brownists, page 15. If
Forms thus devised by Men be found to be lawful and profitable, what sin can it
be for the Governors of the Church to command that such Forms be used; or for
us, that are persuaded of the lawfulness of them, to use them, being imposed?
unless they will say, That therefore it is unlawful to hear the Word, receive
the Sacraments, etc. because we are commanded by the Magistrates so to do.
Whereas indeed we ought the rather to do good things, that are agreeable unto
the Word, when we know them also to be commanded by the Christian Magistrate.
So Mr. Baxter, in his Cure, page 186. If you command your Child to learn a
Catechism, or Form of Prayer, will you teach him to say, Father, or Mother, it
had been lawful for me to use this Form, if neither you nor any body had bid
me; but because you bid me, it is unlawful. O, whither will not partiality lead
men! And it will be worth your while, to see how Mr. Brinsley, in his
Church-Remedy, argues against it, where he concludes, That amongst all the
monstrous and misshapen Conceptions which these brooding Times have hatched
and brought forth, I do not know any more prodigious than this, viz. That
things indifferent in themselves, are made unlawful by being commanded. And
then much less are they thereby made Idolatrous. If our Liturgy then is good
for the Matter, and that the Matter is not altered by the Form; then you may
see where the Storm will fall, and what they are to be thought of that are
guilty of these Reproaches, and how much they distrust the goodness of their
Cause, that betake themselves to such Arts as these to support it.

3. A Church may be separated from upon intolerable Persecution. Where I should
consider, whether it be Persecution, before I proceed to enquire whether it be
intolerable. But because I have no mind to aggravate the Case, by showing what
has been by them formerly thought Persecution, and what not, I shall omit that
part of it, and enter upon the other, viz. the intolerableness of what is
suffered, as a Reason for which they suppose themselves compelled to quit
Communion. And it must arise to this degree, or else it will not justify a
Separation: Persecution alone will not warrant it, unless it comes to be
insufferable. Now this must be either on the part of the Ministers, or on the
People. Not on the Ministers: for all the difference betwixt them and the
People is, that they are required to lay down the present Exercise of their
Ministry, till they are satisfied in the submission they must give to the Rules
and Orders of the Church: But this is no Persecution, much less what is
intolerable No Persecution: for it is a Security required in all Churches of
the World, that those who are entrusted with that Office, should observe the
Order and Discipline that is amongst them. So it was in the Church of Scotland
whilst Presbyterian, where it was resolved, That whosoever has born Office in
the Ministry of the Kirk, or that presently bears, or shall hereafter bear
Office herein, shall be charged by every particular Presbytery where their
Residence is, to subscrive the Heads of Discipline of the Kirk, betwixt this
and the next Synodal Assemblies of the Provinces, under the pain*of
Excommunication; as you may see in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Kirk of
Scotland, printed 1641. page 12. And as they there declared the Office of a
Bishop to be unlawful in it self, page 19. so I find, that the General Assembly
did require, that besides this Subscription to the Book of Discipline, some
Persons (I suppose suspected of affection that way) should subscribe a
particular Declaration of the unlawfulness of Episcopacy, as was the Case of
Mr. Maxwell and Mr. Hay, in the Principal Acts of the General Assembly, 1644.
And thus it was amongst us, when all Persons to be Ordained, were to bring a
Testimonial of their having taken the Covenant, as you may find it in the Form
of Church Government, page 20. and in all Places required to take it, and to
read the Directory the next Lord's Day after the receipt of it, by an Ordinance,
Aug. 23. 1645. So that taking Security by Profession and Subscription, that the
Order of the Church shall be observed by Persons entrusted in the Ministrations
of it, and Suspension in case of refusal, is no Persecution. But supposing that
so it was, yet it is not intolerable. I do grant, that it must needs be a great
trouble to a good Man, that he cannot do God and the Church that Service which
he has devoted himself unto, by reason of some Limitations put upon him; but
yet I think, that this is not sufficient to carry him off from Communion with a
Church, and to set up another, because he is denied this Liberty: for he is
still capable of being a private Member of it, and therefore he ought to
continue in the latter Capacity, when suspended from the former. So says Mr.
Crofton, in his Reformation not Separation, Epist. to the Reader: I cannot be
persuaded, that I am disbanded from Christ's Army, so soon as I am superseded to
my Conduct; I must march under his Banner, when I may not be permitted to march
at the Head of a Company. So again, page 98. I conceive, Administration of
God's Worship is much different from Attendance on God's Worship; and I stand
bound to the last, when I am (justly or unjustly) barred from the first. And
this was the Opinion of the old Nonconformists. But now we find it otherwise;
and sometimes these plead the obligation of their Ordination, sometimes the
Relation which they have to a peculiar People, and sometimes the necessity of
multitudes of Souls. The first we find insisted upon by the Author of
Separation yet no Schism, Epist. to the Reader: If it be asked, May not Supreme
Magistrates, within their Dominion, suspend some Ministers from the Exercise of
their Office, when they conceive it is for the peace of the rest? It will be
answered, That the Lord of Lords, who gives the Office and the Commission, --
has certainly with the Office designed them to the Exercise thereof, and has
therein placed, not only the Office, but the Exercise thereof, above the
restraint of any Powers whatsoever, so long as the Exercise thereof continues
to be regulated by the Laws of Christ. And in this case, nothing is more
ordinarily produced than that of the Apostle, Woe is me, etc. But is not this to
advance every one beyond the cognizance of Superiors, and to fall in with the
Church of Rome, whilst they decry it? If indeed theirs was the Apostle's case,
the Apostle's resolution of obeying God rather than Man, would become them: But
how little it is so, let the old Nonconformists show, in their Confutation of
the Brownists, page 41. How unskilfully that speech of the Apostles is
alleged, will appear to them that will consider these three differences
between their Case and ours. 1. They that inhibited the Apostles, were
professed Enemies to the Gospel. 2. The Apostles were charged not to teach in
the Name of Christ, nor to publish any part of the Doctrine of the Gospel. 3.
The Apostles received not their Calling and Authority from men, nor by the
hands of men, but immediately from God himself; and therefore might not be
restrained or deposed by men: whereas we, though we exercise a Function whereof
God is the Author, and we are also called of God to it, yet we are called and
ordained by the ministry of men, and may therefore by men be deposed, and
restrained from the exercise of it. I shall conclude this with what Mr. Crofton
says, in his Reformation not Separation, page 70. If the Being of Christianity
depended upon my Personal Ministry, as the being or appearing a Christian does
on my Communion with the Church visible, the Inference might be of some force:
But till that be proved, I think it is of little.

But is this really the case? Then what becomes of those that among themselves
have taken up wholly with other Professions, and yet were never charged by
their Brethren, for so doing, (as Mr. Baxter is by the Author of the Antidote,
page 15.) with having left the Lord's Work? Now I question not, but the same
Reason that did induce some to take up with other Employments to the neglect of
this, and so satisfy the rest, that they acquiesce in it, will also be
sufficient to show, That mere Ordination cannot bind to the Exercise of that
Office, when the Magistrate and Church forbids; and consequently, that a
Restraint is no intolerable Persecution.

But the relation that they have to a peculiar People makes this Inhibition
intolerable. This is indeed pleaded in Sacrilegious Desertion, page 11. and 45.
I undertake to prove, that Pastors and People are the constitutive Essentials
of a true Church; that Dr. Seaman, Mr. Calamy, Dr. Manton, etc. with the People
subject to them as Pastors, were true Churches: Prove you, if you can, that on
August 24. 1662. they were degraded, or these true Churches dissolved. But
before he puts others to prove the contrary, he ought to have made good his own
Proposition, by proving, That the Relation betwixt particular Pastors and
People is not to be dissolved. For what though Pastors and People are the
Constitutive Essentials of a true Church? what though Dr. Seaman, Mr. Calamy,
etc. and the People with them, were true Churches? Can neither Dr. Seaman, etc.
remove, or be removed from a People, but all this mischief follows, that
Ministers are presently degraded, and Churches dissolved? Could not Mr. Calamy
remove from St. Edmondsbury to Rochford, and from Rochford to Aldermanbury, as
he himself does declare in his Apology? Could not Mr. Jenkin remove from
Blackfriars to Christ-church, without all this disorder? What wreck was here
made in Churches, if this Relation was indissoluble? But if a Pastor may thus
remove himself from one Church, upon invitation to another, (as it seems he
may) it shows, that the Relation is not so strict as is pretended; and that,
consequently, Superiors in Church and State may so far dissolve that Relation,
as well as the Pastor himself. But however, what relief will this afford to
those that leave those Places where they had any pretense of such a Relation,
and busy themselves where they had none? What relief will this be to those
that contract a new Relation, and that do gather Churches out of Churches?
Surely Dr. Seaman's, Dr. Jacomb's, and Mr. Jenkin's Flocks now, are taken from
other Places than Alhallows Breadstreet, Martins Ludgate, etc.

Lastly, The necessity of the People is what does make their Preaching
necessary (as they would have it understood. So Sacrilegious Desertion, page
59.), and so their Suspension intolerable Persecution. But supposing this, (as
doubtless there is and ever was Work sufficient for a greater number of skilful
and faithful Laborers); yet is there no way to be useful, but by facing a
numerous Congregation, and preaching at such Times, and in such Places, as do
declare a defiance to the Church, which they thereby make a manifest rupture
in, and open separation from? Is there no good to be done by preaching to Five,
besides a Man's own Family, and by Personal Conference and Instruction? How came
then our Savior and his Apostles oftentimes to betake themselves to this way,
as an Author of their own, in his Archippus, does inform us, page 21? But if it
be of great advantage, and that it is no little part of a Ministers Duty,
personally to Instruct, and Preach from House to House, as that Author says,
how comes it to be so sadly neglected by them, as he there complains? and how
comes the Apostles Woe to be pleaded for the one, and not to bind the other?
Hear what the Author of Sacrilegious Desertion faith, page 93. Is it not too
much Hypocrisy to cry out against them that forbid us Preaching, and in the
mean time to neglect that which none forbids us, viz. Christian Conference.
Certainly, as he says, page 94. Sincerity inclines men to that way of Duty
that has least Ostentation.

But if the state of the People be indeed the reason, why do we not find them
where there is most need of their Assistance? Are we not told, in Sacrilegious
Desertion, page 10. That the Nonconformists have found, that some Places of
many Years past have had no Ministers at all? Are there no Places in England
and Wales, that do much more abound in Ignorance, than London, and the adjacent
Parts? and are the Nonconformists there to be met with? No, that Work is left
to one (good Soul) that having not a Liberty by the Law to exercise his Office
in the more Public way, does with unwearied diligence pursue the Ends of it,
in traveling over steep Mountains and craggy Rocks, and conversing with the
rude and untaught Natives, whilst others do more consult their Ease and Profit.

You see then, upon the whole, that their Suspension is not intolerable
Persecution, or what will be sufficient to justify their Separation; but that
still, notwithstanding their Pleas, they are upon the same terms with the
People; and what will not justify the Separation of the People, will not
justify that of the Minister; and what is sufficient to retain the People in
Communion, is sufficient to retain the Minister.

And so we are left to consider the State of the People, and whether there be
on their part intolerable Persecution. Not to dispute whether what is suffered
be Persecution, or not; I shall only consider, whether it be what is
sufficient to warrant their Separation: And that will appear, if we observe,
That their Suffering must be either because they do not at all Communicate with
the Church, or that there are some particular things only which they do not
Communicate with us in. If it be for the former, then they did separate before
their suffering, and consequently their Suffering can be no reason for their
Separation. If it be only as to particular things, then, I say, it will be
hard to show, that any Person does suffer intolerably upon that score; the
Church proceeding in so great tenderness, where Persons have showed their
readiness to hold Communion with her in what they can, and have so far given
satisfaction of their Piety, Peaceableness, and Compliance, that in the Cases
where the Laws have been thought severe, they have rarely been executed upon
such in their severity. Which I conceive is a sufficient Reply to those that
cry out, Persecution, and intolerable, because of the great Penalties that
Offenders in such kind are liable unto. For, the mere supposal and expectation
of severity, is no good Reason for Separation, as long as it is not, nor is
likely to be actually inflicted. For, as Mr. Bradshaw the Nonconformist, in his
Unreasonableness of Separation, printed 1640. page 107. does say, Though Humane
Laws, under never so great Punishments, should bind us to never so great
Corruptions in Gods Service; yet so long as we do not actually communicate in
those Corruptions, our Communicating is never the worse for the said Laws: So I
say, Though Laws threaten never so great Punishments, yet so long as we do not
actually suffer them, our Condition is not the worse for these Laws. And this
was thought a good Argument by Mr. Baily, in his Historical Vindication of the
Church of Scotland, 1646. Page 20. who, when charged, That the King and his
Family are subject to the Classical Assemby, answers, That any Presbyterian did
ever so much as begin a Process with any Prince, when they had the greatest
Provocations thereto, it cannot be showed to this day. The Church of Scotland,
notwithstanding all the cross Actions of King James, or King Charles, -- yet
never did so much as bethink themselves of drawing against them the Sword of
Church Censures. Where he denies not the Charge of their Churches claiming such
a Power; but thinks it enough to reply, That she had never so used it. So then
you see, that it is not the Power that our Superiors have, nor the Penalties
that a Law threatens, that will serve in this case; as long as the Use of that
Power, and Execution of those Laws is suspended: and a Person ought not any
more to quit the Church, than he will his Country, as long as he may be
suffered to abide in it. And that he may do with us, that will hold Communion
with our Church in what he can, and does behave himself with modesty in those
things which for the present he cannot Communicate in.

4. Unjust Excommunication is another Reason given to make Separation
warrantable. But that being a spiritual Persecution (as Camero calls it) does
not really differ from the former, and therefore will receive the same Answer.

5. That which will warrant a Separation from a Church, is a necessary
Communion with it in its Sins. Toward the resolution of which, I shall observe,

1. That bare Communion with a Church, does not necessarily make a Person to
communicate with the Sins of it. This is granted by all that say, We must not
separate from a Church, because of the ungodly that are in its Communion, or
because of some mixtures that are in its Worship: And if we must not separate
from them, it is certain we may continue there, without being guilty of the Sin
of them. How far the first of these is and ought to be acknowledged, I have
showed above, at page 62. And how far the latter, you may see in Mr. Brinsley's
Arraignment of Schism, page 50. Though toleration of some unwarrantable
mixtures in a Church, be an evil; yet it is not so great an evil, as Separation
upon that ground. This was the Opinion of the Five dissenting Brethren, in
their Apologetical Narration, page 6. We have always professed, and that in
those times when the Churches of England were the most either actually
overspread with defilements, or in the greatest danger thereof, -- That we
both did and would hold a Communion with them, as the Churches of Christ. And
this they agreed to, upon this consideration, that otherwise there has been no
Church yet, nor will be to the day of Judgment, which Persons otherwise
persuaded, could or can hold Communion with; as you may find it in the old
Nonconformists Letters to those of New England, page 12. Mr. Firmin's
Separation examined, page 25. and the Vindication of the Provincial Assembly,
page 135.

2. I add, That the imposition of things unlawful, or so thought to be, in a
Church, makes a Person in this case no farther concerned, than as they are
imposed on him. For, if Corruptions tolerated are no bar to Communion, then
they are not when imposed; mere Imposition not altering the Nature, as Mr.
Crofton says, in his Jerubbaal, page 27.

3. Imposition in some things unlawful, or supposed so to be, will not justify
a separation from what is lawful. The Author of Separation yet no Schism, in
his Epistle to the Reader, thus pleads for the People: The People are not
always free from such Impositions which they extremely suspect as sinful; as
that they cannot enjoy Baptism for their Children without the Cross, nor
receive the Lords Supper without Kneeling; to name no more, (as well he could
not). But suppose that these things are imposed, and what they extremely
suspect; can this be a Reason for their separation in those things where
nothing of this nature is? Certainly, in obedience to Magistrates, and for
Communion with a Church, we ought to go as far as we can; and what I cannot do,
is no excuse for the omission of what I can. Thus did the old Nonconformists
think and practice, as I observed to you before, from the Vindication of the
Provincial Assembly, page 135. That though some of them thought it unlawful to
receive the Sacrament kneeling, yet they held Communion with the Church in the
rest. And accordingly Mr. Firmin argues, in his Separation examined, page 29.
Suppose there should be some Humane mixtures, are all the Ordinances polluted?
Why do you not communicate with them in those Ordinances which are pure?

Now if this be true, what shall we say to them that have nothing to object
against the greatest part of what they are required to communicate with us in;
and yet keep up a total and positive Separation from us, as if all Parts were
alike infected, and that from the Crown of the Head, to the Sole of the Foot,
there was nothing but Wounds and putrefying Sores?

4. The mere suspicion that a Person may have of the unlawfulness of what is
imposed, will not justify his omission of, or separation in that particular.
For, he ought to come to some resolution in it, and in case of Obedience,
Communion, and Charity, to go against such his Suspicion. To this purpose
speaks Mr. Geree, in his Resolution of Ten Cases, 1644. Things wherein doubts
arise, are of a double nature: 1. Merely arbitrary, and at my own dispose: 2.
That are under command; as coming to the Sacrament, Obedience to the Higher
Powers in things lawful. If Scruples arise about these, and a Man doubts he
sins if he acts, and he also doubts he sins if he forbears, etc. In this case
he must weigh the Scales, and where he apprehends most weight of Reason, must
incline that way, though the other Scale be not altogether empty. And this
done, after humble and diligent search, with bewailing our infirmity, that we
are no more discerning, will be accepted by God: God puts not his People on
necessity of sinning, nor can our Scruples dispense with his Commands. So Mr.
Faldo, in his Quakerism no Christianity, page 93. In doubtful and difficult
Cases, wherein we cannot reach the knowledge of our Duty, it is our Duty to
follow the Examples of the greatest number of the Saints, etc. And then surely,
what will serve in such a case to let us dispense with our Doubts, will much
more in Obedience to Governors, and for Communion with a Church. This I
thought to have more largely handled, as it is thought a new and late Argument,
used by Bishop Sanderson, etc. (but what I can prove to be of old the common
Resolution of the Case), and as the contrary is pleaded for from Mr. Hales: But
lighting happily upon a Book called Mr. Hales's Treatise of Schism examined,
wrote by a Learned Person, I shall refer you to it, where he particularly
undertakes this Point, page 110, etc.

Having thus made good the Three Propositions abovesaid, and showed, That the
Church of England is a True Church; That there is a Separation from it; and,
That this Separation is voluntary and unnecessary: that which remains is not to
be denied, viz. That therefore the present Separation is Schismatical. So that
now you may see in what condition those of our dissenting Brethren are, that
withdraw from the Communion of our Church; and how little able they will be to
reconcile their present Proceedings, to their former Principles and
Professions. It was once said by them, in the Vindication of the Presbyterial
Government, page 133. We dare not make separation from a true Church, by
departing from it, as you do, [speaking to the Independents.] Then Independency
was what they proved to be Schism, because, 1. Independents do depart from our
Churches, being true Churches, and so acknowledged by themselves. 2. They draw
and seduce Members from our Congregations. 3. They erect separate
Congregations. 4. They refuse Communion with our Churches in the Sacraments.
Now we judge, that no Schism is to be tolerated in the Church; as say the
London-Ministers, in their Letter to the Assembly, page 3. Then the inevitable
Consequences of it could be discovered and represented, as that by it Peoples
minds would be troubled, and in danger to be subverted; bitter heartburning
would be fomented and perpetuated; godly, painful, and orthodox Ministers be
discouraged, and despised; the life and power of Godliness be eaten out, by
frivolous Disputes; and the whole Course of Religion in private Families be
interrupted, and undermined; as they there say, page 4. Then Church-Division
was as great a Sin as Adultery and Theft, as Dr. Bryan maintains, in the
Public Disputation at Kilingworth, 1655. page 28. Then it was pleaded, That
they Covenanted not only against Sin, but Schism, as says Mr. Watson, in his
Anatomy upon the Heart, page 160. But is not that now true, which he there
charges upon themselves, We have gone against the Letter of it? For, do not
many of them that have said all this, set up Churches against Churches,
exercise the Worship of God, administer Ordinances, the Word, Sacraments,
apart, and in a separated Body? Which in a peculiar manner, and by way of
eminency, is called Schism, says Mr. Brinsley, page 16. Is Schism all on a
sudden grown so innocent a thing, that Persons are to be indulged, and tamely
permitted to continue in it? And is it not as sad now, as it was then, that
many that pretend to Religion, make no Conscience of Schism, as Dr. Manton on
Jude, page 492. does observe? Certainly, That still remains good which was said
by Mr. Brinsley, page 17. The Schisms and Divisions which are broken in, and
that amongst God's own People, are what I cannot but look upon as one of the
blackest Clouds, one of the saddest Judgments which hang over the head of this
Kingdom at this day; of sad influence for the present, and, unless they be
healed, of dangerous consequence for the future. Have we not Atheism, and
Infidelity, and Profaneness enough to encounter; but must we have more Work
found us, by those that have given us Arguments to oppose themselves with? Are
we in no danger of being overrun with a Foreign Power, and that the Romans
shall come and take away our Name and Church; when we, which are at difference
amongst our selves, shall without any opposition be swallowed up by them? Are
they yet to be taught, that as nothing can, so nothing will sooner make us a
prey to them, than mutual Hostilities amongst our selves? And whence is it,
that they will run the adventure, and care not what they expose us to? Is it
that Rome is nearer to them, than they are to us? That will not be supposed. Is
it that they expect better Quarter from that, than they meet with from our
Church? That let Experience decide. Is it that by bringing all to confusion,
and a common scramble, they may hope to go away with the Supremacy? That their
Divisions amongst themselves does confute. For, can they think, because they
agree against us, that they will agree among themselves? Or, can they think, if
they do not, that one alone can carry the Victory from the Common Enemy? Let a
sober Author of their own, in his Discourse of the Religion of England, be
heard, who says, page 39. That the common safety and advancement of true
Religion cannot stand by a multiplicity of petty Forms; but requires an ample
and well-setled State, to defend and propagate it against the amplitude and
potency of the Romish Interest. And are not these the thoughts of the wisest in
this Nation? and shall Men yet continue to keep up Feuds and Animosities, and
make no scruple of contradicting themselves to feed them? It was once said by
Mr. Brinsley, page 62. That it is a foul blemish to a Minister of Christ, to
speak one thing to day, and another thing tomorrow, to say and unsay. And I
will appeal to all the World, whether this be not what our Brethren are guilty
of. Surely, if they would but take the pains to review what they have written,
and weigh those Arguments against Schism and Separation that they formerly
published, they would return to themselves, and to that Church which they have
so unadvisedly broken off from; they would then think it their Duty, with the
old Nonconformists, to come as far as they can, and their Happiness to live in
the Communion of that Church where they may be as good as they will; they would
then see, that Schism is a great Sin, and that their present Separation is
Schism.

I should now conclude, but that I may fear that Mr. Jenkin will proclaim, and
others think me a Slanderer, for saying, page 44. That he has borrowed the
Substance of this Sermon from Mr. Brinsley's Arraignment of Schism, if I do not
make it good: and therefore in my own vindication, and also to show you how far
holiness and indignation may be pretended, when indeed it is little better than
hypocrisy and calumny that prompts Men on, I shall draw the Comparison, and
leave you and all others to judge, whether he be not one of those empty and
unaccomplished Predicants spoken of in his Exodus, page 56. that preach the
Sermons of others, and, more than that, dare before all the World publish them
as his own: the like to which is also done by him, or one of his Brethren, in
the Vindication of the Presbyterial Government, page 132. compared with Mr.
Brinsley, page 16. and page 134. with 52. and page 135. with 41. Nor has he
borrowed from Mr. Brinsley alone, but has rifled diverse other Authors for the
greatest part of his Book, as might easily be proved, were it either requisite,
or worth the while. How far he is beholden to others for that kind of Wit and
tawdry Eloquence that a gross and bribed Flatterer, in his Patronus bonae
Fidei, gives him the Title of Seneca for, the Author of the Vindication of the
Conforming Clergy has already showed: And how bold he has made with others
for Argument and Reason, the following Instances will be a sufficient Specimen,
where he has scarcely left any thing untouched that he then thought might
serve his purpose.

A Sermon preached by W. Jenkin, herewith Printed, and also to be found in his
Comment on Jude, printed in Quarto, 1652.
The Arraignment of the present Schism, by John Brinsley. LONDON, 1646.
Mr. Jenkin.THeir Heresies were perverse and damnable Opinions; their Schism
was a perverse Separation from Church Communion: The former was in Doctrinals,
the latter in Practicals; the former was opposite to Faith, this latter to
Charity. By Faith all the Members are united to the Head, by Charity one to
another: and as the breaking of the former is Heresy, so their breaking of the
latter was Schism. page 21.

Mr. Brinsley. Heresy (says Jerome) is properly a perverse Opinion, Schism is
a perverse Separation. The one a Doctrinal, the other a practical Error. The
one opposite to Faith, the other to Charity* - By the one (Faith) all the
Members are united to the Head; by the other (Charity) they are united to one
another. Now the breaking of the first of these Bands is Heresy, the latter
Schism. page 14.

Mr. Jenkin.Schism is usually said to be twofold, negative, and positive. 1.
Negative is, when there is only simplex secessio, when there is only a bare
secession, a peaceable and quiet withdrawing from Communion with a Church,
without making any head against that Church from which the departure is. 2.
Positive is, when persons so withdrawing do so consociate and draw themselves
into a distinct and opposite Body, setting up a Church against a Church, or, as
Divines express it, from Augustine, an Altar against an Altar. And this is it
which in a peculiar manner, and by way of eminency, is called by the name of
Schism. page 22.

Mr. Brinsley.There is, to use his terms (Camero), a negative and a positive
Separation. The former is simplex secessio, when one or more do quietly and
peaceably withdraw themselves from Communion with a Church, -- not making head
against that Church from which they are departed: The other, when persons so
withdrawing do consociate and draw themselves into a distinct and opposite
Body, setting up a Church against a Church. -- This is that which Augustine,
and other Divines after him, call the setting up of an Altar against an Altar.
And this is it (says that judicious Author) which in a peculiar manner, and by
way of eminency, is called by the name of Schism. page 16.

Mr. Jenkin.Schism beeomes sinful, either in respect, 1. of the groundlesness;
or, 2. the manner thereof. 1. The groundlesness; when there is no casting of
persons out of the Church by an unjust Censure of Excommunication, no departure
by unsufferable Persecution, no Heresy nor Idolatry in the Church maintained.
2. The manner of Separation makes it unlawful; when it is made without due
endeavor, and waiting for Reformation of the Church from which the departure
is: and such a rash departure is against Charity, which suffers both much and
long all tolerable things: It is not presently distasted, when the justest
occasion is given; it first uses all possible means of remedy. The Chyrurgeon
reserves Dismembring as the last remedy. It looks upon a sudden breaking off
from Communion with a Church (which is a dismembring) not as Chyrurgery, but
Butchery. page 23.

Mr. Brinsley.Unwarrantable, either for ground, or manner; The former an
unjust, the latter a rash Separation; each a Schism. Unjust, when there is no
Persecution, no spreading Error or Heresy, no Idolatry. 2. The manner, which
if sudden and heady, without due endeavor and expectance of Reformation in
that Church, it may be a rash, and consequently an unwarrantable Separation,
inasmuch as it is opposite to Charity, -- it being the nature of Charity to
suffer much and long, -- all things which are sufferable: -- It is not
presently distasted, so as to fly off upon every small and trivial occasion; no
nor yet upon a just and weighty one, without first assaying all possible means
of remedy. So deals the wary and careful Chyrurgeon with his Patient; not
presently fall to dismembring, -- reserving it for the last remedy. So deals
Charity by the Church; not presently separate and break off Communion (which is
the dismembring of a Church.) No, this (says Camero) is not Chyrurgia, but
Carnificina; which Mr. Cotton -- englisheth rightly, not Chyrurgery, but
Butchery. page 24, 25.

Mr. Jenkin.I shall not spend time to compare it with Heresy, though some have
said that Schism is the greater sin of the two. Aug. contr. Don. l. 2. c. 6.
tells the Donatists, that Schism was a greater sin than that of the Traditores,
who in time of Persecution, through fear, delivered their Bibles to Persecutors
to be burnt. A sin at which the Donatists took so much offense, that it was the
ground of their Separation. page 24.

Mr. Brinsley. Musculus informs me of some who in point of sinfulness have
compared Schism with Heresy, and others who have aggravated it beyond it, as
the greater evil of the two. Augustine tells the Donatists, contr. Don. l. 2.
c. 6. that their Schism was a greater sin than that which they took such high
offense at, and which was the ground of their separation (viz. the sin of the
Traditores, such as in time of Persecution had through fear delivered up their
Bibles to the Persecutors to be burnt.) page 17, 18.

Mr. Jenkin.In respect of Christ, 1. It Is an horrible indignity offered to his
Body (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1. 15.) and makes him to appear the Head of
two Bodies. How monstrous and dishonorable is the very conceit hereof! 2. It Is
rebellion against his Command, his great Command of Love. The Grace of Love is
by some called the Queen of Graces; and it is greater than Faith in respect of
its Object, not God only, but Man; its Duration, which is eternal; its manner
of working, not in a way of receiving Christ (as Faith), but of giving the Soul
to him. page 24.

Mr. Brinsley.It is injurious to Christ, who seems by this means to be as it
were divided. So Paul urges it, Is Christ divided? -- Himself hereby made the
Head of two disagreeing Bodies; which is dishonorable, and monstrous to
conceive of him. page 19.

Mr. Brinsley.It Is opposite to so great a Grace as Charity. Charity, the Queen
of Graces, -- greater than Faith, -- 1. In regard of the Object: -- Faith
respects God only, but Charity both God and Man. 2. In regard of the manner
of working: Faith works intramittendo, by receiving and letting in Christ and
his Benefits; but Charity extramittendo, by giving out the Soul. -- 3. In
regard of duration:- Charity is for eternity. p. 18.

Mr. Jenkin.By Divisions among our selves, we endeavor to divide our selves
from him, in and from whom is all our fullness. -- Upon the Stock of Schism
commonly Heresy is grafted. There is no Schism (says Jerome) but ordinarily
it inventeth and produces some Heresy, that so the Separation may seem the
more justifiable. The Novatians and Donatists from Schism fell to Heresies. Our
Times sadly comment upon this Truth, they equally arising unto both. page 25,
26.

Mr. Brinsley.By dividing themselves from the Body, they are in a dangerous way
to divide themselves from the Head. -- Schism makes way to Heresy. So Jerome.
There is no Schism, but ordinarily it inventeth and broacheth some Heresy,
that so the Separation may seem the more justifiable. -- A Truth sufficiently
experimented in those ancient Schismatics, the Novatians and Donatists, who
from Schism fell to be Authors or Defenders of Heretical Opinions. We have a
late and dreadful Instance, page 22.

Mr. Jenkin.Its injurious to the peace and quietness of the Church. -- If the
natural Body be divided and torn, pain and smart must needs follow. The tearing
and rending of the mystical Body, goes to the Heart of all sensible Members:
they often cause the Feverish Distempers of Hatred, Wrath, Seditions, Envying,
Murders. Schism in the Church puts the Members out of joint; and disjoynted
Bones are painful: All my bones (says David) are out of joint.
Church-Divisions cause sad thoughts of Heart. page 27.

Mr. Brinsley.The Church is hereby disquieted. Even as it is in the natural
Body, if there be a solutio continui, so as it be divided, it breeds smart
and pain. -- The mystical Body cannot be rent and torn by Divisions, but it
goes to the heart of all the sensible Members. The divisions of Reuben were
great thoughts of heart, -- ofttimes breeding those Feverish distempers of
Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Seditions, I and Murders too. p. 21.

Mr. Brinsley.Schism in the Church puts the Members out of joint; -- Bones out
of joint are painful. Thence David borrows this expression, All my bones are
out of joint. Such are Schisms in the Church, causing sad thoughts of heart.
page 67.

Mr. Jenkin.It Is opposite to the Edification of the Church. Division of Tongues
hindered the building of Babel; and doubtless Division in Hearts, Tongues,
Hands, and Heads, must needs hinder the building of Jerusalem. While Parties
are contending, Churches and Commonwealths suffer. In troublous times the Walls
and Temple of Jerusalem went but slowly on. page 27.

Mr. Brinsley.The Church is hereby hindered in the Edification of it. We know
what it was that hindered the building of Babel, even a Schism in their Tongues,
division of Languages. -- And surely there is no one thing that can more hinder
the building of Jerusalem, -- when Christians shall be divided in their Heads,
Hearts, Tongues, Hands. -- As it is in Civil Wars, whilst the Parties are
contending, the Commonwealth suffers. -- The Wall and Temple of Jerusalem went
slowly on in troublous Times. page 21.

Mr. Jenkin.When Church Members are put out of joint, they are made
unserviceable, and unfit to perform their several Offices. They who were wont
to join in Prayer, Sacraments, and Fasting, and were ready to all mutual
Offices of Love, are now fallen off from all. page 28.

Mr. Brinsley.Members of the Church being put out of joint by Schism, become
unuseful to the Body, unapt to those Duties and Services which before they
performed. -- How is it that those who were wont to join with the Churches in
Hearing, Prayer, Sacraments, and were so ready to all mutual Offices of Love,
are now fallen off from all? page 67.

Mr. Jenkin.Our Separation (from Rome) was not before all means were used for
the cure and reformation of the Romanists, by the discovery of their Errors,
that possibly could be thought of: notwithstanding all which (though some have
been enforced to an acknowledgement of them) they still obstinately persist in
them. Our famous, godly, and learned Reformers would have healed Babylon, but
she is not healed. Many skilful Physicians have had her in hand, but she grew
so much the worse. -- In stead of being reclaimed, they anathematized them with
the dreadfullest Curses, excommunicated, yea murdered and destroyed multitudes
of those who endeavored their reducement; not permitting any to trade, buy or
sell, to have either Religious or Civil Communion with them, except they
received the Beasts Mark in their Hands and Foreheads. All which considered, we
might safely forsake her. -- Since in stead of healing Babylon, we could not be
preserved from her destroying of us, we did deservedly depart from her, and
every one go into his own Country: and unless we had done so, we could not have
obeyed the clear Precept, Apoc. 18. Come out of her my people. page 29, 30.

Mr. Brinsley.Our Separation was necessitated, through their obstinacy in their
Errors; which notwithstanding the discovery of them, and that so clear, as that
some of their own have been enforced to an acknowledgement of them, and all
ways and means used for their Reformation, they still persist in. What then
remains, but a cutting off? We would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed. What then follows? Forsake her, and let us go every one to his own
Country. How many Physicians have had her in hand, Luther, etc. and the rest of
our pious Reformers? but all to no purpose. -- We were enforced -- she not
permitting any to trade, buy or sell, to have either Religious or Civil
Communion with her, except they receive her Mark in their Hands and Foreheads:
But, on the other hand, anathematizing them. -- These things considered, let
God and the World be judge, whether our Separation from them be voluntary. --
Not unjust, being warranted by Authority of Scripture, commanding this
separation, Come out of her my People, Rev. 18. 4. page 27, 28.

Mr. Jenkin.To separate from Congregations where the Word of Truth and Gospel
of Salvation are held out in an ordinary way, as the Proclamations of Princes
are held forth upon Pillars, to which they are affixed; where the Light of
Truth is set up, as it were upon a Candlestick, to guide Passengers to Heaven:
to separate from them, to whom belong the Covenants, and where the Sacraments,
the Seals of the Covenant, are for substance rightly dispensed; where Christ
walks in the midst of his golden Candlesticks, and discovers his presence
in his Ordinances, whereby they are made effectual to the conversion and
edification of Souls in an ordinary way; where the Members are Saints, by a
professed subjection to Christ, -- where there are sundry who in the judgment
of Charity may be conceived to have the work of Grace really wrought in their
hearts, by walking in some measure answerable to their Profession: I say, to
separate from these, as those with whom Church Communion is not to be held, is
Schismatical. page 31, 32.

Mr. Brinsley.Are not our Congregations true Churches? What, are not here the
Pillars of Truth? Is not the Word of Truth, the Gospel of Salvation here held
forth, and that in an ordinary and constant way, even as the Edicts and
Proclamations of Princes are wont to be held forth by Pillars to which they are
affixed? -- where the Light of Gods Truth is set up and held forth, for the
guiding of passengers in the way to Eternal Life? Are not here the golden
Candlesticks, where the Seals of Gods Covenant, the Sacraments of the New
Testament, are for substance rightly dispensed; -- where there is the presence
of Christ in the midst of his Ordinances, so as in an ordinary way they are
made effectual to the conversion and salvation of many; where Christ sits,
walks in the midst of his golden Candlesticks; -- where there are Societies
of visible Saints, all such by outward profession, and a considerable part of
them walking in measure answerable to that profession; can it be questioned,
where these are, whether there be true Churches of Christ? page 29, 30.

Mr. Jenkin.The voluntary and unnecessary Separation from a true Church, is
Schismatical. page 31.

Mr. Brinsley.Schism is a voluntary and unwarrantable Separation from a true
Church. page 23.

Mr. Jenkin.Pretenses for Separation are alleged; frequently, and most
plausibly, Mixed Communion, and of admitting into Church Fellowship the vile
with the precious, and those who are Chaff, and therefore ought not to lodge
with the Wheat.

Mr. Brinsley.Sinful mixtures are tolerated among you: -- There is not that due
separation of the Wheat from the Chaff, the precious from the vile; but all
sorts are admitted.

Mr. Jenkin. Answ. 1. Not to insist upon what some have urged, viz. That this
has been the Stone at which most Schismatics have stumbled, and the pretense
which they have of old alleged -- as is evident in the examples of the
Audaeans, Novatians, Donatists, Anabaptists, Bro^nists. page, 33.

Mr. Brinsley. Answ. 1. I might here mind them, That this has been the common
Stock whereup^n Schism has been usually grafted, the common pretense taken up
by all Schismatics, -- the Novatians, Audaeans, Donatists: -- from the same
Root sprung that later Schism of the Anabaptists: -- It was the same Stone at
which Brown and his Followers first stumbled. page 37, 38, 39.

Mr. Jenkin.2. Let them consider, whether the want of reforming abuses, proceed
not from some unhappy obstructions in the exercise of Discipline, rather than
from the allowance of the Church.

Mr. Brinsley.What though there are some failings in the execution, through
some unhappy obstructions in the exercise of Discipline? yet cannot the Church
stand charged with them.* page 40.

Mr. Jenkin.3. Let them consider, whether when they separate from Sinful
mixtures, the Church be not at that very time purging out those Sinful
mixtures. page 33.

Mr. Brinsley.Consider the manner in separating at such a time, in a time of
Reformation. -- What, separate from a reforming Church? page 51, 52.

Mr. Jenkin.Has not God his Church, even w^^re corruption of Manners has
cr^pt into a Church, i^ purity of Doctrine be maintained? And is sep^ration
from that Church lawful, from which God does not separate? page 34.

Mr. Brinsley.Suppose there may be some, nay many just Scandals amongst us, by
reason of corruption of manners; yet is not this a sufficient ground of
separation from a Church wherein there is purity of Doctrine. page 50.

Mr. Brinsley.How dare any forsake that Church which God has not forsaken? p.
59.

Mr. Jenkin.Let them consider, whether God has made private Christians
Stewards in his House, to determine whether those with whom they communicate
are fit Members of the Church, or not? or rather, whether it be not their duty,
when they discover Tares in the Church, in stead of separating from it, to
labor that they may be found good Corn; that so when God shall come to gather
his Corn in to his Garner, they may not be thrown out? Church Officers are
Ministerially betrusted with the ordering of the Church, and for the opening
and shutting of the Doors of the Churches Communion, by the Keys of Doctrine
and Discipline; and herein if they shall be either hindered, or negligent,
private Christians shall not be entangled in the guilt of their Sin. p. 34, 35.

Mr. Brinsley.God has not made all private Christians Stewards, nor yet
Surveyors in his House, so as that every one should take an exact notice of the
conditions of all those whom they hold Communion with, who are fit to be
members of the Church, and who not. It is Cyprian's counsel, What though there
be some Tares discovered in the Church, -- yet let us, for our parts, labor
that we may be found good Corn, that so when God shall come to gather his Crop
into his Garner, we may not be cast out. -- Ministerially the Church Officers,
whom Christ has betrusted with the ordering of the Church, them he has made
the Porters in his House, for the opening and shutting the doors of the
Churches Communion, by the keys of Doctrine and Discipline. Now, in this case,
if either their hands be tied by any humane restrictions, -- or if through
negligence they let loose the Rains, how private Christians should be entangled
in the guilt of that sin, it cannot be conceived. page 414.

Mr. Jenkin.The Command not to eat with a Brother, etc. 1 Cor. 5. 11. concerns
not Religious but Civil Communion, by a voluntary, familiar, intimate
Conversation, either in being invited, or inviting. page 35.

Mr. Brinsley.That which Paul prohibits there, is not properly a Religious, but
a Civil Communion, not to mingle themselves with such scandalous Livers, by a
voluntary, familiar, and intimate Conversation, -- in an ordinary way,
repairing to their Tables, or inviting them to yours.

Mr. Jenkin.Now though such Civil eating was to be forborne, yet it follows not
at all, much less much more, that Religious eating is forbidden: Because, Civil
eating is arbitrary and unnecessary; not so Religious, which is enjoined, and a
commanded Duty. page 36.

Mr. Brinsley.If we may not have Civil, much less Religious Communion. Ans. Not
so neither; inasmuch as the one is arbitrary and voluntary, the other a
necessary Communion. page 45.

Mr. Jenkin.It should be our care to prevent Separation: To this end, 1. Labor
to be progressive in the work of Mortification. page 38.


Mr. Brinsley.How shall this Unity be attained? 1. To this end labor after new
hearts.


Mr. Jenkin. 2. Admire no Man's Person.
-- This caused the Corinthian Schism. Take heed of Man-worship.

Mr. Brinsley.How may Schism be prevented? 6. Take heed of having the Persons
of Men in admiration. This occasioned all those Divisions in the Church of
Corinth. -- Take we heed how we look too much at Men.
p. 59.

Mr. Jenkin.3. Labor for Experimental benefit by the Ordinances. -- Find the
setting up of Christ in your hearts by the Ministry, and then you will not dare
to account it Antichristian. If with Jacob, we could say of our Bethels, God is
here, we would set up Pillars.

Mr. Brinsley. 4. Labor to see and acknowledge God in our Congregations. --
Now if he be here, how dare any withdraw? When Jacob apprehended God present
with him at Bethel, (Surely the Lord is in this place.) he sets up his Pillar
there. -- Have we met with him? why do we not set up our Pillar here? page 58.

Mr. Jenkin.4. Neither give nor receive Scandals. Give them not, to occasion
others to separate; nor receive them, to occasion thy own Separation. --
Construe doubtful matters charitably. Look not upon Blemishes with
Multiplying-glasses, or old Men's Spectacles: Hide them, though not imitate
them. Sport not your selves with others nakedness.

Mr. Brinsley. 3. Take heed of Scandals, whether of giving or receiving: Of
giving, to drive off others; of receiving, to set off our selves. -- Doubtful
matters still construe them on the better part; So does Charity; not looking
upon Blemishes with Multiplying or Magnifying-glasses. -- So far as may be
without sin, hide them. -- Cursed Cham espies the nakedness of his Father, and
makes sport with it. page 56.

Mr. Jenkin.5. Be not much taken with Novelties. New-Lights have set this
Church on fire. For the most part they are taken out of the Dark-Lanthorns of
old Heretics. They are false and Fools-fires, to lead Men into the Precipice
of Separation. Love Truth in an old dress; let not Antiquity be a prejudice
against, nor Novelty an inducement to the entertainment of Truth.

Mr. Brinsley. 2. Be not over-affected with Novelties. -- As for those
New-Lights which have set this Kingdom on fire at this day, for the most part
they are no other than what have been taken out of the Dark-Lanthorns of former
Heretics, -- no other but ignes fatui, false fires, useful only to mislead.
-- Tr th is lovely, and ought to be embraced in whatever dress she comes,
whether new or old. As not Antiquity* so neither should Novelty be any
prejudice to Verity.

Mr. Jenkin.6. Give not way to lesser differences: A little division will soon
rise up to a greater. Small Wedges make way for bigger. Our hearts are like to
Tinder, a little spark will inflame them. Be jealous of your hearts. -- Paul
and Barnabas separated about a small matter, the taking of an Associate. page
40, etc.

Mr. Brinsley. 1. Take heed of lesser divisions. Small Wedges make way for
great ones. Small differences sometimes rise to Divisions. page 57.

Mr. Brinsley. 4. B^ jealous over our own he^rts; they being like unto Tinder,
ready to take fire by the least spark. -- It was no great matter that Paul and
Barnabas differed upon, only about the taking of an Associate. page 71, etc.

Now, Sir, by this you may perceive, how some Men do make their Books and
Sermons, and by what ways a Man may rise to the reputation of being a
considerable Author: he may cull and pick, pilfer and steal, and become Learned
to a miracle, an excellent Preacher, and write even to a Folio; and if he had
but the Art of keeping men from poring into neglected Authors, and prying into
Books that are cast into corners, might pass as such: But as long as what is
forgotten in one Age, is revived in another, and as long as it is become a
Trade to collect Pamphlets, I would advise your Friend to be more wary for the
future, and keep from writing a Folio and a Comment again.

And now, Sir, it is high time for me to conclude, to whom it is no pleasure to
deal in such a way, and to converse with those kind of Books that you see my
Design has put me upon. It is Charity to you and the World that has led me
along; and I hope I have so managed it, as shall be to the offense of none, but
those that are Enemies to Truth: I am sure I have so much avoided all that
might exasperate, that I have for that reason cast aside Leaves of what some
others might be tempted to have taken in. If Mr. Jenkin has been hardly dealt
with, he must thank himself, who (...) without provocation, defamed others,
could not be suffered to run away with that outcry which he has made, without
a just Rebuke. I am,

(SIR) Your Servant, S. R.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The RIGHT of TITHES Asserted and Proved, from Divine Institution, Primitive
Practice, Voluntary Donations, and Positive Laws. With a Just Vindication of
that Sacred Maintenance from the Cavils of Thomas Elwood, in his Pretended
Answer to the Friendly Conference. Printed for E. Croft at the Seven Stars in
Little Lumbard-street.


