A SERMON Preached at TURNERS-HALL, The 5th. of MAY, 1700.

By GEORGE KEITH.

In which he gave an Account of his joining in Communion with the Church of
England. With some Additions and Enlargements made by Himself.

LONDON: Printed by W. Bowyer, for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in
Cornhil, and Char. Brom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard.
1700.

Mr. KEITH's LAST SERMON AT TURNERS-HALL, MAY the 5th. 1700.

1 PETER iii. 16. Having a good Conscience; that whereas they speak evil of
you, as of evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good
Conversation in Christ.
THE last Lord's Day I made the former Verse of this Chapter the Subject of
what I then said in this Place; which I shall not repeat: only let me put you
in mind, that I told you who were then present, That it was the Duty of every
one who professes himself to be a Christian, to be ready to give to every Man
that asks him, a Reason of the Hope that is in him. Under which Term [Hope]
by a Synecdoche of a part for the whole, is comprehended and understood our
whole Faith and Religion, and all our religious Actions and Performances; for
all which, as we ought to be able to give a Reason or Ground why we so believe,
hope, act, and why we so profess, to our own Hearts and Consciences; so we
ought also to be able and ready to give the like Reason or Ground of the same
to others that ask it of us, (which yet suffers some Limitation that I shall
not now repeat) to the end, that by the same, they may be convinced to embrace
the same way with us, as God is pleased to make us instrumental, by the
Operation of his Holy Spirit, to produce that effect, or at least to put to
silence their unjust Clamours against us.

But the chief thing is, with good Reason, to be persuaded in our own
Consciences, that what we so believe, hope, or act, is true and right, is
approved in the sight of God; and in that we shall have Peace.

In the opening of the Words of this 16th Verse, I purpose to answer these
three Questions; I. What Conscience is. II. What a good Conscience is, and how
a good Conscience is distinguished from an evil Conscience. III. What the Rule
of a good Conscience is, according to which it ought to be directed and guided.

To the first, I answer; Conscience is that Power or Faculty of our reasonable
Soul or Mind, that can and does reflect on our Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, both
present and past, so as to judge and determine concerning them, whether they be
really or apparently right or wrong, good or evil, justifiable or reproveable.
Hence, Romans 2. 15. the Conscience of the Heathen, or Gentiles, is said to bear
witness, and their thoughts the mean while to accuse or excuse one another.

To the second, I answer; There are several things altogether necessary to
denominate a Man's Conscience to be good.

1. It must be an enlightened Conscience, with a good measure of true Knowledge,
whereby to know what is right and good, or wrong and evil. An ignorant
Conscience cannot be good.

2. The Obedience of the Heart and Will of Man to what he is convinced of his
Duty either to be believed or practiced, is necessary to denominate the
Conscience to be a good Conscience: for though true Conviction and Knowledge
are necessary, yet that alone, without Obedience, is not sufficient to
denominate the Conscience to be good; even though the Knowledge and Conviction
come from the Spirit of God, there must be a Consent and Harmony betwixt the
Understanding and the Will to constitute and denominate the Conscience to be
good.

3. The Conscience that is purged and justified by the Blood of Christ, even
the Blood of his Cross, that was outwardly shed, through Faith in that Blood,
Romans 3. 25. and where the Heart and Conscience, and whole Soul and Body, is
sanctified by the Spirit of God, and the inward work of Regeneration is known
by the Spirit of God, the Conscience only of such a Man is a good Conscience; I
say, that the Conscience must be purged by the Blood of Christ, that it may be
good. See Heb. 9. 13, 14. For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes
of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh;
how much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without Spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve
the living God. And the Faith which is in the Blood of Christ, Romans 3. 25. is
wrought in us, and generally in all who have it, by means of the written Word;
that is to say, by the Doctrine of Christ crucified, and the spiritual
Blessings we have by him, as it is preached to us; for, as the Scripture says,
Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word, and that Word is the outward
Word, as it is in the mouth of the Preachers; as it follows in Romans 10. 14.
And how shall they hear without a Preacher, and how shall they preach unless
they be sent? Hence the Word, even the doctrinal Word, is called the
incorruptible Se^^, of which true Believers are regenerated and born again,
according to 1 Pet. 1. 23. And Christ, in the Parable, compared his Preaching
to the People to the Husbandman that sows his seed in the several sorts of
ground, Matthew. 13. 3.

There are a great Among the Quakers.
many, who think they have a good Conscience, but they have no need of this
Blood of Christ, nor of Faith in it; they will have the Object of their Faith
only within them; they find no need of having the Conscience sprinkled by the
Blood of Christ without them; nay, they argue against it, as an impossible
Notion, not considering that this Sprinkling is spiritually by Faith, and not
by any material Application. Also they have a wrong Notion of Faith; they think
they have no need of the written Word, or any outward Means or Helps, to have
this Faith wrought in them: The Spirit or Light within, alone, does all; the
Light within them is sufficient to Salvation, without any thing else; the Light
within them is whole Christ, God and Man, Flesh, and Spirit, and Bone. They
need no Christ without them, nor no written Word without them; they can Preach,
Pray, Believe, without Book, without all outward Helps; they need no Crutches,
as some argue against Forms of Prayer, and call them Crutches to lame Persons,
which whole and sound Men need not. So others make no more of the written Word,
the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, as outwardly delivered us in the Holy
Scriptures, but as Crutches which they have no need of at all.

They will not allow of any written Word at all, or any outward Word; they ask
where we find a written Word in Scripture? I tell them, I find it in John 15.
25. where Christ calls a short Sentence that he quoted out of a Psalm of
David, (...), i. e. that written Word. They say, they call the Scripture what
it calls it self, to wit, a Treatise; for which they quote Acts 1. 1. the
former Treatise; but had they understood or consulted the Greek, they would
have found it, (...), i. e. the former Word, whereby he understands the whole
Book of the Gospel according to St. Luke.

Now as to the distinction betwixt a good and evil Conscience, of which also
the Scripture speaks. 1. An evil Conscience is an ignorant Conscience. 2.
Unfaithfulness, and Disobedince to what a Man is convinced of, renders the
Conscience to be evil. 3. Unbelief, and want of Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,
makes the Conscience evil. 4. Not to follow the dictates of Conscience, even
when it errs, is an evidence of an evil Conscience. Here that Axiom takes
place, Conscientia errans ligat sed non obligat, an erring Conscience ties but
does not oblige; it is a great pinch and strait: He (...) follows not an erring
Conscience sins, because he acts not in Faith, and what is not of faith is
sin; and when he follows his erring Conscience he sins. This is no new
Doctrine, however possibly it may so seem to some here; it is that which every
Casuist does commonly teach: I will illustrate it to you by a Similitude that
some have given. If a Subject be deceived by a counterfeit Messenger from his
Prince, who brings a counterfeit Message from the King, sealed with a
counterfeit Seal, and he thinks it to be real, this Subject sufficiently shows
his disrespect and disloyalty to his Prince, if he refuse to obey it; the
application is easy. If any object, that as Contradictories cannot be both
true or both false, but the one true and the other false; so, if to follow an
erring Conscience be a sin, not to follow it is no sin, being Contradictory:
But I answer, they are not Contradictory, for they are both affirmative
Propositions: He that follows an erring Conscience sins, this is
affirmative; He that follows not an erring Conscience sins, this is also
affirmative. But the way to get out of this pinch, is to get a well-informed
Conscience, and to get rid of those Errors of Conscience, which prejudice of
Education by evil Teachers has led them into; read the Holy Scriptures, search,
meditate, pray God to give you a good Understanding, and let you see your
Errors; confer with such whom you have good cause to esteem both more holy and
more wise and understanding than your selves.

To the third and last, what the Rule of Conscience is, according to which it
must be directed and guided, that so it may be denominated a good Conscience.

I answer: We must distinguish betwixt an inadequate or incomplete Rule of
Conscience, and that which is adequate and complete. The Law writ in the Heart
of every Man, is an incomplete Rule to a Man's Conscience, obliging every
Christian to obey it, so that whosoever transgresses against it, is guilty of
heinous sin; and this Law extends in some degree to most of all, yea in some
sort to all the ten Precepts of the Moral Law; but our highest Obedience to
that Law and Rule, cannot denominate the Conscience good, or give true peace of
Conscience, or heal the wound of it that sin has given; for all have sinned
and fallen short of the Glory of God; and whatsoever the Law says, it says to
them who are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and the whole
world become guilty before God. The best of our Obedience cannot make atonement
for our sins; nay, not for one sin, not the least sin; it is only the Lamb of
God, as he was slain for us, that takes away our sins, as we have faith in him,
his Blood cleanses us (...) all sin; and the Merit and Value of it has
procured to us the Gift of the Holy Spirit, to sanctify us; and therefore we
owe both our Justification and Sanctification to the Lamb of God, and to his
most precious Blood; for by our Justification we are cleansed from the guilt of
sin, and by our Sanctification from the filth of it.

And though Faith and Repentance are necessary conditions and qualifications to
our obtaining Remission of sin, Justification and eternal Salvation, yet they
are not in any wise the meritorious Cause thereof; but Christ alone, by what he
has done and suffered for us. Holiness, and our Obedience to God's Laws and
Precepts, both as writ without in the Holy Scriptures, and as writ within in
our Hearts, is indispensibly necessary to our eternal Salvation; but we must
not rest nor rely upon it, even when it is wrought in us by the help of the
Holy Spirit; it must not be the foundation or ground of our Faith, and hope for
remission of Sins, and eternal Salvation, either in whole or in part; but our
reliance must be alone on the Lord Jesus Christ, both God and Man, as he died
for us, etc. and on the Mercy of God through him, apprehended by Faith.

Now the knowledge of this in God's ordinary way is given to us, and all who
have it, by the inward Illumination and Operation of the Holy Spirit, in the
use of the written Word, as it is preached and heard by us, or read and
meditated upon, We feeling the working of the Spirit of Christ, to mortify the
works of the flesh, and the earthly members, and to draw up our mind to high
and heavenly things; as the 17th Article of the Church of England plainly
expresses.

The complete and adequate Rule therefore of our Faith and Practice is the
whole revealed Will of God, as it is declared unto us in the Holy Scriptures;
the Laws and Precepts whereof are of a far greater extent than those writ in
every Man's heart, without all Scripture Revelation, or antecedent to it: as
David said, I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad; that is, the whole complex or body of the Divine Laws given us
by God and Christ, as they are contained in the Holy Scriptures, for Doctrine,
for Correction, for Instruction, etc.

It is therefore a great and dangerous Error in them who hold (as many do in
these Nations) that the Light within, and what it dictates in every Man, is the
full and entire, complete and perfect Rule of all Faith and Practice; and
nothing is absolutely needful to our Salvation, but what that Light within
teaches us and all Mankind, or will teach us if we hearken to it, and obey it,
without all Scripture, and all outward means of Instruction; and yet the utmost
extent that this Light within goes to teach Men without Scripture, and without
the special Illumination and Operation of the Spirit accompanying the
Scripture's Testimony, is no more than the Righteousness of the Moral Law, and
Terms of the first Covenant, Do and Live: which Covenant we have all
transgressed, and therefore cannot be saved by the Terms of it. But God in his
great Mercy has given us a better Covenant, the Covenant of Grace and Peace, in
and through the Knowledge and Faith of Jesus Christ, as he is the Word made
Flesh, or God incarnate, the Terms of which are gentle and easy, and full of
Consolation, God thereby declaring that he will pardon the Sins of all that
sincerely repent, and truly believe the Gospel of Christ, and sincerely resolve
and endeavor to keep his Commands, and give to them eternal Life; the which
Terms God has graciously promised to help every one of us to perform, by the
Offer and Gift of his Holy Spirit, as it accompanies the preaching of the
Gospel.

But these new Terms of the Covenant of Grace, the Light, as it is an universal
Principle in all Men, by whatsoever Name they will call it, or whatsoever Worth
they will ascribe to it, both Scripture and common Experience does tell us,
does not teach them. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his
Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation; and as for his
Judgments, they have not known them, Psalm. 147. 19, 20.

The Jews had this Advantage over the Heathen World, that unto them were
committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. the exceeding great and precious
Promises, 2 Pet. 1. 4. which the Heathen World, to whom the Gospel was not
preached, had not: and we have that Advantage now that the Jews then had. But
the Gentiles being without the Gospel, are said to be without God and Christ in
the World, Ephesians. 2. 12. i. e. without an Interest in God and Christ, and
without Hope; Aliens and Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel: The highest
Acts of Obedience to any Light within us, without the Gospel, and without Faith
in Christ crucified and raised again, do not denominate us the Children of God,
nor prove us to have any just Title or Claim to the eternal Inheritance; for
whosoever are the Children of God, they are so by Faith in Jesus Christ, as the
Scripture expressly declares, Gal. 3. 26. And the Gospel requires, that to
obtain Salvation, we must confess with our Mouths, and believe with our Hearts,
that God has raised Christ from the dead, Romans 10. 8, 9. even him who died for
our Sins, who was delivered for our Offenses, and rose again for our
Justification. But the Light within, as it is an universal Principle, teaches
not Men these things, these great Mysteries of our Salvation, these lively
Oracles, these great and precious Promises, nor these great Fundamentals of the
Christian Religion, such as the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, the Incarnation
of the Word, the perfect Atonement and Satisfaction that Christ has made to
the divine Justice and Law for our Sins by his bloody Passion and Death, his
Ascension, and Exaltation, and Mediation for us at the right hand of God in the
glorified Nature of Man, consisting of a glorified Soul and Body, and that he
is to be the Judge of the Quick and the Dead. Also there are diverse positive
Laws and Precepts of the Gospel, that the Light within, as it is an universal
Principle, teaches us nothing of: The Knowledge and Faith of all these things
are given us by the written Word preached and read outwardly, and by the
special Illumination of the Holy Spirit inwardly working in us a firm
Persuasion and Faith of them, giving us a savoury understanding and relish of
them, and great Joy and Consolation through hope by the Knowledge and Faith of
them.

It proceeds from great Ignorance and Error in many, that they will not allow
any real distinction betwixt the common Illumination given to all Mankind, and
the special Illumination given to Believers in the crucified Jesus: Some will
allow a distinction in degree, but not in kind or specie; but, I say, they
differ in kind or specie, (though both come from one and the same Fountain, the
Father of Lights, from whom all good Gifts flow, both natural, and spiritual,
and supernatural) because they discover differing Objects, i. e. differing
Truths, by way of Object, that differ from these few Truths discovered by the
common Illumination, specifically or in kind; for whatever Truth or Truths the
common Illumination discovers to Heathens of the Being, and Power, and
Providence of God, as Creator, and the Duty of Mankind to him as such, the holy
Scriptures without, and the special Illumination of the holy Spirit within,
discovers far other and greater Mysteries of Truth, in the inestimable Love of
God by the Redemption of the World through Jesus Christ, and the Duty that we
owe to God and Christ thereby, in the Belief of his Word and Promises, the
Obedience to his Commands, and especially all and every of them given under the
New Testament, as that of Baptism and the Supper, Obedience and Subjection to
Christ's Government and Discipline he has established in his Church, and to all
whom he has set up to have the Rule over us, in his House and Church.

But whereas they plead for the Sufficiency of the Light within, and its
Dictates, without the means of Scripture, and all outward teaching, to qualify
Men to be Christians and Saints, and Heirs of eternal Salvation, from Jerem.
31. 33. where God promised to put his Law in the inward parts, making the Law
writ or put in the heart, Jerem. 31. 33. to be the same, and of the same
extent, and the same manner of heart, and manner of writing, with that in Romans
2. 15. This is a miserable Mistake, and a very gross and mischievous Error.
That in Jerem. 31. 33. respects the People and Church of God; but that in Romans
2. 15. respects the Heathen World.

The Law writ in the hearts of the Heathen World, teaching the moral Duties of
Temperance, Justice, and general Piety toward God as Creator, is, I grant,
without the means or help of Scripture, and antecedent to it; but so is not the
Law or Laws of God writ in the hearts of Believers; whether Jews or Gentiles,
who believe in the crucified Jesus, peculiar to the Christian Dispensation, as
Obedience to the Faith of the Gospel, and to the positive Ordinances and
Institutions of Christ, of Baptism and the Supper, and others aforesaid; these
Laws are not writ in our hearts without Scripture, nor antecedent to Scripture,
but posterior to Scripture, and by means of Scripture. These positive and
peculiar Laws of the Gospel, writ in the hearts of true Believers, and deeply
printed and engraven in them, are no other than the Copy or Transcript of the
Laws outwardly writ or printed in the holy Scriptures, which come to be
transcribed into our hearts by what we daily and frequently hear preached to
us, and read out of the holy Scriptures; and what we read our selves out of
them, the Spirit of God working with our Industry and Labor, in our hearing,
and reading, and well pondering and meditating what we hear or read, causing it
to take deep and living Impression on our hearts, and making our hearts that
were stony before, now to be soft and tender to receive that Impression, and
yet so solid, firm, and tenacious as to retain it, being as a Nail fixed in a
firm place by the Masters of Assemblies, given by one Shepherd, Eccles. 12. 11.
But so is not the heart of Unbelievers or Heathen Gentiles, whose heart is a
heart of stone; but the heart of every sincere Believer is a heart of flesh,
according to Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 36. 26, 27. compared with 2 Cor. 3. 3. But, say
some, cannot the Spirit teach us without Book, even without the Scripture? Thus
some argue for the sufficiency of the Light within, without any thing else. I
answer; and so can an able Schoolmaster teach his Scholars without Book, but
they cannot well learn without Book. As the Master condescendeth to the weak
capacity of his Scholars to teach them by Books, so does the Spirit condescend
to our weak capacity, to teach us by the written Word.

Now as concerning the peculiar positive Laws of the Gospel under the New
Testament, and the Gospel Precepts, some of them are greater, and some lesser,
but all highly valuable and profitable. The greater are such, that Obedience to
them is of absolute and indispensible necessity to our Salvation; as, to
believe in Christ, and to love Christ, and to rejoice in Christ, whom yet we
have neither outwardly heard nor seen, according to 1 Pet. 1. 8. and John 20.
29. Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. The lesser are
such that are not of that absolute and indispensible necessity to Salvation in
some cases, thought still generally necessary to Salvation; as, Water Baptism
and the Lord's Supper. It would be too uncharitable in us, to conclude that all
who die without them, fall short of Salvation. Christ said, He that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved: but he said not, he that is not baptized shall
be damned, but, he that believes not shall be damned. Our most mereiful and
gracious Lord knew well, that by some unavoidable Providence some could
neither receive Baptism nor the Supper, how much soever they desired it, being
prevented by Death, before they could have them administered to them: in which
case all good Casuists and Divines say Votum Baptismi, i. e. The Desire of
Baptism, and the Willingness of the Mind to subject to it as the Ordinance of
Christ, is equivalent to Baptism it self: And the like may be said of the
Lord's Supper.

But what shall we say or think of many in our day and time, who may have it,
and yet through woeful Ignorance and Error, being deluded by false Teachers,
and prejudice of Education, or otherwise darkened and blinded in their Minds,
refuse and reject it; not only break these two precious Commands of Christ, but
teach Men so to do: And many have lived and died in this opposition to these
Precepts of Christ, without any sign of Repentance, being taught by their false
Teachers to believe that they are no Commands of Christ. I own, to my Grief and
Shame, that I have been so deceived by them; and I thank my gracious God that
has spared and prolonged my natural Life until he was pleased to farther
enlighten me, and give me to see my great Error, and renounce it, as I have
done, and now to practice that which I formerly rejected. But to answer
directly to the Question, what other or better Answer can I give than the words
of our Savior himself, Mat. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Some understand it so, that he shall have no place in the
Kingdom of Heaven; which is true, if he live and die in wilful Ignorance and
Disobedience: but I will not be so uncharitable, as to think so, of many who
have in some measure in Faithfulness held the Fundamentals of Christianity, and
have sincerely endeavored to obey such of the greater Commands of Christ, that
they are perished; but, on the contrary, I have the charity to them, and so I
hope and desire that ye may have the same, that God has in mercy received them,
and has not excluded them from the Kingdom of Heaven, notwithstanding they have
lived and died not only in the disuse of some of Christ's Commands, such as
Baptism and the Supper, but have even continued in the opposition of them to
the last moment, not throught any wilful Ignorance, but by being imposed upon
by the high Pretenses of their false Teachers, whom they esteemed to be
Prophets: Yet I think, without breach of charity, I may say, that for their
Ignorance, and ignorant opposition to these or any of the least of Christ's
Commands, they shall have a lesser degree of Glory in the Kingdom of Heaven
than otherwise they should have had.

I have now done with what I had to say in answer to these weighty Questions: I
shall only observe one Particular from the words of the Text, which is this.

That it has often been, and is the Lot of good Men, having a good Conscience,
to be wrongfully judged, misrepresented, and falsely accused, both Scripture and
History abounds with Examples to prove this: as in the case of Joseph, Moses,
David, and Daniel, and many of the Prophets; and in the case of John Baptist,
and our Savior; John came neither eating nor drinking, and they said he had a
Devil; Christ came eating and drinking with Publicans and Sinners, and they
called him gluttonous, and a Wine-bibber: to which my Case somewhat resembles.
These four Years past, my Adversaries among the Quakers reproached me, that I
was of no Communion, neither Quaker nor Presbyterian, nor Independent nor
Baptist, nor of the Church of England; and unless I would declare my self to be
of some particular Communion, they would not dispute with me, nor regard me, to
answer me; though I told them I was a Christian, and a Member of the Catholic
Church of Christ, and have great charity for all the sincere that hold the Head
in all the several Communions of Protestants: but this would not satisfy, but
they would insult, and sought to trample me under their feet, but God supported
me.

But now again, when with a good Conscience, being farther (I bless God)
enlightened, and my Scruples I had being fairly removed, after diligent
Examination and mature Deliberation I have declared my self to be for the
Church of England, and have joined in Communion with her, they do as much
reproach and revile me, and falsely accuse me, as formerly; and so would they
have done if I had joined with any of the Dissenters: but, I bless God, I have
a good Conscience, and my care has been, is, and I hope ever shall be, to have
Peace with God, and my own Conscience; and therefore I need not be much
concerned what my Adversaries, or any other ignorant persons, shall say of me.
I am comforted with the words of our Blessed Lord to his Disciples, Matthew. 5.
11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. This (I thank God) is my
case: I charge my Adversaries to prove any thing against me of evil
Conversation. I have with Zeal and Resolution, which God has been pleased to
give me, and who has greatly supported and strengthened me, opposed and
testified against their vile Errors; and this is all the cause of their Hatred
against (...), and that God has been pleased to bless and prosper (...) with
some Success; so that both in America many and here in England, both in City
and Country, diverse have come from Quakerism and gone over to the Church of
England with me; yea, diverse have prevented me, and gone before me; and diverse
here, I hope, will go along with me. I also remember what Christ said, John 16.
2. The time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
Service. Persecutors commonly follow an erring Conscience; few Persecutors, and
be sure they are of the worst sort that knowingly and wilfully persecute the
Servants of God.

Having thus far proceeded, according to the Doctrine I mentioned at the
beginning of this Discourse, on the foregoing Verse, 1 Pet. 3. 15. I think it
my Duty, and a weighty Concern lies upon me, to give to this Auditory the
Reason of the Hope that is in me, of my Faith and Persuasion in this very
particular, Why I have joined in Communion with the Church of England, although
I retain Charity to all the honest-hearted of other Communions, hoping that in
God's due time, the more Sincere will follow my Example; and that God will make
all the Sincere, to be not only of one Faith, (as many at present are) but of
one Way and Practice, and Uniformity, Worship, and Church Discipline, so as
with one mouth, and one heart and mind, to glorify God, Romans 15. 16. This will
be a Joyful Day, which I hope many here, and elsewhere, pray for. Why then will
ye not help it forward by your good Examples, laying aside all weak and
insufficient Scruples, which upon due Examination, will be found without just
ground? And why find ye fault with those that begin to give you good Example?
Though this Change of mine is not so great as some imagine, I was never so
uncharitable as I find some are; though I grant, I have been too uncharitable,
which I have retracted: I have been for a considerable time very charitable to
all sober and religious Protestants of all sorts, and have often in secret,
bewailed their Opposition one to another, perceiving that in great part it came
more from Prejudice of Judgment and Education than any just Cause. I date not
my Conversion to Christianity from this Change, nay, nor from my first turning
to the Quakers. My gracious God began early to deal with me, and turned my
Heart toward him. I was well instituted in the Fundamentals of Christianity,
by the good Education I had, (for which I praise God,) before I knew the
Quakers; and though in too many things I was misled by them, being deceived by
their high pretenses to Perfection, and divine Enjoyments, by which they have
deceived many as well as me, yet I retained a sound Faith of the Fundamentals
of Christianity, and did constantly profess the same, which I can sufficiently
prove both by my printed Books from time to time, and diverse Manuscripts; and
from my Childhood to this day, God has in mercy preserved me from all
scandalous Conversation and Practice; whereof some of good Credit are ready to
give a Testimony, who have known me for Forty six Years past, and my manner of
Conversation.

I am the more concerned to give the reason of my said Change, chiefly for the
sake of some of my good Friends here present, who though by the Blessing of God
have been by me, as an instrument, brought off from the Quakers Errors, that
were opposite to the Fundamentals of Christianity, yet have some remaining
Scruples that at present hinder them from so cordial a joining with the Church
of England, and seem to be concerned with my joining with her, which I hope God
in due time will remove; and so far as is possible for me, I will endeavor, as
his instrument, to be assisting to them; as also for the more confirming of
such who are cordially ready to join with me: And in the next place, to silence
the unjust Clamours, and false Accusations of my professed Adversaries, and
others ignorantly prejudiced against me, I am desirous to let them know that I
have good reason for what I have done, and have acted as a rational Christian
Man in my so doing.

A chief Reason therefore which I offer is this: Suppose there were a parity or
equality in all other respects betwixt the Dissenters and the Church of
England, I mean the more sound and orthodox among them, as in Doctrine and
Worship, Sacraments and Church Government, Discipline and Constitution of
Members; yet this with me does cast the Balance, and I think ought to cast the
Balance with any rational considerate person, that on that supposition, the
minority or lesser number should yield to the majority or greater number, and
the younger should yield to the elder, and the Daughters to the Mother. For,
certain it is, that the Church of England, as she was in King Edward VI. and
Queen Elizabeth's time, and in Queen Mary's time, was the Mother Protestant
Church. The Dissenters Forefathers had their Christianity, Baptism, and
Christian Education and Profession in her Communion, and were nursed as it were
in her Arms, and suckled at her Breasts; and the more sober of all Dissenters
will say, she was a true Church then, in all the main things of Religion. Now
unless they can prove that she is changed from what she then was, either in
Doctrine, or Sacraments, or Worship, or Discipline, or Church Government, in
any material thing, from better to worse, which I think they cannot do, how can
they justify their Separation from her?

And I think I may safely add, that the wiser Men and ablest in solid Learning
and Piety, and in the sound Knowledge of the Scriptures to instruct the
Ignorant, and convince or put to silence Opposers, to refute Antichristian and
Popish Errors as well as all other old and late Heresies are much more numerous
to be found in the Church of England. And what solid Learning the ablest of the
Dissenters have had, so far as may be acquired by outward means, has been
originally by means of Church of England Men. She has been all along, and
still is the greatest Bulwark against Popery (whereof she has given sufficient
Proof from time to time, witness the many elaborate and excellent Books and
Tracts written by her Members) against Popery especially, and other old and new
Heresies, as Deism, Atheism, etc. yea, let the Libraries and Closets of the
generality of the Dissenters Ministers be searched, who are the more knowing
and judicious, and of best repute among them, either for Piety or Learning, and
it will be found, that they have more Books of Church of England Divines, and
other foreign Divines who own Communion with her, than of any others? And yet
for all this shall I be so uncharitably judged, and my Friends who go along
with me, as a sort of Apostates, and as having bad Ends and Designs, and as
some of them (I hear) suggest against me, that I do it for a Living, I pray God
forgive their uncharitable Judgment, I neither was nor yet am so hard put to it
for a worldly Living, as some imagine, and as others wish and desire, I mean of
my Adversaries among the Quakers, who have Prophesied of my outward as well as
inward Ruin, and longed to have their false Prophecies accomplished against
me; but God has hitherto disappointed them, and preserved me and mine from
Ruin both inwardly and outwardly, for which I bless his Name, and I hope he
will preserve me to the End. Why should the Expectation of a Living incline me
more to the Church of England, than to the Dissenters? Had I joined with them,
I might have got a Living among them, perhaps more plentiful by the Peoples
Gratuities, than by a Set maintenance in the Church of England.

Which last way of living I think is the more Honorable; and less obnoxious to
many great Temptations; and every way as suitable to the Gospel.

I find that the Church of God in Scripture is compared to an Army, whose
Captain is our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, called the Captain of our Salvation.
Now suppose there were two Armies in the Field, the one very great and
numerous, the other far less in Number, as suppose the one Thirty thousand, the
other Ten, pray tell me, whether it is not more safe for us all, who are
concerned in one common Cause against the common Enemy, to keep within the Body
of the Army, then in several Parties to straggle and keep asunder from it, or
Entrench by themselves: The like is our present Case, both the Church of
England, and all called Protestant Dessenters, profess to be concerned in one
common Cause against Papists, Turks and Jews, Deists and Atheists, and others
guilty of vile Heresies in a Spiritual Warfare. Is it not therefore more
prudent and safe, to unite together in one Body of Christian Society and
Communion against the common Enemy, that we may be the stronger; especially
seeing the differences betwixt the Church of England and the more judicious and
moderate of the Dissenters, are not in any Materials either of Doctrine or
Worship, but the very same, as they have Confessed? Have not these Divisions
and Separations had bad Effects, weakened the Protestant Interest, strengthened
the Papists, yea, and Deists, and Atheists, and loose and scandalous Persons,
who take occasion to say, there is no true Religion on either side, by
observing the great Heats and Annimosities, and bitter Prejudices of the
differing Parties?

I will now come to answer what I think they will object mainly against my
Reason above given: They will tell us, that if the parity or equality on both
Sides were the same, my Reason would be good; but they will allege there is a
great disparity and inequality, the Dissenters having the Advantage, in several
Particulars, as 1st. in Doctrines, 2dly. in manner of Worship, 3dly.
Administration of the Sacraments, 4thly. Church Governments, which (say the
Dissenters) is more agreeable to Scripture among them, than in the Church of
England. To every one of which I think to say something, as briefly as I can.
And First, as to the Doctrine, as touching the Articles of Faith (the Quakers
excepted) they profess to be one with the Church of England, and have signed,
or profess themselves willing to sign to her Articles. Secondly, as to the
manner of Worship, which the Dissenters contend for, should be wholly by an
extempore Gift of the Spirit, whereas the Church of England, though she
allows, that Ministers before and after Sermon may Pray (without a Set Form,
either read, or repeated from the bare Memory) by using their sanctified Parts,
and Gifts of Understanding, to Conceive Prayer by the Help of the Spirit, yet
She is not only for the Lawfulness of Set Forms of Prayer, composed by Pious
Men of Spiritual Abilities, both ancient and late, but for the great
Convenience and Profitableness of them, yea and Necessity of them in many
respects, in the Public Worship of God, leaving every one to their Christian
Freedom, whether to use or not use, Set Forms in their Closet and Private
Devotions.

But to this I say, The most Pious as well as Judicious, whom the Dissenters
esteem so, and repute as their Fathers; and others that repute them not so, yet
will allow that they were very holy and spiritual Men, have owned the
Lawfulness of Set Forms of Prayer; yea not only the Lawfulness, but the great
Convenience and Necessity of them in the Public Worship of God. Calvin, one of
the most famous of the Protestant Reformers was for them, as I proved to you
some time ago, Quod ad formulam precum, etc. As to the Form of Prayers, and
Ecclesiastical Rites, [Note] that I greatly approve that it be certain; from
which it may not be lawful for Pastors to depart in their Function, both to
guard against the Simplicity and Unskilfulness of some, and also, that the
Consent of all the Churches among themselves may be more certainly known. And
lastly, to Put a Check to the insolent Liberty of some who affect certain
Innovations. -- So then it behooves there be a Set [or fixed] Catechism, a Set
Admininistration of Sacraments; also a Set Form of Prayers.


out of his express words, in his Letter to the Protector of England, Epist.
87. The Protestant Churches abroad in Germany, Holland, Poland, Sweden,
Denmark, and France, from the beginning of the Reformation to this very day,
have used Set Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving in their Public Worship. And
yet I think the Dissenters here will not conclude, that their Worship was
wholly carnal dead, and without Life or Spirit, as many of them do now argue
against the public Prayers of the Church of England. The Life and Spirituality
of Prayer does not consist in the Mode or Form of the words, whether Set or
Extempore, say all sound and judicious Christians, but in the Purity, and
Fervor of the Affections.

And therefore an Extempore Prayer may be very Formal, dead and dry, and a
Prayer in a Set Form may be very lively, powerful, and effectual, as the
experience of Thousands daily confirm. And suppose the Dissenters would be so
uncharitable to judge, that Calvin's Prayers at Geneva in Set Forms, and
Luther's in Wittenberg, and all the other Protestants Prayers in Set Forms,
were barely Formal, Carnal, Dead and Dry, and the blessed Protestants Prayers,
who died Martyrs in Queen Mary's Reign that used Set Forms, yea many of these
now in use (which would be great uncharitableness.) Will they dare to judge so
of the public Prayers of the Church of Christ, that were in Set Forms in the
purest Times of Primitive Christianity, from the days of the Apostles, in the
Three First Centuries, as is evident from Church History, before Popery was
heard of in the World? Or will they be so uncharitable to Censure the public
Prayers of the Jewish Church, in her best and purest Times, who had Set Forms
of Worship, both for Prayer and Thanksgiving: And that it was the constant
manner of the Jewish Church, to have a Part of the Public Worship with the
Priests, joining with them in Vocal Prayer with their Mouths and Lips. Both in
Prayer and Thanksgiving is clear from many places of Scripture in the Old
Testament, where no doubt their Assemblies, both in the Temple, and Synagogues,
consisted of a great mixture of good and bad, Sincere and Hypocritical; see
Psalm. 50. 15, 16. This was spoken not to Priests only, but to the People; and
Isai. 29. 13. where the Lord blamed not the People simply, for drawing near to
God with their Mouth, and honoring him with their Lips; but that while they
did give him that outward Part of Worship, they had removed their Heart far
from him, and gave him not the internal as well as the external Part of
Worship; the internal being as the Soul, and the external as the Body of it.
This clearly shows, what the manner of their Public Worship then was, and that
the People that assembled did really Pray Vocally with the Priests; and that
they did Offer unto God the Calves of their Lips, according to Hos. 14. 2. And
in like manner, the Christians in their Assemblies are commanded to Offer up
unto God the Fruit of their Lips, Heb. 13. 15. and though the Sacrifice of
Praise is there only mentioned, yet no doubt Prayer is also understood, and is
as real a Duty for the People to practice, as that of Praise; and if People may
Sing with the Spirit, and yet use Set Forms, as they do in Singing David's
Psalms in Public Congregations all of them, [some Anabaptists excepted] why
may they not Pray with the Spirit in Set Forms? If the Set Form quench not the
Spirit in Singing, why should it be supposed to do it in Praying?

It is indeed one of the chiefest Reasons that persuade me, that in the Public
Worship of God Set Forms are necessary, because the People ought to have a Part
of the external Worship, as well as the internal, by Confessing, Praying, and
giving thanks in Common with their Mouths and Lips, as in believing in one
Common Faith, with their Hearts, being a holy Priesthood unto God, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

And whereas they say, the Ministers Mouth when he Prays, is the Peoples Mouth
unto God in Public Prayer.

As this is allowed that sometimes so it is, but to say it is always, and must
be always so, is without ground; yea, is hurtful and prejudicial, for so, as
God is denied that external Service from the People that is due to him, of
Adoration, the People is deprived of that which is their Privilege and a great
Benefit unto them, to speak unto God by themselves, (and not by a Proxy always)
when they Pray. And if Prayer with the Mouth be a Duty in Private for all
Christian People, it is no less a Duty, or rather much more, in Public.

We are Commanded to Confess with the Mouth, as well as Believe with our Heart,
to hold fast the Profession of our Faith, the Greek word in both places
signifies a joint Confession, simul dicere, to say together. How should we know
one another Faith, that we hold it fast, but by holding fast the Profession of
it, in joining together in the Christian Assemblies, Vocally and with word of
Mouth, to Confess what we Believe, as we are Commanded, and as with one Mind,
so with one Mouth to Glorify God, Romans 15. 6. This one Mind, is the Consent
and Harmony of many Minds; and therefore the one Mouth, is not one simple Mouth
of the Minister, no more than it is one single Mind of the Minister; but the
Consent and Harmony of many Mouths, even of the whole Congregation.

There is a greater Advantage and Benefit in Vocal Prayer by the Organs of
Speech, when duly performed both in Private and Public, than many do well
understand, and especially in Public; both for their own good, and the good of
others. Although our Prayers neither Vocal nor Mental, move God properly
speaking, yet they move our selves and others; and if the Spirit of God assist
in our Vocal Prayers, as we have cause to believe he does so assist all good
Christians, though not in that manner as he did the Prophets, that Motion
kindles a Celestial Fire both in our selves, and others that hear us; and if
one Mouth so divinely moved kindles a little, many Mouths so moved will kindle
a great deal. St. James tells us, the Tongues of wicked Men are set on the Fire
of Hell; and that one Tongue is like a little Spark of Fire that kindles a
great matter, James 3. 5. And why may not we as well conclude that the Tongues
of Godly Men are enkindled with Fire from Heaven. Yea it stands with good
reason, that Holy Angels who are present in the Assemblies of the Faithful, are
moved with the Vocal Prayers and Praises of the Faithful in the Church, whereby
they know our inward States and Thoughts, as Men know our Thoughts by our
Words, when we sincerely express them; for Angels know not our Thoughts
immediately, but mediately either by audible words, or by some soft and gentle
motion of our bodily Organs of Speech: Also it stands with good reason from
Scripture Authority, that our blessed Mediator Jesus Christ, not as he is God,
but as he is Man in our Nature, now in Heaven glorified, is really moved and
affected with the Prayers, both Mental and Vocal, of the Faithful, Heb. 4. 15.
We find in the Revelations, that after the four Living Creatures, i. e. the
Body of the Church, had sung together their Antheme, the Twenty Four Elders, i.
e. the Governors, answered with their Antiphone; and the Angels answered both
with theirs, Rev. 4. 8, 9, 10. compared with Rev. 5. from ver. 8. to 12.

Now if the People in the Public Worship should have a Part, joining in Vocal
Prayer and Thanksgiving with the Minister, and answering him, sometimes by
saying Amen, sometimes by other fit and suitable words, this must needs be in
Set Forms that both are agreed in, and know beforehand, otherwise either the
People must be tied to his Form, which however Extempore to him, and free, yet
to them is a Limitation and Restriction, as much and much less safe, than to be
tied to a Form they had formerly known, and been acquainted with, or else we
must suppose a Miracle to be wrought every time they Pray Vocally together, If
every of them, or any two of them Pray extempore in the same Form of words,
without receiving it the one from the other.

To plead for using a new Form, or Method of words in Prayer every time that
Men Pray, is as improper and impertinent as to plead, that every time we Eat we
must have a new Dish or Platter, to Eat out of; and every time we drink, we
must have a new Cup to drink out of, and if every day, yea as often every day as
we Pray, we must use a new extempore Form, we may as well plead every day, we
must several times each day, put on New Shoes, and New Apparel; which as it
would be great waste, so would it be very uneasy. The method of words in
Prayer, whether extempore, or in a Set Form, is as remote an Accident to the
substance of Prayer, either for Matter or Life, as a Dish or a Platter is to
the Meat put into it, or a Cup to the Drink that is in it; the same Meat may be
as good as when put into another Dish, and the Drink as good as in another Cup;
and as several Habits of Garments may suit the same Person, so several Forms of
Prayer, with respect to the external Form, may suit the same Prayer, both as to
Matter and Life. As Grace does sometimes cause a variety in our words of
Prayer, when the Matter is the same, so mere humane Art can, and does most
frequently cause a variety; for by mere humane Art, six words can be varied
some hundreds of times, and yet the matter remain the same: It is therefore a
great mistake in many who think, they who pray in greatest variety of words and
modes of expression, they Pray most by the Spirit, or with Grace; for as it can
be done by mere Art without Grace, so it frequently is so done; and thereby
many are greatly deceived, especially when it is Varnished with great seeming
shows of Fervor, by gestures and tones, that move and stir the natural and
animal Passions and Affections.

But I remember I have heard two or three things objected by some against the
matter of Common Prayer. 1. Where the People say, There is no Health in us. But
that is no more offensive, then what the Scripture says, That it is not in
Man^ to direct his Steps, i. e. It is not in Man as of himself, but of the
Lord, so there is no health in us, nor in any Man, but what is of God and
Christ: It is not in us originally, but by derivation and participation from
God and Christ, in whom all fullness dwells, and of whose fullness we all
receive, and Grace for Grace. 2. That they still are praying from Seven to
Seventy, Lord be merciful to us miserable Offenders; but this I think is only
made by the Quakers, all others confess that they are Sinners, and
consequently, as in themselves, miserable, and continually needing God's mercy;
for as St. James said, in many things we offend all; and as St. John says, if
we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves; but if we confess our Sins, etc.
The Church of God in all Ages have confessed their Sins; and the holiest Men
have done so, as Daniel, Esdras, etc. The great remission of Sins in the most
solemn and public manner, is reserved to the day of Judgment, that great day
of Assise; what remission the best now have, is but like the Criminal's Pardon
from the King, that he has by himself in secret; that is not so Authentic till
it be proclaimed in open Court at the Assise. 3. Some object against that
expression in the Common Prayer, We are tied and bound with the chain of our
Sins. But I think none of the Dissenters (the Quakers excepted) can well so
object; many of whom commonly in their Prayers say, They must carry about with
them a Body of Sin and Death to the Grave; which I think is more then what is
here objected against. I think it were more safe and warrantable according to
Scripture to say, that some remainders of Sin remain in the Faithful,
especially with respect to the Original Defilement by Adam's Fall, as also with
respect to some remaining part of those Habits of Sin we had contracted by our
actual Transgressions, than that the Body of Sin remains in them, if they
understand it, of the whole Body or Complex of vicious Habits contracted by
actual Sins, which the Saints are said to have put off by Regeneration, as,
when the Body or Bulk of a great Tree is cut down, with its Boughs, Branches,
Twigs and Bearers, yet the Stump and Root, or some part of it remains in the
Ground, which if due care be not taken continually to mortify, suppress, and
subdue, would spring up again, to which that in Hebr. 12. 15. seems plainly to
refer, and with respect to such a remaining Part, root or seed of Sin, in the
Faithful, it is said by St. John, 1 John 1. 8. If we say that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. This remainder of Sin God
has seen meet to suffer to remain in the Faithful (though he pardons the
Guilt of it, and has promised to give them sufficiency of his Grace, whereby
still they may be able to mortify and subdue it) for the trial of their Faith,
and the Exercise of both their Faith, and all other their Graces and Virtues,
in the way of Spiritual Conflict and Warfare, against three grand Enemies, the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh; that so through the Victory that the Faithful
obtain by the Victorious Power of God's Grace, their Reward may be the greater,
(which yet is still the Free Gift of God) according to 2 Timothy 2. 5. And if a
Man also strive for Masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive
lawfully. Not that Sin either in less or more, is any proper Cause of the
increase of our Virtues, yet as in natural Effects one natural Agent commonly
works the more powerfully in the presence of a contrary Agent, if that contrary
Agent be not too powerful, its Agency serving but to excite the other the more
effectually against it; as Heat is increased by Cold, and a little Water cast
into Fire increases the Flame. Now that this remaining part, root, or seed of
Sin, with what other is contracted by the daily indeliberate, and for the most
part, involuntary infirmities that the Faithful are obnoxious to may be said to
be a Chain, whereby they are tied and bound, in part, though as to the main,
they are loosed, and set free from the reign and prevalency of Sin, by the
virtue and prevalency of God's Grace; as when a Man that has been bound Hands
and Feet, and in his whole Body, by strong Fetters of Iron, is loosed from the
greatest and heaviest of them in his whole Body and Members, yet some less
Chain or Chains remain, that though they neither do nor can hinder his acting
and walking, yet do in part incommode and retard him. This is fitly represented
by what is reported of that holy Man Anselm's observation of a Shepherd Boy
that had tied a small Stone with a small Thread, to the Foot of a small Bird,
and then let it out of his hand loose to fly. The small Bird did fly but a
little at a time, being incommoded and retarded with the weight of the Stone,
though but little, flying a little, and resting a little; now mounting upwards
as if it would fly straightway to Heaven; but then soon after descending to the
Earth; which that holy Man beholding, made the Emblem of the State of his
Soul, and fell into Weeping, saying to this effect, What the little Stone is to
this little Bird, that my Sin that hangs about me is to me.

To the Third, The Administration of the Sacraments; wherein do they suppose,
that the Dissenters have any advantage above the Church of England? they will
say, that they add nothing to Christ's Institution in Baptism, whereas the
Church of England adds the Sign of the Cross, and at the receiving the Lord's
Supper they receive it kneeling; to this I answer, the Church of England makes
not the Sign of the Cross, any part of Baptism, for she does not order it to be
used at private Baptism to any that is in danger of Death, nor does she make it
any Means of Grace, but a convenient Symbol to put us in mind, and also to
signify, that we own Christ that was crucified on the Tree of the Cross, and
are not ashamed to confess him, the Captain of our Salvation, and manfully to
fight under his Banner, against Sin, the World, and the Devil, etc. which has
but the like Service that a Cross drawn with Ink on Paper, has to signify the
Cross of Wood, that he was crucified upon, and is but a sort of Hieroglyphick,
neither commanded nor forbidden in Scripture, but simply indifferent; and that
our Superiors both Ecclesiastic and Civil, have Authority to command us in the
use of indifferent Things, I am well satisfied, and I see not but so ought the
Dissenters to acknowledge, who grant that our Superiors both Ecclesiastical and
Civil may enjoin the keeping of a Fast Day for public Calamities, or a
Festival Day of Thanksgiving for public Mercies. Baxter makes no more hurt in
using the sign of the Cross in Baptism, than if we should tie a piece of Thread
to our Finger to keep us in mind of what we desire to remember.

That the Lord's Supper is received kneeling, has no more Ceremony nor hurt in
it, than that we pray kneeling, for both the Minister that gives, and the
People that receives the Elements of Bread and Wine, do it with Prayer.

For all the great Clamor against the Ceremonies of the Church of England, I
scarcely find any more but one, that may be so called, to wit, that
abovementioned, the sign of the Cross at Baptism, which is a very harmless, and
a very ancient Practice in the Church of Christ, and had a warrantable
Original, that because the Heathens upbraided the Christians with the Cross, to
show, they were not ashamed of it, after receiving Baptism, they received the
sign of the Cross on their Foreheads, nor is that occasion wanting in our Day,
where so many Thousands here in this Nation, on the pretense of high Divine
Inspirations, have cast away the Profession of Faith in Christ, as he was
outwardly Crucified, together with the Memorials of him, Baptism, and the
Supper.

And as concerning Infant Baptism time will not permit at present, that I
should insist on it; but this I say, I am fully satisfied with the Baptism I
had in Infancy, and I do believe that it as duly belongs to the Infant
Children of Believers under the New Testament, being a seal to them of God's
Covenant of Grace for remission of Sin, as Circumcision did belong to such
under the Old Testament, for God is no less merciful to Believers and their
Children now, than he was then.

I cannot but think strange, that there should be such a Clamor against the
Ceremonies in the Church of England, having upon enquiry, found them so few. I
lately met with a Book of one of the Church of England, wherein I found him
having the same Thought with mine, that there is but one Ceremony in the Church
of England, viz. the sign of the Cross, and strictly speaking, I see no need
why it should be called a Ceremony, this hard Word offends many ignorant
People, why may not our Superiors Ecclesiastic and Civil enjoin some Things
that are merely Circumstantial, and in themselves indifferent, as to the Habit
of Minister's Clothing, and the Use of a Surplice in Divine Service, of the
Decency and Convenience of which they are more proper Judges than private
Persons, as well as they are generally allowed to determine other Circumstances
of Time and Place, and various Actions, relating to both Religious and Civil
Matters. To bury in Woollen, and to lay the dead in a Coffin, to lay a Cloth, or
Cushen on the Pulpit, to ring a Bell before Sermon, to have a Clock or
Hourglass before the Minister's Face when he Preaches, which the Quakers cry
out against as much as others do against the Surplice, and sign of the Cross,
to have a clean Linen Cloth on the Communion Table, and Silver Platter and
Cup, for the distributing the Elements of Bread and Wine at the Lord's Supper,
all these and diverse other Things the Dissenters commonly allow, as well as the
Church of England, some of them, by command of Superiors, others of them by
Custom, why do they not call them Ceremonies, and fright the People with that
hard Word?

Lastly, as to the Government of the Church, the Dissenters are so far from
having the Advantage of the Church of England, that she has the Advantage over
them, in that as well as in the other Things abovementioned.

That in all Societies both Civil and Ecclesiastical, there should be an Order
and Superiority of Officers, Rulers and Governors, Nature it self teaches it.
How can a City or Nation be ruled and kept in Order, if all the Rulers be
equal? How can an Army be governed, or disciplined, or led forth to Battle
without diverse Degrees, Superior and Inferior of Military Officers, if all the
Captains of each single Company, consisting suppose of one hundred Men each
single Company, and the whole Army consisting of many Thousands; if these
single Captains had no superior Officers over them, but every one left to his
own Discretion, to lead on his Company to Battle against the common Enemy, who
has all in good Order, and a due and regular Distinction of superior and
inferior Officers, how can it be supposed, but that the Army that has this
good Order and Distinction of various Officers, superior and inferior, should
prevail against the other that has no such Order and Distinction, we may see a
wonderful order of Superiority and Inferiority in all Things in the whole
visible Creation, in the Heavens and Elements; and that there is the like
Superiority in the invisible Creation, of Angels and Spirits, the Scripture
does plainly inform us, as Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities and Powers, Cherubim and Seraphim; Jethro Moses's Father-in-Law,
advised him to set Captains over Tens, over Fifties, over Hundreds, and over
Thousands of the People of Israel, for the better and easier Government of
them, both in War and Peace; and Moses hearkened to his Advice, Exodus 18. 24.
And we find in Scripture, that the Church is compared to an Army, and the
Members thereof to Soldiers; the chief General and Captain whereof is our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has appointed diverse Officers in his Church under the New
Testament, distinct not only in degree, but in kind, as Bishops, Presbyters
(otherwise called Priests) and Deacons answerable to the three Officers that
were in the Church of the Jews under the Old Testament, to wit, the high
Priest, Priests and Levites; and because they were but one Nation, all living
within a small Compass of Ground, one High Priest did suffice, according to
God's Appointment.

This threefold distinction of Church Government by Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons, upon a further search into the New Testament, I find so very clear as
does fully satisfy me, notwithstanding that by prejudice of Education I was
formerly Principled against it; and also by searching into Church History, and
the Writings of the Ancients, nearest to the Apostles Times, and the succeeding
Ages, in the purest and best State of the Churches, as well as when there was a
great declining from that purity, yet as many other things both of sound
Doctrine, and good practice still remained; so this distinction of Church
Rulers did all along remain, generally in all Places, as well as in all Ages,
where God had any Visible Church, or where there was any Society of People,
professing the Christian Religion, until the beginning of the Reformation,
where in diverse Countries abroad, there was no Protestant Kings, the
Protestants set up Churches without Bishops (not rejecting the Office, nor
condemning it as unlawful or Antichristian, as some in late Times have done)
but excusing the want of it by that general maxim, Necessity has no Law. I need
not insist to prove the distinction of Presbyters and Deacons out of the New
Testament, it being (in some sort) generally acknowledged by the Dissenters.
But the Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters, is that which is condemned by
some as Antichristian, and by some others judged at best unnecessary, and no
part of Christian Discipline, belonging to Christianity either essential or
integral. But if you will lay aside all prejudice of Education, and
uncharitableness, you will clearly and evidently see it in the Holy Scriptures.
That the Apostles had a Superiority over not only the LXX, but all other
Ministers and Pastors, or Teachers, is very clear from 1 Cor. 12. 28. compared
with Ephesians. 4. 11.

That Bishops were to succeed the Apostles, and have the like Office both with
them, as Churches came to be planted in diverse parts of the World before their
Decease, and also after their Decease; not with respect to the extraordinary
gifts of Prophecy and Miracles, but with respect to the Government of the
Church by a regular Succession, is evident from Mat. 28. 19, 20. compared with
the above cited Ephesians. 4. 11. otherwise all standing or settled Ministry, as an
Ordinance of Christ, may be rejected, as Enthusiasts generally do, yea what can
these Governments be, mentioned 1 Cor. 12. 28. but as really the Superiority of
Bishops over Presbyters, as of Presbyters over the Deacons, and the People,
otherwise why Governments in the Plural Number? Also what are these Dignities
mentioned Jud. 8. that some despised in the Apostles days? and 2 Pet. 2. 10,
11. And how should any doubt of the Office of Episcopacy, being an Ordinance of
Christ in the Church, when the qualifications requisite to such an Officer are
so expressly set down, 1 Timothy 3. from v. 1. to v. 8. But whereas it is objected,
that seeing there is only mentioned in that Chapter a twofold Order, 1. Of
Bishops, 2. Of Deacons, it would seem, that Presbyters are there understood by
Bishops, otherwise Presbyters should be wholly excluded from Church Government.

I answer, that will not follow, 1. Because Presbyters, though not expressed,
yet may be understood, and implied, under either the one or the other expressly
mentioned; the name Deacon being sometimes a general Name in Scripture,
signifying the most superior, as well as inferior Officers in the Church, 1
Cor. 3. 5. St. Paul called himself and Apollo by the Name of Deacons, as it is
in the Greek; and 2 Cor. 3. 6. he calls all Ministers and Teachers at large by
that Name. But 2. in the order of things there were but these two Officers at
first (excepting the Apostles) Bishops, and Deacons. The Churches in many
places at first being small, the Bishop could both sufficiently teach, and rule
his Flock, and so did, without Presbyters, only by the assistance of Deacons;
but the number of the Flock increasing, he did choose, and raise up those that
had well used the Office of a Deacon, to the higher degree of Presbyters, which
is called by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3. 13. a good degree, which they purchased to
themselves, even as those that well used the Office of a Presbyter were
afterward raised up to the Office of a Bishop, as was accordingly practiced in
the Church, so that in priority of Nature, and also of Time, the Deacon is
before the Presbyter, though in priority of Dignity, the Presbyter is before
the Deacon. Hence according to the Order established in the Church, none is to
be ordained a Presbyter, until he first be ordained a Deacon; nor can he at one
and the same time, be Ordained to be both.

The Distinction and Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters or Elders, is very
clear to me, as well as to many, out of St. Paul's Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, 1 Timothy 1. 3. I. St. Paul writes to Timothy, to Command, or give in
Charge to some that were Teachers at Ephesus, to teach no other Doctrine, than
the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, such as he had heard of him. And had not
Timothy had a Superiority of Office above other Teachers, which were then at
Ephesus, why did he direct both his Epistles to him only, laying down excellent
rules, and method of Government for him to follow, in the exercise of his
Episcopal Function, 1 Timothy 3. 15. with respect to several States of Persons
both Male and Female?

II. Why did St. Paul give the Charge to Timothy to count the Elders that ruled
well, (which were no doubt under him) worthy of double Honor, especially them
who labored in Word and Doctrine, but that he was able to confer that double
Honor upon them; a part of which was an Honorable Maintenance, according to
what follows, ver. 18. for the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox
that treads out the Corn; and the Labourer is worthy of his reward. By this
it is plain, that it belonged to Timothy, being the Bishop of Ephesus, (as he
is expressly called the First Bishop of Ephesus, at the end of the second
Epistle to him) to whom the Church Treasure, (made up of the Gifts of the
People) was entrusted, to provide for the Presbyters under him, a necessary
Maintenance, which manner of practice continued in the Church, the Bishops
having the dispose of the Churches Treasure, within their several Precincts,
during all that time the Church had no Christian Magistrate to Countenance her,
and long after.

III. He writes to him as an Ecclesiastic Ruler and Judge, that had power to
hear and examine Accusations brought against Presbyters, and accordingly to
judge, after due Evidence of two or three Witnesses; which plainly shows his
Power of Jurisdiction over Presbyters, 1 Timothy 5. 19.

IV. He gives him a most solemn Charge before God, the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Elect Angels, that in the exercise of the Power of Judicatory, he act
impartially, without Favor, or biass of Affection, not preferring one before
another, ver. 21.

V. He writes to him, as one having Power of Ordination, to Ordain Elders by
laying on of Hands; and cautions him, to lay hands suddenly on no Man, ver. 22.

VI. He writes to him in his second Epistle, to stir up the gift of God that
was in him by the putting on of his Hands, together with the Hands of the
Presbytery or Eldership, viz. some other Apostles that might jointly with St.
Paul, lay Hands on him, 1 Timothy 4. 14. for that the Presbytery here mentioned
was a College only of Presbyters, is a bare alledgment, viz. when he ordained
him the first Bishop of Ephesus, as appears from the end of the second Epistle,
2 Timothy 1. 6.

VII. He wills him, that he commit to faithful Men who shall be able to teach
others also, those Things that he had heard of him, among many Witnesses, which
behoved to be some peculiar Things relating in great part to Rules of
Discipline and Church Government, which were not fit either for Heathens to
hear, or Novices in the Faith, who yet might hear the common Doctrines of the
Christian Faith, preached in the Christian Assemblies.

VIII. Writing to Titus, he presupposes him Bishop of the Cretians, as appears
from the end of the Epistle to him, and tells him why he left him in Crete,
That he should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in
every City as he had appointed him. I know no reason why these should be
thought Lay Elders, i. e. such as were not to Preach, I find none such, either
here or any where else in the New Testament. How could Titus exercise this
Authority in such a spacious Island, where many Cities were, and Christian
Congregations set up, if he had been only a single Presbyter? And if the other
Presbyters had equal Power with him, why did not he write to him and them
jointly? Whether in the Ordination of Presbyters, others jointly did not lay on
Hands with the Bishop, is not the present question; but whether it is to be
found in Scripture or Church History, that any Number or College of
Presbyters, Ordained any without a Bishop presiding over them?

IX. He tells him, that the Mouths of such Teachers as were unruly and vain
Talkers; and Deceivers, and who taught things which they ought not, for filthy
lucre sake, must be stopped; which plainly shows his Authority to depose and
silence false Teachers, as well as to Ordain Sound and Worthy.

X. He tells him of his Authority to judge, who is a Heretic, and how after
the first and second Admonition, (if he amend not) he ought to reject him.

By these Instances plainly collected out of the Epistles to Timothy and Titus,
it may I think appear, to all impartial persons that well and duly consider
them, that both Timothy and Titus were Bishops, and had a Superiority of Power
and Jurisdiction over the Presbyters in the Churches of Ephesus and Crete, as
well as of Ordination.

I know W. Prynne has printed a Book, which he called the Unbishoping of
Timothy and Titus, which I have read; but I find not that he has either
sufficiently answered the Arguments brought from Scripture, to prove that they
were Bishops, or given any sufficient Arguments to the contrary. I have also
seen another great Book of his, giving a Historical Relation of the evil
Practices of many Bishops, all which if true, says nothing against the Office.
But I could write a great Book, [threefold greater] giving a Historical
Relation of many good Things, Bishops have done in the World. Many Bishops both
in the early and latter Ages, have been eminently exemplary in Holiness of
Life, and all Christian Virtues; and for diverse Ages succeeding the Apostle's
Days, were blessed and happy Instruments, to preserve the Truth and Purity of
the Christian Doctrine, in the World, and the Unity and Peace of the many
Churches in it, hindering Schisms, and curing them that did threaten to arise.
Cutting down with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, [even the
Doctrinal Word, outwardly delivered in the Holy Scriptures, as they were
mightily assisted by the Holy Spirit so to do] the monstrous and vile Heresies
that sprung up from time to time, oppugning the Christian Faith, wherein
Almighty God blessed them with great Success, and this they did partly by their
particular Writings, Treatises and Epistles, as well as Sermons, and partly by
their assembling in great Numbers, in Synods and Councils, to condemn them, and
that many times to the danger of their Lives, under persecuting Kings and
Emperors; some whereof were Heathen, and some Arian and Eutychian.

Such who are but ordinarily well acquainted with Antiquity and Church History,
cannot be ignorant that the Government of the Church from the very days of the
Apostles in all the famous places of the World, where Christianity came to be
planted, was by Succession, the which did lineally descend for four hundred
years from the Apostles days and upwards, and in diverse places, to this Age.

There are two places of Scripture in the Old Testament, which diverse of the
Fathers understood of Episcopal Government, as it was to be set up in the
Church under the New Testament, as Psalm. 45. 16. being a Prophecy concerning
Christ's Church, and his Government in the same by Church Officers. Instead of
thy Fathers [i. e. the Apostles, who were the Founders of the New Testament
Church, and were her Fathers] shall be thy Children, [i. e. their Successors in
the Government of the Church after their Decease] whom thou may make Princes
in all the Earth.

The other Place is in Isaiah 60. 17. I will appoint them Bishops in
Righteousness, and Deacons or Ministers in Faith, as Clemens Bishop of Rome
quotes it in his famous Epistle to the Corinthians, but as the Septuagint has
it, is thus, And I will give thy Princes in Peace, and thy Bishops in
Righteousness.

Ignatius who conversed with St. (...) the Apostle, and as his Disciple, and
Bishop of Antioch, being committed by him, writes thus to the Church of
Smyrna, let the People be subject to their Deacons, the Deacons to the
Presbyters, the Presbyters to the Bishop, and the Bishop to Christ, as he is to
his Bishop. Policarp also was constituted by St. John, Bishop of Smyrna, who
both suffered Martyrdom, as Church History gives (...) says, lib. 3. cap. 3.
We have to remember them, who were appointed Bishops by (...) qui ab Apostalis
(...)sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis and Successoret eorum usque and nos.
the Apostles in the Churches; and their Successors even (...) us. This
Irenaeus was Bishop at Lions, and lived within about a hundred years after St.
John. It is acknowledged both by ancient Writers, and later; yea by some (...),
and particularly by David Paraeus, that the seven Angels of the seven Churches
of Asia, to whom St. John wrote, were the seven Bishops set over those seven
Churches; also it is very probable that St. John himself had planted all these
seven Churches, and did constitute the Bishops in them.

Hierom, whom the Adversaries of Episcopacy think that he favors in
opposition to the Episcopal Authority, plainly grants that the Power of
Ordination is lodged in the Bishop, saying quid enim facis excepta ordinatione
Episcopus, quod Presbyter non faciat, i. e. for what does the Bishop, that the
Presbyter may not, on ought not to do, except Ordination. Epist. ad Euagrium.
And the sense affirms, that from Mark the Evangelist, until Heracla (...)
Bishops there, the Presbyters of Alexandria did name him Bishop, one among
themselves elected, and placed in a higher degree, but he does not say that
they ordained him.

And both Hierom and Clemens Romanus long before him, did make a parallel
betwixt the High Priests, Priests and Levites in the Jewish Church, and
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons in the New Testament Church, what Aaren and his
Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple (says he) the same in the Church may
Bishops and Presbyters, and Deacons, challenge unto themselves. Hier. ad Eugr.
And how universal the extent of Episcopacy was in all the Churches, and to what
end it was appointed, he further declares in that same Epist. it was decreed
in the whole world, that one chosen out of the Presbyters should be placed
above the rest, to whom all care of the Church should belong, and so the Seeds
of Schism be removed.

Thus far I think I have made it appear, that in none of the Particulars above
mentioned, the Dissenters have any advantage above the Church of England; but
that what advantage there is to be found either from Scripture, or Church
History, and Antiquity, lies on her side.

FINIS.

