A TRUE NARRATIVE OF GOD'S Gracious Dealings WITH THE SOUL of Shalome Ben
Shalomoh, Of the Circumcision after the Flesh. As Delivered to the Church of
Christ, Assembled at Their Meeting House, in Rosemary-Lane, September the 29th,
1699. With some ADDITIONS made thereunto since; Being taken from his Mouth by
the Subscribers to the Certificate annexed to the Preface.

Published for Exalting the Free Grace of God.

Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for
my Soul.

Psalm. 66.16 I say then, Has God cast away his People? God forbid: For I also
am an Israelite of the Seed of Abraham, etc.

As concerning the Gospel, they are Enemies for your sake; but as touching the
Election they are beloved for the Father's sakes.

Romans 11.1, 28. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to
the Glory of God.

Romans 15.7. LONDON: Printed for William Marshal, and Sold by hm, at the Bible
in Newgate-Street. 1699.

To the READER.
THE End of Publishing the following Narrative, is, not to ascribe Glory to one
particular Party, as if by our own Power or Holiness we had made this Man, who
was spiritually dead, to walk; but to obviate such Mistakes, which a thing so
novel and uncommon may be obnoxious to; and more especially, to magnify the
Riches of Free Grace, which has glorified Jesus Christ, by the Manifestations
of his Divine Power and Goodness, 1 Pet. 2.3.
displayed to the Soul of this Son of Abraham: And therefore, to you who have
tasted, that the Lord is gracious, the ensuing Narrative (I presume) will be
acceptable: For though it pretends not to the captivating Oratory of our Age, yet
it may challenge your serious Regard, inasmuch as Salvation is come to his
House, who is, according to the Flesh, of the rejected Stock of Israel; whom it
has pleased irresistible Grace, to turn from Darkness to Light, Act. 26.184
and from the Power of Satan to Himself. Which, I hope, is an encouraging
Presage, of the happy Re-ingrafture of the unbelieving Jews, into their own
Olive Tree: Romans 11.24
A thing witnessed to by the Sacred Word of God, and confirmed to us by this
unusual Act: By the one he has declared, what he will do; and by the other,
what he can do. And as the Word of Promise may encourage us to pray, so this
Instance of Divine Power to hope, Ezekiel. 37.5, 9.
that God will cause Breath to enter into those dry Bones, that they may live.

But not to enumerate Particulars (which is foreign to our present Purpose)
since there is a professed Expectation of the Jews Conversion in these Latter
Days, among the greatest part of Christians; I shall proceed to obviate such
Objections, as may possibly be brought against the Truth of this Jew's
Conversion.

Object. 1. Is it possible, that a Person so unacquainted with the Christian
Religion, and so vicious in his Life and Conversation, should so suddenly
arrive to such a strong Persuasion of his Interest in a crucified Savior?

Answ. In Answer hereunto, consider,

1. That God, the most Sovereign Agent, is the Sole Worker of Faith in the
Hearts of his Elect; wherefore it is called, Col. 2.12.
Faith, of the Operation of God: And in his working thereof, he acts like
himself, energetically, and instantaneously. He that commanded Light to shine
out of Darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6.
at once, in the first Creation, can in a Moment illuminate a Soul benighted
with its own Darkness, by giving the Light of the Knowledge of his Glory
((...)), in the Person of Christ. Why should it be thought then a thing
incredible, that he who at the last Trumpet's Sound, will effect such an
amazing Change in the Bodies of the Saints, and that ((...)), in the twinkling
of an Eye, should make one no less admirable in the Soul of a poor despised
Jew, the Conversion of whose Brethren in the Flesh, Romans 11.
is represented by Life from the Dead? There is doubtless a determinate
Instant, wherein the Soul of an Elect Sinner is to be delivered from the Power
of Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of God's dear Son; Ezekiel. 16.8.
which is called the Time of Love, Ps. 110.3.
the Day of Power; until which the Soul is polluted in its own Blood, Heb 11.6.
and whatsoever he does is displeasing to God, because done in Unbelief, and
having undoubtedly the Nature of Sin: To which agrees several Passages in the
Homily of Good Works, as follows: Without Faith, all that is done of us, Art.
13. of the Church of Engl.
is but dead before God, though the Work seem never so gay and glorious before
Man: Ev^n as a Picture graven, or painted, is but a dead Representation of the
Thing it self, that is without Life, or any manner of Moving; so be the Works
of all unfaithful Persons before God, Page 46, 47. Edit. in Octavo, 1687.
they be as the Course of a Horse that runs out of the Way; which takes
Labor, but to no purpose. Thus far the Homily. Hereby you may see, how the
Sentiments in that Age, concerning Words before Faith, differed from those
which now obtain amongst us. What they accounted sinful and dead, is now
esteemed Righteousness and Life: A superficial Reformation of Manners, passes
for Conversion; and a Moral Heathen shall be caressed for a Serious Christian:
Whilst the poor Publican, who discovers the Depravity of his Nature, by the
Enormity of his Actions, is destined to an unpleasant Pilgrimage, before it be
allowed him to lay hold of a Gospel-Promise; and to serve the Egyptian
Taskmasters, some Years, (it may be) before permitted to enquire after the
Freedom of the Gospel: And if the God of all Grace, heals a Conscience wounded
for Sin, with greater Expedition than is by some allowed, who are forwarder to
lay Burdens on others Shoulders, than to touch them with one of their Fingers,
the Cure immediately must be called into question, because the prescribed Time
was not observed in perfecting it; and whilst God is owned to be a Free Agent,
they rob him of his Prerogative, in confining him to Humane Methods; and the
Person on whom such an instantaneous Change is wrought, must expect, from them,
no better Treatment, than the Blind Man, in the Gospel; did from the blinder
Jews, John 9.

2. Censider some of those Instances (recorded in Scripture for our Learning)
wherein God has exemplified the Power of his Reigning Grace, by making
stout-hearted Rebels (who are far from Righteousness) submit to his
Righteousness. Zacheus, Isa. 46.12.
a notorious Sinner, Romans 10.3.
immediately becomes a joyful Receiver of Jesus Christ. Luke 19.
He that was Prince of Publicans, is suddenly pronounced a Son of Abraham; as
Stella, Tom. 2. p. 221.
a Papist, observes on the place: Qui heri peccator fuit, jam hodie possit
divina benignitate justus effici: He who was Yesterday a Sinner, by Divine
Bounty, is to Day made Righteous.

The Jailer, whom we find Inhumane in his Treatment of Paul and Silas, Act.
16.24
not long after washing their Wounds, as a genuine Effect of his Believing the
Word they spoke to him; he who about Midnight designed to be his own
Executioner before Daybreak was a joyful Believer: And how many of the
obstinate Jews, who had embrewed their wicked hands in the Blood of Christ,
fled for refuge to the hope set before them in the Gospel, and in one days time
became Church Members, whose continuance in the Apostle's Doctrine was as
steadfast as their Conversion was sudden, Acts 2.23, 41.

Objection 2. It may be said these were extraordinary Instances, and therefore
nothing to the Purpose in hand.

Answer. I grant that the Work of Regeneration is not ordinary, but special, if
compared with the more usual Dispensations of Divine Bounty in his common
Providence, as to the things of this life; and though there are not many Converts
in this day who parallel the foregoing Instances; yet they who have the Spirit
witnessing with theirs that they are the Sons of God, cannot but set to their
Seal; from their own Experience, that the Lord's Arm is not shortened, Doctrina
adversariorum qui legem cum Christo decebant, ut justificationis causum
concurrere. i. e. The Doctrine of our Adversaries, who hold, That the Law is a
Co Adjutor with Christ, in the Justification of a Sinner. Beza in La.
though the Doctrine of his Grace is so clouded by some Self-Justiciaries. The
Apostle affirms, That the Spirit cannot be received by the Works of the Law,
but by the Hearing of Faith. And how far the generality of Preachers deviate
from this Doctrine, is too conspicuous; who not allowing the Grace of God to be
so powerful and effectual now, as when the Gospel was first promulgated, send
us for Life to that Law which has already condemned us.

Object. 3. Why did not this Convert give some Reasons why he turned from
Judaism?

Answ. He gave the most persuasive Argument that could be, viz. His believing
Jesus Christ to be the true Messiah, upon the naked Testimony, and Record of
God, concerning him, expressed in several Texts of Scripture: Which will be a
sufficient Reason to those poor blind Jews, who are still walking after the
Imagination of their own Hearts, to relinquish their Errors, when God in his
infinite Wisdom shall think fit to call them by his Grace.

2. Consider, the Things he spoke, were delivered to a Church of Christ (not to
an Auditory at Lions), to satisfy them of a Work of Grace in his Soul: And
therefore, though his Speech was rude, yet it is not doubted, from the Certainty
of his Conversion, but he had those Divine Impulses on his Soul, whereby he
could not but desert Judaism, and lay hold of the true Messiah for Life and
Salvation.

It only remains (Reader) to inform you, That what Shalome Ben Shalomoh spoke
publicly, has not passed under any material Alteration since; but as far as it
consists with Plainness and Perspicuity, his own Expressions are retained, though
through his Deficiency in our English Dialect, it was judged proper to alter
some of his Words; yet retaining his Sense: Which, with some Additions,
forgotten by him when he delivered himself to the Church, and others whereinto
God has since instructed him, are now offered to your serious Consideration
(the Glory of God, and your Good, having been primarily consulted herein), by

Your Servant, in our Lord Jesus Christ, T. H.

WE whose Names are hereto annexed, Pastor, and Members of the Church of
Christ, into which Mr. Shalome was admitted, do hereby certify, That the
following Account is what he delivered Viva Voce, to the Church; and that such
Additions as are made, were taken from his own Mouth,

by Thomas Humfrey. Nathaniel Shepard. Samuel Stratton.


THE NARRATIVE of the CONVERSION OF Shalome Ben Shalomoh, the JEW, DELIVERED
Unto the CHURCH of CHRIST, to which Mr. Thomas Humfrey is Pastor.
Mr. Humfrey. BRethren, I suppose you well remember that Mr. Shalome was
proposed to this Church in order to Communion therewith; he is now come to give
an Account of the Dealings of God with his Soul: I hope you will attend, as
those who are sensible of the Grace of God toward you.

Sir, If you please to speak.


Shalome, I hope (Men and Brethren) that what I am about to say, may prove as
effectual as the Sermon which Peter preached to the Men of Judea and Jerusalem,
at the hearing of which there was an Universal crying out, Men and Brethren,
What shall we do? Acts 2.37. If that be your Enquiry, take Peter's Answer, You
must believe and be baptized, that the Holy Ghost may come upon you, v. 38. I
Shalome Ben Shalomoh, was born of Jewish Parents, my Father's Name Shalomoh, my
Mother's Leah, was circumcised the eighth Day in Pusnonny, in Poland, where I
lived till I was twelve Years of Age, at which time it pleased God (who works
all things for the good of his Elect) that all our Family (my self alone
excepted) died in a great Plague, which had universally spread its self through
that Land: Being left thus destitute, I had an Inclination to travel, and in my
Travels, a Boy, who was in the Duke of Brandenburg's Army, came and said to me,
Why do you not turn a Christian? A Christian, said I, why think you I will
worship Images? (for such was my Ignorance that I thought all Christians were
Papists, there being none but Papists, who were called Christians, and Jews, in
the Country where I was born:) do you (said I) believe the Bible, the Old
Testament, the five Books of Moses, the Psalms of David, and the Song of
Solomon? Yes, said he, we have all these. Do you, said I, worship Images? There
are, said he, two sorts of Christians, Protestants, and Papists; we believe no
other Savior but Jesus Christ alone. Well, said I, carry me to a Minister, who
accordingly brought me to the Duke of Brandenburg's Minister, who opend to me
something concerning Jesus Christ, from the five Books of Moses, As, 1st, that
in Genesis 3.15. And I will put enmity between thee, and the Woman, and between
thy Seed, and her Seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his
heel; which appeared to me, when God opened my Eyes, (for I could not see it
before) a lively Representation of the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ;
as also from that in Numb. 21.9. when God commanded Moses to lift up a brazen
Serpent on a Pole, that every bitten Israelite looking thereto might be healed;
did I learn that Jesus Christ was the true brazen Serpent, by believing on whom
alone it was that I could obtain Salvation and eternal Life: He also
endeavored to show me, how that many of the Psalms were prophetical of Jesus
Christ, particularly Psalm 2.7. Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotteu thee.
And Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right Hand, etc.
And Psalm. 22.16, 17, 18. The assembly of the wicked have enclosed me, they
pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all my bones, they look and stare upon
me, they part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture. Which did
to me clear up something of what Jesus Christ underwent as he stood Surety for
his Elect, from Isa. 9.6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given,
and the government shall be upon his Shoulders, and his Name shall be called
wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.
I learned something of the Humane Nature of Jesus Christ; he also endeavored
from Genesis 1.2. (...) And the Spirit of GOD moved upon the Face of the the
Waters; to evince to me the being of the Holy Ghost; the Notion of a Trinity I
took in form Genesis 1.26. (...) Let us make Man. And from Genesis 11. where God
coming down to see the City and the Tower which the Children of Men had built,
says in ver. 7. (...) Go to, let us go down and confound their Languages. From
Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet till Shiloh come, etc. I saw that Jesus Christ was the true
Messiah, in which I was satisfied, and though as yet I had nothing more then the
Notion of Things, yet, as the Eunnch said to Philip, Acts 8.36. so said I, What
hinders me to be baptized? and baptized I was in Berlijn in Brandenburg, the
Duke stood my Godfather: I became not a Christian for Silver, nor Gold, but was
constrained thereto by the mighty Power of Jesus Christ; I was beholden to
none, but to the Almighty Power of God. After this I was recommended to a
Minister in the City Ryneburg on the Rhyne, by whom I was further notionally
confirmed in the Christian Faith: and from that time had a mind to travel into
England; where, under the Denomination of a Christian, I lived a great while
Revelling in all manner of Wickedness, committing Iniquity with Greediness; as
I grew older I thought it was high time to reform, knowing I must give an
Account of Deeds done in the Body; I then resolved to lead a new Life, and
venture on the Mercy of Christ, which, though I prayed for Night and Day yet
could not find; I made many Resolutions to live better, and broke them as fast,
knowing nothing of the Person of Jesus Christ; at length I was by continued
Prayer very solicitous for Repentance; yet thought I, should I repent, it will
not avail me unless I could forsake my Sins; to Prayer I went, and in a Agony I
was, I flung up mine Eyes and Heart to Heaven, Lord Jesus Christ, said I, though
thou will not show Mercy to me, though I must perish, yet will I trust thee
still; Terrors of Conscience still pursued me, so that I often thought through
want of Ease in my Conscience, though I should trust in Jesus Christ, yet I
should be Damned; I thought many times, as I passed over the Fields, that I saw
the Lord Jesus Christ coming in the Clouds; upon which, when I began to
consider my own Condition, I passed Judgment on my self as one that deserved
Hell and Damnation; I found (as I thought) the Devil binding me in Chains,
which made me cry out, as Romans 7.23, 24. I am carried into Captivity, to the
Law of Sin which is in my Members; O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the Body of this Death? The Terrors of Hell took hold of me, I thought
I saw the Pit of Hell ready to receive me. How to get Peace of Conscience I
knew not; nothing but Hell and Damnation sounded in my Ears; I thought I must
be damned, if I turned not to Jesus Christ: In these Agonies of Spirit I read
once and again the Book of one Baxter, which I thought would have been a great
Means of my Salvation. But, alas! that drove me more into Hell, I thought I
should by it have sunk into utter Despair; I could find nothing in it for my
Consolation; what Course to take I knew not, I desired the Lord Jesus Christ to
do a Miracle upon me, in breathing the Breath of Life into my Soul, who was
dead in Sin, as he formerly raised those who were naturally dead from their
Graves; I pleaded his Power as he in Matthew. 8.2. Lord if thou will, thou can
make me clean; and cleansing I stood in need of, for I saw my Sin so black,
that I abhorred my self in dust; I thought I was not worthy to roll my self on
Jesus Christ; yet to venture I resolved, I knew I could but be rejected, as 2
Kings 7.4. If we say we will enter into the City, then the Famine is in the
City, and we shall dye there; and if we sit still here, we shall dye also: Now
therefore come, and let us fall into the Host of the Syrians, if they save us
alive, we shall live, and if they kill us we shall but dye. I always concluded
Prayer after this manner, Lord, though thou will not hear me, yet will I trust to
thee; I prayed (as one sensible of my own Insufficiency) that God would by his
Spirit teach me to pray; there was yet a secret Hope in me that God would call
me; however, I resolved to lean on the Lord Jesus, praying that he would give
me the Spirit of him that raised Jesus Christ from the Dead, to raise me from
the Death of Sin; such was my Affection to Jesus Christ, that I often wished my
self in a Cave so that I might enjoy him, though I endured the greatest Hardship.
In these Conflicts of Spirit the Devil set in upon me, told me, It was
impossible for me to be saved; For, said he, your Parents have wished a Curse
upon you; and insinuated as if I was by that Curse bound over to eternal
Damnation: How, said he, can you believe that the Son of God should be born of
the Virgin Mary? or that he that was born of her, should be the Savior of your
Soul? Know you not what a Fellow (which word went through my Soul, God knows)
he was? It is impossible, said he, that he should ever save you. To whom I
answered and said, Satan, get thee behind me; God (said I) and the Lord Jesus
Christ are all One; God at first created the World out of Nothing, created Man
out of the Dust, and of a Rib taken out of Adam made he a Woman; yea, Christ
himself was overshadowed by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin Mary: And
now, O Devil! what is too hard for such an Almighty Power which has done all
this? Thou have no Power over him, nor can thou Disannul what he has done.
After this, my Inclination stood bent to frequent the Assembly of God's People;
though whether to go I was at a lost, I heard there was many Churches, One cried,
Here is Christ; another cried, Here is Christ: I knew there was but one Christ,
however, I thought I would assemble my self with a sober People; at length I
came among the Quakers, but, alas! there I found nothing to my Satisfaction, so
that I was at a Loss again, and so continued for many Years, going no where,
but lived without Christ, an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, a Stranger
to the Covenants of Promise, without God in the World, at last my Heart began
to burn within me, whether thought I shall I go: I prayed that the Lord, if he
had any Love to me, would show himself to me in Jesus Christ, (for I always did
even when I lived in the Flesh, (as many nominal Christians do) look for God in
the Face of Jesus Christ,) and point me out a way; at length I came to
White-chappel, where my Apprehensions concerning my State were dreadful; I went
one Night to bed, and there thought I heard a Voice distinctly, saying, Arise,
arise; if you look not about you, and repent not, you must certainly be damned.
This was a sad Sermon preached to me, which from a slavish Fear and Dread drove
me to worship God, not from a Sense of his Love, but, as I said, from a fearful
looking for of Judgment and fiery Indiguation; my very Heart trembled within
me; Lord! thought I, it is high time to repent; what shall I do? Meeting a
young Man, I told him my sad Condition; who told me, Unless I was born again of
Water and of the Spirit, I could not enter into the Kingdom of God; which new
Birth was wholly mysterious to me: What shall I do then, said I? I fell to
weeping; I pray, said I, help me to a Minister, a good Gospel-Minister, (I
prayed many times that God would direct me to a right Church (though with never
so much Affliction, the Head whereof is Christ. I have often seen, as I
thought, Jesus Christ perfectly at the right Hand of God, who has promised to
pour out his Spirit on all Flesh, and certainly it cannot be far off; I am sure
if I were to dye shortly, it will not be long after my time) who brought me to
this Minister, to whom I declared my Mind, who went Evangetically to work with
me, he went far beyond Baxter, Baxter drove me back; but this Gentleman told me
there was free Grace for all that came to Jesus Christ: This proved an happy
Day to my Soul, he told me the Lord accepts Jew and Gentile, as in Gal. 3.28.
There is neither Jew, nor Greek, there is neither Bond nor Free, there is
neither Male nor Female, for ye are all one in Jesus Christ; after some
Discourse with Mr. Humfry, who made some Discovery to me of God's Way of
Salvation by free Grace, of the Way of the Work of the Spirit of God, on the
Spirit of a Man, in raising him up from the Death of Sin, I read in a Book in
which I found the Citation of that Scripture in John 17.26. Father, I have
declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it, that the Love wherewith thou
have loved me may be in them, and I in them.

And, thought I, now there is an open Door to come to God through Jesus Christ;
it came on my Soul with such Power, that it appeared to me as if a Door had
been set open for any to enter in who will, how abominably vile and filthy
soever they be. I thought I saw Jesus Christ, yea, the very Godhead shining
round about me through the Manhood of Jesus, for in him dwells the Fullness of
the Godhead bodily, 2 Col. 9. And now I am persuaded whether I direct my Prayer
to God the first Person in the Trinity, or to Jesus Christ the second, it is
the same, they being the same in Essence, equal in Power and Glory. The Quakers
indeed will suffer no Man to Pray, but as the Spirit moves them, pretending to
be guided by a Light within, which is no other than the Devil transforming
himself into an Angel of Light; and indeed it proved but a dark Guide to my
Soul: But as I was reading the Book abovenamed, it pleased God to dart in a
Beam of Divine Love in Jesus Christ on my Soul, though for about an hour and a
half, my Bed shook under me, I quivered and trembled, and thought my very Heart
was broken within me; Lord thought I, what shall I do to be saved? But it was
soon cleared up to me by the Spirit of the Lord, that I should be saved by
Jesus Christ and by him alone; and I am sure there is Salvation in no other
than in Jesus Christ; no, there is not. And now I would give my Body to be
burnt, yea, had I a thousand Lives, I would lay them all down, rather then be
an unbelieving Jew; For, says Christ, unless you believe that I am he, i. e.
the Messiah, you shall die in your Sins, and whither I go you cannot come, John
8.21, 24. This is a miserable Sentence to all Unbelievers. I often wondered when
I heard Ministers pray for unbelieving Gentiles, surely thought I the Gentiles
all believe in Jesus Christ: But, alas! Believing is quite another thing than I
took it to be, a thing of far greater Difficulty than most are aware of; He
that comes to God must believe that he is every way such as the Scripture
declares him to be, Heb. 11.6. he must believe that all his Attributes are
highly exalted, and infinitely advanced in our Salvation, that the Law is much
more highly magnified and made honorable, Isa. 42.21. by the Obedience of
Jesus Christ God and Man, than it could possibly be by the perfect Obedience of
Sinless Adam; he must believe that what Christ has done and suffered for us as
our Surety in our room and stead, is the only Righteousness whereby we are
justified before God and accepted with him; and that this very Righteousness
becomes ours, pleadable by us by Virtue of God's Divine Act of Imputation,
Jesus Christ is all and in all, Col. 3.11. But, alas, by how few are these
Gospel-mysteries really and truly believed? Here you see one in whom the
Covenant of Abraham is fulfilled, as it is in all those who believe in Jesus
Christ; But if you do not believe you must die in your Sins; I am afraid that
my Forefathers (though I must Judge as Charitably of them as I have warrant for)
yet I fear lest many of them are gone down to the Pit of Eternal Destruction;
and yet I am, a Brand plucked out of the Fire, Zec. 3.2. Now if God saved not
his own Covenant-Children, his own Spouse, those who were naturally in the
Root, what will become of those who are grafted in, and yet believe not that
Jesus is the Christ? 1 John 2 22. but I know, and am persuaded, That Jesus
Christ loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. which is the main Point,
and that by his Death and Resurrection my Soul is saved.


Mr. H.] Brethren, you have heard what an account Mr. Shalome has given in; If
you have any Question to ask on any thing that he has said, you have your
Liberty.


Shalome.] Brethren, Come, what will come, I am willing to wait with Patience,
flinging my self wholly on Jesus Christ, trusting in him, resolving to die at
his Feet, in the Strength of Christ I speak it.


Here it was desired by a Member in the Name of the Church, that Mr. Humfrey
would propound such Questions to him, as by his Answers to which, his Insight
into, and Experience of the glorious Mysteries of the Gospel might farther
appear.

Mr. H.] What do you find in your Soul upon believing in Jesus Christ?


Shalome.] Comfort, Joy, and Peace, as if I saw the Heavens themselves opening
ready to receive me; but sometimes I feel a dark Night.


Mr. H.] What Course do you take when you find the Guilt of Sin flying in your
Face?


Shalome,] I go to Jesus Christ, I go to Mount Calvary, there he gave
Satisfaction for my Sins, and is now ascended, and sits at the Right Hand of
God, and makes (how call you it in English? It was answered, Intercession;
Aye,) Intercession, Heb. 7.25. He was the Lamb of God slain from the Foundation
of the World, Rev. 13.8. and I verily believe that God elected me in Christ
before ever I was born; yea, before the Foundation of the World was laid,
Ephesians. 1.4. Or else I should never have come to him, had he not loved me with
an everlasting Love, he would never have drawn me with loving Kindness; Jer.
31.3. and now might I be a King, a King of the Jews I value it not, I had
rather be a Beggar, and dye in a Dungeon, then be an unbelieving King.


Mr. H.] Well, but what say you to the Devil, when he tells you, your Sins are
too great, or too many to be pardoned?


Shall.] Say to him! I tell him Jesus Christ was the great Sacrifice, who upon
the Cross gave full Satisfaction for all my Sins be they never so many, or
never so great; He obeyed and suffered for me; and besides this, Must I believe
the Devil?


Mr. H.] And what course do you take when you are down in your Spirit?


Shall.] I have Hope in the Lord, and stay my self on God still; when in my own
Conscience I was under the greatest Sense of Condemnation, when the Law,
Conscience, Sin and the Devil all condemned me, my Cry was as now it is, I
trust in Jesus Christ; when I had no Strength, and knew not where to go, still
I resolved to trust in Jesus Christ, with whom there is free Grace, and to whom
there is an open Door; and I could cheerfully undergo the Destruction of this
Body, might it be in the declaring the Name of Jesus Christ to my Brethren, in
discovering something to them of the Riches of the free Grace of God in Jesus
Christ, which has plucked me as a Brand out of the Fire, that it might redound
to the Praise, and the Honor of Jesus.


Mr. H.] And what is it that moves you to pray?


Shall.] The Spirit of God setting home on my Soul the Sense of the Pardon of my
Sin, what is it that keeps me in the Ways of Jesus Christ (of which I was
ignorant till God by his Providence made you an Instrument in directing me
thereto) but the Spirit? And now I see it is a Way so plain, that wayfaring
Men, though Fools, shall not Err therein, Isaiah 35.8. I am, since God has called
me out of Darkness into his mavelous Light, made to admire the infinite
Wisdom of God in taking Flesh upon him, a Mystery so strange, so odious to the
Jews, that they could kill him who should affirm it.


Mr. H.] Did you not find your Soul drawn by hearing the Gospel?


Shall.] Yes, by that it was that the Love of God wonderfully appeared to my
Soul; By that I was made to see my self an adopted Child of God, an Heir of
Glory; so that, when under a Cloud, I could then cry, Thou art my Father, I am
thy Child, leave me not therefore utterly, take not thine Holy Spirit from me,
but act as a Father toward me; If thy Spirit leaves me, I am like a Child
whose Leading-strings if you let go down it falls: We have continual daily need
to feed on Jesus Christ; the Manna we had Yesterday will not serve us to Day.
Gentlemen, Do not look upon me as a righteous Man in my self, for there I am a
Sinner, and altogether unclean, Isaiah 1.6. But yet in Jesus Christ I am
without Spot, Sin, or Stain, and blameless before the Throne, Cant. 4.7. By
Grace I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15.10. In the imputed Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, Genesis 3.21.


Mr. H.] Then you do not think to be saved by your own Righteousness?


Shall.] No, it is all as filthy Rags, I might better have continued a Jew, then
seek Salvation by my own Righteousness; they who have received Grace, cannot do
otherwise then praise, and glorify the Lord; but when we have done all we can,
it is but filthy Rags, Dross and Dung; It is Jesus Christ alone that saves me
when all is done; Grace laid the Foundation, and when the Top-stone is laid, it
will be with shouting forth, Grace, Grace, Zach. 4.7.


Mr. H.] And what alteration did you find upon discoursing of the Gospel? You
believed in a general Way, you said, that the Messiah was come.


Shall.] I did so, and had but a common Work of the Spirit; I desired to be let
further into the Mysteries of the Gospel, that I might be found One of those
Worshippers, who worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; that is, the true
Worship, not at Mount Samaria, nor yet at Jerusalem.


Mr. H.] I well remember when you first came to me, you was much troubled with
the Burden of Sin.


Shall.] Aye, There appeared the Mercy of God, now you put me in mind: I was
always cast down, my Heart was broke, I was just as a broken Reed; I could not
tell what to do; Oh! Sin did load me, I saw my self even in the Pit of Hell, I
thought I was not worthy to come to Jesus Christ; but such was his Grace, that
he was pleased to lay hold of me; and since I am come to him, I have Peace in
Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; Glory be to his Name for ever.


Mr. H.] Well, what, do you believe that God has forgiven you all your Sins at
once?


Shall.] Yes, I believe he has forgiven all at once, past, present and to come;
and now Christ will not leave me, though I fall I shall rise again.


Mr. H.] You see what Ground you stand upon;


Shall. I hope I stand upon the Rock; the true Rock, upon Peter's Confession of
Faith.


Mr. H.] As to your being chosen of God, and elected, what do you believe
touching that?


Sha.] Elected, had I not been Elected, I am assured God would never have
wrought such a Work upon me; He has Elected me before the Foundation of the
World was laid, and when I was young, my Heart was opened within me; when I
heard my Parents speak any thing of the Messiah, though they would not tell me
that he who was slain without the Walls of Jerusalem was the Messiah; they
talked of two Messiahs, one that should come to be slain, the other to deliver:
It may be that both Jews and Gentiles will in a short time be called in, the
Lord will call them. And I wish that at this Day, God would turn the Hearts of
all People, that they may all come to Jesus Christ; Oh! the Joy, the Comfort,
the Happiness that is to be found there! There is Salvation in none other but
in him; whether shall we go? (says Peter.) Thou have the Words of eternal
Life. Indeed there is no other Way, we must have no Confidence in the Flesh, we
must deny all our Comforts, and come to Jesus Christ, all must be laid down but
Jesus Christ.


Mr. H.] If you have (Brethren) any other Question to propound, Mr. Shalome is
very free to answer them.


It was desired by the Church, that something might be asked him concerning his
Conviction of Original Sin.

Mr. H.] What do you think about the Pollution of your Nature?


Shall.] What do you mean by Pollution?


Mr. H.] Do you find any Evil workings in your Heart?


Shall.] Yes, but Jesus Christ takes them off.


Mr. H.] Whence do you think you received this Corruption and Pollution?


Shall.] From the first Adam, for in Sin I was conceived, and born in Iniquity;
and the Corruption of my Nature is such, that it has rendered me utterly unable
to keep the Law in its Demands, and therefore by the Law was I drove to Jesus
Christ, i. e. when I saw the Law to be so holy, just, and good, so Spiritual,
and I so Carnal, that it required so much, and I was able to perform so little,
and the Gospel making a Discovery of one who had kept the Law and satisfied
Justice to the full, I fled for Refuge from the Law as a Covenant of Works, to
lay hold of the Hope that is set before me in the Gospel, as a Covenant of
Grace; this is what I intend by the Laws driving me to Christ.


Mr. H.] What do you, when you find these evil Thoughts stirring in you?


Shall.] What? Why then I fly to Jesus Christ, to that Blood which has washed
me from all my Sins, and roll my self wholly on Christ.


Mr. H.] Think you, that you stand Righteous before God?


Shall.] In Jesus Christ I do, though not in my self, for in my self I am a
condemned Creature; but yet I am fully satisfied that there is no Condemnation
to me being in Jesus Christ; though I may slip and fall through the stirrings of
the Old Man in me, which in themselves are sufficient Matter for Condemnation,
yet seeing my self in Jesus Christ, I know there is no Condemnation to me for
these Facts.


Mr. H.] What think you of Jesus Christ's keeping the Commandments?


Shall.] He kept them perfectly for me, had he broke the Law in the least Point,
he had been no better than the first Adam was, and we had been utterly undone;
Had he broke one Commandment, he had been guilty of all.


Mr. H.] Wherefore desire you Communion with this Church?


Shall.] 1st, Because Christ has made it my Duty. And 2d, To Renew the Actings
of my Faith on Jesus Christ;


Mr. Shalome withdrew. Mr. H.] Brethren, you have heard the Account of God's
Dealing with the Soul of Mr. Shalome. Let me acquaint you, that I have
occasionally had a considerable Acquaintance with him, perhaps as much as any
one Man here; I must needs say, I think he has given as uncontrollable a Proof
of God's Dealing with his Soul by way of Conversion, as any one I have
conversed with since I came into the Ministry; although his Language may be
broken, and his Phraseology unusual, yet I have observed a true Strain of Faith
run through his discourse, and he has given me sufficient Reason to conclude
that he is a stronger Believer than most of us Gentiles.


According to the usual Custom observed by the Congregational Churches, in
their Admission of Members, the Question was put affirmatively and negatively
whether Mr. Shalome Ben Shalomoh should be admitted a Member of this Church,
and it passed Nemine Contradicente in the former.

After I came to the Lord's Supper I found much Joy and Comfort, as if I lived
out of the World, nothing but Joy and Rejoicing: I see that Jesus Christ, as he
is God, is my Father; but as Man, he is my elder Brother; It has pleased God
to discover something to me of the Glory of that Covenant that he made with
Abraham, in Genesis 17. I am assured it is a Covenant of Grace Ratifyed and
Confirmed in the Blood of Jesus, and does belong to me and my Seed in their
Generations; so that I am persuaded, and assured, that my Children have as just
a Right to Baptism, as the Seed of Abraham of old had to Circumcision, or as
Believers have now to the Lord's Supper, in as much as it is an external Sign
of the Washing away of Sin by the Blood of Jesus Christ: God has made himself
over to me in absolute Covenant made to Abraham, and to my Seed as a part of
me; and when I take the Lord's Supper, in Faith, I see that as really as the
Bread is broken, and the Wine poured forth, the Body of Christ was broken, and
his Blood poured forth for the Remission of my Sins; when I recollect my former
State that when I lay in my Blood, and was led away Captive by Sin, when I
thought not on Jesus Christ, yea, before I was born Jesus Christ thought of me,
and laid down his Life for me, and made Satisfaction for my Sin; when, I say, I
consider these things, I am made to pray for the Spirit of Praise that I may
glorify God for ever, who by the Riches of his Grace has brought me in, as
the First Fruits of that great harvest of the Jews when a Nation shall be born
in a Day; which I firmly believe is at hand.

ERRATA.
PReface, Page 2. line 20, lege (...), put Art. 13. of Church of England, to
the 21 line.

The following PROOFS out of the OLD and NEW TESTAMENT concerning the Godhead,
Manhood, Doctrine, Death and Resurrection of the Messiah being transmitted to
us, we thought good to publish it, which by the Divine Blessing may tend to the
Conviction of the Jews, and to the Building up many in their most Holy Faith,
who profess a Belief in the Name of Jesus Christ.

Psalm 110.1. THe Lord said to my Lord Sit thou at my right hand till I make
thine Enemies thy footstool. The only begotten Son of God. Mat. 22.43. Mark
22.36. Luke 20.42.
The same Words as in the Old Testament. Psalm 2.7. The Lord has said unto me,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Acts 2.34. Acts 13.33. Heb.
1.5.
To which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father and he shall be to me a
Son. Heb. 5.6. John 1.14. John 3.16.
And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, the
Glory as of the only Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth. Isaiah
9.6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government
shall be upon his shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Consellour,
the Mighty God, the Everlaststing Father, the Prince of Peace. The eternal and
true God. John 10.36. I and the Father are one. Micah 5.2. Out of thee shall
come forth unto me to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of
old, from everlasting. Coeternal, and Coequal with the Father. 1 John 1, 2, 3.
The same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made. Prove. 8.22.32. I was set up
from everlasting from the beginning or ever the Earth was. Col. 1.13.16. Heb.
1.3.
By him were all things created in Heaven and in Earth, visible, and invisible.
Psalm 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his
Name Immanual. That he should take our humane Nature, and be born of a Virgin.
Mat. 1.23. John 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16. Luke 1.31.34.
And the Word was made Flesh. God was manifest in the Flesh. Genesis 22.18. Genesis
18.18. Genesis 12.3. Isai. 11.1. Jer. 23.5.
In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. That he shall be of
the stock of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah and David. Romans 1.3. Rev. 5.5. Mat.
1.16.
Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord which was made of the Seed of David
according to the flesh. Hosea 11.1. Out of Egypt have I called my Son. That he
should flee into Egypt. Mat. 2.5. Isa. 40.3. Mat. 3.1.
The Voice of him that cries in the wilderness, Prepare ye the Way of the
Lord, make strait in the Desert an high Way for our God. That one in the Spirit
and Power of Elias should prepare his Way. Mat. 3.4. Luke 3.4. Mark 1.3. John
1.23. Mat. 17.10.12. Mark 9.11 12.
Psalm. 9.1, 2. The People that walked in Darkness have seen a great Light, etc.
That he should begin to preach in Galilee. Mat: 4, 15, 16. Isal. 35.4, 5, 6.
The Eyes of the Blind shall be opened, and the Ears of the Deaf shall be
unstopped. That he should confirm his Doctrine by many Miracles. John 19.29.
Matthew. 27.48.
The Blind receive their sight, and the Lame walk, and the Lepers are cleansed,
and the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised up, the Poor have the Gospel preached to
them. Zech. 9.9. Behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and having
Salvation, lowly and riding on an Ass, and on a Colt the Foal of an Ass. That
he should enter Jerusalem triumphantly on an Ass. Matthew. 21.5. Mark 11.2. John
12.15.12.
Psalm 41.9. Yea, mine own familiar Friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of
my Bread has lift up his Heel against me. That he should be betrayed by one of
his Disciples for thirty pieces of Silver. Then one of the twelve, Judas
Iscariot, went unto the Chief Priests, and said, What will ye give me, and I
will betray him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of
Silver. Zech. 11.12. And the Lord said to me, Cast it unto the Potter, a goodly
price that I was prized at of them, and I took the 30 pieces of Silver and cast
them unto the Potter in the House of the Lord. Matthew. 27.7. And they took
Council, and bought with them the Potters Field to bury Strangers in. Zech.
12.7. Awake, O Sword, against my Shepherd, against the Man that is my Fellow,
says the Lord of Hosts, smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered.
That the Apostles should be scattered when he was taken. Matthew. 26.31. Mark
14.27. John 16.32. Matthew. 26.56.
Then said Jesus to them all Ye shall be offended because of me this night, for
it is written, as Zeck. 13.7. Isaiah 50.6. I gave my Back to the Smiters, and my
Cheeks to them who plucked of the Hair, I hid not my Face from Shame and
Spitting. That he should be mocked and spit on. Matthew. 26.67. John 18.22.
Then did they spit in his Face, and buffeted him. Isaiah 52.12. And he was
numbered with the Transgressors. That he should suffer between two Malefactors.
Matthew. 27.28. Then were two Thieves crucified with him, one on the right Hand,
the other on the left. Isaiah 53.4. Surely he has born our Griefs, and carried
our Sorrows. That he should suffer for our Sins. Matthew. 8 17. Himself took our
Infirmities, and bear our Sicknesses. 1 Peter 2.24 Who his own self bare our
Sins in his own Body on the Tree. Psalm 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, etc. That he should suffer extreme Agonies in his Soul. Matthew.
27.46. Mark 15.24.
Psalm 22.16. Numb. 21.8, 9.
The Wicked have enclosed me, they pierced my Hands and my Feet. That he should
die an accursed Death, and be crucified, as he was tipifyed by the brazen
Serpent. John 19.34. John 3.14.
But one of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his side. Psalm 69.21. And they
gave me also Galls for Meat, and in my Thirst, they gave me Vinegar to drink.
That Vinegar and Gall should be offered him to drink. John 19.23. Matthew. 27.48.
They filled a Sponge with Vinegar, and put it to his Mouth. Psalm 22.18. They
part my Garments among them, and cast Lots upon my Vesture. That Lots should be
cast for his Garments. Luke 23.24. And they parted his Garments, and cast Lots.
Exodus 12.46. Numb. 9.12.
Neither shall ye break a Bone thereof. That not a Bone of him should be
broken, as was typifyed by the Paschal Lamb. John 19.33, 36. When they came to
Jesus, and saw he was dead already, they break not his Legs. Zech. 12.10. They
shall look on me whom they have pierced. That he should be pierced. John 19.34,
37. One of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his Side. Psalm 16.10. Thou will
not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. That he should not see Corruption,
but rise the third Day. Luke 24, from 13 to the end. Joel 2.28, 29. I will pour
out my Spirit on all Flesh. John 16.7. But if I depart I will send him ( i. e.
the Comforter) to you. Acts 2.3, 4. There appeared to them cloven Tongues, and
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.

FINIS.

