DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's most Gracious Declaration to all his Loving Subjects. 1643
JAMES R.

WHereas We are most sensible that nothing has contributed so much to our
Misfortunes, and our Peoples Miseries, as the false and malicious Calumnies of
our Enemies; Therefore We have always been, and still are most willing to
condescend to such things, as, after mature deliberation, We have thought most
proper for removing thereof, and most likely to give the fullest Satisfaction
and clearest Prospect of the greatest Security to all ranks and degrees of our
People. And because We desire rather to be beholding to our Subjects Love to
us, then to any other expedient whatever, for our Restoration; We have thought
sit to let them know before hand our Royal and sincere Intentions; and that
when ever our Peoples united Desires, and our Circumstances give us the
opportunity to come and assert our Right, We will come with the Declaration
that follows.

JAMES R.

JAMES R.

WHen We reflect upon the Calamities of our Kingdoms, We are not willing to
leave any thing unattempted whereby We may reconcile our Subjects to their
Duty. And though we cannot enter into all the particulars of Grace and Goodness,
which we shall be willing to grant, yet We do hereby assure all our Loving
Subjects, that they may depend upon every thing that their own Representatives
shall offer, to make our Kingdoms happy. For we have set it before our Eyes, as
our Noblest Aim, to do yet more for their Constitution, than the most renowned
of our Ancestors; And, as our chiefest Interest, to leave no umbrage for
Jealousy, in relation to Religion, Liberty, and Property.

And to encourage all our Loving Subjects, of what degree or quality soever, to
set their Hearts and Hands to the perfecting of so good a Work, and to unite
themselves in this only means of Establishing the future Peace and Prosperity
of these Kingdoms, We have thought fit to publish and declare; That on our
part, We are ready and willing wholly to lay aside all thoughts of Animosity or
Resentment for what is past; desiring nothing more then that it should be
buried in perpetual Oblivion; And do therefore by this our Declaration, under
our Great Seal, solemnly promise our Free Pardon and Indemnity to all our
Loving Subjects, of what degree or quality soever, who shall not by Land or Sea
oppose Us and those We shall think necessary to accompany our own Person, in
this just attempt to recover our Right; Or (in such a number of days after our
Landing, as We shall hereafter express) shall not resist them who in any part
of our Dominions shall according to their Duty assert and maintain the Justice
of our Cause: Beseeching God to incline the Hearts of our People that all
effusion of ^^^^d may be prevented, and Righteousness and Mercy take place. And
for that end, We further promise (...) such as shall ^ome to, and assist us,
that (...) will reward them according to their respective Degrees (...) Merits.

We do further declare that We will, with all speed, call together the
Representative Body of our Kingdom; And therein will Inform our selves what are
the u^^^^ed Interests, and Inclinations of our People; And with their
concurrence will be ready to redress all their Grievances, and give all those
Securities of which they shall stand in need.

We likewise declare, upon our Royal Word, that We will protect and defend the
Church of England, as it is now established by Law; And secure to the Members
of it, all the Churches, Universities, Colleges, and Schools, together with
their Immunities, Rights, and Privileges.

We also declare, We will with all earnestness, recommend to that Parliament
such an impartial Liberty of Conscience, as they shall think necessary for the
Happiness of these Nations

We further declare, We will not dispense with, or violate the Test. And, as
for the dispensing power in other matters, We leave it to be explained and
limited by that Parliament.

We declare also, that We will give our Royal assent to all such Bills as are
necessary to secure the frequent calling and holding of Parliaments; The free
Elections, and fair Returns of Members; And provide for impartial Trials: And
that We will ratify and confirm all such Laws, made under the present
Usurpation, as shall be tendered to us by that parliament.

And in that Parliament We will also consent to every thing they shall think
necessary to re-establish the late Act of Settlement of Ireland, made in the
Reign of our Dearest Brother; And will advise with them, how 02 to recompense
such of that Nation as have followed us to the last, and who may suffer by the
said Reestablishment, according to the degree of their Sufferings thereby; Yet
so as that the said Act of Settlement may always remain entire.

And, if Chimny-Money, or any other part of the Revenue of the Crown, has been
burdensome to our Subjects, We shall be ready to exchange it, for any other
Assesment that shall be thought more easy.

Thus We have sincerely declared our Royal Intentions, in terms we think
necessary, for settling our Subjects minds; and according to the advice and
intimations We have received, from great numbers of our Loving Subjects, of all
ranks and degrees, who have adjusted the manner of our coming to regain our
own Right, and to relieve our People from Oppression and Slavery.

After this, We suppose it will not be necessary to enumerate the Tyrannical
Violations, and Burdens, with which our Kingdoms have been oppressed, and are
now like to be destroyed.

And whereas our Enemies endeavor to assright our Subjects, with the
apprehensions of great Sums which must be repaid to France; We positively
assure them, that our Dearest Brother the Most Christan King expects no other
Compensation for what he has done for us, than merely the glory of having
Succor'd an injured Prince.

We only add, that We come to vindicate our own Right, and to establish the
Liberties of our People. And may GOD give us Success in the prosecution of the
one, as We Sincerely intend the Confirmation of the other.

JAMES R.
Given at St. Germanies en Lay, April 17th S. N. 1693. And in the Ninth Year
of Our Regin.

