A NARRATIVE Of the PROCEEDINGS Of the FLEET: Giving an Account of what has
passed since their Arrival at Graves End, between diverse Honorable Members of
Parliament and Vice Admiral Lawson, and the Commissioners sent from White Hall
appointed to Treat on the behalf of the Army.

Sent in a Letter of the 22. Instant, from the FLEET Riding at Anchor at
Graves-End.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, 1659.

A LETTER of the 22. of December, 1659, from the Fleet, Riding at an Anchor at
Graves-End, giving an Account of what has passed there since the 17th present.
SIR,
ON Saturday morning 17 Instant at ten of the clock, Mr. Scot, Col. Okey, and
Mr. John Streater, Comptroller of the Ordnance, arrived on Board the Bristoll,
Captain Deakint being Commander of the Ships Riding at an Anchor in
Tilbary-Hope; half an hour after, on Board the same Ship, arrived Sir Henry
Vain, Major Sa^loway, Mr. Courtney, and Mr. Thankful Owen: Captain Deaki^
about two of the Clock commanded the Drake Frigot to weigh Anchor, and set sail
either to meet Vice Admiral Lawson, who then was thought to ride with the Fleet
in Margarets Rode; or was sailing toward the Hope: The Gentlemen before
mentioned went on Board the Drake Frigate; and after four hours sailing, she met
the Fleet: The Gentlemen went on board the James to the Vice Admiral. Sir Hen.
Vain endeavored to persuade the Vice Admiral. Sir Hen. Vain endeavored to
persuade the Vice Admiral to come to an Anchor in the place where he met him:
The Vice Admiral refused, and came to an Anchor at 8. in the Evening a little
below Graves-End.

Nothing passed that Night worth the taking Notice of; but on the Sabbath Day
the 18. Instant, about two in the Afternoon, the Vice Admiral called a Council
of War, there being present the Gentlemen before mentioned; the three first in
behalf of the Parliament; and the latter as Mediators between the Army and the
Fleet; unto whose aid came Colonel Salmon, and Col. Barrow.

The Vice Admiral began, expressing in an excellent Discourse the Reasons and
Grounds of the Fleets coming in to the River, and their declaring their
Resolutions to endeavor the Restoring of the Parliament to the Exercise of
their Authority, they judging them the only means to Restore Peace and
Settlement unto these distressed Nations, almost ruined with Changes, decay and
loss of Trade occasioned thereby, and the like. After which, he caused the
Declaration of the Fleet to be read, together with his Letter to the late
Lieutenant General Fleetwood, and the Letter to the Lord Mayor, Court of
Aldermen, and Common Council of London: After which, the Vice Admiral gave a
Narrative of Colonel Barrow's Negotiations with him in the Downs; as also what
past between him, Col. White, and Captain Kingdom, which was to this purpose,
viz. they desired him to forbear Declaring, especially in behalf of the
Parliament: Likewise, That if he should offer to come out of the Downs, Charles
Stuart would immediately Transport Men over to England, who had (as they
a^^edged) (...) Sail at Ostend, which were ready.

To which the Vice Admiral answered; As to the first, He was Resolved, with
the whole Fleet, to Declare, and with their Lives and Fortunes to pursue it in
all points as become Englishmen, in order to the Restoration of their
Liberties: To the Second; He had Intelligence from Ostend, That there were no
Ships ready, but some small Pickeroons; and that he should leave at Dunkink and
the Coast of Flanders sufficient Force to attend their Motion. And moreover, he
should leave 3. or 4. small Frigates in the Downs (as he has) that should be
enough to secure England from any present Danger, that any preparations that
were on foot at present could threaten; as also, that he was certain Charles
Stuart had no other Forces ready, nor could not in any reasonable time, if He
had Ships. Colonel Salmon endeavored to persuade the Vice Admiral, and the
Council of War, to send five or six more Frigates to the Downs, but could not
prevail; They were Resolved to keep Entire, and rather look after the Enemy in
the heart of their Country, then those in the Extreme Parts: Colonel Salmon and
Colonel Barrow fell both of them upon the Parliament, alleging that they had
not done any good to the Nation: to which, it was Replied, That the Reasons
were, for that the Army had always bin the Obstruction and Hinderance, by
their Imposing upon the Parliament such things as not only hindered the Good
which they ought in Duty to have done to their Country, but also forced and
overawed Them to do those things that gave offense and dislike to the People
in General; to which, Barrow and Salmon Replied, That then, if they stood in
the dislike of the People, it was Expedient and Rational to compose All to call
a Free Parliament, or another Parliament under Qualifications, rather then that
Parliament: Unto which it was Answered, That the Parliament was the only
Visible Power of the Nation, and that it is really in being by Act of
Parliament; and that if they should not meet, and devolve the Supreme Power
over to succession of Parliaments, they must receive their Parliaments, whether
Free or Limited by Qualifications, from the power of a Committee of Safety, who
received their power from the Army, who have nothing to do with giving of Laws
to the Nation; and, That it was the Duty of every man to oppose and hinder the
carrying on of any such pernicious Designs, which tended to nothing less then
the Converting the Supreme Power of the Nation into the Hands of the Army: For
that if they should submit to have a Free Parliament, then if they did but harp
upon the string of Charles Stuart, they would Dissolve Them, and plead that
Parliaments would not do the Work, and that God had a mind to lay aside that
Idol of the People, Parliaments, so it would fall into the Hands of a refined
Interest, the Army; and if that the Parliament, Elected by the Authority of the
Army, should not fall upon a Single Person, in Design to prevent them of their
Design against Parliaments: Yet, what would they do when they shall be
Overruled by the 2^ Conservators, whose Judgment and Interest must be put into
the Balance with the Judgment and Interest of the Public. To the last, it was
Replied by the Madiators, That the Conservators might possibly be laid aside;
To which it was answered, That in the room of them, the General Council of the
Army would undertake that matter: It was Replied by the Mediators, That the
Army had reason so to do, to see that what they had Fought for, should not be
lost at a Breath; unto which was answered, That the Parliament were oblidged in
an higher Nature than the Army, to prevent that; besides, That the Parliament
could not do it, in regard that what was Fought for, was the public Interest,
and the Parliament must necessarily adhere to the public Interest. That the
Army never intended other, then to fortify its Self against the public
Interest, by setting it Self up as a distinct Corporation over the People and
public Interest; the which, was apparent by their present Practices, and
therefore it was necessary that the Army should be brought under the Civil
Power, above which it had Exalted it Self for several years last past: And that
although they promised to sit under that which they now should set Up; all the
World knows they might pull down what they set up, notwithstanding their
Promise; for the World knows that yet no Promise, Covenant, Engagement, or
Declaration ever held Them. Therefore it is necessary to oppose Them, since
They strike at All, especially, when that their present offer of a Parliament,
Free, or Qualified, tends to nothing but to avoid the present Emergency, of
what is threatened by General MONCK and Vice Admiral LAWSON, and the other
Forces of the Commonwealth, who (no doubt) with the blessing of the Almighty,
will bring Them to Account for all heir Horrid Perjuries, Breach of Trust,
Blastings and Abusing of the Nation, by pretending the securing of the Cause,
the refined Interest, and the People of God, when nothing was more Destructive
thereunto, then their present Proceedings, which does overthrow and endanger
all together; and destroy the Trade and Navigation, obstructing of Justice, and
discomposing the Harmony of Government, to the dishonor of God, and disquiet
of th^se Nations: Besides, there is nothing less to be expected from Them; Nay,
some of Them have boasted, that so soon as this Danger is over they will bridle
this Nation well enough without Parliaments; therefore the People are to have a
care they be not taken by the snare of their specious Pretenses, since it is
certain, no Parliament can be called that knows better how to rid the Nation
of these unquiet and dangerous Persons: Moreover, it was largely discoursed and
proved, that this Parliament ever did what they could possible (in their
sitting before Cromwell's Interruption) to shake of the Yoke of the Army, that
thereby they might arrive at the work of Settling the Nation upon the just and
honorable Basis of true Freedom, such as might consist with the Preservation
of Public Interest: The like they did at their last Sitting, it is evident to
the whole World, They made it appear, that they did not intend longer to lend
their Authority to be a Mask to the Armies Tyranny: Besides, It was made
appear, that when they were admitted the last time to the Exercise of their
Authority, it was to no other end than to be a Shield to defend the
Ringleaders of mischief in the Army; For some small time, to color their Act
of turning out Richard and his Parliament, until they should find an Occasion
or fit Opportunity to turn them our again, so that they might arrive at what
they aimed at, viz. The Tyrannizing over the Nation: Nay, in their Private
Cabals, there are some of them have advised rather to choose a Free Parliament,
than a Parliament that shall be chosen with Qualifications, in regard they
should have Opportunity administered sooner for their turning out.

There were many more particulars discoursed of; but my memory, together with
my time, preventeth me of giving You the particulars: But, let me assure You,
they were the best that ever I heard, in so much that they concurring with the
Judgment and Resolution of the honest and gallant Sea-Commanders, 4 or 5 of the
dissenting Commanders that stood out at the first were convinced, and signed
the Declaration, before the faces of the Mediators. Sir, There being nothing of
Action at the present, I forbear to give You any further Account, in regard
that what they intend further is under consideration in order to Action; the
which no doubt will produce another face upon things, if the Wallingfordians
shall still persist in their Folly and Madness, against which and Them God in
his providence will witness, to the deliverance of these almost destroyed
Nations; in which work, it is the Duty of every Englishman to assist, that
Posterity may be happy under a Succession of Parliamentary Authority, derived
from a Civil, rather than a Military Fountain, from whence flows nothing but
Absoluteness, Pride, and unlimited, arbitrary, and Tyrannical Streams.

Sir, I do not question but You will contribute your aid in this Work, and
endeavor to undeceive the Nation of the Pretense of the Army, in calling a
Parliament together; with the Danger of receiving a Parliament from an Army, in
which the Nation does no less than grant the Army to be the Supreme Authority:
Besides, when it is Their Design in Calling them, for no other End than to levy
Money, to hold You and your Posterity in Slavery and Bonds not easily to be
shaken off.

Sir, Your Friend, and faithful Servant to the Public, M. H.


