ZAYDE, A Spanish History. Being a Pleasant and Witty NOVEL. The Second and
Last Part. Originally Written in French,

By Monsieur SEGRAY.

Done into English by P. PORTER, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for William Cademan, at the Pope's- Head in the
Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, in the Strand, 1678.

ZAYDE, A Spanish History. A NOVEL. THE SECOND PART.
WHEN Gonsalvo found himself in the Court of Leon; the sight of a Place where
he had been so Happy, renewed in him the Remembrance of his passed Fortune, and
awakened his Hatred against Don Garcia: The Regret of having lost Zayde, gave
place (for some Moments) to the Impetuosity of his Rage: All his Thoughts were
filled with a Desire to let that Prince know, how little he valued all the bad
Usage he might receive from him.

While his Mind was busied about these Thoughts, he saw Hermenesilde coming
into the Room, followed by the Prince of Leon; The sight of both these present
together, in so private a Place, and at Midnight, did so surprise him, that he
was not able to conceal it: He went back some Steps; and his Astonishment did
so plainly appear, that his Countenance betrayed the variety of Thoughts that
crowded into his Imagination: In-so-much, that Don Garcias, breaking Silence,
told him; I am mistaken, my dear Gonsalvo, if you are not yet ignorant of all
the Alterations that happened in this Court: Do you doubt my being Lawful
Possessor of Hermenesilde? I am truly, added he; and there is nothing wanting
to complete my Happiness, but your Consent, and your being a Witness of it:
With that, he Embraced him; Hermenesilde did the like; and both the one, and
the other, prayed him to forgive them the Misfortunes which they had caused
him. Sir, said Gonsalvo (throwing himself at the Prince's Feet) I rather ought
to beg Pardon of you, for those bad Suspicions I had of you; though, at the
same time, I must confess, I could not have any other of your Courtship to my
Sister; but, I hope, you will be pleased to grant it to the first Impulse of so
extraordinary a Surprise, and to the little Appearance I saw of the Favor you
have done to my Sister. You might expect better things from her Beauty, and my
Love (Replied Don Garcias): I Conjure you, to pardon what she has done without
your Consent, for a Prince whose Heart she knew so well. Sir, answered
Gonsalvo, Success has so well justified her Conduct, that she has cause to
blame me, for endeavoring to oppose her Happiness. After this, Don Garcias
told Hermenesilde, that, being it was late, she would (perhaps) be glad to
retire; and, that he would be glad also, to stay some Moments with Gonsalvo
alone.

When they were by themselves, he Embraces Gonsalvo with great Demonstrations
of Friendship. I dare not hope (said he) you can forget what is passed: I only
entreat you to remember the Friendship that was betwixt us; and to think, that
if I have been wanting to what I owed you, it was by the Fascination of a
Passion, that bereaves a Man of his Reason. I am so full of Surprise, Sir,
(said Gonsalvo) that I can make you no Answer: I suspect my own Eyes; and
cannot believe my self so Happy, as to find again that same Goodness, which I
have heretofore experimented in you: But, my Lord, give me leave to ask you,
who it is, to whom I owe this happy Return? You ask too many Questions at once
(Replied the Prince; yet, though I need a longer time to satisfy your
Curiosity, I will tell you, in few Words; for, I will not put off, for the
least time, what may justify my Proceedings toward you.

Then he went about to tell him the beginning of his Passion for Hermenesilde,
and the share Don Ramires had in it: But Gonsalvo, to save him that Labor,
told him, That he had learnt all that had passed to the Day of his parting from
Leon; and, that he was only ignorant of what had happened since that time.

The HISTORY of Don Garcia and Hermenesilde.
DOubtless, the Information you received of my Weakness, in consenting to your
Banishment from Court, made you go away as you did: After your finding out, by
Nugna Bella's Mistake offending you the Letter she writ to Don Ramires, what
we, with so much Industry, endeavored to keep from your knowledge: Don Ramires
received the Letter which was directed to you; and soon perceived the Mistake;
for which, he was extremely perplexed; I was no less troubled; we were equally
Guilty, too in a different manner. But the News of your Departure, gave him no
small Joy; nor was I, then, sorry for it: But, when I reflected upon your
Condition, and that I was the Cause of your Displeasure; I was infinitely
troubled at it; I saw, I was much in the wrong, to have so studiously concealed
from you the Passion I had for Hermenesilde. My Opinion was then, That the
Nature of my Inclination for her, was not to be blamed or condemned: It came
into my Thoughts several times, to send after you; and I had certainly done it,
if I had been the only Person in Fault; But the Interest of Nugna Bella, and
Don Ramires, were invincible Obstacles to your Return. I concealed my Thoughts
from them, and made use of all ways possible, to make me forget you: Your
Departure made a great Noise; and it was variously talked of, according to
Peoples Inclinations. When I found my self loose from the stay of your
Counsels, and gave my s^^f over to Don Ramires his Advice, who thought it his
Intrest to see me more Absolute; I fell at open Variance with the King: who
then found, he was mistaken in the opinion he had, that it was you that put me
upon doing those things, which had been so displeasing to him; our
Mis-understandings grew Public; the Queen's Endeavors proved fruitless; and
Things were come to that pass, that all believed I meant in good Earnest, to
form a Party. Nevertheless, I believe, I should not have taken that Resolution,
were it not for your Father, who (by the means of some People that he had
placed about your Sister, understood the Love I had for her) sent me word,
that, if I would Marry her, he would Raise me a considerable Army, and furnish
me with what Money and strong Places, that might be necessary to compel the King
(my Father) to give me a share in the Sovereign Government: You know, what
Influence my Passions have upon me; and what Power Love, and Ambition, have
over my Heart: Both the one, and the other, were answered by the Offers that
were made me; and my Virtue was too feeble, to resist their Temptations, being
no longer supported by the Strength of your Advice. I accepted, with Joy, his
Offers; but, before I would fully resolve to engage my self, I desired to know,
who were to be of the Party I intended to Head? I was told, there were many
Persons of great Quality; amongst others, the Fathers of Nugna Bella, one of
the Counts of Castile: I found also, that Nugnes Fernando, and he, required I
should own them as Sovereign Princes: This Proposition surpised me; and I was
ashamed, to consent, to an Act so prejudicial to the State, out of an over
eagerness to Reign: But Don Ramires his Interest made me pass over all: He
assured those that treated for the Counts of Castile, they should prevail with
me, to do what they desired, upon condition, that he might be secured to have
Nugna Bella. He brought me to demand her for him; I did it with Joy, and it was
granted me; so that, our Treaty was concluded in few Days. I could not resolve
to put off my enjoying Hermenesilde, until the end of the War; and therefore,
I sent word to Nugnes Fernando, that I would carry her away with me, at my
going from Court; He consented to it: Now, all my care was only, how I should
bring it about; Don Ramires was as much concerned as I; because Don Diego
Porcellos thought it necessary that Nugna Bella should be conveyed away at the
same time. We resolved (when the Queen should go out of the Town to take the
Air) to make the Coachman that was to drive Nugna Bella and Hermenesilde, to
leave that Road the Queen should take, and to drive directly to Palence, a Town
that was in my power, and where I was to meet Nugnes Fernando.

All which, was executed with more success than we hoped for: I married
Hermenesilde that very Night, for so, Decency, and my Love required; besides
that, it tied Nugnes Fernando more close to my Interest: In the midst of our
Merriments we spoke of you with Regret: I confessed to your Father what
occasioned your departure, we lamented our Misfortune of being Ignorant in what
part of the world you were gone to. I could not satisfy my self without you,
and I was unconsalable for your loss; I looked upon Don Ramires with horror, as
the causer of my fault: His marriage was put off, because Nugna Bella would
stay for her Father, who stayed behind in Castile, to gather the Troops which
were raised there.

In the mean time, most part of the Kingdom declared for me, for all that, the
King had a considerable Army, and made Head against me, many Battles we
refought; in the first of which, Don Ramires was Killed upon the Spot; for
which, Nugna Bella appeared very much Afflicted; your Sister was witness of her
Grief, and took pains to comfort her. In less than too months I made so
considerable a progress, that the Queen despairing of better success, persuaded
the King to come to an Accommodation: She came toward the place where I was;
she told me the King was resolved to seek out a quiet Retreat, and to depose
himself, and resign his Throne to me; that he would only reserve to himself
the Sovereignty of Zamara, to pass the rest of his days in, and that of Oviedo,
to bestow upon my Brother. It were hard to reject such advantageous offers: I
accepted of them; all things necessary for the accomplishment of this Treaty we
performed: I came to Leon, where I saw the King; he resigned to me his Crown,
and parted that very day for Zemara.

Give me leave Sir, interrupted Gonsalvo, to tell you my wonder at all this:
Stay a little, said Don Garcia, until I have told you what became of Nugna
Bella: I know not whether what I am going to tell you, will make you glad or
sorry, for I am ignorant of your thoughts of her. I have none Sir, answered
Gonsalvo, but a calm indifference for her. Then you will hear me out, without
much pain, replied the King: Presently after the Peace was concluded, She came
to Leon with the Queen; she seemed to wish for your return: I spoke to her of
you, and I found in her a hearty Repentance for her Infidelity to you. We
resolved to make a diligent search after you, though we found it difficult, not
knowing to what corner of the Earth you were gone to: She told me, if any one
could give me light in it, it must be Don Olmond: I sent for him at that very
instant; I conjured him, to tell me where you were: He told me, That since my
being Married, and the Death of Don Ramires, he had often a great mind to speak
to me of you; judging, that the reasons that caused your absence, might now be
ceased; but that being not informed of the place of your abode, he did believe
it to no purpose: Lastly, that he had very lately received a Letter from you,
wherein you gave him no account of your Residence, but desired him to write to
you to Taridgone, which made him judge that you were not out of Spain: I
immediately dispatched away several Officers of my Guard to go look for you; I
found by the Letter, you writ to Don Olmond, that you knew nothing of the
alterations that happened: I gave them order not to let you know any thing of
the state of the Court, or my intentions; for I fancied to my self an extreme
pleasure in being the first that should inform you both of the one and the
other: Some days after, Don Olmond parted likewise in quest of you, with an
opinion that he should find you sooner than those I sent. Nugna Bella seemed
extremely satisfied with the hope of seeing you again; but her Father, whom I
acknowledged as Sovereign Prince (as well as your Father) sent to the Queen to
beg she might be suffered to come to him: Though Nugna Bella was infinitely
grieved at this separation, yet she could not avoid it; she went away: As soon
as she was Arrived in Castile, her Father Married her against her will to a
German-Prince, whom Curiousity, or Devotion had brought into Spain: he fancied
an extraordinary merit in this Stranger, and therefore made choice of him for
his Son-in-Law, he may be both Wise and Valiant, but neither his Humor nor his
Person are agreeable; and in a word, Nugna Bella is most unhappy.

Thus have you, said the King, all that has happened here since your departure;
and if you are no more concerned for Nugna Bella, and Love me still, I have
nothing more in the world to wish for, since you may be as happy as ever you
were, and I shall be so likewise by the return of your Friendship. You Confound
me Sir, with so many, and so great favors, answered Gonsalvo, I fear I shall
not be able to make you sensible enough of my joy and acknowledgments; for my
Misfortunes, and my Solitude have so accustomed me to sadness, that I cannot of
a sudden shake off their impression, which clouds the cheerful thoughts of my
heart.

After this, the King withdrew, and Gonsalvo was Conducted to an Appartment
which was prepared for him in the Court. When he saw himself alone, and made
some reflection upon his own insensibility, of so advantageous a change, he was
angry with himself for having so entirely given himself over to Love.

O Zayde, it is you alone, said he, that hinders me from enjoying the return of
my Fortune, and of a Fortune so far above what I lost: My Father is a Sovereign
Prince, my Sister is a Queen, and I am revenged of all those that betrayed me;
and yet am Unfortunate, and would purchase at the hazard of all these
advantages, the occasion I have lost of following you, and seeing you once more.

The next day, all the Court was full of Gonsalvo's return; the King thought he
could never show enough, how much he esteemed him, and took all the care
imaginaable to give public demonstrations of it, to Repair, in some measure,
what had passed: So great a favor could be no Consolation to this Lover for
the loss of Zayde; nor was it in his power to conceal his Affliction. The King
took notice of it, and pressed him so hard to declare the cause of it, that
Gonsalvo was fain to tell it him. After having informed him of his Passion for
Zayde, and all that had befallen him since his departure from Leon. Thus Sir,
said he, have I been punished for daring to maintain against you, that none
ought to Love, but after a long acquaintance: I was deceived by a Person, whom
I believed I knew well, and this experience could not defend me against Zayde,
whom I did not know at all, nor know not yet; and for all this, disturbs the
happy state in which you are pleased to place me. The King was too sensible of
Love, and had too great a feeling of all that concerned Gonsalvo, not to be
touched at his Misfortune, he began to consult with him of the means how to
learn some tidings of Zayde; they resolved to send to Tortosa, to the House
where he heard her voice to endeavor to be informed of her Country at, least,
and whether she might be gone. Gonsalvo, who had a design to let Alphonso know
all that had happened to him since he left his Solitude, laid hold of this
occasion to write to him, and to renew the assurances of his Friendship toward
him.

In the mean time, the Mores taking their time, when the Kingdom of Leon was in
these disorders, had surprised several Towns, and continued still to enlarge
their bounds without so much as declaring War. Don Garcias, prompted by his
natural Ambition, and fortified by Gonsalvo's Valor, resolves to Invade their
Country, and retake from them all those places which they had Usurped. His
Brother Don Ordogno joined himself to him, and betwixt them, they brought a
powerful Army into the Field, whereof Don Gonsalvo was made General: He made a
very considerable Progress in a very short time, he took diverse Towns; he had
the better in several Battles, and at last, Besieges Talauera, a place of great
Importance, considerable for its Situation and Greatness. Abderam, King of
Cordowa, who succeeded Abdala, came in Person, to oppose the King of Leon: He
came toward Talauera, with hopes to force them to raise the Siege. Don
Garcias, and the Prince Ordogno, having left Gonsalvo with part of the Army to
streigthen the Town, Marches with the rest of the Army to meet him in order to
fight him. Gonsalvo was extreme glad of the employment; for, his assurance
either to win or dye, would not let him fear any ill success. Having no news of
Zayde, he was more afflicted than ever, with the passion he had for her, and
his great desire of seeing her; so that in spite of his Fortune and Glory,
being not able to hope for any thing but a miserable kind of life, he run
headlong into all occasions of ending it.

The King Marches against Abderame, whom he found Encamped in an advantageous
post, within a days March to Talauera; they passed some days without action,
for the Moors would not come out of their Post; and Don Garcias did not think
himself strong enough to Attack them: In the mean time, Gonsalvo judged it
impossible to continue the Siege, because his Forces being not numerous enough
to encompass the whole Town, and Parties getting into the Town every Night,
might put the Besieged in a posture of making stronger Sallies than he could
sustain; and therefore having made a considerable breach, he resolved to hazard
a general Assault, and to endeavor by so bold an attempt, to carry the
Victory, which otherwise was desperate. He puts this result into execution; and
after giving all necessary orders, he begun the Attack before day, but with so
much resolution, and hope to overcome, that he inspired the same courage into
all his Men: They performed incredible things, and at last, in less than two
hours, Gonsalvo carried the Town: He did what was possible to hinder the
Soldiers from Plundering, but it was impossible to stop an Army from it, whom
the hope of Plunder encouraged, more than any other motive whatever.

As he run about the Town himself, to prevent the disorder (which upon such
occasions are too frequent) he saw a man alone, defending himself with
incredible Valor against a great many; he endeavored by Retreating, to get
into a Castle which held out still: Those that attacked him, pressed him so
home, that he had been infallibly killed, if Gonsalvo had not thrown himself
betwixt them and him, and commanded them to withdraw: He made them ashamed of
the action; they excused themselves, by telling him that, the man they
Assaulted, was Prince Zulema, who had killed abundance of their Men, and was
endeavoring to throw himself into that Castle. This Name was too famous, by
the greatness of this Prince, and the general Command he had amongst the Mores,
not to be known to Gonsalvo: He advances toward him; and this Valiant Man
seeing it impossible any longer to defend himself, delivered his Sword, with so
noble and so bold an air, that Gonsalvo could no longer doubt, but that he
well deserved the great Reputation which he had gained: He gave him to be kept
Prisoner to some Officers that followed him, and Marches to Summon the Castle:
He propromis'd Quarter to all that were in it. The Gates were opened for him;
he was told (as he entered) that there were many Arabian Ladies, who cast
themselves into it for safety. He was Conducted to the place where they were;
he enters a spacious Appartment, richly furnished after the Morish fashion;
several Ladies lying along upon Carpets (by their melancholy silence) made
appear how sad they were for their Captivity: they lay at some distance, out of
respect to a Lady Magnificently Arrayed, that was sitting upon a Pallet, with
her head leaning upon one of her Hands, and with the other wiping her Tears,
and hiding her Face, as it were to keep her self for some moments from being
seen by her Enemies: At last (at the noise which those that followed Gonsalvo,
made) comeing into the Room, she turned her Head, and let Gonsalvo see it it
was Zayde: But Zayde, far more beautiful than he had ever seen her, in spite of
all the grief and trouble that appeared in her Face. Gonsalvo was so surpised,
that he seemed more troubled than Zayde; and Zayde seemed to take courage, and
lose some part of her trouble, at the sight of Gonsalvo: They advanced toward
one another; and beginning both to speak at once, Gonsalvo making use of the
Greek Tongue, asked her pardon for appearing before her like an Enemy: At the
same time Zayde said in Spanish, she feared no more those Misfortunes which she
apprehended, and that this was not the first danger in which he had relieved
her: they were so amazed to hear each other speaking their Language, and their
surprise represented to them, so plainly, the reasons why they learnt those
Languages, that they both Blushed, and remained silent for some time. At last
Gonsalvo broke silence, and continuing to make use of the Greek Tongue, said, I
know not (Madam) whether I had reason to wish as much as I have done, that you
might understand me, perhaps I should not be less unhappy: But happen what
will, since I have the Joy of seeing you once again, after having so often lost
all hope of you, I will never more complain of my Fortune. Zayde seemed
somewhat pusled at what Gonsalvo said; and looking upon him with those fair
eyes, wherein (nevertheless, he could read nothing but Melancholy. I know not
yet (said she to him in her own Language, being not willing to speak any more
Spanish) whether my Father has escaped with his Life, amid'st so many dangers,
to which he has exposed himself this day; you will excuse me if my concern for
him hinders me from making Answer to what you said. Gonsalvo caused some of
those that were about him, to enquire after what she desired to know: He had
the pleasure to learn that the Prince (whom he saved) was Zayde's Father; and
she seemed to be overjoyed to know by what happy means her Fathers Life came
to be saved. After this, Gonsalvo was obliged to pay his respects to the rest
of the Ladies that were in the Castle: He was not a little surprised to find
Don Olmond in that Castle, of whom, there had been no tidings since he went
from Leon to seek him out. Having performed the Civilities that were due to so
faithful a Friend, he returned to the place where Zayde was. As he began to
speak to her, word was brought that the Confusion and Disorder was so great in
the Town, that nothing but his Presence could put a stop to it. He was fain to
go where his Duty called him; he gave the orders that were necessary to appease
the tumult which the Avarice of the Soldiers, and the terror of the
Inhabitants had caused: After which, he sent away an express to the King, to
acquaint him with the taking of the Town, and so came back with what have he
could to Zayde.

All the Ladies that were with her, were, by chance, at some distance from her:
Gonsalvo was resolved to take the advantage of this favorable moment, to speak
to her; but as he was going to entertain her with the declaration of his
Passion, he felt in himself an extraordinary Irresolution, and found that it is
not enough at all times to be in a capacity of being understood, to make a man
resolute enough to declare his mind; he was fearful, nevertheless, of losing an
opportunity which he so much longed for; and after, having for some time
admired the Caprice of Chance, that made them be so long together, without
being able to be acquainted, or to speak to one another: We are now (says
Zayde) far from falling into the same difficulty, since I understand Spanish,
and you know my Language. I fancied my self so unhappy (replied Gonsalvo) in
not knowing it, that I have learnt it, even when I was out of hope, that it
should ever be useful to repair what I have endured for not understanding it.
For my part, (Answered Zayde, Blushing) I have learnt the Spanish Tongue,
because it is hard to live in a place without acquiring the Language thereof,
that one may not be always in trouble how to make themselves understood.

I often understood you, Madam, (said Gonsalvo) and though I knew not your
Language, yet I could give a very exact account of some of your Sentiments. I
am likewise persuaded you saw mine much better than I did yours. I assure you
(Answered Zayde) I am not so quick of Apprehension as you take me to be; and
that all I could judge of you, was, that you were sometimes very sad. I also
let you know the cause thereof (replied Gonsalvo;) and I am persuaded, that
although you knew not the meaning of my words, you could not chufe but
understand me: Go not about to deny it Madam, for you have Answered me with a
Severity that may please you; but since I found your indifference, how could
you avoid finding out Sentiments which appear much more plainly than
indifference, and which expound themselves often even against our will? Yet I
must confess I observed sometimes those bright eyes turned toward me, after a
manner that might give me Joy, if at the same time I did not believe my self
beholding to some other, for what was of obliging in them. I will not dis-own,
(Answered Zayde) but that I did fancy you like one; but you would have no cause
to be angry at it, if you knew how often I wished you the same Person whom you
resembled. I know not Madam (Answered Gonsalvo) whether I should fancy what you
have said, to be to my advantage; nor can I thank you for it, unless you did
explain your self better: I have told you too much (replied Zayde) to need any
further Exposition; and my last words oblidge me to keep it as a secret: Sure I
am reserved for nothing but Misfortunes, (Answered Gonsalvo) since I cannot
understand what you say, even when you speak to me in Spanish: But Madam, can
you yet be so Cruel, as to add more incertainties to those in which I have
lived so long? I must dye at your feet, or you must tell me who it was you wept
so much for in Alphonso's Solitude; who it is that my good or bad Fortune has
made me resemble: Doubtless my curiosity would not stop at these two things, if
the respect I bear you, did not withold it; but I will wait with patience,
until time and your goodness will give me leave to ask you more.

As Zayde was going to answer, some Arabian Ladies that were in the Castle,
desired to speak to Gonsalvo, and there came afterward so many other People
in, that (with the care the Princess took to avoid a particular Conference, it
was impossible for him to find any further opportunity.

He shut himself up alone, to abandon himself to the pleasure of having found
Zayde again, and in a place where he had the sole command. He believed also to
have observed some joy in her eyes when she saw him; he was very glad that she
had learnt the Spanish Tongue; and she made use of his Language with such
readiness and promptness, as soon as she saw him, that he flattered himself
with the opinion that he had a great share in the care she took to learn it; at
least, the sight of Zayde, and the hope he had, not to be hated by her, made
Gonsalvo feel all the pleasure that a Lover (that is not assured of the
affections of his Mistress) can be sensible of.

The return of Don Olmond from the Castle, whether he had sent him to place
some of his Troops, interrupted his thoughts; as he found him in the same place
with Zayde, he thought he might inform himself of that fair Princesses Birth
and Adventures; but he apprehended that he might be in Love with her, and his
fear of finding a Rival in the Man he believed his Friend, retarded for a long
time his Curiosity; but could not forbear, at last, asking Don Olmond, by what
Accident he was brought to Talevera. After he had learnt that he was taken
Prisoner, going to look after him at Tarragon, he spoke to him of Zulema first,
the better to bring on the discourse of Zayde.

You must know (said Don Olmond) that he is Nephew to the Caliph Osman, and
that he should have been in the place of Carmadan, that reigns at this day, if
he had been as fortunate as his Merit deserves; he holds yet a considerable
rank among the Arabians: He came into Spain to be General of the King of
Cordoua's Army, where he has lived with so much Honor and Grandeur, that I was
surprised at it. At my Arrival here, I found a very agreeable Court: Belleny,
the Wife of Prince Osmin, Zulema's Brother, was then here; this Princess was no
less respected for her Virtue, than her high Birth: She had with her the
Princess Felime, her Daughter, whose Wit and Beauty are full of Charms, though
there appears (in both) something of Languishing and Melancholy. You have seen
the incomparable Beauty of Zayde, and you may judge how great my Astonishment
was to find at Talevera so many Persons worthy of Admiration. It is true
(replied Gonsalvo) that Zayde is the most accomplished Beauty I ever saw; and I
question not, but she has a great number of Admirers here, Alamire, Prince of
Tharsus, is passionately in Love with her, answered Don Olmond; he began to be
in Love with her in Cyprus, and came along with her from thence: Zulema
suffered Shipwreck upon the Coast of Catalonia; he is come (since that) into
Spain, and Alamire came to Talevera to find out Zayde.

These words of Don Olmond, struck Don Gonsalvo to the heart; they confirmed
him in all his Suspicions, and he found in an instant that all his Imaginations
were true; the hopes of being deceived (with which he had so often flattered
himself) quite left him; and the Joy which he received in his last Conversation
with Zayde, served only to augment his grief. He was no longer in doubt, but
that those Tears which she shed at Alphonso's, were for Alamire, that it was
him he was like; and that it was he that carried her away from the Coast of
Catalonia: These thoughts gave so much disquiet to his mind, that Don Olmond
believed he was Sick, and gave him to know that he was much concerned thereat.
Gonsalvo concealed the cause of his Affliction, and was ashamed to own that he
was in Love after what he had already suffered by it: he told him he should be
well again in a little while, and asked him if he had ever seen Alamire,
whether he was worthy of Zayde, or whether she Loved him? I never saw him
(replied Don Olmond) for he was gone to join with Abderam, before I was brought
to this Town; his Reputation is great, but I know not whether Zayde Loves him
or not; but I believe it is not easy for her to despise the Application of a
Prince, so deserving as he is given out to be, and he appears so assiduous
about her, that it is hard to say, that he should be altogether neglected by
her; the Princess Pelime, with whom I have contracted a sincere Friendship, in
spite of the reservedness, in which the People of her Country and Quality
live, has often spoke to me of Alamire, and to judge of him by what she says,
there cannot be a more accomplished Person, or a more passionate Lover than he
is. If Don Gonsalvo had followed the impulse of his thoughts, he had asked many
more questions of Don Olmond; but he was withheld by the fear he had of
discovering to him what he studied to conceal; he only asked him what became of
Felime: Don Olmond told him, that she was gone after the Princess her Mother,
to Oropese, where Osmin commanded a Body of an Army.

After this, Gonsalvo withdrew, pretending to take some rest; but in reality,
to be at Liberty to Afflict himself, and to reflect upon the stubbornness of
his invincible Misfortunes. Why did not I know that Zayde was in Love with
Alamire, before I found her again? If I had been assured of that, when I lost
her, I should have been less afflicted for her absence; I should not be so
joyful for having found her, nor should I endure now the cruelty of losing all
the hopes she came from giving me. What kind of Destiny is mine, that even the
sweetness of Zayde must create me nothing but Misfortune? Why should she seem
to Countenance my Love, if she approves Alamires passion? Or what means that
wish of hers, that I might be the man I resemble?

These kind of reflections augmented his Grief; and the next day, which he
ought to have wished for with impatience, and which ought to be to him so
grateful, since he was sure to see Zayde, and to speak to her; seemed to him
the most frightful of all his Life; for he fancyed, that in seeing her, he
could hope for no other thing, but the Confirmation of all his Disasters.

About Midnight, the Messenger whom he had sent to the King, to acquaint him
with the taking of the Town, came back with Orders, for Gonsalvo to March away
at that very instant, with all his Cavalry, to join the Army. Don Garcias knew
that the Moors expected a considerable Recruit; and as soon as he knew that
Gonsalvo had taken Talevera, he thought it expedient, by the benefit of this
Victory, together all his Forces, and to fall upon the Enemy before they were
reinforced by their new Succors.

Though Gonsalvo saw the difficulty of executing his Majesty's Orders, by the
trouble he should find to make his Soldiers March, being scarce refreshed
after the Fatigue of the precedent Night; yet the ardent Desire he had to be at
the Battle, made him use so much Diligence, that he put his Men in a very short
time, in a readiness to March; and he did himself the cruel Violence of parting
with Zayde, without taking his leave of her. He ordered Zulema to be brought
into the same Castle where the Princess was; and commanded him that was
Governor of it, to acquaint her with the Reasons that obliged him to leave
Talavera in such have.

At Break of Day he put himself in the Head of his Cavalry, and began to March
with a Sadness proportionable to the cause of his imagined Grief. When he came
near the Camp, he met the King that came out to receive him: He alighted, and
went toward him, to give him an account of what passed at the taking of
Talavera. After he had discoursed with him about what concerned Martial
Affairs, he spoke to him of his Love: He told him how he had found Zayde; but
that he had likewise found out that Rival, whose only Shadow had created him
so much trouble. The King told him how much he was concerned in all that
touched him, and how much he was satisfied with the Victory he had gained.
After this, Gonsalvo went to quarter his Men, and to put them into a Condition,
by a few Hours Rest, to be ready for the Battle which was intended to be given:
They had not yet resolved upon it; for the advantageous Post in which the Enemy
was, their Number, and the length of the March to them, rendered this
Resolution hard to be embraced, and dangerous to be put in Execution.
Nevertheless, Gonsalvo was for giving Battle; and the hope he had of meeting
Alamire in the Combat, made him maintain his Opinion with so much earnestness,
that the giving Battle was resolved upon the next Day.

The Arabians were Encamped in a Plain, within sight of Almeras; their Camp was
encompassed by great Woods; insomuch, that there was no Access to them, but by
such narrow ways, that it did seem unsafe to attempt it; notwithstanding,
Gonsalvo, in the Head of the Horse, begun first to pass the Wood, and appeared
first in the Plain, followed by some Squadrons. The Arabians were so started to
see their Enemies so near, that they employed the time of Fighting, in
consulting what they had best to do; so that, they gave the Spaniards the
leisure to March all their Men through the Wood, and draw them up in Battalia,
on the Plain. Gonsalvo Marched directly toward them, with the left Wing, beat
back their Battalions, and put them to a disorderly Rout: He did not amuse
himself to pursue those that fled; but seeking up and down, the Prince of
Tharsus, and fresh Laurels, turns short upon the Arabian Infantry: But the
right Wing did not fare so well; for, the Arabians routed it, and beat it back
to the main Body, which was Commanded by the King of Leon; But the King put a
stop to Fury, and repulsed them even to the very Gates of Almaras; so that, the
Foot only was left Commanded by Abderame, and stoutly attacqued by Gonsalvo:
This Body of Infantry stood firm to their Ground, and opening their Battalions
to the Right and Left, made way for their Archers; which so terribly galled the
Spaniard, that they could not abide it: Gonsalvo Rallied his Men, and Charged
them the second and third time; and, at last, surrounded them on all sides: But
Gonsalvo, moved with Compassion to see so many Gallant Men knocked on the Head,
commanded Quarter to be given to all: The Arabians laid down their Arms, and
came flocking about him, to admire his Clemency, after having felt the smart of
his Valor. Then likewise came the King of Leon up to Gonsalvo, and gave him
all the Praise that was due to his Courage. They understood that King Abderame
was Retreated during the Shock, and was gotten into Almaras.

The Glory which Gonsalvo acquired in this Days Action, might have given him
cause to rejoice; but he felt no other, than Grief of having survived it, and
not to meet with Alamire.

He understood afterward, by some of the Prisoners, that this Prince was not
in the Army; that he commanded the Reinforcement, which the Enemy expected;
and, that it was the Hope of this Succor, that made them endeavor to avoid
coming to a Battle.

But the Arabians, having Rallied a part of their Army, and being Reinforced
by the Addition of those Succors which Alamire brought to them, and lying
under the Walls of a strong City; the King of Leon could hope for no other
Advantage by his late Victory, but the Glory of having gained it. Nevertheless,
Abderame, under pretense of Burying the Dead, desired a Truce for some few
days, with design to Commence a Treaty of Peace.

During the time of this Cessation, Gonsalvo passing from one Quarter of the
Army to another, saw upon a little Emmence, two of the Enemies Horsemen,
defending themselves against a good number of the Spanish Cavalry, who by their
multitude, were upon the point of destroying them: He was amazed to see this
Combat, during the Truce, at so much inequality: He sent some of his Guards,
with all speed, to interpose, and to know the reason of ^his: They brought him
back word, that these two Arabian Horsemen had endeavored to pass their
outmost Guards, that the Centries were rude in stopping them; that they drew
their Swords thereupon; and that the rest of the Guard fell upon them. Gonsalvo
sent an Officer to beg these two Cavaliers excuse, and to conduct them whither
they desired to go, beyond all the Guards: This done, he continued his way,
visiting all the Quarters as he went toward the Kings; so that, it was late
before he came back. The next Morning, the Officer that was sent to Conduct the
two Arabians, came to him, and told him, That one of those whom they Conducted,
gave him in charge to tell him, That he was sorry, that an important Affair,
which concerned not the War, hindered him from coming to return him Thanks; and
that he was willing he should understand, that it was the Prince Alamire, that
owed him his Life. When Gonsalvo heard the Name of Alamire, and believed, that
this Rival, whom he had so great a mind to seek all over the World, even when
he did not so much as know his Name, nor his Country, was then passed through
his Camp, and in his own fight, without all doubt, to go to find out Zayde: he
was in a maze; all he had power to do, was only to ask, which way he steered
his Course? Being told, toward Talavera; he dismissed all that were in his
Tent; and remained alone full of despair, for not having known that it was
Alamire.

How? He has not only escaped my Fury and Revenge, but I must likewise open him
the way to go see Zayde! This moment he sees her; he is with her; he tells her
by whose means he has passed through this Camp: It was only to insult over me,
and up-braid me with my Misfortunes, that he sent me back word, that he was
Alamire: But may be, he may not long Regale himself at the Expense of my
Misfortunes; and I will solace my grief, with the pleasure of being Revenged.

He resolves at that very instant, to steal out of the Camp, and to go to
Talavera; by his Presence, to interrupt Alamire, and Zayde's Interview, and
take away his Rivals Life, or dye before the Princesses Eyes. As he was musing
how to execute his Design, News was brought him, That some of the Enemies
Troops appeared not far off of the Camp, and that the King Commanded he should
go to discover them; he was forced to obey, and to defer the Execution of his
Purpose: He got a Horseback; and after he had Rid a little way, word was
brought him, as he came out of a Wood, that they were only some few Arabians,
that came from Conducting a Convoy. He commanded the Cavalry that were with
him, to return to the Camp; and followed by a few of his Servants, he Rid on
slowly, on purpose to stay in the Wood until his Cavalry were at some distance,
that he might directly go undiscovered to Talavera. Being in the middle of a
great Walk, he met with an Arabian Cavalier, of an excellent Presence and
Meine, that came sadly along that way: Those that were with Gonsalvo, by
accident, pronounced his Name; at the sound of which, this Cavalier, that
seemed plunged in some serious and deep study, came to himself; and asked them,
if he that Rid before alone, were Gonsalvo? As soon as they answered, It was: I
shall be glad (said he, loud enough to be heard by Gonsalvo) to see a Man of so
extraordinary a Merit, and to thank him for the Favors I have received from
him: With this he advances toward Gonsalvo, lifting up the Beavoir of his
Helmet to Salute him: But so soon as he had viewed his Face, he cried out, O
Gods! Is it possible, this should be Gonsalvo? And looking steadfastly upon him,
he remained without Motion, like a Man that had been Planetstruck, and divided
within himself, with very different Imaginations: After remaining thus for some
time; Alamire (cried he of a sudden) must not let him live for whom Zayde is
designed, or for whom she reserves her self. Gonsalvo, who appeared astonished
at this Strangers first Words and Action; and who, nevertheless, expected the
Event with a great Calmness, was likewise struck with an Extraordinary
Amazement, when he heard the Names of Zayde, and Alamire; and saw before him
this formidable Rival, whom he was going to find out with so much Hatred, and
desire of Revenge. I know not (replied he) whether Zayde be designed for me;
but if you be the Prince of Tharsus, as you make me believe you are, you must
not hope to possess her but by my Death: Nor you, but by mine, answered
Alamire; and your words too clearly inform me, that you are the Person, that
causes my Misfortune. Gonsalvo heard but confusedly these last Words: He went
back some Paces, and withheld his impatience to Fight, only to hinder that
their Combat might not be interrupted: He commanded those that followed, to go
further off; but with such an Authority, that they durst not disobey: But they
with all speed, Rid after the Party that left Gonsalvo, to call back some of
the principal Officers of the Army, who could not yet be far gone from them. In
the mean time, Gonsalvo and Almire began a Combat; where Courage and Resolution
made appear all that could be Heroic and Wonderful: Alamire was wounded in so
many Places, that his Strength begun to fail him; and though Gonsalvo was so
too, the Prospect of an approaching Victory, supplied the Defects of his
Ability with new Vigor which made him Master of this Princes Life. The King,
who by chance was not far from this Wood, drawn thither by the Noise and
Outcries of those that Gonsalvo Commanded away, arrived in this place, and
separated the Combatants: He understood by Alamire's Squire, who came in at
that instant, his Master's Name; and Gonsalvo seeing Alamire bleed in great
abundance, gave order to help him.

If the King had followed the first Impulse of his angry Thoughts, he had given
contrary Orders; but he contented himself with the Command, that the Prince of
Tharsus should be forthcoming, and turned all his care toward the
Preservation of his Favorite. He caused him to be carried to the Camp; Alamire
was not in a Condition to be carried so far, but was brought to a Castle that
was not far off. As soon as Gonsalvo was arrived, the King desired to know what
the Physicians thought of his Wounds: They assured him, there was no danger of
his Life. Don Garcias would not leave him, until he had known from his own
Mouth, the occasion of this Fight. Gonsolvo, who had nothing in reserve from
the King, told him the whole Truth: The King being apprehensive, that too long
a Discourse would be hurtful to Gonsalvo's Health, would have left him to take
his Rest: But Gonsalvo, holding him, said; Leave me not, Sir, to the disorder
and confusion of my Thoughts; Help me to dis-intangle my self from the new
Trouble, which the Actions, and the Words of Alamire has put me into: He met me
without seeming to look for me; He accosts me like one that would Complement
and Thank me; and of a sudden, I see him surpised, troubled, and ready to
draw upon me: What could he learn in seeing me? Who made him alter his
Intentions? Who made him fancy, that Zadye was destined for me, either by
Zulema, or by her self? He could not know from any but her self, that I was his
Rival: And if she has given him an account of my Love, it was not to make him
fear my Pretensions: He also knows very well, that she is not destined for me
by Zulema, who knows me not, who is ignorant of my Passion for his Daughter,
and whose Religion is opposite to mine. Wherefore, upon what are his Words
grounded? and, by what reason should my Countenance provoke his Anger, rather
than my Name? It is hard, my dear Gonsalvo (answered the King) to dive into
this Mysterious Adventure: I think seriously of it, but cannot find any
satisfactory Reason: Is it not perhaps (said he, of a sudden) for having seen
you in Alphonso's Solitude, when you went by the Name of Theodoric, and so,
knew you again by your Countenance, to be his Rival? Ah Sir (replied Gonsalvo!)
that Thought came into my Imagination too; I found it so funestous to me, that
I cannot fancy it to be that: Can it possible be, that Alamire could be hidden
in that Defart? Or, Can it possible happen, That the Joy which appeared
sometimes to me to be in Zaydes Eyes, and which caused all my Happiness, was
only the Remains of what the sight of Alamire had produced in them? But Sir,
continued he, I scarce ever was from her; I should have seen this Prince, if he
had ever come to Alphonso's: More-over, this Princess knows who I am; he comes
now from her; there is no doubt, but that she has told him; and so, must needs
have known Gonsalvo to be the Lover of Zayde, when he met me. I cannot
comprehend what should cause so sudden a Change; and I find nothing but
Impossibilities in all that I can imagine. Are you sure (said the King) that
Alamire has seen Zayde? He passed through our Camp Yester-day very late; You met
him this Morning; It seems to me hard to believe, that he was at Talavera, and
came back in so short a time: But, it is no hard matter to know the Truth of
this; for, two of my Officers have assured me, that they lay last Night where
this Prince did; and we shall know from them, where they met him. The King
commanded these Officers to be sent for presently; and when they were come, he
asked them, in what Place, and what Time they met with Alamire.

One of these Officers made Answer; Sir, We were coming Yester-day from
Ariobisbe whither we were sent; we made a Halt in the Evening in a great Wood,
that is three or four Leagues from the Camp; we lighted, and lay down to sleep
in this Wood: I overheard a Noise that waked me; I saw at a distance (through
the Trees) this Arabian Prince speaking to a Lady that was Magnificiently
Dressed: This Lady, after a long Conference, left him, and came to sit down by
another Lady, not far from the Place where I lay: They spoke loud enough; but I
could not understand what they said, because they spoke a Language that I knew
not, and which is not the same that the Arabians use: They named Alamire diverse
times; and, tho their Backs were turned so to me, that I could not see their
Faces; yet my thought, that she who spoke to Alamire, wept bitterly. After
this, they went away: I heard Wagons, and a great Noise of Horses going
toward Talavera: I awaked my Comrade, and pursued our Way: We saw Alamire at a
distance, lying under a Tree, as if he had been indisposed; his Squire asked
me, whether they could reach the Camp of the Arabians by Daylight? I told
them, they could not; so they came, and lodged in the same Village where we lay.

The King repented him to have examined these Officers: As soon as they were
gone, Gonsalvo said; You see, Sir, whether I was in the wrong to believe, that
Alamire had seen Zayde. But, can you imagine, that it was possible (said the
King) for her to come out of the Town, being she is a Prisoner? My ill Fate
(Replied Gonsalvo) never lets me fail of any thing that can prejudice me: I
gave order at my coming away, That Zayde might have the Liberty of going out of
the Town to take the Air, as often as she would: She expected Alamire in these
Woods: He had reason to send me word, That an Affair of Importance, that
concerned not the War, hindered him to make any stay in this Camp. He has seen
her then Yester-day; She wept when he was gone: It is true then, that Zayde is
in Love with Alamire; and now I am no longer in doubt. Leave me Sir! Cast off
your Care of a Man, that is too much persecuted by ill Fortune, to deserve your
Esteem: I am ashamed to be prized and beloved by you, being so Wretched.

Don Garcias was sensibly touched at the Condition Gonsalvo was in, and
endeavored to comfort him by the Assurances he gave him of his Affection and
Friendship.

The next Day, word was brought, that the Prince of Tharsus, his Wounds were
very dangerous; his Fever was so violent the ensuing Days, that there was
little hopes of his Recovery. Gonsalvo imagined, that as soon as Zayde should
come to know the danger this Prince was in, she would send to know how he did:
He gave order to one of his Servants, in whom he confided, to go every day to
the Castle where Alamire was kept, to discover whether any came to try if they
could see him: He would fain have known, like-wise, Whether there were any of
that Resemblance betwixt them, which caused in him so much Curiosity: But the
Extremity, to which this Prince was reduced, hindered all Discoveries of that
Nature; few or none of the Features of his Face being now distinguishable.

He that was commanded to go to the Castle, acquitted himself of his Commission
with Industry: For, he told Gonsalvo, That since Alamire had been there, none
had desired to see him; but that certain People, whom he knew not, came every
day to know the state of his Health, without telling who sent them. Although
Gonsalvo doubted no longer of Zaydes Love to Alamire; yet every little
Circumstance that assured him of it, gave him new trouble and disquiet: the
King came into his Tent, as he was agitated with the fresh Affliction he had
received; and apprehending that so many Displeasures would hazard his Life, he
forbid all those that came about him, to speak to him of Alamire, or the
Princess Zayde.

In the mean while, the Truce was ended, and the two Armies fell to Action:
Abderame Besieged a little Place, where he expected no great Resistance, by
reason of the Inconsiderableness and Weakness of the Place: But it happened,
that the Prince of Gallicia, nearly related to Don Garcias, who by chance was
carried to this Place, the more commodiously to be cured of some Wounds he had
received in the last Battle, undertook the Defense of it, with more Rashness
than Courage: At which, Abderame was so enraged, that, as soon as the Town was
surrendered, he caused his Head to be struck off. It was not the first time
that the Moors abused their Victories, and treated the bravest of the Nobility
of Spain, with a barbarous and unparalled Inhumanity. Don Garcias was
extremely incensed at the News of the Death of the Prince of Gallicia: The
Spanish Army was no less; they loved the Prince; and, already weary of so many
Cruelties, for which no public Satisfaction was made or required; they came in
Troops, to Petition the King, that Alamire might be used as the Moors had done
the Prince of Gallicia. The King consented to their Desires; because it was
dangerous to refuse to please an Army so much incensed: He sent word to the
King of Cordoua, That he would cause the Prince of Tharsus his Head to be cut
off, so soon as he should be in a better condition of Health; and that his
Wounds would permit him to be made a Public Example off, without leaving Cause
to report, that he had only hastened his End.

Gonsalvo, by the King's Order, was ignorant of what had been transacted,
touching Alamire. Some Days after, they brought him word, that a Gentleman
belonging to Don Olmond, desired to see him: He ordered him to be admitted.
This Gentleman, after having told him, That his Master was extremely troubled,
that the King's Order did detain him at B^ragel, and hindered him from coming
in Person, to ask him how he did, gave him several Pacquets. Gonsalvo opened
that which was addressed to him, and read in it these Words.

The LETTER of DON OLMOND TO DON GONSALVO.
IF I were not well assured of the Inclination you have to do great Actions, I
would not send you the Enclosed; and should believe it to no purpose, to
entreat you in the behalf of your Enemy: But I am too well acquainted with your
generous Soul, to doubt of your kind Entertaining the Request I am desired to
make to you. However just it may appear to treat the Prince of Tharsus, as the
Prince of Gallicia has been used; it will become you to preserve a Man of the
Merit and Quality of Alamire: I think, more-over, you ought to allow some Pity
to a Passion that is not altogether unknown to you.


The Name of Alamire, and the last Words of this Letter, caused a very great
Dis-order in Gonsalvo: He asked the Gentleman, What his Master meant, by what
he writ concerning the Prince of Gallicia? Although this Gentleman ought not to
think, that Gonsalvo was ignorant of what had been done; nevertheless, he
informed him in few words, of the whole Matter. Gonsalvo Read the Letter which
Don Olmond had enclosed, which contained these Words:

The LETTER of FELIME to Don Olmond.
YOU have a great Power with Gonsalvo; order it so, that he preserve the Life
of Alamire from the King of Leon's Fury: In securing him from the Death which
is intended him, he will not save his Life; his Wounds will soon bereave him of
that: And Gonsalvo is already sufficiently Revenged of this wretched Prince,
since we are obliged to have Recourse to him for his Preservation. I conjure
you, to use all your Interest in this Matter: You will save more than one Life,
in saving Alamires.


Ah Zayde, cried Gonsalvo! Felime does but write by your Order: And you command
me by this Letter, to preserve your Alamire: How Inhumane is your Cruelty? To
what Extremes do you reduce me? Are not my Misfortunes great enough? Must I be
obliged more-over, to labor for his Preservation, that creates them? Must I
oppose the King's Pleasure? His Resolution is just: He has been driven to it
against his Inclination: I had no share in it: I ought to let Alamire perish,
though I were ignorant of his being my Rival, and being beloved of Zayde; But I
know it: And this Reason, as Cruel as it is, will not let me consent to his
Ruin. What kind of Law is this that I impose upon my self? What manner of
Generosity is it, that obliges me to save Alamire? Is it because I know he robs
me of Zayde, that I must save his Life? Ought I to pretend, that the King in
granting me this Request, should expose himself to the hazard of making his
Army Revolt? Shall I forsake the Interests of Don Garcias, to tear from my own
Heart, those sweet Hopes with which the Death of Alamire flatters me? This only
Man stands betwixt me and Zayde; and, how-ever she may be prepossessed in his
Favor; if she were never more to see him, I might promise my self to be Happy.

After these Words, he remained a great while, as it were, buried in a profound
Silence: At last, he starts up of a sudden; and, though he was extreme weak,
he caused himself to be carried to the King's Tent: This Prince was strangely
surprised when he saw him, and more when he understood what he came to ask.

Sir, said Gonsalvo, if you have any kindness for me, be pleased to grant me
Alamire's Life: I cannot live if you make him dye. What is this you say
Gonsalvo, replied the King? By what Accident does the Life of the Man that
makes you miserable, become so necessary to your Quiet? Zadye Sir, commands me
(said he) to preserve it; I must endeavor to answer the good Opinion she has
conceived of me: She knows I Adore her, and ought to hate this Prince; and yet
she has so much Confidence in me, that she believes me so far from consenting
to his Death, that I will endeavor to save him from the Death that is intended
him. She is willing to owe me the Life of her Lover; I beg it of you, by all
your Goodness. I must not hear (said the King) such Desires, which a blind kind
of Generosity inspires, and a Passion that leaves you not the use of your
Reason: I must Act pursuant to my own Interest and yours. The Prince of Tharsus
must dye, to teach the King of Cordoua, to make better use of the Law of Arms;
and to appease my Troops, which are ready to Mutiny: He must dye likewise, to
leave you sole Possessor of Zayde, and to hinder him from disturbing your Quiet
hereafter. Ah Sir! shall I find any Quiet (replied Gonsalvo) in seeing Zayde
displeased with me? and in despair for the Death of her Lover? I must think no
more of disputing Zayde with Alamire, whether he lives or dies; I must not
render my self worthy of the ill usage of Fortune, by an unreasonable
Obstinacy: I will make Zayde pity me, since she could not love me; nor will I
leave it in her Power, either to despise or hate me. Take time (said the King)
to examine what it is you ask me; and consider with your self, whether you
ought to desire it. No Sir (replied Gonsalvo) I will not have the leisure to
change my Opinion; nor to be exposed to oppose a second time, those vain and
flattering Hopes, which the thought of alamire's Death has already given me;
nor would I give Zayde room to believe, that I was any way irresolute in the
Choice I make: And I beg of you the Favor, to declare even now, That you have
granted me this Princes Life. I do promise you (replied the King) to leave him
to your Disposal; But you must conceal it yet a while from the Knowledge of the
World. You know our Design upon Oropese; the Inhabitants are this Night to
open us the Gates; If the Enterprise succeeds, the Joy of the happy Success,
may perhaps dispose the Army to milder Thoughts: Felime will be in our Power;
know of her, whether Alamire be beloved of Zayde: Dive into the Secrets of your
Destiny, before you decide the Fate of this Prince; and put your self into a
Condition of taking such Resolutions, whereof you may not Repent hereafter. But
Sir, perhaps Felime may not be willing to discover the Sentiments of Zayde to
me. To oblige her to it (interrupted the King) send word to Don Olmond, that
you will not undertake what she desires, unless you know the true Reasons why
she is so much concerned for the Preservation of Alamire. It is Don Olmond,
that is ordered to enter Oropese; and you will know by him, all that concerns
you to learn. I submit, Sir, (answered Gonsalvo) upon Condition, that you will
permit me to oblige the Army, to come of themselves to you, to beg Alamire's
Life, at the same time, that the News of the taking Oropese is Published: And
as Felime shall be our Prisoner, Don Olmond may conceal from her the Grace you
intend, until she has discovered all that concerns this Prince. Zayde shall
know, that I have obeyed her Commands, at that very instant, that I received
them; and she shall judge by this blind Obedience, that if I renounce the
Pretensions I had to her Affections, I was not unworthy to possess them.

The King granted all that Don Gonsalvo desired; but, at the same time,
commanded him to write to Don Olmond about what they had resolved: The King
spent part of the Night with his Favorite, who began to sink under the
Violence he had used against himself, in sacrificing to an exact Generosity
(from which he expected no Advantage) all the Hopes of a Passion, which
possessed his whole Heart.

The next Day, Don Garcias received Letters of the Prosperous Success of their
Enterprise upon Oropese; he sent the News of it to Gonsalvo; and, at the same
time, sent him word, that he gave him Liberty to use his Endeavors for the
saving of Alamire's Life. Gonsalvo caused himself to be carried into the Camp,
with the same Alacrity and Earnestness of Mind, as if the Success of his
Undertaking were to assure the Conquest of Zayde: And with the same
Countenance, and the same Voice, which he so often had made use of, to inspire
Courage into his Soldiers, to follow him to Victory, showed them what a shame
they went about to cause him, in desiring to take away a Princes Life, who had
not been in their Power, but for his engaging with him: He told them, That by
this Death (of which he should ever be thought the Author) they made him lose
all the Honor he had won with them in so many Battles: That he was at that
instant, going to the King, to lay down his Commission, and the Command he had
of the Army, in order to his Departure out of Spain: That he left it to their
Choice, either to be Witnesses of his taking his leave of the King; or else, to
go at that instant, and beg Alamire's Life. Scarce did the Soldiers give him
leave to make an end of his Speech; but thronging about him (as it were), to
hinder him from going away, followed him to Don Garcias his Tent; so animated
by the General's Words, that it seemed now as dangerous to refuse them
Alamire's Life, as some Days past not to grant them his Death.

In the mean time, Don Olmond, amidst so many Troubles he had in the settling a
Town newly taken, bethought him of Consalvo, whose Interest required he should
entertain Felime: He sent to desire leave to speak to her, with the same
Respect, as if the Law of Arms had not given him a free and full Disposal of
her: He found her in a deep Melancholy, for, what happened that Day, as well
as a great Fit of Sickness, which her Mother had for some time, seemed the
Causes thereof.

So soon as they could talk without being heard; Well (said she) Don Olmond,
Have you prevailed with Don Gonsalvo, to save Alamire's Life? Madam (answered
he,) that Princes Destiny is in your Hands. In my Hands, cried she? Alas, by
what Accident can it be in my Power to do any thing, that may preserve him?
I Will secure you his Life, replied he: But to make me able to keep my Word; you
must inform me of the Reasons that move you so eagerly to work his safety: You
must tell it to me truly, with all the Circumstances, and every thing you know
concerning this Prince. Ah, Don Olmond (replied she!) what is this you ask me?
At this, she remained silent for a while; then, of a sudden, said; Do not you
know, that he is Osmin and Zulema's near Kins-man? That we have been acquainted
with him a great while? That he is a Person of extraordinary Merit? Is not this
enough to make me concerned for his Life? But, Madam, (replied Don Olmond,) the
concern you have for his Safety, has other more pressing Reasons: If you think
it too much trouble to let me know it, you are free to let it alone; but you
must be content to free me from the Engagement I gave you. How Don Olmond (said
she?) Must this be the Ransom of Alamire's Life? What will it avail you, to
know what you ask? I am sorry, I cannot tell you (answered Don Olmond): But
Madam, once more, I cannot do any thing for him, but upon these Terms: All is
left to your Choice. Felime remained a good while, with her Eyes fixed upon the
Ground, in so profound a silence, that Don Olmond wondered at it: At last,
taking Courage; I am going (said she, to him) to do that thing, which of all
things in the World, I thought I should never have the Power over my self to
do: The good Opinion I have of you, and the Friendship I have for you, help
much to confirm me, as well as the Desire I have to save Alamire's Life. You
must keep my Counsel inviolably; and give ear, with Patience, to the Relation I
am going to make you; which cannot but be tedious to you.

The HISTORY of ZAIDE and FELIME
Cid Rahis was Brother to Caliphe Osman, and might have disputed (by
Birthright) the Empire with him, had he not been so unfortunate, as to be
abandoned by all those that gave him Hopes of their Assistance; and thereby,
was compelled to renounce his pretension, and consent to be banished into the
Isle of Cyprus, under color of being made Commander in Chief there. Zulema,
and Osman, whom you know were his Children; They were Young and Handsome, and
had given many Signal Testimonies of their Valor: They both fell in Love with
two Women of extraordinary Beauty, and great Quality; who were Sisters, and
were deseended of a long succession of Princes; Who formerly bare the chief
sway in this Island, before it fell under the Command of the Arabians: The one
was called Alasinthe, the other Belenia. Osman and Zulema, being well skild in
the Greek Tongue, found no difficulty to make themselves to be understood, by
these two Ladies, who were Christians; But the difference of their Religion,
made none in their inclinations; They mutually loved passionately: And so soon
as the Cid Rahis, his death, left them their liberty; Zulema married Alasinthe,
and Osmin married Belenia: They consented, that their Children should be
brought up in the Christian Religion; and made them believe, they would be so
themselves within a short time. I was born of Osmin and Belenia, and Zayde of
Zulema and Alasinthe: The Passion of Osimin and Zulema made them continue some
years in Cyprus: But, at last, the desire they had to find out a favorable
Conjuncture of renewing the pretensions of their Father, called them back into
Afric: At first, they conceived great hopes; For, contrary to the Rules of
true Policy, the Caliphe that succeeded Osman, gave them such considerable
Employments, that Alasinthe and Beleny could not complain of their being far
from them: But after five of six years absence, they began to murmur, and be
much afflicted: They found that they were not all this while in the Wars, but
had other Occupations: They heard from them sometimes; but they not coming,
made them believe themselves forsaken: Alasinthe therefore thought no more of
any thing, but of Zayde, who even at that age deserved all her Application: And
Bellenia made me the sole object of all her care.

When we were passed our Infancy, Alasinthe and Belenia retired into a Castle
upon the Seaside; where they led a Life conformable to their Sadness: The
regard, they had for Zayde and me, made them live with a Grandeur and
Magnificence, which perhaps by their own inclinations, they would have been
glad to leave. We had diverse young people of Quality about us; and there was
nothing wanting, that might contribute to our Education, and the Divertisement,
that were suitable to the place where we were brought up. Zayde, and I, had as
great ties of Love and Friendship for each other, as we had of Blood and
Affinity. I was two years older than she: There was also some difference in our
Humors; Mine was less inclinable to Mirth; it was easy to perceive it in our
Conversation: Zayde had also a great advantage of Beauty over me.

Some time before the Emperor Leo sent to invade Cyprus, we were walking by the
Seaside; The Sea was very Calm, there was not a breath of Wind stirring; We
prayed Alasinthe, and Belenia, to be pleased to let us go to Sea in Boats, to
divert us. We took diverse Young People with us; we made our Barge-men Row
toward some great Ships, that were at Anchor in the Road: As we came near
these Vessels, we saw several long Boats put off, whom we judged to be full of
Arabians, that were going ashore: These Boats Steared toward us; In the first
of which, were several persons richly attired; one of which, by his Noble Air,
and the Beauty and Comeliness of his Person, appeared to be somewhat more then
any of those that were about him; This Rencounter Surprised us, and made us
judge it not fit for us to venture further to Sea; and that we ought not to
give, those that were in the other Boats, occasion to believe that our
Curiosity to see them, had led us that way: We made our Barge fall off to the
Leeward; the Boat we endeavored to avoid, Tacked after us; but the rest made
toward the Shore; The other followed us so near, that we could perceive the
man we remarked above the rest, looking steadfastly upon us; who seemed to take
pleasure in following us. Zayde was extremely taken with the Adventure, and
caused our Boat to Tack, to see if the other would follow us still, For my
part, I was strangely concerned, without knowing why: I looked earnestly upon
him, that seemed the Chief amongst them; and considering him at so near a
distance, I found something in his face so fair, and so agreeable, that I
thought I had never seen any thing more pleasing in all my life. I told Zayde,
we must put to shore; and that, without doubt, when Alasinthe and Belenia had
given us leave to come off, they did not think we should have met with such an
Adventure. She was of my opinion; we rowed toward the shore! The Boat followed
us, got a head of us, and put to shore near the other Boats, that were already
landed.

So soon as we touched, we saw him that we had remarked, followed by a great
many other, advancing toward us; and offered us his hand, with an Air, that
showed he had already learnt who we were. Zaydes and my astonishment was
great; we were not used to be accosted with so much boldness; and above all,
by Arabians, for whom we were taught an extreme aversion: We believed, that
he would be surprised, when he should find, that we did not understand his
Language; but we were more our selves, when we found that he Spoke ours
with the same exactness, and Eloquence, which the ancient Greeks used in
former times.

I know Madam (said he, to Zayde, who went before) that an Arabian should not
be so bold as to approach your Presence, without first asking your leave: But
I believe, that what would be thought a crime in another, is pardonable in a
man that has the honor, to be allied to the Princes Zulema, and Osmin. Being
Curious to see what was most remarkable in Greece, I thought, I could not
satisfy that Curiosity better, than in beginning with the Isle of Cyprus: And
my good fortune made me find at my first Arrival in it, that which I should
have fought in vain, in all the other parts of the World.

In saying these words, he fixed his eyes sometimes upon Zayde, and sometimes
upon me, with such demonstrations of a true Admiration, that we could hardly
doubt, but that he really thought, what he said to us. I know not whether I
was already prepossessed, or whether it was the solitude of the place where
we lived, that made me think this Adventure very agreeable: But I must
confess, that I never saw any thing so surprising. Alasinthe and Belenia, who
were at some distance from us advanced toward us; and sent before, to know
the Name of this nevv-come Stranger: They were informed, that it was Alamire
Prince, of Tharsus, Son to that Alamire, who assumed the Title of Calyphe, and
whose power was so terrible to the Christians: They knevv the affinity that
was betwixt this Prince and Zulema; So that, the respect which was due to
his Birth, together with the desire of hearing from them, made them receive him
with a less Aversion, than they used to have for the Arabians. Alamire by his
words, increased the disposition they had to receive him more favorably: He
spoke to them of Zulema, and Osmin, whom he had seen a little before his
Departure; and blamed them for being Capable of abandoning two Persons so
worthy of their Love. Their Conversation was so long upon the Seaside, and
Alamire appeared so agreeable, even in the eyes of Alasinthe, and Belenia, that
contrary to the Resolution they had taken of avoiding the company of all
strangers, they could not avoid offering him Lodgings in their Habitation.
Alamire told them, that although, he knew that Civility ought to forbid him,
accepting the offer they made him; yet that he could not reject it, because he
would not deprive himself of the pleasure he took, in being Conversant with
persons that had given him so much Admiration: Wherefore he walked along with
us, and presented to us a person, for whom he showed much esteem, whose name
was Mulziman. All that evening, Alamire continued to confirm us in the esteem,
we at first conceived of him. I was every Moment so astonished at the
pleasantness of his wit, and gracefulness of his person; And this astonishment
was so powerful upon me, that I might well even then Judge, there was
something more in it, then a bare Surprise; Me thought he viewed me with a
great deal of attention, and gave me Commendations that made me think, that my
person was at least as pleasing to him as Zaydes.

The next day, instead of going away, as in all likelihood he should have done,
he engaged Alasinthe, and Belenia, to pray him to stay. He sent for very fine
Horses, which he had brought with him, and caused them to be rid by several of
his People; and rid them himself with that grace, and dexterity, which is
particular to those of his Nation; He found pretenses to stay three or four
days with us; and wrought so upon Alasinthe, and Belenia, that they consented
to admit his visits, during his abode in Cyprus. At his going from us, he told
me, that if his presence had been troublesome to me, or should be for the
future, I must blame my self alone for it; Nevertheless I had taken notice,
that his looks were often upon Zayde; And I observed likewise that his eyes,
were as often fixed upon me, after a manner which appeared so natural to me,
that joining the Language of his Eyes, with many things which he had said to
me, I remained convinced, that I had made some impressions upon his heart. O
Gods! How deep were those he made upon mine: As soon as he was out of my sight,
I felt a sadness that was utterly unknown to me; I quitted Zaydes company; I
went dreaming about; my thoughts were confused; I was weary of my self: I came
again to find Zayde, and my thoughts it was only, that I might speak to her of
Alamire; I found her busy with her Maids, making Garlands of Flowers: And she
seemed to me as unconcerned, as if she never had seen this Prince; I felt a
kind of a Mazement at her being so busy with her Flowers, and found my self so
little disposed to amuse my self with them, that I snatched them from her
whether she would or no. We went to walk; I talked to her of Alamire; I told
her, that I saw him look very much upon her; she made answer, that she did not
observe it; I endeavored to find out whether she had taken notice of the
inclination which he professed for me; but I found, she had not so much as a
thought of it; And I remained so astonished, and so confounded to see the
different Effects, which the sight of Alamire had upon Zayde, from those it had
wrought upon me, that I blamed my self, and used such reproaches against my
self, as were already but too just.

Some days after, he came to see us; at a time, when Alasinthe and Beleny were
gone abroad, and were not to return until night; Alamire appeared to me more
Lovely than ever; and as Zayde was not present, it was my Misfortune to see
him, when there was nothing that could divert his attention from looking upon
me; and made me so many protestations of his love, that the inclination I had
for him, persuaded me that I was as acceptable and pleasing to him, as he was
to me; He took his leave of me before the hour that Zayde was to return, after
such a manner, that I flattered my self with the opinion, that he had no
thoughts of seeing her; she returned a great while after, and I was surprised
when Alasinthe told me that they met him very near the Castle, and that he came
back to conduct them to the Castle Gate; I fancied by the space of time, since
he left me, he should have been farther off than they said; and that if he had
not waited for them, he could not have met them, This thought gave me some
disquiet; Nevertheless I did attribute their meeting, to Chance rather than any
thing else, yet I was in greater impatience to see Alamire again, then ever I
had felt before: He came some days after to bring Alasinthe the news of the
War the Emperor Leo Designed to make against Cyprus. And this news that was of
such Consequence, served him as a pretense to come more often to see us; And as
often as he came, he still made the same protestations of love to me, as
formerly; I had need of all my reason to conceal from him the Disposition of
mind in which I was toward him; and perhaps all my reason would have been too
weak, if the Concern I saw he had sometimes for Zayde did not help to retain
me, for all that I attributed what I saw him do to please her, only to his
innate Civility and he had address enough, to hide from me what might give me
other thoughts.

We had intelligence that the Emperors Fleet was in sight of our Coasts;
Alamire persuaded Alasinthe, and Beleny to leave the place we were in; Although
our Religion gave us no Apprehension of the Emperors forces; yet the Alliance
we had with the Arabians, and the apprehensions we had of the disorders, which
attends upon War, obliged us to follow Alamire's Counsels, and remove to
Famagosta; I was very glad of it, both because I thought I should be in the
same place with Alamire, and that Zayde and I should be no longer Lodged
together: Her Beauty was so dreadful to me, that I was glad to be where
Alamire might see me, without seeing her. I believed, I should be fully
satisfied of his intentions toward me, and should see whether I ought to
abandon my self to the inclination I had for him; but my heart was no longer in
my power: I am persuaded nevertheless, that if I had been then as well
informed of Alamires humors as I have been since, I might have defended my
self against the inclination which drew me to Love him: But as I knew only the
agreeable, and charming qualifications of his Wit and Person, together with the
Passion he pretended for me, it was hard for me to resist an inclination, which
was so violent and so natural.

The day we arrived at Famagosta, he came to meet us; Zayde was that day so
Charmingly Beautiful, that she appeared in the eyes of Alamire, what he
appeared in mine; That is to say, the only person, that can please; I perceived
the extraordinary care he took to view her attentively. When we were arrived,
Alasinthe and Beleny separated; Alamire followed Zayde, without so much as
pretending an excuse to leave me; I remained struck with the sharpest grief I
ever felt; I knew by the violence thereof, the true Passion I had for this
Prince, and this knowledge increased my sadness: I now saw the Horrible
Misfortune, I was fallen into by my own fault; but after having afflicted my
self for a long time, I saw some beams of hope still: I Flattered my self, as
all those that are in Love do; and I fancied that some Reasons, unknown to me,
might occasion what displeased me; I was not long fed with this weak hope:
Alamire for a while would have us believe, that he loved us both; that he might
determine afterward, according to the usage he received, to whom he should
stick: But the Beauty of Zayde, without the succor of hope, carried it; Nay,
he had forgotten, that he had ever endeavored to persuade me to believe that
he had a kindness for me: He seldom or never came to see me after; or if he
did, it was to follow Zayde; he loved her with an extraordinary passion. In
sine, I saw him in that condition for her, as I should have been for him if
decency would have pormitted me to show my sentiments for him.

I know not, whether it be necessary, for me to tell you what I suffered, and
the various impulses that perplexed my heart; I could not endure to see him
with Zayde, and to see him so Amorous of her; and of the otherside, I could not
live without him; I had rather see him with Zayde, than not to see him at all;
in the mean while, what he did to gain her esteem instead of lessening my
Passion, raised it to the highest pitch: All his words, and all his Actions
were so adapted to my fancy, that if I could inspire a conduct into those that
should desire to please me, it should be that which Alamire used toward Zayde.
It is true, that it is so dangerous a matter to see Love made, that it inflames
even those to whom it makes no tenders nor addresses; Zayde gave me an account
of his thoughts for her, and her aversion for him; when she spoke to me after
that manner of him, I was sometimes ready to discover to her the disposition I
was in, to engage her by this confession not to suffer the continuation of this
Princes love, but I was fearful of making him appear more lovely to her, by
showing how much he was beloved; yet I set my self a Rule not to render any ill
offices to Alamire; I was so sensible of the Horrible Misfortune of not being
loved again, that I resolved not to contribute to his feeling of it, whom I so
passionately loved; and perhaps, it was the little propensity I saw in Zayde
toward him, that made me steadfast to that resolution.

The Emperors Troops were so considerable, that there was no doubt made but
that Cyprus would quickly fall into his hands: upon the noise of this invasion
Zulema, and Osimin awakened out of their profound Oblivion, in which they had
so long continued; the Caliphe began to be afraid of them, and seemed to be
resolved to send them further off, they prevented him by desiring him to give
them the command of those forces, which he intended for the relief of Cyprus;
and we saw them arrived, when we least expected them: this was a sensible joy
for Alasinthe and Beleny, and it would have been so for me, if I had been
capable of it; but I was oppressed with sorrow, and the Arrival of Zulema gave
me new apprehensions, fearing he should favor Almires designs. My fears were
not without cause, Zulema, who by his long abode in Africa, grew more stubborn
and steadfast to his Religion than ever; wished, that Zayde would leave hers: He
came from Tunis, with design to carry her thither, and to marry her to the
Prince of Fez, of the house of Idris: But the Prince of Tharsus, appeared so
deserving of his Daughter, that he approved of his passion for her: I saw then
a necessity of endeavoring to hinder, that Zayde should not love Alamire; it
being the only thing I apprehended most in the world, to see him happy by her
means.

This Princes passion was grown so violent, that all that knew him were amazed
at it. Mulziman, of whom I spoke to you, whom I entertained sometimes because
Alamire had a kindness for him, seemed to me so astonished at it, that I
concluded that this Prince never until then; had been susceptible of a Passion
so strange and lasting. Alamire made Zulema understand the intentions he had
for his Daughter; and Zulema acquainted Zayde, with the desire he had she
should Marry Alamire: As soon as she was told of the thing she most
apprehended, she came to tell me of it, with such marks of disquiet, that, I
confess, I was puzzled to comprehend the reason of her Affliction for being
designed to spend her Days with Alamire. This unfaithful Man had so thoroughly
forgotten those Protestations he had made me, that being informed by Zulema, of
the Aversion which Zayde had for him, he came to make his moan to me, and to
implore my Assistance. All my Reason, and my Resolution, were scarce strong
enough to contain me; I felt such a conflict and agitation of Mind, that he
might easily have perceived it, if he had not been prepossessed with the same
Passion that disordered me. At last, after a silence, which but two plainly
spoke my mind; I told him, I wondered much at Zaydes Resistance against
Zulema's Will; but I am the most unfit Person in the World to make her change
her Opinion. I should speak against my own Judgment; and besides, the
misfortune of being tied to one of your Nation, is so well known to me, that I
cannot persuade Zayde to expose her self to it. Belenia, has too well informed
me ever since I was capable of knowing any thing; and I believe Alasinthe has
so thoroughly instructed her Daughter, that it will not be easy to make her
Consent to what you desire; and for my part, I assure you once more, that I am
the unfittest Person in the World to undertake it.

Alamire was out of his Wits, to find me so indisposs'd to favor him; yet he
was in hopes to win upon me, by letting me see his Affliction, and the violence
of his Passion for Zayde. I was in despair, to hear what he said upon this
occasion; and yet I could not but pity him, through the Conformity that was
betwixt our Misfortunes: All my Thoughts were distracted: The Aversion which
Zayde showed for him, gave me some Joy, by the Sweetness of Revenge, which I
tasted plentifully: And yet my Glory was offended, to see one that I so much
Adored, thus despised.

I resolved to tell Zayde the State of my Heart; but before I would do it, I
pressed her to consider well with her self, Whether she should always be able
to resist the Design Zulema had, of Marrying her to Alamire? She told me,
There was no Extremity, which she would not endure, rather than consent to
marry a Man so opposite in Religion to hers; and whose Laws permitted him, to
take as many Wives as he pleased: But, that she believed, that Zulema would not
compel her; or, if he should endeavor it, that Alasinthe would find means to
hinder him. What Zayde had told me, gave me all the Joy imaginable: And I began
to endeavor to tell her, what I had resolved to discover to her; but I found
more Difficulty and Reluctance, than I thought. In fine, I over-came all the
Oppositions of Pride and Bashfulness; and I told her, with many Tears, the
State I was in: She was strangely amazed at it; and she seemed as much
concerned at my ill Fate, as I could wish. But why (said she) did you conceal
your Thoughts with so much Care, from him that gave them Birth? I do not doubt,
but that if he had at first discovered them, he would have Loved you; and I
believe, That if he should yet be made sensible of your Inclination for him,
the Hope of being Beloved, together, with the ill Usage he receives from me,
would quickly make him forsake me: Will not you give me leave (added she,
Embracing me) to try to make him conceive, that he ought rather to address
himself to you, than to me? Ah Zayde (answered I!) Do not rob me of the only
thing that hinders me from dying with more Grief; I should not be able to
survive Alamire's Knowledge of the Concern I have for him; not only the
Interest of my Honor would make me inconsolable; but I should be likewise so,
by that of my Passion: I might flatter my self with the Hope of being Beloved,
if he should know my Inclination to Love him: Yet I know, Love does not always
beget Love: Therefore, I will not deprive my self of that Hope, as weak as it
is, since it is the only Comfort I have left me. I gave Zayde so many other
Reasons, that she was of my Opinion, that I ought not to discover my Passion to
Alamire: I found a great Ease, in having opened my Heart to her, and much
Satisfaction in making my moan to her.

The Wars in the mean-time, held on still; though at such a Rate, as was
plainly to be seen, that we should not be able to hold out long: All the
Country was lost, but Famagosta, Alamire exposed himself every Day, with a
Valor or a Temerity, that clearly showed the Despair he was in: Mulziman would
tell me of it, with an extraordinary Affliction; and he so often hinted to me,
the Amazement he was in, to behold Alamire so violently passionate of Zayde,
that I could not forbear asking him the Reason; and pressing him to tell me,
Whether Alamire had never been in Love before he saw Zayde? He made some
difficulty, to tell me the cause of his Astonishment: But, I conjured him so
efficaciously, that (at last) he told me the Adventures of that Prince. I will
not trouble you with the whole Story, because it would be too tedious; But
only, what may suffice to let you know Alamire's and my Misfortunes.

The HISTORY of Alamire, Prince of Tharsus.
I Have already acquainted you with Alamire's Birth. What I have told you of
his Person, and my thoughts of him, ought to persuade you, that he is as worthy
of Love as a man, can be: He had likewise, made it his whole Study, from his
Youth, to gain the love of all Women: And although the manner of living, of the
Arabian Women, be directly opposite to Gallantry, Alamires address, and the
pleasure he took in Surmounting difficulties, made all that easy to him, which
would have been thought impossible by others. As this Prince was unmarried, and
his Religion gave him the liberty to have several Wives: so there was not a
Young Lady in Tharsus, that did not flatter her self with the hopes of Marrying
him. Nor was he sorry to find, that this hope made him to be more fayourably
used; But his inclination lead him to no engagement that he could not break at
pleasure. He aimed at nothing but being Beloved; the pleasure of being in Love
was utterly unknown to him: he never had a sincere Passion; but he was so well
Versed in appearing in Love, without being so; that he persuaded all those, he
had thought worthy, of his Love. It is true also, that during the time, he made
it his business to please; the desire of making himself to be Beloved, gave him
a kind of Ardour, which might be taken for a real Passion: but as soon as 0202
he saw himself beloyed, having nothing more in his desires, and not being
enough in Love, to find any Pleasure in Love alone, separated from
Difficulties, and Intregues, he thought of nothing more but how to break with
those that loved him, and to find out others whom he might draw into the same
Engagements.

One of his Favorites called Selemin, was privy to all his Amors, and was
himself as unconstant; the Arabians do celebrate certain Feasts at certain
times of the year; it is the only time that the Women have any liberty; they
are permitted at those times to go about the Town, and to walk in the public
Gardens; they assist at the solemn Plays, which are showed sometimes, but always
Veiled: Alamire and Selimin waited with impatience for those Opportunities;
they never failed of finding out some new unknown Beauties, and ways of
speaking to them, and managing some private Intregues with them.

Upon one of these Feasts, Alamire saw a young Widow called Naria, whose
Virtue, Beauty, and Riches, were extraordinary, by chance unveiled as she was
speaking to one of her Slaves; he was surprised with the Charms of her Beauty;
she was a little startled at the sight of this Prince, but could not forbear
looking earnestly upon him: which he perceived, he followed her, and made it
his business to let her take notice that he did so. In fine, he had seen a Fine
Woman, and was seen by her, and that was enough to erect in him both Love and
Hope; the Character he received of Naria's Virtue and Wit, doubled in him the
desire he had to make her in Love with him; he sought Her in all places with
much industry, he passed very often by her House without seeing her, or being
seen by her; he met her by chance as she was going to a Bath; and was so happy
as to have a sight of her Face two or three times, and as often found her most
Beautiful; and was so smitten with her, that he believed she designed to put a
stop to all his lightness, and inconstancy,

Several Days passed before Alamire could find any sign that Naria approved of
his Love, and begun to be very much concerned at it; Yet for all that, he did
not quit the Design he had laid, to gain the good Esteem of her, or those
other fair Persons; and above all, of a young Lady, called Zoromade, very
considerable by her Father's Quality, as well as her own Beauty: The difficulty
of seeing her, was almost as great, as that of seeing Naria; But he was
persuaded, that this Fair Maid would have easily found means to overcome them,
if she were not so narrowly watched by her Mother: So that, he was not so eager
to surmount these Obstacles, as he was to overcome Narias Resistance; being
she had no Body to control her: He had endeavored two or three times, but in
vain, to gain some of her Slaves, to know from them the Days she used to go
Abroad, and the Places where he might see her: At last, one of those that
seemed the most Obstinate, promised him to give him Notice of all she did. Two
Days after, he told him, She was going to a very fine Garden, she had out of
Town; and that, if he would please to walk about that, there were about it
Risings, from whence he might easily see her. Alamire made use of this
Intelligence: He goes out of Tharsus disguised, and passed all the Afternoon
about this Garden.

Toward Evening, as he was ready to return, he saw a Door open, and perceived
it was the Slave, which he had gained; who beckoned to him to approach: He
believed Naria was walking, and that he might have a sight of her from that
Door: He advances, and enters into a Magnificient Arbor, richly adorned with
all things that might add to its Beauty: But what surprised him most, was the
Sight of Naria, sitting upon Cushions under a stately Canopy, after the
resemblance of the Goddess of Love; two or three of her Women stood at a Corner
of the Arbor: Alamire could not forbear running toward her, and casting
himself at her Feet, with an Air so full of Transport and Astonishment, that he
augmented the modest Blushes, which appeared on the Face of this Beautiful Lady.

I know not (said she to him, entreating him to rise) whether I ought of a
sudden, to show you the Inclination I had for you, having concealed it so long
a time from you: I believe, I should have hid it, all my Lifetime, if you had
taken less pains to show me the Love you had for me; But, I confess, I could
not but resist a Passion that was pursued and maintained upon such weak and
slender Hopes. The first Moment I saw you, you appeared Lovely to me; I have
endeavored to see you undiscovered, with more care than you did to see me: In
fine, I was desirous to be as well assured of the Passion you had for me, by
your Words, as you had convinced me of it by your Actions.

Great Gods! What Assurance could Naria have in Alamire's Words! She little
knew the bewitching and inevitable Charms of his alluring Speeches: He outdid
all the Hopes she conceived of his Love; and by his flattering and insinuating
Wit, he gained an entire Conquest over the Heart of this Lovely Creature: She
promised to give him a second Meeting in the same place: He returns to Tharsus,
fully persuaded, that he was the Man of the World, the most in Love; and had
almost persuaded Mulziman and Selemin, that he was so. He visited Naria diverse
times; who showed him the greatest Inclination, and truest Marks of Love, that
ever were: But she told him, That she had learnt, the great Disposition he had
to Change: That she was incapable of giving any share of her Heart to any
other; and that, if he intended to preserve hers, he must think of no Body
else: And upon the first occasion she should have of being Jealous of him, she
would for ever break with him. Alamire answered her with so many Oaths, and so
much Address, that he persuaded her of his Eternal Fidelity.

But the very Thought of such a strict Engagement troubled him; and as there
were no Obstacles to hinder him from the Freedom of seeing her, his Love began
to grow cold: Nevertheless, he continued making still the same Protestations of
Love to her. As she had no other Thoughts but of Marrying him, she believed
there was nothing could obstruct it, since she both Loved, and was Beloved of
him; insomuch, that she begun to talk to him of Marriage: Alamire was surprised
at the Discourse; but his Address was such, that the Surprise was not taken
notice of; And Naria made a full Account, that in a few Days, she should be
Married to this Prince.

Since his Love for Naria began to diminish, his Pursuit of Zoromade began to
increase: And by the Assistance of an Aunt of Selimens, whom her Nephew's
Favor made Complaisant to the Princes Passion, he found means to write to her:
The Impossibility of seeing her, was still the same, by which his Passion still
augmented.

All his Hopes was in the Feast, that is kept in the beginning of the Year: It
was the Custom, to send great Presents one to another, during this Feast; and
the Streets were crowded with Slaves, laden with all that was Rich and Rare to
be found. Alamire sent Presents to diverse Persons: Naria, being of a haughty
and and proud Disposition, would not give way to any considerable Presents; yet
he sent her some Arabian Sweets, which were so Rare, that none had any of them
but himself; and sent them with all the Ornaments, that might make them more
agreeable to her.

Naria's Passion was grown so violent for this Prince, upon the Receipt of this
Present, that if she had followed the Dictaments of her Heart, she had staid at
Home to think of him; and would have avoided all Divertisements, where he was
not to be Notwithstanding, being invited by Zoromades Mother to a Feast at
their House, she could not with Decency gratify her Inclination herein. She
went thither, and was not a little surprised at the Smell of the same Perfumes,
as she came into a large Closet, which Alamire had sent. She stopped with some
Astonishment, to inquire from whence that Pleasant Smell came? Zoromade, who
was Young, and not used to conceal any thing, Blushed, and was out of
Countenance: Her Mother seeing her make no Answer, said, She thought, they came
from Selimen's Aunt, who had sent them to her Daughter. This Answer confirmed
Naria, that they came from the Prince: She saw them with the same Ornaments as
hers were, but somewhat Richer. This Discovery made so violent an Impression
upon her, that she feigned her self indisposed, and went Home as really sick,
as she desired to appear: She was violent, and quick of Apprehension; The
Thought of being deceived by the Man she Adored, put her into a deplorable
Condition: But, before she would give her self up to Despair, she took a
Resolution to be more fully informed of the Princes Infidelity.

She sent him word, That she was sick, and that she could not go to any of the
Public Entertainments, during these Festivals. Alamire came to see her; and
assured her, that he also would not see any of those Public Divertisements,
since she could not be there: and talked to her after a manner, that did almost
persuade her, that she did him wrong to suspect him. Nevertheless, as soon as
he was gone, she got up, and disguised her self so, that she could not be
known: She frequented those Places, where it was most likely to find him. The
first Object that offered, was Alamire disguised; but no Disguise could hide
him from her: She saw him following Zoromade; and during the Plays that were
Represented, she perceived him always close by this Fair Lady. The next Day,
she followed him again; But, instead of finding him in Pursuit of Zoromade, she
saw him in another Disguise, closely Courting another Lady: Her Grief, at
first, began to lessen; and she was not a little pacifyed, to think that
Alamire had only talked to Zoromade, by Accident, or to divert himself only.
She crowded her self, amongst those Women that attended this Young Lady, whom
Alamire followed; and she came so near to him, that at the turning of a Street,
where this Young Lady made a stop, she heard Alamire speaking to her, with the
same Air, and those very Terms, that had so forcibly persuaded her of his
Love. Judge what became of Naria, and the sensible Affliction she felt. She
would have thought her self Happy at that time, if she could have been
convinced, that Zoromade was the only Object of Alamire's Pursuit. She would
believe, at least, that the Inclination he might have for this Beautiful
Person, might cause his Change: She might have slatter'd her self to have been
Beloved of him, before his Inclination for Zoromade: But finding, that he was
able to have the same Care, and speak the same Words, to two or three at the
same time, she was satisfied, that she only had busted his Wit, and not
possessed his Heart; and that she was only amused, without attaining to her
Happiness.

It was such a cruel Adventure for a Person of her Humor, that she had not
Force enough to bear it: She returns Home overwhelmed with Grief and
Affliction; where she found a Letter from Alamire, assuring her, that he was
shut up in his Closet at Home; not being able to indulge himself the Pleasure
of seeing the Public Entertainments, since he could not hope for that, of
seeing her there. This Cheat made her judge of what weight were all the passed
Actions of Alamire. She was confounded with Shame, for having so long pleased
her self with a Passion, that was but a mere Treachery: She soon resolved what
to do; She writ to him, all that Grief, Affection, and Despair could invent, of
most sensible, and most passionate, without acquainting him what should become
of her; only, bid him an Eternal Farewell. This Letter surprised him, and gave
him some sense of Grief: The Beauty and Wit of Naria, were of such high
Perfection, that it rendered the Loss of her troublesome, even to the
Inconstant Humor of Alamire.

He went to tell his Adventure to Mulziman, who made him ashamed of his
Precedure: You are deceived (said he to him,) if you think your manner of
dealing with Women, is not contrary to the true Sense of an Honest Man. Alamire
was netled at this Reproach. I will justify my self to you, answered he; for,
I have too much Esteem for you, to let you continue in so bad an Opinion of me:
Do you think me so great a Beast, as not to Love with sincerity, a Person that
I thought Loved me truly? But, do you think (interrupted Mulziman) to justify
your self, by accusing those you Love? Did any of them deceive you? Did not
Naria Love you with a true and sincere Passion? Naria believed, she Loved me,
replied Alamire; but she loved my Quality, and the Rank to which I might raise
her. I have hitherto found nothing but Vanity and Ambition in Women: They loved
the Prince, and not Alamire. The desire they have to make a signal Conquest,
and the Ambition to raise themselves above that Slavish Life, to which they are
subject, has created in them what you call Love; as the Pleasure of being
Beloved, and the desire to overcome Difficulties, begot in me, what seemed a
Passion to them. I believe (said Mulziman) you wrong Naria; for, I am
confident, she truly loved your Person. Naria spoke to me of Marriage (answered
Alamire) as well as the rest; and I know not, whether her Passion was more
sincere than theirs. How (replied Mulziman!) Would you have a Woman Love you,
and not think of Marrying you? No (said Alamire,) I would not have them think
of Marrying me, while I am above their Quality, that should pretend to it: But,
I would not be unwilling they should desire it, if they did not know my
Quality; and did in a manner believe, they transgressed against the Rules of
Prudence, in Marrying me: But so long as they look upon me as a Prince, that
may raise them above the Sphere they are in; and may give them a Prerogative,
to claim more Liberty, than they enjoy in the Quality of a Subject; I shall not
think my self obliged, to take any great Notice of the Design they may have to
Marry me; or take it for a true Love. You should see, added he, That I am very
capable of Loving sincerely, if I found a Person that should Love me, without
knowing who I am. You desire an Impossibility, to show your Fidelity, replied
Mulziman; and if you were capable of being Constant, you should meet with
enough, without expecting such extraordinary Occasions to show it.

The Impatience he was in, to know what was become of Naria, broke off this
Conversation: He goes to her House, where he learnt, that she was gone to
Mecka: and that none knew the Way she took, nor the Time when she would come
back. This was enough to make him forget Naria: All his Thoughts are now bent
upon Zoromade; who was guarded with so much Care, that it rendered all his
Addresses in a manner vain: Not knowing, therefore, what other Course to take,
he resolves to venture upon a way, the most dangerous in those Countries, that
could be thought of; which was, to hide himself in one of those Houses, where
Women use to Bath themselves.

Those Baths are stately Palaces; Women frequent them two or three times a
week: They take a pride to show their Grandeur and Magnificence, by making a
great number of Slaves to March before and after them, carrying all those
things of which they have use in their Bathing Houses; the entrance of those
Houses is forbidden to all men upon pain of Death, and there is no Mercy for
them, that are found there? Alamire's quality seemed to warrant him against the
ordinary Laws; but his Rank exposed him to a general Revolt and Sedition, in
which he should not be able to save either his Life or Estate.

All Reasons were too weak to retain him from it; he writ to Zoromade that he
was resolved to hazard all for to see her, and entreated her to instruct him
how he might speak to her; Zoromade made a difficulty to consent to the hazard
to which he was to expose himself; but at last Led away by her Passion for him,
and forced by that insupportable Constraint under which the Arabian Women live,
writ to him, That if he could find means to get into the Bathing House, he must
inform himself of that Appartment where she used to be; that there was a Closet
where he might conceal himself; that she would not Bath that Day; and that
whilst her Mother was in the Bath, she might have the opportunity of
entertaining him. Alamire felt a sensible pleasure, in the difficulty of his
enterprise: He won the master of the Baths by great Presents; he learnt the Day
Zoromade was to come thither; he got in by Night, and was conducted to the
Appartment wherein that Closet was, where he remained until morning, with all
the the impatience that a man truly in love could be in.

Much about the time that Zoromade was to come, he heard a Noise in the next
Chamber, as if diverse People were come into it; a little after, the Noise
lessened, and the Closet Door is opened, he expected to see Zoromade come in to
him; but in her stead, he sees another Person whom he knew not, Richly attired,
of a Beauty that had all the Flower, and all the Life of a blooming Youth. This
Lady was as much surprised at the sight of Alamire, as he was to see her; he
was no less proper than she, to cause Astonishment, by the agreeableness of his
Person, and the richness of his Apparel. It was so unnatural a thing, to see a
Man in that Place; that, if Alamire had not made signs to this young Lady, to
hold her peace, she had cried out loud enough, to make all that was in the
Room, to come into the Closet: She comes nearer to Alamire, who was ravished
with this new adventure, and asked him by what accident he came into this
place; he told her it was a story too tedious to be told then, but conjured her
to say nothing, and not to ruin a man, who valued not the danger he was in,
since he owed to it the pleasure of seeing the beautifullest Person in the
World; she blushes with an air of Innocence and Modesty, capable of inflaming
a heart less sensible than Alamire's. I should be very sorry, replied she, to
do any thing that might hurt you. But you have run great hazard in coming in
here; I know not whether you are sensible of the danger you are in.

Yes Madam, I know it, and it is not the greatest that I am threatened withal
this Day. After these words of which he believed she understood the meaning, he
prayed her to tell him who she was, and how she came to enter into that Closet:
My Name is Elsibery, answered she; I am the Governor of Lemnos his Daughter, my
Mother came to Tharsus two Days ago, where she never had been before, no more
than I; she is now in the Bath; I was not disposed to Bath, and I came by
chance into this Closet; but I beg of you likewise added she, to tell me who
you are? Alamire was glad to meet with a young Woman that knew him not: He told
her, his Name was Selemin, (it was the first Name he could think of): As he
talked to her, he heard a Noise: Elsibery went toward the Closet-Door, to
hinder any to come in; Alamire followed her two or three Steps, forgetting the
Danger he exposs'd himself to. May not one hope to see you again, Madam, said
he? I know not (replied she, with an Air full of trouble,) but I think, it is
not imposible: With this, she went out, and shut the Door after her.

Alamire was charmed with this Adventure: He never saw any thing so Beautiful,
nor so Lovely, as Elsibery: He did believe, that he had observed by her, that
he was not unpleasing to her: She did not know him to be the Prince of Tharsus.
In fine, He found in this Lady, all that might sensibly touch him. He staid
until Night, in that Closet, without once thinking, that that he was come
thither to see Zoromade; so full was his Imagination, with the Charms of
Elsibery.

But, Zoromade was not so easy in her Mind; She truly loved Alamire: The
Danger in which Alamire was in, put her into a Mortal Disquiet, and a sensible
Affliction, that she could reap no Benefit by it. Her Mother was indisposed,
and would not go to the Bath; and therefore, her Appartment was given to
Elsibery's Mother. Alamire, at his return, found a Letter from Zoromade;
informing him, what I have told you; and likewise, that they talked of Marrying
her out of hand: But that, she was not much disquieted at it, seeing he might
prevent it, by declaring to her Father, the Intentions he had for her. He
showed this Letter to Mulziman, to let him see, that all Women's Love to him,
tended only to get him to marry them: He told him also, his Adventure in the
Bathing-House: He did Exaggerate to him the Charms of Elsibery, the Joy he had
to believe, that she had an Inclination for him, without knowing him to be the
Prince. He assured him, That he had now found something, that deserved to
engage his Heart; and that he should see, how real his intentions should be for
Elsibery; and, in truth, he resolved to leave off all other Pursuits, and to
think of no Body else, but how to win the Love of this Beautiful Person. It was
almost impossible for him to see her; especially, having resolved not to make
himself known, as Prince of Tharsus: The first Resolution he takes, was to hide
himself once more in the Bathing-House: But, he understood, that Elsiberyes
Mother was sick, and that her Daughter would not come abroad without her.

In the mean-time, the time of Zoromades Marriage was at hand; and the Despair
she was in, to see her self slighted and forsaken by the Prince, made her
consent to it: As her Father was a Man of great Quality, and the Man she was to
marry was no less; so it was resolved, the Ceremony should be very Splendid at
her Wedding. Alamire learnt, that Elsibery was to be there. The manner of
Marrying amongst the Arabians, could afford him no Hope of seeing her there;
because the Women are quite separated from the Men, both in their Mosques, and
at their Feasts: He resolves, nevertheless, to hazard as much for her, as he
had done for Zoromade: He feigned himself sick the Wedding Day, the better to
dispense himself from assisting Publicly at the Ceremony: He put himself into
Women's Attire; and put on a long Vail, such as the Women do wear when they go
abroad; and goes to the Mosque with Selimen's Aunt. He saw Elsibery coming in;
and, though she was Veiled, yet her Garb was so particular, and her Habit so
different from that the Women of Tharsus wear, that he was not afraid to be
mistaken in her: He followed her close to the Place, where the Ceremony was to
be performed. He placed himself so near Zoromade, that, carried on by the
Remains of that Humor, that was so natural to him, he could not forbear making
himself known to her; and speaking to her, as if he had disguised himself only
to see her. His Sight caused so much trouble in Zoromade, that she was
constrained to go back some Steps: And, turning her self toward him; It is an
inhumane thing of you (said she) to come to trouble my Quiet, by an Action that
should persuade me, that you Love me, if I were not well assured of the
contrary; But, I hope, I shall not long suffer the Evils, which you have caused
me. She could say no more, nor could he make a Reply; for, the Ceremony ended,
and all the Women went to their own Places.

Alamire never thought of the Grief, in which he saw Zoromade; he was so full
of his Desire and Care, how to speak to Elsibery: He kneeled just by her, and
begun to say his Prayers very loud, after the Arabian Fashion: That kind of
confused Murmur of so many People, that speak all at once, make it hard to be
heard, but by those that stand close to one another. Alamire, without turning
his Face toward Elsibery, or changing the Tone in which he prayed, called her
several times by her Name: She turned toward him; and, as he saw that she
looked upon him, he lets fall his Book; and in taking it up, he lifted up his
Vail a little; so that, Elsibery alone might see him: He showed her a
Countenance, whose Beauty and Youth did not belly the Habit of a Woman. He
found, that his Disguise did not deceive Elsibery; Yet, he asked her, If he was
so Happy, as to be known again by her? Elsibery, whose Vail was not quite down,
turning her Eyes toward Alamire, without turning her Head; I know you too
well, said she; but, I tremble for the Danger you are in. There is none so
great, to which I would not expose my self, rather than not see you, replied
he. It was not to see me, said she, that you exposed your self in the
Bathing-House; and, perhaps, it is not for me, that you are now here. It is for
you alone, Madam, replied he; and you shall see me every Day in the same
Dangers, unless you give me some Opportunity of speaking to you. I go to
Morrow, said she, with my Mother to the Caliph's Palace; be you there with the
Prince: My Vail shall be off, because it is the first time that I come thither.
She would say no more, for fear of being overheard by the Women that were near
her.

She put Alamire into great Perplexities about the Assignation she gave him; he
very well knew that the first time Women of Quality are admitted to the Caliphs
Palace, if the Caliphe or the Princes his Children come into the place where
the Women are, they do not let down their Veils, and after that they are always
Veiled: So that Alamire was sure to see Elsibery; but then he must be forced to
show himself, as Prince of Tharsus, and that was, what he could not consent to
do. The pleasure of being beloved for the sole Beauty of his Person, was so
great and sensible to him, that he was resolved not to rob himself of it; but
yet it was a great trouble to him to lose an opportunity of seeing Elsibery,
and an opportunity which she her self gave him. That little Jealousy which she
showed; For having found him in the Bathing-House, whether he came not for her
sake, engaged him the more not to omit any thing that might persuade Her of the
reality of his inclinations for her. This perplexity made him hesitate a good
while without answering her. At last he asked her if he might not Writ to her:
I dare not trust any Body said she, unless you can gain, if possible, a Slave
whose Name is Zebelec.

Alamire was satisfied with these Words, they leave the Temple; he goes to
change his Habit, and to take his measures what to do the next Day, though he
found it difficult to conceal his Quality from Elsibery; and though it was a
great trouble to him to avoid seeing the person of the World he most coveted to
see, yet he resolves to do it, because he determined to find whether he could
be truly loved without out the help of his Quality; by which, after he had
considered how to carry on his design, he writ this Letter to Elsibery,

The LETTER of ALAMIRE to ELSIBERY.
IF I had already desired any Favor from you, or that you had given me any
hope, perhaps I should not trouble you with the Request I am going to make, I
thought it might then seem more reasonable than now. But Madam, you scarce know
me, and I cannot flatter my self, with the thought that I could make any
impression upon your Heart; You are not engaged to me either by inclination or
word; and you are going to morrow to a place where you will see a Prince, who
never yet saw any thing of Beautiful, but he was in love with: What may not I
apprend, Madam, from that interview? I cannot doubt but Alamire will fall in
love with you; and though perhaps it may seem a Caprice in me to fear him as
much as I do, and to apprehend that he may be so happy as to please you, yet I
cannot forbear praying you not to see him. Why should you refuse me this Madam?
It is no Favor I ask; and I am happily the only man in the World that ever did
desire such a thing; I know my request will seem strange to you, since it
appears more strange to my self; But do not refuse this Boon to one who has
exposed his Life, that he might have the Happiness, only to say, he loves you.

Having writ this Letter, he disguises himself to go along with some he
confided in, to find out who this Slave should be, of whom Elsibery spoke: He
bestir'd himself so well about the Governor of Lemnos his House, that, at
last, he gained the Favor of an old Slave, to bring Zebelec to him. He saw at
a distance, this young Slave coming; and was surprised with his Beauty and
Shape, and the Fineness of his Face. Alamire stood sculking in a dark Entry;
and this young Slave looked upon him, as he came toward him, as if he had
known him formerly: But, as soon as he came near, the Prince (without showing
himself) begun to speak to him of Elsibery. The Slave hearing a Voice which he
knew not, of a sudden, changed his Countenance; and, after a great Sigh, looks
down, and stood silent, with so profound a Sadness, that Alamire could not
forbear asking him the Reason thereof. I believed, I knew him that asked for
me, answered he; and I did not think, that I was called to hear talk of
Elsibery: But, go on; whatever regards Elsibery, concerns me near. Alamire was
surprised and troubled at the manner of this Slave's Discourse; He went on,
nevertheless, in Recommending to him, the Delivery of a Letter to Elsibery;
naming himself Selemin: The Sadness and Beauty of this Slave, made the Prince
imagine, That this was some Lover of Elsibery, who had disguised himself to be
near her. The Trouble in which he saw him, when he spoke to him of Letters that
he was to give, confirmed him in that Opinion: But, he reflected likewise, That
if Elsibery had known this Slave to be her Lover, she would not make Choice of
him, to convey his Rivals Lotters. In fine, This Adventure perplexed him; And,
be it how it would, this Slave appeared to him too Beautiful, and of an Air so
far above his Condition, to be permitted to continue about Elsibery.

He expected the next Day with several sorts of Disquiet; He went be-times to
his Mothers Appartment: No Lover was ever more impatient, to see his Mistress,
than he was not to see his: Nor had any Lover more Reason to wish, he might not
see her. He believed, that if Elsibery came not to the Palace, it was to grant
him the Favor he begged of her: That it was a true Sign, that she had received
the Letter, which he gave Zebelec for her; and that, if that Slave had given it
her, it was apparent he was none of his Rival. In fine, In not seeing Elsibery
come along with her Mother, he was sure he had Established a Correspondency
with her; that he had no Rival, and that he might hope to gain her Love. He was
taken up with these Thoughts, when Word was brought him, that Elsiberyes Mother
was coming; and he had the Pleasure to see, that her Daughter was not come with
her. His Transports were inexpressible: He retired, being unwilling his Face
should be known to his Mistresses Mother; and went to his own Lodging, to wait
for the time which he appointed to speak to Zebelec.

The fair Slave came to him, with as much Sadness as he showed the Day before;
aad brought him Elsiberyes Answer: He was over-joyed at this Letter: He found
in it Modesty, mixed with much Affection: She assured him, that she would have
for him the Complacency of not seeing the Prince of Tharsus, and that she
should never make a difficulty of granting him such Favors. She prayed him
likewise, not to hazard himself for her; because that her own Natural
Fearfulness, and the strictness of the Watch that was kept over her, would
render all his Endeavors ineffectual. Though Alamire was extremely satisfied
with this Letter; yet, he could not endure the Beauty and Sadness of the Slave:
He asked him diverse Questions about the Means of seeing Elsibery: But, the
Slave made but cold Answers. This Proceeding increased the Princes Suspicions;
and, as he found himself more touched with the Beauty of Elsibery, than he had
ever been with any other; so he feared to enter into a necessity of using her,
as he had done all those that he Loved before; or to engage himself to a
Person, that might have other Inclinations. In the mean-time, he writ to her
every Day: He obliged her to let him know to what Places she went: And his Love
made him as careful to avoid seeing her in all Public Places, where she might
know him to be the Prince, as he was industrious to find out the means of
seeing her in Private. He so carefully observed all the Places about the House
wherein she lodged; that he found, that upon the Top of the House, which was
made into a Terrass, there was a Balcony jetting out over a Back-Street, which
was so narrow, that one might Discourse from the House that was against it: He
soon found ways to be Master of that House. He writ to Elsibery, conjuring her
to be the Night following upon the Terras, where she might be seen and
entertained by him. For, being come thither, Alamire might easily discourse
with her, without being overheard by any other: Nor was the Night so dark, but
that he might have the Pleasure distinctly to see that Beauty, of which he was
so enamored.

They entered into a long Discourse of the Inclinations they had for each
other: Elsibery desired to be informed, what Adventure had brought him to the
Bathing-house: He confessed to her the whole Truth, and all that had passed
betwixt Zoromade and him. Young People are too sensible of these kind of
Sacrifices, without apprehending the Consequences of them for themselves.
Elsibery had a violent Passion for Alamire: She gave her self wholly up in this
Interview; and they resolved to see one another often in that Place. As he was
ready to withdraw, he turned his Head by chance, and was not a little
surprised, to see the Fair Slave, that had already caused him so much Disquiet,
standing at one of the Corners of the Terrass.

He could not conceal his Trouble; but said, Madam, if I have showed you some
Jealousy the first time I writ to you, may I be so bold, as to show it you
again the first time I speak to you? I know, that Women of your Quality have
always Slaves about them; But, I think, they are not of the Age and Meine of
him, I see with you. I do confess, that what I know of the Person and Wit of
Zebelec, may render him as dangerous to me, as the Prince of Tharsus can be.
Elsibery Smiled at this Discourse; and calling the Beautiful Slave, Come
Zebelec, said she; Come, and cure Selemin of the Jealousy you have caused him.
Madam, I dare not without your Permission; and I wish, replied Zebelec, That
you had the Power to make him Jealous: It is not for my own Interest I wish it;
it is for Yours, and for the Apprehensions I have of the Misfortunes, to which
you are going to expose your self. But Sir, continued the Slave, addressing her
self to the Prince, whom she took for Selemin; It is not just, to let you
suspect the Virtue of Elsibery.

I am a wretched Creature, whom Chance has placed in her Service; I am a
Christian of Greece, of a Birth, far above the Condition you see me in: A
little Beauty (of which, there are scarce any Footsteps left) drew many Lovers
to Court me, in the Prime of my Youth: I found so little Truth, and so much
Treachery in them, that I looked upon them with Scorn. One more Unfaithful than
all the rest (but who knew how to disguise it better) gained my Affections: I
broke off for his sake, a considerable Match. My Parents persecuted us: He was
forced to fly: He Marries me; I Disguised my self in Man's Apparel, and
followed him: We took Shipping: There happened a Person of great Beauty to be
in the same Ship, brought thither by some extraordinary Accident, to pass into
Asia, as well as my self: My Husband fell in Love with her: We were set upon,
and taken by the Arabians: They shared the Slaves: My Husband, and one of his
Relations, had their Choice to be in one Lot with those, that should fall to
the Captain, or the Lieutenant's Share: It was my Lot, to fall to the Captain;
and, by an unheard of Ingratitude, my Husband chose to go with the Lieutenant,
to follow this Woman he Loved: Neither my Presence nor Tears, nor what I had
done for him, nor the wretched Condition in which he was going to leave me,
could move him: Judge of my Grief! I was led hither: My good Fortune gave me to
Elsiberies Father. Though I have seen my Husbands Ingratitude, I cannot
altogether lose the Hope of his Returning; and that was it, that caused the
Change you observed in my Face, the first time I came to speak to you: I was in
hopes, it might be him that desired to speak to me; and, as ill grounded as
this Hope was, I could not lose it without Grief. I do not oppose the
Inclination which Elsibery has for you: I know, by woeful Experience, how vain
it is, to oppose such kind of Thoughts: But, I grieve for her; and I do
foresee, the Mortal Pangs into which you will throw her. She never was in
Love: She is now Engaging her self into a sincere and real Passion for you;
which no Man that has been already in Love, can deserve.

When she had left speaking; Elsibery told Alamire, That her Father and Mother
knew her Quality, her Sex, and her Merit; but for Reasons that she had to
remain unknown, she appeared in the Guise of a Slave. The Prince was Charmed
with the Wit and Virtue of Zebelec; but more, to find how vain the Grounds of
his Jealousies were. In the Sequel, He found so many Charms, and so much
Sincerity in Elsiberies Conduct, that he was convinced, that he was never
Beloved but by her alone. She loved him for Loves sake, without considering
what this Passion tended to: She never dived into his Fortune, nor his
Intentions: She hazzarded all to see him; and did all things blindfold, that he
could desire: Another Woman would find much Constraint, in the Conduct he
desired she should observe. He would have her still believe him to be Selemin:
He was forced to hinder her from going to certain Public Feasts, where he was
obliged to appear as Prince: But she found nothing difficult, that pleased him.

Alamire believed himself, for a time most happy to be beloved for his own
sake; but it came into his Head, that although Elsibery loved him without
knowing that he was the Prince of Tharsus, it might happen that she might
forsake him for one, that should be of that Quality: He was resolved to put her
Heart to the Test, by making the true Selemin pass for the Prince of Tharsus;
making Love to her; and to see with his own Eyes, after what manner she would
treat him: He told Selemin his Intention; and they, together, found means to
put it in Execution. Alamire made a Horse-Race; and told Elsibery, That, to
give her some share in the Divertisement, he would get the Prince, with all his
Company, to pass by her Window: That the Prince and He would be Attired alike,
and that he would Ride close by the Princes side; and that, although he had
always apprehended her seeing Alamire, he believed himself too well assured of
her Heart, to apprehend, that the Prince might draw her Eyes toward him,
chiefly in a Place where he should be near enough, to have his share of her
Looks. Elsibery did verily believe, that he whom she should see with her Lover,
would be the Prince of Tharsus; and the next Day, seeing the true Selemin with
Alamire, did not doubt, but that it was the Prince: She thought, her Lover had
no Reason to represent Alamire, for such a formidable Man, since she thought
him nothing so agreeable, as him she took for his Favorite. She did not forget
to tell him the Judgment she made of him: But, that was not enough to him: He
resolved to try further, whether this supposed Prince would not take with her,
when he should seem to be in Love with her, and propose to Marry her.

At one of the Arabian Feasts, where the Prince was not obliged to appear in
Public; he told Elsibery, that he would Disguise himself, that he might be
near her: He did so; but carried Selemin with him: They placed themselves near
Elsibery, and Selemin called her three or four times: her mind being full of
Alamire, she doubted not, but that it was he; And taking her time, where no
body looked on her, she lifted up her Vail to show him her Face, and began to
speak to him; But she was surprised, when she saw him near her, whom she took
for the Prince of Tharsus; Selemin seemed to be surprised likewise, and smitten
with her Beauty; He fain would have spoken to her, but she would not hear him;
And being troubled, at this Adventure, she went nearer to her Mother; In so
much, that Alamire could not accost her all the rest of the day. At Night,
Alamire went to speak to her upon the Terrass: She told him all that happened
to her, and that with so much Truth and Exactness, and such Apprehension, lest
he should suspect that she had any way contributed to it, that Alamire had all
the Reason imaginable, to be well satisfied: Yet he was not content, but caused
the old Slave (which he had already found very sensible of Presents) to be
bribed, to carry a Letter from the supposed Prince to Elsibery: As the Slave
would have given it her, she chid him foundly, and refused the Letter: She gave
an account of it to Alamire, who knew it already, and enjoyed the Pleasure of
his Cheat. To accomplish what he had begun, he carries Selemin to the Terrass,
where he was used to speak to Elsibery, and hid himself so, as she could not
see him; but might hear every Word they spoke. Elsibery was extremely
surprised, to see the supposed Prince upon the Terrass: At first, she thought
to withdraw; but her Suspicion, that her Lover betrayed her to the Prince, and
her desire to find it out, kept her there for some Moments. I will not tell
you, Madam, (said he) Whether it was by my own Address, or by the Consent of
him you thought to find here, that I possess the Place that was intended for
him; neither will I tell you, whether he be ignorant of my Intentions for you;
but you may judge, by the likelihood of it, and by the Power that the Quality
of a Prince may give me: I will only tell you, That by one sight of you, you
have done that in me which long Converse could never effect: I would never
Engage my self; and now, my only Happiness is, to induce you to accept of the
Quality I possess: You are the only Person, to whom I ever have offered it; and
you shall be the last, to whom I ever shall offer it: Think of it, Madam, more
than once, before you deny me; and think, that in refusing the Prince of
Tharsus, you refuse the only Means to draw you out of that Eternal Captivity,
to which you are now destined.

Elsibery could hear no more what the supposed Prince said to her: As soon as
he gave her to understand, that her Lover had sacrificed her to his Ambition,
without making any Reply to what he had said to her: I know not, Sir, (answered
she) by what Adventure you came hither: But let it be how it will, I must hold
no longer Conversation with you; and I beseech you, to allow me the Liberty to
with draw. In saying these Words, she left the Terrass, and retired to her
Chamber with Zebelec, who had followed her with as much Disquiet, and Prouble
of Mind, as Alamire had Joy and Tranquillity: He saw, with Delight, that she
despised the Offers of so great a Fortune, at the same time that she had
grounds to believe, that he had deceived her: Nor could he any longer doubt,
but that she was proof against those Aspiring Thoughts, of which he was
apprehensive. The next Day, he tried again to get a Letter conveyed to her from
the Prince, to see if Spite and Rage had not caused her to change her Mind: But
the old Slave that was entrusted with it, and endeavored to deliver it, was as
ill handled by her, as he had been the first time.

Elsibery passed the Night with incredible Grief: There was all the Appearance
imaginable, that her Lover had betrayed her: There was none but him, that could
discover their Intelligence, and the Place where they used to speak to one
another. Nevertheless, her great Kindness for him, would not let her condemn
him without hearing him. She saw him the next Day; and he argued his Case so
well, that he persuaded her, that he was betrayed by one of his People; and
that the Caliphe, at his Son's Request, had kept him a part of the Night from
coming upon the Terrass: Nay, he persuaded her, that he was sensibly displeased
at the Princes Passion for her. The fair Slave was not so easy of belief, as
Elsibery; and the Experience she had of the Falsehood of Men, would not permit
her to give Credit to the supposed Selemin's Words: She endeavored (but in
vain) to let her see, that he imposed upon her: But, a little while after,
Chance gave her occasion to convince her of it.

The true Selemin was not so taken up with the Princes Gallantries, but that he
had time enough to have some of his own: The Lady he was in Love with, had a
young Slave that waited upon her, who was passionately Enamoured of Zabelec,
whom she took for a Man. She told her the Love that was betwixt Selemin, and
her Mistress, and the Contrivance they had found to see one another. Zebelec,
who knew Alamire by no other Name but that of Selemin, caused her self to be
thoroughly informed of all that might let Elsibery see the Infidelity of her
Lover; and went in that very instant, to tell her of it. She was sensibly
afflicted at this Discovery; yet she gave her self up to her Sorrow, without
reflecting injuriously upon him that caused it. Zebelec used all the Arguments
she could think of, to persuade her never more to see Alamire; nor to hearken
to any Justifications, which could be no other but new Inventions, to cheat
her. Elsibery was willing enough to follow her Advice, but had not the Power.

Alamire came that very Evening to the Terrass; and much astonished, when
Elsibery began their Interview with a Flood of Tears, and followed it with
Reproaches so tender, that even those who had no Love for her, could not choose
but be concerned for her. He could not imagine, what she could accuse him of;
or by what strange turn of Fortune, she alone should accuse him of Infidelity;
having never been Faithful to any but to her self: He justified himself with
all the Force that Truth could inspire: But, in spite of the Disposition she
was in to believe him Innocent, she could not give Credit to his Words. He
pressed her to tell him, who she should be, that she thought him in Love with:
She did so, and told him all the Circumstances of their Commerce. Alamire was
not a little surprised, to find that it was the Name of Selemin, that made him
appear Guilty; and was much perplexed, to find by what means he should go about
to justify himself: He could not resolve it presently: His only Course was, to
make new Protestations of his Innocence, without engaging himself into a
further Justification: His Perplexity, and his Words, in general, confirmed
Elsibery of his Infidelity.

He goes immediately: to Selemin, to tell him his Misfortune; and think with
him, of the Means to make his Innocence appear. I would break off with the
Person I Love, for your sake, said Selemin, if I thought that would be any
Advantage to you: But, although I should leave seeing her, Elsibery would
believe still, that there was a time in which you had been Unfaithful to her;
and so, would not be able to give any Credit to your Words: If you would take
away all Ground of Suspicion from her, my Opinion is, That you own who you are,
and who I am. She has Loved you, without the Help of your Quality: She believed
me to be the Prince of Tharsus, and despised me for your sake; and, in my
Opinion, that was what you would be at. You have Reason my dear Selemin, cried
the Prince, but I cannot resolve, to discover my Quality to Elsibery: I shall
lose by that Discovery, all that was Charming in my Love; I shall lose the only
true Pleasure I ever had; and, I know not, whether I shall not lose the Passion
I had for her. But, consider also, Sir, answered Selemin, that in going still
by my Name, you will lose the Heart of Elsibery; and that, in losing that, you
will lose all the Pleasures, that a false Imagination makes you apprehend, can
never be found again.

Selemin spoke so convincing to Alamire, that (at last) he made him resolve to
discover himself to Elsibery: He did so that very Evening: And none ever was
transported of a sudden, from so deplorable a Condition, to so happy a State,
as she was. She found Marks of a most sincere and tender Passion, in all those
Accidents that before appeared to her as Deceits: She had the Pleasure, to have
convinced Alamire of her Inclination for him, without knowing that he was a
Prince. Lastly, Her Transports were so great, that her Heart was scarce able to
contain them; nor did she hide them from Alamire: But, he suspected this Joy of
hers: He believed, the Prince of Tharsus had a share in it, and that Elsibery
was more sensibly touched for having him for her Lover: But, he concealed his
Thoughts from her, and continued visiting her with much Assiduity. Zebelec was
surprised, that she had been deceived in her Diffidence of Men's Passions; and
envyed Elsiberies Happiness, in having found so Faithful a Lover: But, the
Cause of her Envy did not last long. It was impossible, but that those
extraordinary Things which Alamire had done for Elsibery, should add new Life
to the Passion she had for him: The Prince perceived it. This redoubling of her
Love, appeared to him an Infidelity; and caused in him the same trouble, which
the Decrease of it ought to have done. In fine, He thought himself so well
assured, that the Prince of Tharsus was better Beloved, than Alamire had been
under the Name of Selemin, that his Passion began to diminish, though he had no
Engagement elsewhere. He had already had of so many sorts; and, this last had
something in it that was so quick, and seelingly Charming, that he found
himself insensible of any other. Elsibery saw the Love and Care he had for her,
decay insensibly; and, although she endeavored to deceive her self; yet she
could no longer doubt of her Misfortune, when she was told, That the Prince had
taken a Resolution, to go to Travail over all Greece. She learnt it from
others, before he told her any thing of it: He was now weary of Tharsus, and
that inspired him with the Design, which he put in Execution, notwithstanding
all Elsiberies Entreaties and Tears.

The fair Slave saw then, that Elsiberies Destiny was as Unfortunate as her
own; And Elsibery, had no other comfort, but what she found in bemoaning her
self to Zebelec; who had the News of her Husband's Death, for which she was
sensibly agrieved, notwithstanding his horrible Infidelity to her: His Death
having now taken away the cause of her Disguise, she prayed. Elsiberies father,
to give her that Liberty, which he had so often offered her; having obtained
it, she put on a Resolution, to return to her own Country; there to spend the
rest of her days in some Solitude, remote from the Commerce of all men. She
had often spoken to Elsibery, of the Christian Religion: This fair Creature
being touched with what she had heard her say, and with the Inconstancy of
Alamire, (for which she hoped for no Redress) resolves to turn Christian, to
follow Zebelec; and live with her in a profound Oblivion of all earthly Ties;
She went away, without giving any notice to her Parents, only by a Letter which
she left for them.

Alamire was already got far on his way, when he understood by a letter from
Selemin, what I came from telling you of Elsibery: But where ever she be,
perhaps she would find some Consolation, could she but know how severely her
Quarrel was revenged upon Alamire, for his Infidelity to her, by the Violent
Passion which Zaydes Beauty kindled in him.

He arrived in Cyprus, and fell in Love with that Princess, (as I told you)
after ballancing some time betwixt Her and Me: But, he Loved her with a Passion
so different from all others he ever Loved, that he scarce knew himself.
Formerly, he would always declare his Love, from the first Moment that he felt
it; He never was afraid to offend those to whom he declared it: But, to Zayde,
he scarce durst let her have any inckling of it. He was astonished, at this
Change in himself: But, he being forced by the Violence of his Passion, to
declare it to Zayde; and, that he found, that the indifference she had for him,
did but irritate his Love for her; when he saw himself brought to Despair by
her usage to him, without being able to disintangle himself from his Passion
for her; he felt a Grief, that was not to be expressed.

How! (would he say to Mulziman) Love never had more Power over me, but I was
pleased to give it; and, though it had entirely Conquered me, I always was
pleased with all Places where I Loved: And now he must, through the only Person
in the World, in whom I found a Resistance, to Domineer over me, with so
absolute an Empire, that he has left me no Power to dis-ingage my self from
him. I could not Love all those that Loved me* and I am compelled to Adore
Zayde, that despises me. Is it her extraordinary Beauty, that produces this
unusual Effect? Or, Can it be possible, that the only way to fix me, was not to
Love me? Ah, Zayde! Shall I never be in a Condition to know, that they are not
your Rigors that ty me to you?

Mulziman could not tell what to say to him; such was his Surprise, to see him
in the Condition he was in: He endeavored, notwithstanding, to comfort him,
and to ease his Pain. Since the Arrival of Zaydes Father, and her Declaring
never to Marry that Prince, his Despair grew greater, and hurryed him to seek
his Death any where with Joy.

This is, as near I can remember, what I learnt from Mulziman, continued
Felime; and perhaps, I have been too exact in my Narrative: But, you must
pardon those Charms, which those that are in Love, found in the Persons whom
they Love; though it may be, even upon disagreeable Subjects. Don Olmond told
the Princess: That, far from thinking her self obliged to excuse the Length of
her Narration; That he was bound rather, to return her Thanks, for informing
him of Alamire's Adventures: He conjured her, to finish what she had begun to
tell him: She continued her Discourse after this manner:

You may very well judge, that what I learnt of the strange Adventures and
Humor of Alamire, could give me no great Hope; since I was covinced, that the
only way to make him Love, was not to love him; notwithstanding, I did not love
him less. The Dangers to which he daily exposed himself, gave me Mortal
Apprehensions for him; I did believe, that every Stroke might fall upon his
Head; that he was the only Man, that could be in danger. I was so overwhelmed
with grief, that I thought nothing could be added to it: But, Fortune exposed
me to a kind of Misery, more cruel than any I had yet felt.

Some Days after Mulziman had told me Alamire's Adventures, I was speaking of
them to Zayde; and I made such sad Reflections upon the Cruelty of my Destiny,
that my Face was all bathed in Tears. One of Zaydes Women passed through the
Room where we were, and left the Door open, which I not perceiving: It cannot
be denied, said I to Zayde, but that I am very Unfortunate, to have settled my
Affections upon a Man, that is so unworthy in all Respects, of the Inclination
I have for him: As I ended these Words, I heard some Body behind me in the
Room; I thought, at first, it was that Woman, that was going through again: But,
What a confusion and trouble was I in, when I saw it was Alamire! and that he
was so near me, that he could not choose but hear my last Words? But the
Trouble I was in, and the Tears that trickled down my Cheeks, took from me all
Means of hiding from him the Truth of what I had said: My Strength failed me;
my Speech left me; I wished my self Dead: In short, None ever was in such a
taking, as I felt my self. And, to add to the Cruelty of my Adventure, the
Princess Alasinthe came in, accompanied with diverse others; who went all to
speak to Zayde, and left me alone with Alamire.

The Prince looked upon me with an Air, that showed the fear he had to
increase the Confusion in which he saw me. I am sorry, Madam, said he, that I
came in at a time, when in all appearance, you were not willing to be heard by
any but Zayde: But, Madam, since Chance has ordained it otherwise, do not take
it ill if I ask you, How it can possible be, that a Man that has been so happy
as to please you, could oblige you to say, That he was unworthy in all
Respects, of the Kindness you have for him? I know, no Man can deserve the
least of your Favors: But, Can there be any Man, that could give you Cause to
complain of his Intentions? Be not angry, Madam, that I have some share in your
Confidence; you shall not find me unworthy of it; and, though you took care to
conceal from me what I have heard; yet, I shall always have a great Value for
a Secret, which I owe only to Chance.

Alamire had spoke on for a long time, if he had stayed until I had been able
to interrupt him: I was so out of Countenance, and so daunted with the fear he
should find out, that he was the Man of whom I complained; and with Grief, that
he should believe, that I loved another Man; that it was utterly impossible,
for me to answer him. You think, perhaps, that having concealed from him the
Passion I had for him, with so much Industry, and seeing him so much in Love
with Zayde; I should be indifferent, whether or no he imagined, some other
might have gained my Esteem: But, Love had already put so much Constraint upon
it Self, to hide it from the Person that gave it Birth, that it could not be so
cruel to it self, as to let him think, that another had kindled it. Alamire
attributed my Perplexity, to my trouble of seeing him persuaded that I was in
Love. I see, Madam, said he, that you are unwilling I should be your Confident;
but your Concern is unjust: Can any Man have more Respect for you than my self,
or more Interest to please you than I? You have an absolute Power over that
Princess, of whom depends my Destiny: Tell me then, Madam, Who he is, of whom
you complain? and if I have half as much Power with him, as you have over her I
Adore; you shall quickly see, if I do not make him know his Happiness, and
render him worthy of your Goodness for him.

Alamire's Words increased my trouble and agitation of Mind: He urged me again
to tell him, who he should be, of whom I complained: But, all the Reasons that
made him desire to know him, rendered him in my Thoughts, unworthy to be
informed. At last, Zayde judging the Perplexity I was in, came to interrupt us,
before I could have the Power to utter one word to Alamire. I went away,
without so much as looking upon him: My Body was not able to bear the Agitation
of my Mind: I fell sick that very Night, and continued so a long time.

Among the Number of Men of Quality, that were then in Cyprus, it were hard if
some did not concern themselves in the Preservation of my Life: I was told of
their Care, to be informed of the state of my Health: I made Reflections, how
littled I was touched with their Kindness: And, when I considered, that if
Alamire had known my Inclination for him, parhaps, it might make as little
impression upon him, as the Passion of those that loved me, made upon me. I
thought my self happy, that he was ignorant of my Love for Him; But, I must
confess, this Happiness was only pleasing to my Reason, and no way grateful to
my Heart. When I began to Recover, I put off as long as I could, all occasions
of seeing Alamire; and when I came to be seen by him, I took notice, that he
observed me with great Care, to find out by my Actions, who it was, of whom I
complained; the more I found him diligent, in prying into my Deportment, the
worse I handled all those, that showed any inclination for me; though there
were many, of whose Merit and Quallitys, I needed not be ashamed; yet, there
was none of them, that did not blemish my Honor; For, I could not endure, he
should think, that I loved without being beloved Reciprocally; and, this very
Thought made me Fancy, that I seemed to him, to be less Worthy of him therefore.

The Emperors Troops plied Famagosta so warmly, that the Arabians thought it
their best way to desert it. Zulema and Osmin resolved to embark us with the
Princess Alasinthe and Belleny: Alamire also resolves to leave Cyprus to follow
Zayde, and quit a place where his Valor could be no longer useful. He had
still a great Curiosity, to find out who it was that I complained of: When we
were ready to part, and saw that my Sadness did not increase; How, said he! Can
you leave Cyprus without showing new Marks of Affliction? It is impossible,
Madam, but you most sensibly feel this Departure: Do me the Favor to let me
know, Who it is that you are concerned for? There is not a Man in all this
place, but I can prevail with, to go into Africa; and, you shall have the
Pleasure to see him there, without his least Suspicion, that you desired any
such thing: I have no mind, said I to trouble my self, to dispossess you of an
Opinion, which you conceived upon appearances that seemed to be true;
Nevertheless, I must tell you, that those appearences are false, I leave none
in Famagosta, For whom I have any extraordinary Concern: And yet, it is not for
any Change my Heart has made. I understand you, Madam, the Man that had the
good Luck to please you is not here: I looked for him in vain, amongst the
Number of your Adorers; and, I believe he was gone from Cyprus, before I had the
Honor to see you. It is neither before you saw me, nor since your coming
hither, that any has been so happy as to please me, said I to him, very
abruptly; and I pray you, not to speak to me any more, of a thing that
displeases me so much.

Alamire seeing that I was Angry, would say no more to me, and assured me, he
would never trouble me any more upon this Subject; I was glad to end a
Conversation, in which, I was always in danger of discovering, what I so
earnestly desired to conceal. In fine, we went abroad, and our Voyage was at
first so pleasant, that we had no reason to fear such an unfortunate
Shipwreck, as we suffered upon the Coast of Spain, as I shall inform you Anon.

Felime was going to continue her Relation, when a servant came to tell her
that her Mother grew worse. Though I had many other things to tell you, said
she to Don Olmond, as she was going to leave him, I have told you enough, to
let you know, that my Life depends upon that of Alamire, and likewise, to
engage you to keep your Word with me. Madam, I will most exactly perform my
Promise; But I pray you to remember also, that you must inform me of the rest
of your Adventures.

The next Day he went to the King; who no sooner perceived him, but he
presently would have Gonsalvo put out of the impatience, and the disquiet which
appeared in his Countenance: Therefore, leading them both into his Closet, and
commanding, Don Olmond, to tell him, whether he had seen Felime; or learnt from
her, what interest she took in the Preservation of Alamire. Don Olmond, without
seeming to Dive into the Reasons, Why the King, should be so curious, to know
the Adventures of that Prince; he gave an exact Account, of all that he had
learnt from Felime, of her Passion for Alamire, of Alamires for Zayde; and, of
all that happened to them, until their departure from Cyprus. Having made an
end, he judged, that the King, and Gonsalvo, could not be so free in their
Discourse, as they would be if he were not there; and, to leave them at
Liberty, he said, for excuse, that he was Obliged to return to Orepese.

So soon as he was gone, the King looking upon his Favorite, with an Air that
showed the kindness he had for him, said to him, Do you yet believe, that
Alamire is beloved of Zayde? Do you believe it was she, that made Felime Write?
Do not you see, how ill your Apprehentions are grounded? No Sir, (replied
gravely, Don Gonsalvo,) all that Don Olmond has said, cannot persuade me yet,
but that I have cause to fear; Perhaps, Zayde was not, at first, in Love with
Alamire; or, that she concealed it from Felime, seeing the Passion she had for
that Prince; but whom do you believe she lamented, when she was Shipwrack'd
upon the Coast of Spain but Alamire, whom she believed Dead? Whom can I
resemble but that Prince? Felime spoke only of him in her Relation; Zayde, has
deceived her, my Lord, or else, she has owned to her the inclination she had
for him: But since there being at Alphonso's House, all that I have heard, does
not destroy the Opinion I had; and, I fear much, that, what remains yet
untold, will rather confirm, than destroy them. It was so late when Gonsalvo
left the King, that he should have thought of nothing else, but of taking his
Rest: But, his disquiet of Mind would not give him leave to take any. Felimes
Relation augmented his Curiosity, and left him still in that cruel uncertainty,
in which he had been so long. In the Morning, one of the Officers of the Army,
that came back from Oropese, brought him a Note from Don Olmond, wherein he
Read these Words.

Don Olmonds Letter to GONSALVO.
FElime has kept her Word with me, and told me, the rest of her Adventures. The
Love she bears to Alamire, is the only Cause of her Concern for his Life:
Zayde, has no Interest in it; and, if any Man should have hard Thoughts of
Zayde, it is not of Alamire, he must be Jealous.


This Note put Gonsalvo into a new trouble, and made him think, that he was
only deceaved in believing, that Alamire was the Man she loved; But, that he
could not be deceived in his belief, that Zayde was in Love. The Letter he saw
her Write at Alphonso's House, what he had heard her say at Tortosa, of a first
inclination, and the Note he Received from Don Olmond, would not let him doubt
of it. He thought he must be still unhappy, since Zaydes Heart, was firmly
concerned; Nevertheless, without knowing why, he felt some ease, by the
assurance he had, that her Passion was not for the Prince of Tharsus.

In the mean while, the Mores made Overtures of Peace, which were so
advantageous, that it was not thought Prudence to reject them;
Plenipotentiaries were named on both sides to Regulate Differences, and a new
Cessation was agreed upon. Gonsalvo was Privy to all the Transactions: Yet, as
busied as he was by the importance of those Affairs, which the King entrusted
him with, he was much more impatient to know who this Rival should be, of whom,
he never heard before. He expected Don Olmond with so much impatience, that he
could take no Rest: At last, he beseeched the King, either to send for him to
the Camp; or, to give him leave to go to Orepese; Don Garcias, who whas as
curious to hear the sequel of Zaydes Adventures, resolved to be by at Don
Olmonds telling them; he sent for him with all speed. When Gonsalvo saw him
coming, and looking upon him, as the Man that was to relate to him, the true
Sentiments of Zayde, he was almost ready to stop his mouth; he so much feared
to hear the truth of his misfortune, though at the same time, he earnestly
wished to know it. Don Olmond, with his accustomed discretion, without seeming
to perceive Gonsalvos trouble, begun to tell what he had received from Felime,
in their last Conversation. The King having Commanded him to speak

The Sequel of the History of FELIME and ZAYDE.
THe Princes, Zulema and Osmin, left Cyprus, with an intention to pass into
Africa, and to land at Tunis: Alamire went along with them; and their Voyage
was Prosperous enough, until a contrary Wind drove them toward Alexandria.
When Zulema saw himself so near that Place, he had a mind to go a Shore, to
visit Albumazar, (the most famous Astrologer of all Africa) his old
Acquaintance. The Princesses (who were not used to the Hardships of the Sea),
were glad to go a Shore, to rest themselves; and the Winds continued in a
contrary Point; so that, they could not put to Sea again so soon as they
expected.

One Day, as Zulema was showing to Albumazar diverse Rarities which he had
brought from his Travails, Zayde espied in a Box which he opened, the Picture
of a Young Man, of an extraordinary Beauty, and a most agreeable Physiognomy;
the Dress (that was like to that which is used by the Princes of Arabia) made
her imagine, that it might be the Picture of one of the Caliph's Sons: She
asked her Father, Whether it was not so as she thought? He told her, He knew
not for whom that Picture was drawn; that he bought it of a Soldier, and kept
it for the Excellency of the Work: Zayde seemed taken with the Beauty of that
Picture: Albumazar took notice of her Attention, in considering it; He joked
with her about it; and told her, That he perceived, that a Man that should
resemble this Picture, might hope to please her.

The Grecians have naturally a great opinion of Astrology, and young People are
very curious to know what is to come; so, Zayde pressed this famous Astrologer,
to tell her something of her Destiny: But he still excused himself. He passed
all that little time which he could spare from his Studies, in Zulema's
Company; and seemed to avoid all occasions, of showing his extraordinary Skill.
At last, one Day finding him in her Father's Chamber, she urged him more than
ever, to consult the Stars about her Fortune. I need not consult the Stars for
that, said he, Madam; for, I can assure you, that you are Destined for the Man,
whose Picture Zulema showed you. Very few Princes in Africa are equal to him:
You shall be Happy if you Marry him: Have a care, you do not Engage your
Affection to any other. Zayde received this Answer, as a kind of Rallery, for
her too much Attention in viewing the Picture: But Zulema told her, with all
the Authority of a Father, That she must no ways doubt of the Truth of this
Prediction; That he gave so full a Credit to it himself, that he should never
consent she should Marry any other, but the Man for whom this Picture was drawn.

Zayde and Felime could not believe, that Zulema spoke what he truly thought;
but when he declared, that he had no Intention now, that the Princess (his
Daughter) should marry the Prince of Tharsus: They no ways doubted of the
Truth of what Albumazar had said. Felime was not a little transported with Joy,
when she knew that Zayde was no longer destined for Alamire. She fancied a
great pleasure to tell him of it: She flattered her self with the hope, that he
would return to her, when he should have no further expectation, that Zayde
would be his. She begged leave of this fair Princess, to acquaint Alamire with
Albumazars Prediction, and Zulema's intention; this leave was soon granted,
Zayde easily consented to all, that might Cure the Prince of Tharsus, of the
Passion he had for her.

Felime, found an occasion to speak to the Prince, and without making any show,
of the Pleasure she took, in telling it to him, she advised him to break off
with Zayde; since she was designed for another, and that Zulema was no longer
favorable to him; she, moreover told him, how Zulema came to change his Mind,
and, showed him the Picture, which was to deside Zaydes design. Alamire
appeared overwhelmed with Grief, at the words of Felime, and surprised, with
the Beauty of the Picture, she showed him; he remained a good while silent; at
last, lifting up his Eyes, with an Air which showed his Grief; I believe it,
Madam, said he, that Man, whose Picture I see, is designed for Zayde; his
Beauty deserves her; But, he shall never have her; For, I will Kill him, before
he shall be able to pretend to Rob me of Zayde: But, replied Felime, if you
undertake to fight with every Man, that may be like this Picture, You must
attack a great number of men, before you find out him, for whom it was drawn. I
am not happy enough, answered Alamire, to be in danger of such a mistake. This
Picture represents so great, and so particular a Beauty, that very few can be
like it. But, Madam added he, this Physiogncmy, as agreeable and as pleasing as
it appears, may hide such unpleasing Humors, and a temper of mind so
different, from what ought to please Zayde, that as Beautiful, as this
pretended Rival may be, perhaps he may not be beloved of her: And, as
favorable and kind as Fortune and Zulema may be to him, if he does not
Captivate Zaydes inclinations, I shall not think my self altogether unhappy; I
shall be less troubled to see her in the possession of a man that she cannot
love, then to see her in love with a man that she cannot possess. Nevertheless
Madam, continued he, although this Picture has made such an impression in my
mind, that cannot easily be blotted out, I conjure you to leave it with me for
some time, that I may consider it at leisure, and that I may imprint the Idea
thereof more strongly in my Memory.

Felime was so much Concerned to see that, what she had said, would not abate
of Alamire's hopes, that she let him carry away the Picture: Which he returned
to her some days after, in spite of the desire he had, to hide it for ever
from the eyes of Zayde.

After some stay at Alexandria, the winds were favorable, for their departure;
Alanire received Letters from his Father that obliged him to leave Zayde, to
return to Tharsus: But knowing that he should not need to stay long there, told
Zulema, that he should be as soon at Tunis as he. Felime was as much afflicted
at their Separation, as if she had been really beloved by him: She was used to
all the afflictions which love causes, but she had not been yet acquainted,
with that which absence gives: And she felt it so sensibly, that she found,
that it was the pleasure alone, of seeing him she loved, that gave her strength
to support the Misfortune of not being beloved.

Alamire parted for Tharsus; and Zulema and Osmin, in different Ships, sailed
toward Tunis: Zayde and Felime would not be parted, but staid together in
Zulema's Ship. After some Days Navigation, a grievous Storm rose, which
dispersed the Fleet: That Ship in which Zayde was, spent her main Mast: At
which, Zulema losing all Hope of Safety in staying in the Ship, and knowing
that he was not far off the Land, resolved to save himself in the long Boat: He
caused his Wife, his Daughter, and Felime, to go into the Boat; and took with
him all that he had of Value: But, as he was going to step into the Boat, a
Wave broke the Rope that fastened it to the Ship, and carried it with that
Violence, that it staved in against the Beach. Zayde was cast upon the Shore of
Catalonia half Dead; and Febime, who had got hold of a Planck, was driven in
there too, after she had seen the Princess Alasinthe drowned. When Zayde was
come to her self, she was in a maze, to find her self among People that she did
not know, and whose Language she could not understand.

Two Spaniards that were walking upon the Beach, found her in a Trance, and
caused her to be carried to their House; Some Fishermen led Felime thither
too: Zayde was over-joyed to see her; but was more afflicted, to hear of the
Death of the Princess, her Mother: Having shed many Tears for this Loss, she
bent her Thoughts how to get out of that Place: She made Signs, that she
desired to go to Tunis, where she hoped to find Osmin and Belleny.

Looking earnestly upon the Youngest of those two Spaniards, whose Name was
Theodorick, she perceived, he very much resembled the Picture, with which she
had been so taken: This Resemblance surprised her, and made her look upon him
with more Attention. She went along the Beach, to search for a Box, in which
this Picture was; which, she believed, was put into the Boat, when she came off
from the Ship, She sought in vain; and she was extremely vexed, that she could
not find what she looked for. She perceived, for some Days, that Theodorick
had a Passion for her, though she could not understand it by his Language; yet
his Carriage, and his Actions, made her suspect it; Nor was that Suspicion
disagreeable to her.

Some time after, she thought her self mistaken: She saw him very Melancholy,
without any Cause from her: She saw, that he often left her to go alone, to
Dream and Think. In fine, She believed, he was engaged in Affection to some
other, which made him uncasie, and troubled in Mind. This Imagination gave her
a surprising Disquiet, and made her as Melancholy, as Theodorick seemed to
her. Although Felime was taken up with her own Thoughts; yet she was too well
acquainted with Love, not to perceive the Passion which Theodorick had for
Zayde, and the Inclination Zayde had for Theodorick: She hinted it to her
diverse times; and, notwithstanding the Reluctance this fair Princess found in
her, to own it to her self; yet, she could not forbear owning it to Felime.

It is true, said she, I have an Inclination for Theodorick; of which I am not
Mistress: But, I pray you Felime, Is it not of him, that Albumazar spoke? And
was not that Picture (think you) which we saw, drawn for him? There is no
likelihood of it, answered Felime; The Fortune and Country of Theodorick, has
nothing that can relate to what Albumazar said. Consider, Madam, that having no
ways credited that Prediction, you now begin to believe it, by imagining, that
Theodorick may be the Man that is destined for you; and judge from thence, what
are your Thoughts for him. Hitherto, replied Zayde, I did not believe the Words
of Albumazar, to be a true Prediction: But, I must confess, that since I saw
Theodorick, they began to make an Impression upon my Fancy. I thought it
something Extraordinary, to have found a Man that resembled that Picture; and,
at the same time, to feel an Inclination for him. I am surprised, when I think
of Albumazar's forbidding me to suffer my Heart to receive any Impression: He
seems to me, to have foreseen the Inclination I have for Theodorick: And, his
Person is so pleasing to me, that if I am designed for a Man that resembles
him, what should make me Happy, is like to make my Life uncomfortable. My
Inclination is deceived with this Resemblance, and hurries me to him, to whom I
ought not to belong; and, perhaps, prepossesses me so strangely, that I shall
not be able to Love him, whom the Destinies have ordained I should Love. There
is no other Remedy, continued Zayde, but to leave a Place where I run such
hazard, and where Decency it self, forbids we should continue any longer. It is
not in our Power, answered Felime, to leave it: We are in a strange Country,
even where our Language is not understood. We must stay for the Ships: But take
notice, that what soever Care you seem to take, to leave Theodorick, you will
not easily be able to blot out the Impression he has made upon your Heart. I
perceive in you, the same things I felt, when I began to love Alamire; and
would to the Gods, I could see in him, what you cannot but see in Theodorick.
You are mistaken, said she, if you think that Theodorick has any Inclination
for me; he has, doubtless, for some other Person: And the Sadness I perceive
him in, proceeds from a Passion, of which I am not the Cause. I have, at least,
this Consolation in my Misfortune; that the Impossibility of expressing my
Thoughts to him, will hinder me from the Weakness of declaring to him that I
love him.

A few Days after this Conversation, Zayde saw Theodorick at a distance;
looking, with great Attention, upon some thing, which he held betwixt both his
Hands; Her Jealousy made her fancy, that it was a Picture: She resolves to
find out the Truth, and steals toward him as softly as she could; but she
could not do it so gently, but that he heard her: He turned his Head, and hid
what he had in his Hands, so that she could see nothing but the Luster of some
Diamonds: She no longer doubted, but that it was a Picture-Case, as she had
imagined; the Assurance she believed, she had of it, struck her with such a
Grief, that she could not hide her Sadness, nor look upon Theodorick; And she
felt such anguish of mind, to be so passionately smitten with a Man, whom she
believed in Love with another. Theodorick, by chance, let fall what he hid; she
saw it was a Knot of Diamonds, which held to a Bracelet of her Hair, which she
had lost some Days before: The Joy she was in, that she had been mistaken,
would not let her show any Anger. She snatched up her Bracelet, and returned
the Diamonds to Theodorick; who presently threw them into the Sea, to let her
see how much he despised them, when they were separated from her Hair: This
Action convinced Zayde of the Love and Magnificence of that Spaniard, and did
no small Feats in her Heart.

After this, he gave her to understand, by the help of a Picture (where he made
the Painter to draw a Beautiful Lady, weeping over a Dead Man), that the
Severity she showed him, proceeded from the Ties she had for that Man, whom she
lamented. It was no small Grief to Zayde, to find, that Theodorick believed,
that she loved another: She was now no longer in doubt of his Love for her; and
she loved him with so much Tenderness, that she no longer endeavored to
smother it.

The time in which she was to depart, drew on; and not being able to resolve
upon her Departure, without letting him know, that she loved him; she told
Felime, That she was resolved to write to him the Inclination she had in her
Heart for him; but not to give it him, until the very moment she was to Embark.
He shall not know the Passion I had for him, until I am sure, I am out of
danger of ever seeing him more: It will be a great Comfort to me, that he shall
know, that I thought of no other but himself; whereas, he believed, I was
wholly taken up with the Remembrance of another Man. I shall find a great
Pleasure, in expounding all my Actions to him; and in giveing my self the
Freedom of telling him, how much I loved him: I shall have this Delight,
without breach of Modesty. He knows not who I am: He shall never see me more:
And, what matter is it, if he knows that he touched the Heart of that Stranger,
whose Life he has saved from Shipwreck. You have forgot, Madam, said Felime to
her, that Theodorick does not understand your Language; So that, what you will
write to him, will be of no use to him. Ah, Madam! If he has any kindness for
me, he will find means to be informed of what I shall have written to him; and
if he has not, I shall be glad that he does not know, that I love him: And, I
am resolved to leave him with my Letter, the Bracelet of my Hair, which I so
cruelly took from him, and which he deserved but too well.

Zayde began the very next Day, to write what she intended to leave to
Theodorick: He surprised her, as she was Writing: and she easily found, that he
was Jealous at it. If she had followed the Impulse of her Heart, she had then
told him, That she writ to none but him: But her Prudence, and the little
Knowledge she had of the Quality or Fortune of this Stranger, kept her from
saying any thing, that might be taken for an Engagement; and made her conceal,
what she desired he might know, when he should see her no more.

Some short time before she was to depart, Theodorick left her; and made her
comprehend, that he would be back the next Day. The Day following, she and
Felime went to walk upon the Beach, not without Impatience to see Theodorick's
Return; and this Impatience made her more Pensive than usual: So that, seeing a
Boat put in to the Shore, instead of being Curious to see those that were in
it, she walked another way: But, she was much surprised, to hear her self
called, and to distinguish her Father's Voice: She ran to him with great Joy;
and he was transported to see her again. After she had acquainted him how she
escaped from Shipwreck, he told her in few words, That his Ship was driven upon
the Coast of France; from whence he could not depart, till some few Days
before, and that he was come to Tarragone, to wait for the Ships that were to
sail for Africa: That in the mean-time, he resolved to Row along the Coast,
where Alasinthe, Felime, and she had suffered Shipwreck; to find, if any of
them had chanced to escape* At the Name of Alasinthe, Zayde could not contain
her Tears; by which, Zulema understood the Loss he had received: Having
bestowed some time upon his Grief, he commanded the Young Princesses to go into
the Boat, to sail along with him to Tarragone. Zayde was in great Perplexity,
how to persuade her Father, not to carry her away just then: She told him the
Obligations she had to those Spaniards, who had received her into their House;
thereby, thinking to induce him to let her go to take her Leave of them: But,
all she could allege, would not persuade him to trust her any more into the
Hands of the Spaniards. He made her Embarque, in spite of all she could say to
the contrary. She was so sensible of the Opinion Theodorick might conceive of
her Ingratitude; or rather, that she was going to leave him, without all Hopes
of ever seeing him any more; that, not being able to master her Grief, she was
forced to say, She was sick. The sole Consolation she could find in her
Affliction, was to see, that her Father had saved the Picture, with which she
had been so well pleased; and which now, was become that of her Lover.

But, this Consolation was not strong enough to help her to support Theodoricks
absence: She was not able to resist it: She fell dangerously ill: And Zulema
was a long time in fear of Losing so every way accomplished a Creature, in the
Prime, and Flower of her Youth and Beauty. At last there were visible Hopes of
her recovery: But she was yet so weak that she could not brook the fatigue of
the Sea. Her whole employ was to learn the Spanish Language, and having
interpreters, and conversing with none but Spaniards, she easily learnt it
during that time which she passed in Catalonia: She made Felime learn it
likewise, and she found some pleasure in speaking no other Language, but
Spanish.

In the mean time, the great Ships were parted from Taragone, for Afric; and
though Zulema, did not know what was become of Osmin, after they had been
separated by the storm, yet he writ to him, to let him know how he was
Shipwracked, and the reason that obliged him to stay in Catalonia. Those
Vessels returned from Afric before Zayde was recovered of her Sickness: Osmin
writ to the Prince his brother, that he Arrived safe: And that he found, the
Calipe in the mind to keep them still at a distance: And that King Abderame,
having sent to him for Generals, to command his Armies, he designed they should
pass into Spain, and that, for that purpose he had sent him the orders. Zulema
knew well it was not safe to disobey the Calipe: He resolves therefore to take
a brigantine, to go by Sea to Valentia, to join with the King of Cordova, and
so soon as the Princess his Daughter, was in a condition to Travel, he had her
Conveyed to Tortosa: Where he remained some days to give her some rest: But
she was far from finding any: For, during the time of her sickness, and since
she began to recover, the desire she had to let Theodorick hear from her, and
the difficulty of doing it, put her into a Cruel disquiet of mind: She could
not be satisfied in her thoughts, because she had the Letter, which she
intended to leave him, about her that day her father carried her away. She was
extremely vexed, that she had not left it somewhere, where he might light upon
it. In fine, the night before she parted from Tortosa, she sent one of her
fathers Gentlemen with the Letter, with Directions where he should find
Theodorick near Tarragone: She commanded him not to tell who sent him, and to
have a care that he should not be dogged as he returned, nor known who he was.
Though she never hoped to see Theodorick, yet her grief was renewed, by leaving
a Country wherein he lived: She passed some part of the night, making her moan
to Felime, in those pleasant Gardens belonging to the house where she lodged.

The next morning, that Gentleman whom she sent, came back, and told her, that
he had been at the place whether she directed him: but that he had bin informed
that Theodorick, was gone from thence that day before, with design to return
nomor to that place. Zayde was sensibly vexed at this unlucky Chance, which
deprived her of the only Consolation she sought after: And robbed her Lover of
the only favor she ever intended him: She embarked with a heavy heart, and
Landed in few days at Cordova. Osmin and Belleny staid there for them: The
Prince of Tharsus was there likewise, who hearing at Tunis that she was in
Spain, under pretense of those Wars, came thither to find her out. Felime at
the sight of Alamire did not find that absence had cured her, of the passion
she had for him: Alamire found nothing but an Augmentation of, the rigors of
Zayde: And Zayde an increase of her Aversion for Alamire.

The King of Cordova, gave the General command of his Army to Zulema, with the
Government of Talevera, and that of Oropese to Osmin: These two Princes a
little while after, had some causes of disgust given them by Abdrame, but being
unwilling to publish their anger, they withdrew themselves to their Governments
pretending to visit the Fortifications, and to give the necessary Orders for
the security of those places. Alamire followed Zulema, that he might be near
Zayde: But a little while after, the Armies going to Action, he was forced to
go to join with Abderame. I parted about that time to find out Gonsalvo. I was
taken prisoner by the Arabians, and carried to Talevera: Belleny, and Felime
went to Oropese, but Zayde remained with the Prince her Father. After Gonsalvo
had taken Talevera, and a truce was proposed, Alamire sent word to Zulema, that
he would lay hold upon the freedom of this Cessation to wait upon him, and that
he would take Oropese in his way; Zayde being informed of what I told you by
her father, writ to Felime to let her know, that she had found her Theodorick
again, and that, she was unwiling, he should imagine that it was the Prince of
Tharsus, whom she lamented at Alphonsoes house: and therefore prayed her to
forbid him to come to Talevera.

Felime found no difficulty to deliver this Message to Alamire. The next day
Belleni finding her self indisposed with the closeness of the place, took the
advantage of the Cessation, and went out of the town to take the Air, in a
great Wood that was near the City: as she was walking with Osmin and Pelime,
they espied the Prince of Tharsus coming toward them, whom they received with
Joy: And after they had discoursed together a good while, Felime had
opportunity to entertain Alamire in private.

I am sorry, I must tell you a thing that will hinder you from going on the
Journey you intended: For, Zayde prays you not to go to Talavera, and she
entreats it after a manner, that may pass for a Command. By what Excess of
Cruelty, Madam, cried Alamire, would Zayde Rob me of the only Comfort her
severity has left me, which is to see her? I believe answered Felime, she
intends to put an end to the Passion you profess to have for her; you know the
aversion she has to be Married to a Man of your persuasion: You likewise know,
that she has reason to believe, that you are not the Man that is destined for
her; and know moreover, that Zulema has changed his Resolution. All these
Obstacles, replied Alamire, shall never make me change, nor the continuance of
Zaydes unkindness; and in despite of the Fates, and the manner she uses me, I
will never let fall my hopes of being beloved. Felime more than usually Netled
at the Obstinacy of Alamires Passion, disputed with him a good while, upon the
Reasons that ought to draw him from his Pursuit: But seeing all her Arguments
were in vain, Rage did so inflame her, that, ceasing for the first time to be
Mistress of her self, she told him; That if the Decrees of Heaven, and the
unkindness of Zayd, would not make him lose his hopes, she knew not what would.
Nothing, answered Alamire, but to see that another Man has won her Heart; then
you must lay by all your hopes, replied Felime: for Zayde has met with a Man,
that has found the way to please her, and by whom she is Adored and Beloved.
Alas! who is that happy Man, cried Alamire? A Spaniard, said Felime, that
resembles the Picture you have seen; in all likelihood it is not he, for whom
that Picture was Drawn, nor whom Albumazar meant: But as you fear none but him,
that may please Zayde, let it suffice you, to know, that she loves him, and
that it is her fear of displeasing him, that makes her not to consent to see
you. What you say cannot possible be, replied Alamire, Zayd's Heart is not so
easily Conquered, if it had been so, you would not tell it me, nor would Zayde
give you leave to reveal such a Secret: nor have you any Reason that may induce
you to tell me of it. I have too many, replied she, transported as she was with
her Passion; and you -- She was going to continue, but of a sudden she
recovered her Reason: She was out of Countenance at what she had said: she was
troubled, and was sensible of her Error: this same increased her Surprise. She
remained a while without speaking, and as it were besides her self; at last,
casting her looks upon Alamire, and believing she saw something in his looks,
that discovered something of the Truth, she put a constraint upon her self, and
reassuming a Countenance, wherein appeared, more of tranquillity, than she had
in her mind. You have reason, said she to believe, that if Zayde were in love
with any body, I should not acquaint you with it; I had only a mind to make you
apprehend such a thing. It is true, that we have met with a Spaniard that is in
love with Zayde, and resembles that Picture which you saw: But you have made me
perceive, that I have perhaps, committed an Error, to have told it you, and I
am in great perplexity, fearing lest Zayde should be displeased at it.

There was something so natural, in what Felime said, that she believed it had
wrought some part of the effect, at which she aimed: Nevertheless, her Surprise
was so great, and the words she had Spoken were so remarkable, that excepting
the trouble in which she saw the Prince of Tharsus, she could not flatter her
self with the hope that her words had not laid open her own thoughts.

Osmin, who came to them just then, interrupted their discourse: Felime pressed
by her sighs and her tears, which she could not contain, walked into the wood
to hide her grief, and ease her mind by making her moan, to one in whom she had
an entire confidence. The Princess Belleny her Mother ordered her to be called
back, that they might return to Oropese, she durst not look upon Alamire, for
fear of seeing in his eyes too much grief for what she had told him of Zayde,
or to much knowledge of what she had said of her self: She saw notwithstanding
that he went toward the Camp, and it was some satisfaction to her to think,
that he did not go to visit Zayde.

The King could not forbear interrupting of Don Olmond in this place; I do not
wonder now, said he, to Gonsalvo, at the sadness in which you saw Alamire, when
you met him after his leaving Felime: It was to her, that the Trooper saw him
speak in the Wood; what she said to him, was the cause he knew you: And we now
understand the meaning of those words, which he spoke to you, when he drew his
Sword at you, and which appeared to you then so obscure; and gave us so much
Curiosity to know what they meant; Gonsalvo made no answer, and Don Olmond
followed the thread of his Discourse.

It is not hard to judge how Felime passed that Night, and into how many sorts
of Afflictions her mind was divided. She saw that she had betrayed Zayde; and
she feared, that she had put Alamire into Despair: And, in spite of her
jealousy she was troubled, that she had made him so Unhappy: Notwithstanding,
she wished he might know that Zayde was engaged in her inclinations to another;
she apprehended, that she had too well diswaded him from the Opinion she gave
him of it: But above all, she feared that she had to much discovered her own
Passion for him. The next day, a new Affliction blotted out all the rest: She
heard of the Combat that was betwixt Alamire and Gonsalvo; and, her whole Mind
was taken up with the fear of losing him: She sent every day to the Castle,
where he lay, to know how he did? and when she began to have some hopes of his
Recovery, she heard what the King had ordered about his Life, to Revenge the
Prince of Gallicia's Death. You saw the Letter which she writ to me the last
Day, to oblige me to labor for his Preservation. I told her what Gonsalvo had
done at her Request: And I have nothing more to tell you, but that I never saw
in one and the same Person, so much Love, so much Discretion, and so much Grief.

Don Olmond thus ended his Relation; during which, Gonsalvo felt an
inexpressible Pleasure: To know, that he was beloved of Zayde; to find Marks of
Kindness, in all that he took for Marks of Indifference, was an Excess of
Happyness, which transported him beyond Expression; and made him taste in one
moment, all the Pleasures, which other Lovers taste only by fits. The King was
going to tell Don Olmond, that Gonsalvo was Theodorick, when word was brought
him, That the Deputies who came to treat of Peace, desired Audienco. He left
those two Friends together; and Don Olmond taking up the Discourse, I might
with Justice complain, said he, that I owe the Knowledge who Theodoric was,
only to my self, since our Friendship might claim that Knowledge from you. I
wonder how you could believe, it could be possible for you to conceal it from
me, while you showed so much Curiosity to know all that might concern Zayde. I
know, you loved her the first Day you spoke to me of her: And I could not well
believe, that the first sight could produce in you so violent a Passion, as to
me it appeared by what Felime told me; since I was sure, that the Man (such as
she described Theodorick) could be no other but Gonsalvo. I had no other way to
Revenge the Secret you kept from me, but by the Note which I writ to you, with
an intention to give you some Disquiet: My Revenge is over; and the Pleasure I
gave you by my Relation, makes me forget all that could displease me. But,
added he, I will not let you take more Pleasure than you ought; for, I must
tell you, That unless you have produced a great Alteration in Zaydes Heart, she
is resolved to resist the Inclination she has for you, to obey her Father's
Commands and Will.

The Certainty of being beloved, inspired him with so violent a Desire to see
that Princess, that he begged Leave of the King to go to Talavera: Don Garcias
willingly granted his Request; and Gonsalvo parted full of Hopes, to be
confirmed, at least, (by the fair Ey^s of Zayde) in the Truth of all that he
had heard from Don Olmond. He heard at his Arrival to the Castle, that Zulema
was indisposed. Zayde came to receive him at the Entry of her Father's
Appartment; and told him, The Trouble her Father was in, that he was not in a
Condition to see him. Gonsalvo was so surprised, and so dazzled at the Charming
Beauty of that Princess, that he stood stock still, and could not forbear
showing his Amazement: She took notice of it, and blushed; and remained in such
a Surprise of Modesty, that it added a new Luster to her Beauty. He led her to
her Lodgings, and spoke to her of his Love with more Assurance, than he had
done in his first Conversation: But, seeing that she answered him with a
Discretion and Reservedness, which would conceal from him how her Heart was
inclined toward him, if he had not learned it from Don Olmond; he resolved to
let her understand, that he knew some part of her Inclinations.

Will you never tell me, Madam, said he, The Reason that made you wish, I were
the Man whom I resembled? Do not you know, said she, that it is a Secret which
I cannot reveal? Is it possible, Madam, replied he, looking steadfastly upon
her, That the Passion I have for you, and the Obstacles you see to my
Happyness, will not induce you to have some pity of me, and to let me see (at
least) that you wish my Destiny were more Happy: It is only this poor Wish of
my Happiness, that you conceal from me with so much Industry. Ah, Madam! Do you
think it too much for a Man, that has Adored you from the first moment that
ever he saw you, to prefer him only in Wish, to some Affrican whom you never
saw? Zayde was so surprised with what Gonsalvo said, that she could not answer.
Be not amazed, Madam, said he, (fearing she should accuse Felime for
discovering her Thoughts); be not troubled, that Chance has informed me what I
have now told you: I heard you in the Garden the Night before you parted from
Tortosa; and I knew from your self, what you have the Cruelty to conceal from
me. How Gonsalvo, cried Zayde! You heard me in the Garden at Tortosa? Were you
so near me, and would not speak to me? Ah, Madam, answered Gonsalvo, (casting
himself at her Feet!) What a Joy you give me by this Reproach? and, How glad I
am, to see you forget that I listened to you, to remember, that I did not speak
to you? Do not repent, Madam, continued he, (seeing her trouble that she had
discovered the Inclination of her Heart): Be not sorry to give me some
Pleasure; and give me leave to believe, that I am not altogether indifferent to
you. But to vindicate my self from that Reproach, I must tell you, Madam; That
I overheard you at Tortosa, without knowing that it was you: And that my
Imagination was so filled with the Opinion, that we were separated by the Seas;
that, although I heard your Voice, being in the Night, and could not see you,
and that you spoke Spanish, I could never imagine, that I was so near you: I
saw you the next Day in a Barge; But, when I saw you, and knew you, I was no
longer in a Condition to speak to you; being then in the Custody of those the
King sent to find me out. Since you overheard me, answered Zayde, it is but a
Folly to go about, to give another Construction to my Words: But, I beseech
you, to ask me no more Questions; and to give me leave, to go from you: For, I
must confess, that the Shame I have of what you have heard unknown to me, and
of what I have unadvisedly said to you, puts me into such a Confusion, that I
must beg of you, if I have any Power over you, to be g^^e. Gonsalvo was so
pleased with what he had seen, that he would not press Zayde to make any
Declaration of her Thoughts: He left her as she desired; and came back to the
Camp full of Hope, to make her shortly change the Resolution she had taken.

Don Garcias his Forces, and the Valor of Gonsalvo, were so formidable to the
Moors, that they submitted to all the Articles of Peace, which the King off
Leon had proposed. The Treaty was signed on both Sides: And, as the Moors were
to surrender some Places that were far of; it was agreed, That Don Garcias
should retain all the Prisoners, until every Article of the Peace were
fulfilled. In the mean time, he was resolved to so^ourn for some time, in those
Cities which he had won; and therefore, went to Almaras, which the Moors had
surrendered to him. The Queen, who passionately loved the King, accompanied him
from the beginning of the Wars in the Field: But, during the Siege of Talavera,
staid at a Place that was not far off; where a slight Indisposition held her
still: But, she was, in a few Days, to come to him. Gonsalvo being impatient
until he saw Zayde again, prayed the King, to desire the Queen to pass to
Talavera, under pretense of seeing this new Conquest; and bring away all the
Arabian Ladies, that were there. The Queen knew the Interest Gonsalvo had in
Zayde; and, she was glad to Repair on this occasion, in some measure, those
many Crosses she had caused him, in the Intreigue of Nugna Bella. She went to
Talavera; and all the Arabian Ladies readily consented, to pass all the time
they were to stay in Spain, in the Queens Court. Zulema, who remained Prisoner
at Talavera, was not so willing to consent, that Zayde should leave him; and
the Rank which he always held made him see with some Trouble, that his
Daughter must be obliged to follow the Queen, as well as the rest of the
Arabian Ladies: He consented to it, nevertheless; and Gonsalvo received the
joyful News, that he should soon see that admirable Beauty, which made him so
much in Love. The Day that the Queen was to come, the King went two Leagues to
meet her: She was on Horseback, with all the Ladies of her Train. As soon as
she came near him, she presented Zayde to him, whose Beauty was increased by
the care she took in her Dressing; inspired there-to, by her Desire to appear
to Gonsalvo, with all her Charms about her: Her graceful Person, her complete
Wit, and her modest Behavior, surprised all that saw her. She was treated as a
Person of her Birth, Merit, and Beauty, deserved: And she saw her self, in a
few Days, the Delight, and the Admiration of all the Court of Leon.

Gonsalvo could not look upon her without Transports of joy; and the Assurance
he had, that she loved him, would not let him think of the Obstacles which
opposed his Happiness: If he loved her formerly, only for the Charms of her
Beauty, the Knowledge of her Virtue made him now adore her. He watched all
opportunities of speaking to her in private, with as much Industry, as she used
to avoid them: At last, having found her one Night in the Queens Closer, where
there were but few besides; he conjured her with so much Earnestness and
Respect, to tell him, how she was disposed toward him, that she could not deny
him.

If it had been possible for me, said she, to hide it from you, I would do it,
notwithstanding the esteem I have for you; and I would spare my self the shame
of showing an Inclination for a man, for whom I am not destined; But, since you
have known my thoughts against my will, I willingly own them to you, and will
explicate to you some Passages, of which you could have but an obscure
Knowledge. Then she told him all those things which he had already heard by Don
Olmond, Concerning Albumazar's Predictions, and the Resolutions of Zulema: You
see, added she, That all I can do, is to pity you, and bemoan my self. You are
too full of Reason to expect, or ask me, not to follow my Fathers will. At
least Madam, said he, let me flatter my self, that if he were capable of
Changing his Resolution, you would not oppose in I cannot tell you whether I
should oppose it or no, answered she. But I believe, I ought to do it, because
all the Happiness of my life depends upon it. If you believe, Madam, replied
Gonsalvo that you should be unhappy in making me happy, you have reason to
continue the Resolution you have taken: But I dare tell you, that if you
continued in that opinion, which you would have me flatter my self with, you
have nothing could induce you to believe, that it were possible for you to be
unhappy. You are deceived, Madam, when you imagine that you have some little
kindness for me; and I was mistaken too, when I fancied at Alphonses house,
that you were disposed to be favorable to me. Let us say no more, replied
Zayde, of what we might believe of one another, during our abode in that
solitude: And do not make me remember all that might persuade me, that your
mind was taken up with other affliction, than those I might give you. I have
learnt since I saw you at T^luvera, what made you leave the Court Nor do I
question but that you bestowed upon the Memory of Nugna Bella, all the time,
which you did not spend in my company. Gonsalvo was Glad, that Zayde had given
him occasion, to clear all the doubts, which she had of his passion: He laid
open before her the true state his Heart was in, when he first saw her: He told
her moreover, what he suffered for not being able to understand her, and all
that he thought of her affliction: And yet I was not altogether mistaken Madam,
added he, when I believed I had a Rival: And I have been informed since of the
passion the Prince of Tharsus had for you. It Is true Answered Zayde, that
Alamire has professed a passion for me: And that my Father intended to give me
to him, before the saw that Picture, which he keeps with an extraordinary care;
So fully he is persuaded that my Happiness depends upon marrying the man, for
whom it was drawn. Well Madam, said Gonsalvo, you are resolved then, to consent
to it, and to bestow your self upon the man that you shall and like me. If it
be true, that you have no Aversion for me, you may believe that you will have
none for him: So that the assurance I bove, that I am not displeasing to you,
is to me a convincing Argumend, that you will without any Reluctance Marry my
Rival. It is a kind of Misfortune which no man, but my self has ever met with.
And I know not why the condition, I am in should not move your pity. Do not
complain of me, said she; but rather, that you have been born a Spaniard,
Although I should be to you, what you would desire, and that my Father were not
prepossessed, your Country would still be an invincible obstacle against your
wishes. And Zulema would never consent that I should Marry you. Give me leave
at least. Madam, applied Gonsalvo, to acquaint him with my intensions. The
Aversion you showed for Alamire, ought to put him out of hope of making you
marry a man of his Religion: It may be, he is not so tied to Albumazar's words
as you think: In fine Madam, Give me leave to try always, by which I may
Arrive to a happiness, without which it is impossible for me to live. I
consent to what you desire, answered Zayde; nay, and I would have you believe
too, that I fear all your endeavors will prove unsuccessefull.

Gonsalvo went away presently to the King, to beseech him to assist him to
sound Zulema's thoughts, and to try to make him approve of his design. They
concluded to Charge Don Olmond with this Commission; whose address, and
Friendship for Gonsalvo, seemed more likely than any other, to succeed in this
affair. The King writ by him to Zulema: And requested Zayde for Gonsalvo, with
the same Application, as if he demanded her for himself. Don Olmonds journey,
and Don Garcias his Letter, were in vain. Zulema made answer, that the King
Honored him too much, who having his Daughter in his possession, might dispose
of her: But that by his confent, she should never Marry a man, that was of a
contrary Opinion to his own. This answer gave Gonsalvo all the affliction he
could bear: Being beloved of Zayde, he would not acquaint her with the illness
of (...), fearing lest that the certainty of never being his, would make her
Change the intentions she had for him: He told her only, that he did not
despair of gaining Zulemas consent, and obtaining of him what he so earnestly
desired.

The Princess Belleny, Felimes Mother, who was left Sick at Oropese, died a
little after the Peace had been concluded. Osnin was sent to Talavera, to be
with Zulema, until the expiration of the time prefixed, for the releasing of
the Prisoners; and Pelime was conducted to the Court: She had all her wonted
Charms about her. The affliction of her mind had so Macerated her Body, that
her Beauty was impaired by it; but it was not hard to perceive, that her
indisposition of health, had caused this alteration. This Princess was much
surprised, to find, that the same Gonsalvo, whom she believed never to have
known before, and whose Name she could not hear without Horror; for, the Wounds
he gave to the Prince of Tharsus, was the same Theodoric, that she had seen at
Alphonso's House, and that found the way to please Zayde. Her Afflictions were
increased, when she reflected, that what she said to Alamire in the Woods of
Oropese, made him know Gonsalvo for his Rival, and was the occasion of their
Combat.

That Prince was carried to Almaras; she had the satifaction to hear from him
every day; and the consolation, not to be obliged to hide her Affliction, which
was attributed to the Death of her Mother. Alamire, whose Youth for a time
supported his Life, was at last reduced to that extremity of weakness, that the
Physicians began to despair of his Recovery. Felime was with Zayde and
Gonsalvo, when word was brought them, that one of that unfortunate Princes
Gentlemen desired to speak with Zayde: She blushed, and after remaining some
time in a confusion, she caused him to be brought in, and asked aloud, what the
Prince of Tharsus desired. Madam, said he, my Master is upon the point of
Death, and he beggs, he may have the Honor, to see you before he Dies: He hopes
the Condition he is in, will not let you refuse him this Favor. Zayde was
troubled and surprised at the Gentleman's Request; she remained some time
without answering: At last, turning her Eyes toward Gonsalvo, as if it were to
know of him what he would have her do: But seeing he said nothing, and judging
by his Countenance, that he did not desire she should see Alamire: I am very
sorry said she, to the Gentleman, that I cannot gratify the Prince of Tharsus
in what he desires of me; If I thought that my presence would contribute any
thing to his Cure, I would most willingly see him; but being persuaded that it
will avail him nothing, I beg he will excuse my not seeing him; and, I pray
you to assure him, that I am much troubled at his weak Condition. The Gentleman
went away with this Answer; and Felime remained overwhelmed with Grief; of
which, nevertheless, she made no other show but by her silence. Zayde was sad
for Felime, and she had some pity for the wretched Destiny of the Prince of
Tharsus. Gonsalvo was divided, betwixt his joy to see the complaisance Zayde
had for a meaning which he had not so much as acquainted her with, and his
Grief to have deprived that dying Prince of the sight of the Princess.

As all these persons were thus taken up with their diverse thoughts; Alamire's
Gentleman returned again, and told Felime, that his Master desired to see her:
That there was no time to be lost, if she meant to grant him that Favor: Felime
rises from her Seat, and had no other sign of a living Body, but her power to
go: She gave her hand to that Gentleman, and being accompanied by her women,
she went to the place where Alamire lay. She placed her self at his bedside,
and without saying any thing to him, she remained without motion, with her eyes
fixed upon him: I am Happy Madam, said he to her, that the example of Zayde has
not inspired you with the same Cruelty, to refuse me the satisfaction of seeing
you; it was the only Comfort I could expect, since I have been deprived of her,
to whom I took the boldness to pretend. I beseech you to tell her, that she had
reason to think me unworthy of the Honor which Zulema once intended me. My
Heart has been inflamed with so many Fires, and has been profain'd by so many
false Adorations, that it did not deserve to touch hers: But if an inconstancy
which ended at the first sight of her, could be repaired by a passion which
made me directly opposite to what I was before, and by a pursuit, the fullest
of respect that ever was; I do believe, Madam, that I had expiated all the
Crimes of my Life. Assure her Madam, I conjure you, that I had for her the same
kind of Veneration, with which the Gods are adored; and that the Wounds I
received from Gonsalvo, are not so Mortal to me, as to see that he is beloved
by her. You told me the truth in the Woods of Oropese, when you informed me
that her Heart was engaged. I believed it too true, though I told you at first
I did not; I just parted from you, full of the Idea of the happy Spaniard. When
I met Gonsalvo, his resemblance to the Picture which I had seen, and what you
had then told me, struck me of a sudden, so that I made no doubt, but that he
was the Man of whom you spoke. I gave him to understand that I was Alamire; he
fell upon me with that Animosity, as if he had known me for his Rival. I have
been told since, that I was not mistaken, when I took him for the Man, that had
the luck to please Zayde. He deserves her Love, I envy his Happiness, without
thinking him unworthy of her: I Dye oppressed with my misfortunes, without
murmuring; and if I durst, I would only complain of Zaydes inhumanity, in
depriving a Man of her sight, that is going to lose her for Ever. It is easy
to judge, how many mortal Arrows pierced the Sold of Felime at these words of
Alamire. She endeavored once or twice to speak; but her Sighs and her Tears
obstructed her Speech. At last, with a Voice interrupted with Sighs, and
precipitated by a Passion, which she could no longer contain; Believe me, said
she, That if I had been in Zaydes place, no Man should be preferred before the
Prince of Tharsus. In spite of his Grief, he was sensible of the force of
these Words; and she turned her Head aside, to hide the abundance of her Tears,
and to avoid the Eyes of Alamire. Alas, Madam, replied this dying Prince! Can
it possible be, that what you have let me see, can be true? I must confess,
that the Day you spoke to me in the Woods, I believed some part of what I now
dare believe: But, I was so full of trouble, and you so dexterously turned the
Meaning of your Words, that I retained but a very slight Impression of it.
Pardon me, Madam, that I dare think it; and, pardon me, for creating a
Misfortune, which has been more grievous to my self, than to you. I did not
desire to be Happy; I had been too too Fortunate, if --

A sudden Fainting hindered him from proceeding; He lost the use of his Speech:
And, turning his Eyes toward Felime, as if he meant to bid her Adieu, he
closed them for ever, and dyed that very moment. Felimes Tears stopped; she is
drowned in Sorrow: She looks upon this dying Prince with her Eyes fixed in her
Head, and without motion. Her Women, seeing that she did not offer to stir from
her Seat, came and led her away from a Place, where she no longer could see any
thing but dismal and funestuous Objects. She suffered her self to be Conducted
away, without pronouncing one Word: But, when she came into her Chamber, the
Sight of Zayde embitter'd her Sorrow, and gave her Strength to speak. Are you
now satisfied, Madam, said she to her? Alamire is Dead! I, Alamire is Dead,
continued she, as if she were speaking to her self! I shall never see him more!
I have then lost all Hopes of ever being Beloved of him! It is no longer in
Love's Power, to preserve him for me! My Eyes shall never meet with his! His
Presence, which sweetened all my afflicting Misfortunes, is for ever vanished
from my sight. Ah, Madam, said she to Zayde! Is it possible, that any Man
should please you, when Alamire could not? How Cruel was your Humanity? Why
would not you love him? He Adored you most Religiously. What could there be
wanting in him, to render him more Amiable? But, replied Zayde, softly; You
very well know, that I should increase your Sufferings, if I had loved him; and
that it was the only thing in the World, which you apprehended most. It is
true, Madam, answered she; it is true, I was unwilling you should make him so
Happy: But, I would not have had you deprive him of Life. Alas! Why did I with
so much Care, conceal from him the Passion I had for him? Perhaps, it had won
upon him; happily it might have given him some Diversion, from that fatal Love
which he had for you. What was I afraid of? Why should not he know, that my
Heart Adored him? The only Consolation which is left me, is, that he suspected
something of it: Well, although he had known it, it may be, he would have
dissembled that he loved me, and so would have deceived me: What, if he had
continued to deceive me, as he begun? Those dear Moments, wherein he made me
believe that he loved me, are yet precious to my Memory. Is it possible, that
after suffering so many Evils, there should rest still so great for me to
endure? I hope, at least, that my Grief will be strong enough, to bereave me of
Force to support them.

As she talked thus; Gonsalvo came to the Door of her Chamber (not thinking she
was there) to know in what Condition she was in, after returning from Alamire's
Apartment: He withdrew himself suddenly, that he might not irritate her grief
by his Presence: But, he could not do it so quickly, but that she had a Glimpse
of him; and this sight of him, made her cry out so mournfully, that the hardest
Hearts could not choose but be moved there-at. I beseech you, Madam, said she
to Zayde, to give order, that Gonsalvo comes not in^^ my sight: I cannot endure
the Sight of a Man, from whose Hand Alamire received his Death; and who robbed
him of what was dearer to him, than his Life.

The Violence of her Grief took away her Speech, and her Senses: And her Health
being already much impaired, it was easy to perceive, that her Life was in
danger. The King, and the Queen, being told of her Condition, came to see her;
and sent for all that could give her Ease. After five or six Hours lying in a
kind of Lethargy, the Strength of the Medicines which was given her, brought
her to her self: She knew none of the Standers by, but Zayde; who fate weeping
by her, with much sorrow. Do not lament my Loss, said she, (so low, that she
could hardly be over heard); I should no longer be worthy of your Friendshp;
nor could I love a Person that caused the Death of Alamire. She could say no
more. She fell into the same Fainting-Fits again: And the next Day, about the
same Hour that she saw the Prince of Tharsus depart, she ended a Life, which
Love had rendered so Unfortunate.

The Death of two Persons, of so extraordinary Merit, was so worthy of
Compassion, that all the Court of Leon was afflicted there-at: Zaydes Grief was
inexpressible; She loved Felime passionately: and the manner of her Death,
added more Sorrow to her Affliction. All Gonsalvo's Prayers, and his Cares,
could not prevail for several Days with her, to moderate her Grief: But, her
Apprehensions of leaving Spain, and losing Gonsalvo, gave some Respite to her
Tears, to afflict her with another sort of Discontent. The King returned to
Leon: And there remained so little now of what was to fulfill the entire
Accomplishment of the Articles of Peace, that in all appearance, Zulema was
very shortly to re-pass into Africa: Yet, he was not in a condition to Travail;
for, he was dangerously sick, when Felime dyed; and the Extremity he was
reduced to, was kept from Zayde, that she might not be oppressed with so many
Afflictions at one and the same time. Gonsalvo was full of Mortal Disquiet; and
studied all ways, by which he might either induce that Prince to consent to
his Happiness, or persuade Zayde to stay in Spain with the Queen; since Reason
seemed to dispense with her, for not following a Father, that appeared in a
Resolution, to force her to change her Religion. Some Days after they came to
Leon, Gonsalvo came one Evening into the Queens Closet; where Zayde was; but
her Eyes were so fixed upon a Picture of Gonsalvo's, that she did not see him
when he came in. It is decreed, Madam, said he, that I must always be jealous
of Pictures; since I am so even of my own, and must envy the Attention you have
in looking on them. What, of your Picture, answered Zayde, with an extreme
Surprise! Yes, Madam, of my Picture, replied Gonsalvo: I see, you can hardly
believe it, because it is so Handsome; but I assure you, it was drawn for me.
Gonsalve, said she, was there no other Picture drawn for you, like this? Ah,
Madam, cried he, with that kind of Trouble, which uncertain Joys creates in
us! May not I believe what you give cause to suspect, and what I can scarce
dare to tell? Yes, Madam, other Pictures like this you see, have been drawn for
me: But, I dare not give my self the Liberty to believe what I perceive you
think, and what I should have thought long since, if I had judged my self
worthy of those Predictions which have been told you; and if you had not
always assured me, that the Picture which resembled me, was drawn for an
African. I believed so by the Habit, and the Words of Albumazar persuaded me to
it: You know, added she, how much I desired, that you might be the Man you
resembled: But what surprises me, is, that having wished it so much, my
Pre-occupation should hinder me from believing it. I spoke of it to Felime, the
first time I saw you at Alphonso's House. When I saw you again at Talavera, and
was informed of your Birth and Quality, this very Imagination came into my
Mind; but looked only upon it, as a pure Effect of my Wishes. But, How hard a
matter will it be, continued she, fetching a deep Sigh! to persuade my Father,
to believe this Truth? And, how much I fear, that these Predictions, which
seemed true to him when he thought they concerned a Man of his own Persuasion,
will seem false to him, when they relate to a Spaniard? While she thus argued,
the Queen came into the Closet; Gonsalvo made her partake of his Joy: She did
not defer a moment acquainting the King, with the Discourse they had; and the
King came that very instant, to know of Gonsalvo, What remained to be done,
that his Happiness might be completed. After consulting a good while, by what
means Zulema might be won; it was agreed, he should be brought to Court. A
Messenger was in stantly dispatched to Talavera, to acquaint him, that the King
desired he should be brought to Court; and being now perfectly Recovered,
arrived there in few Days. The King received him with great Demonstrations of
Esteem, and led him into his Closet. You would not grant me Zayde, says he,
for the Man of the World I consider the most; but, I hope, you will not refuse
her to him, whose Picture you see here; and to whom, I know, she is destined by
the Predictions of Albumazar. At this, he showed him Gonsalvo's Picture, and
presented to him Gonsalvo himself, who was withdrawn from them a little.
Zulema looks now upon the Picture, and then upon Gonsalvo; and seemed to be in
a deep Study: The King believed, that his Silence proceeded from his
Uncertainty. If you are not fully persuaded, said he, by the Resemblance, that
this is Gonsalvo's Picture; you shall have so many other Proofs, that you shall
have no cause to doubt of it: The Picture you have, which is like this, could
not fall into your Hands, but since the Battle which Nugnes Fernando (
Gonsalvo's Father) lost against the Moors: He caused it to be drawn by an
excellent Painter, who had Traveled over most Parts of the World: He took such
a liking to the African Garb, that he drew all his Pictures in that Habi^. It
is true, Sir, replied Zulema, that I have that Picture, but since the time you
speak of: It is true likewise, because you do me the Honor to say it and the
Resemblance makes it out; that I cannot doubt, but that it is Gonsalvo's
Picture: But that is not the Cause of my Silence, or Astonishment. I admire the
Decrees of Heaven, and the Effects of the Almighties Providence. There has been
no Predictions made to me, Sir: The Words of Albumazar, of which I perceive,
you heard speak, were taken by my Daughter in another Sense than they should
be. But, since you have the Goodness to be concerned for my Daughters Fortune,
give me leave to inform you, what you cannot know but from me; and to show you
the beginning of a Life, which you alone can make Happy.

The just Pretensions my Father had to the Empire of the Caliphe, occasioned
his Banishment into Cyprus; whither I went along with him: There I fell in love
with Alasinthe, and Married her: She was a Christian; I resolved to embrace her
Persuasion; because it was the only way, that seemed to me fit to be lived in:
Nevertheless, the Austerities of it, frighted me, and stopped the Execution of
my Design. I went back into Africa: The Pleasures, and the Corruption of
Manners, re-ingaged me more than ever, in my own Religion, and gave me a fresh
Aversion against Christians. I forgot Alasinthe for many Years: But, at last. I
had a desire to see her, and Zayde, which I had left an Infant: I resolved to
go into: Cyprus to fetch her away, and to make her change her Religion; and
Marry her to the Prince of Fess, of the House of Idris. He had heard of her,
and earnestly desired to have her. His Father had a particular Friendship for
me. The Wars that were then begun in Cyprus, made me hasten my Design: When I
arrived there, I found the Prince of Tharsus in love with Zayde: I thought him
very Deserving. I did not question, but that she had an Inclination for him: I
believed, my Daughter would have been easily persuaded to Marry him: Nor was I
wholly Engaged to the Prince of Fez. Her Mother being a Christian, I feared she
would be an Obstacle to the Design I had, to make Zayde change her Religion. I
gave my consent to Alamire's Pretentions: But was surprised, to find the
Aversion she showed to him. And, during the Siege at Famagosta, all my
Endeavors could not prevail with her, to Marry him. I thought not fit, to
press her too much, to conquer an Aversion which seemed Natural in her; but,
resolved to Marry her to the Prince of Fez, so soon as we should be Landed in
Africa. He writ to me since my Arrival in Cyprus; by which I understood, that
his Mother was Dead: So that, I saw no Obstacle to this Marriage. We left
Famagosta; we landed at Alexandria; where I found Albumazar, with whom I had
been long acquainted. He took notice, that my Daughter looked earnestly upon a
Picture, which I had, that was like this I see. The next Day, as I was speaking
to this Learned Man, of the Aversion she had for Alamire; I told him my
Intention to Marry her to the Prince of Fez, whether she should like him or not.

I doubt, answered Albumazar, whether she will have any Dislike to his Person;
for this Picture, which so much pleases her, is so like that Prince, that I
believe, it was drawn for him. I cannot judge, said I, because I never saw him:
It is not impossible, but that it may be his Picture: Nor do I know, for whom
it was drawn; for, it came into my Hands, by Chance. I wish, that Prince may
please Zayde: But, if she should dislike him, I should not have the same
Complaisance for her, as I had upon the Prince of Tharsus his account. Some
days after, my Daughter prayed Albumazar to tell her something of her Fortune:
As he knew my Intentions; and did believe, that the Picture which she saw, was
made for the Prince of Fez; he told her, without any Design, That his Words
should be taken for a Prediction; That she was destined for him whose Picture
she had seen. I seemed to believe, that Albumazar spoke by a particular
Foreknowledge he had of Things to come. I still appeared to Zayde, to be of the
same Opinion. When I left Alexandria, Albumazar assured me, that I should never
succeed in the Designs I had for her: Nevertheless, I could not lose my Hopes
of bringing them to pass. During my late Sickness, the Design I had formerly
of embracing the True Religion, came so strongly into my Fancy, that since my
Recovery, all my Thoughts have been employed about fortifying my self in this
Resolution; yet, I confess, that this Happy Resolution was not yet so strong,
as it ought to be: But, now I must yield to what Heaven is working in my favor.
It leads me by the same ways, which I meant to follow, in making my Daughter
marry a Man of my own Persuasion, to marry her to one of her Religion. The
Words which Albumazar spoke without Design, only upon a Resemblance, in which
he was mistaken, proves a true Prediction; and this Prediction is accomplished
in every part, by the Happiness which my Daughter will have, in marrying a Man,
that is the Admiration and Wonder of his time. I have nothing more to say, but
to beg of you, Sir, To receive me among the Number of your Subjects; and, To
permit me, to end my Days in your Kingdom.

The King and Gonsalvo were so surprised and over-joyed with Zulema's
Discourse, that they Embraced him without replying; being not able to find
Words of a sudden, to express their satisfaction. At last, after having
declared their Joy, they stood a great while, admiring the Circumstances of so
strange an Adventure: Yet Gonsalvo no way admired, that Albumazar should be
mistaken in his Resemblance to the Prince of Fez; he knew, that others had been
deceived in it, as well as he: He told Zulema, That the Prince of Fez his
Mother, was Sister to Nugnes Fernando, his own Father; and that, being taken
away in an Invasion which the Moors made, she was carried into Africa; where
her Beauty made her Legitimate Wife to the Father of this Prince of Fez.

Zulema went to acquaint his Daughter with what had passed; and it was easy for
him to perceive by her manner of receiving this News, that she was not
insensible of Gonsalvo's Merit: Some few Days after, Zulema made public
Profession of the Christian Faith. Nothing now was thought on, but the
Preparations of this Marriage; which was solemnized with all the Gallantry of
the Moors, and the Politeness of Spain.

FINIS.

