Mr. Speakers SPEECH, WITH HIS MAJESTY'S SPEECH TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT,
At the passing of the Bill for Tonnage and Poundage: BEING An Answer to Mr.
SPEAKERS Speech at the presenting thereof, 22. June 1641.

Printed in the year, 1641.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
CR
royal blazon or coat of arms

Mr. SPEAKERS SPEECH In the LORDS House of Parliament, June 22. 1641.
THat policy, most gracious and dread Sovereign, which weighs the Prerogative
of the King and property of the Subject in the same Scales, and increases the
plenty of the Crown, and contentment of the people; the even poising of this
Beam enables both, the one being ordained for the preservation of the other.

This principle is so riveted into the hearts of your Subjects by the Acts of
their Ancestors, and traditions of their forefathers, that it has created a
belief in them, that their wills are bound to a due allegiance, and their
fortunes and estates, as well as their duty and subjection, must bend to the
Commands of that Sovereign power with which God has invested your sacred
Majesty.

Compulsary obedience, advanced by the transcendent power of Prerogative, is
too weak to support the right of government: It is the affections and estates
of your people, tied with the threads of obedience, by the rules of Law, that
fastens safety and prosperity to the Crown.

The experiment of elder times, in the reigns of the most valiant puissant
Princes, has concluded this the Sovereign preservative against the diseases
of distraction and confusion, and makes it manifest to the world, that the
honor and glory of this Throne is to command the hearts of freemen.

This admitted, the permission of the least diminution, or any eclipsed
interposition between the honor and plenty of the Crown, contracts a Scorn
upon the Nation.

Several Parliaments in former times have stamped the Character of a free gift
upon the forefront of this aid, still offered by the people, as a sacrifice of
thanksgiving to the Crown, for the safe conduct of your Merchants, and
provision of the Navy, to strengthen your undoubted dominion over the seas,
which has protected your Allies, and is a terror to your Enemies.

Our hopes were long since to have settled this for the measure and the time,
and with this to have presented to your sacred Majesty the triumphant palm of
Tranquillity in all your Kingdoms: But, as a ship floating upon a rough Sea,
we have been cast upon the Rock of fear and dangers, and tossed on the Billows
of distraction and distrust of Church and Commonwealth, where we yet remain
hopeless ever to pass through that narrow channel which leads to the Haven
of Peace, unless we be speedily steered on by the hand of your sacred wisdom,
care and providence.

In the midst of all these troubles, and the several opinions which have been
amongst us, no division had power to distract any one of us from the care and
duty we owe to your sacred Person.

And, to that end am I now sent by the Commons of England, to present this as a
Mark only, whereby your sacred Majesty may view the inward duties of our
hearts, until time and opportunity will give leave for a further expression of
our duties and affections. The acceptance of this Gift will glad the hearts of
your people, and the approbation by the royal assent of this Bill (being the
largest for the measure which was ever given) will join wings to our desires
and hopes, which shall never return without that Oliveleafe, which may declare
that the waters are abated, and your sacred Majesty may have full assurance of
the faith and loyalty of your Subjects.

FINIS.

