A LETTER to a Person of Quality, occasioned by a printed Libel, Entitled, The
Cause of the Difference between Tobias Cage Esquire, and Mary his Wife: Stated
by the said Mary in a Letter to a Gentleman, for her own Vindication: The
Design, Malice, and Falsehood whereof is hereby detected with Proofs by Persons
of value, on Oath, and otherwise.
SIR,
I Cannot but acknowledge my obligation to you for acquainting me with this
Libel, which is as false as Hell it self: The design of it was to obstruc^ my
being discharged of my Bonds, for the Peace which my Wife maliciously bound me
in; whereby she conceives her Friend (as she calls him in the the Libel) would
be preserved in his Person, and the Jury who is to try the Caus^ between her
Husband and that Friend, be possessed with some obliquities in he^ Husband, and
so award the less for damages; but principally in pursuance of the old wicked
Design between her and her Friend for a separation from her Husband believing
that a Gentleman can never possibly digest such Slanders and Indignitie^ from a
Wife.

Sir, We are not to judge either of the Integrity, or Wickedness of a Man by
hi^ Affliction, or Prosperity in this Life; Solomon says, the same event
happens to the Just and Unjust; nor yet by what is said on the one side or the
other, but from the Mouth of two or three Witnesses. You know Job was said to
be wicked, because he was afflicted. St. Paul was said to be a pestilent
Fellow, and mad when he wa^ in Bonds; and Sir, you know who was accused to be a
Wine-bibber, and a Frien^ of Publicans and Sinners: Job also had his Wife, and
David his Michal; and yo^ know that Law among the Medes and Persians, That
every man should bear rule in h^ own House, was published upon Vashties
contempt of her Husband. Even Socrat^ the patient Philosopher had his Xantippe,
as well as others. Sir, It has please God to exercise me with Afflictions most
of my days, yet has his Providenc^ miraculously supported me, and that under
this trial by such a Wife as Solomon reckons, a continual dropping, and as
rottenness in the Bones. I am not ignorant o^ the nature and duties of a
married Life, and have now twice experienced it. I have found (as Charon of
Wisdom calls it) the first a Paradise, and this last a Hell i^ comparison of
that sweet society of Life I enjoyed for sixteen Years with my forme^ Wife, of
whom I ever did and must say with an honor to her Memory, Man Daughters have
done virtuously, but thou excelled'st them all: but what I can say of thi^ and
that truly, I shall forbear in all things not necessary for my defense.

^

Sir, I shall answer that infamous Libel with all the moderation I can, and
only show in a plain, familiar, and historical way the whole truth and occasion
of the unparalleled differences between me and my Wife, or rather (as she
calls it) between her and me: some of the Paragraphs of the Libel I recite, and
answer particularly; others as summarily as I can, to avoid prolixity, and make
all good with Proofs.

Libel 1. It being my own interest as well as my obligation to satisfy you in
your request, I shall give you a faithful and impartial account of the rise and
continuance of the difference between me and my Husband.

Answer. This Sir, deserves a Remarque; The Person that thus invites a Wife to
condemn her Husband he never heard, and that in Print, merits a character that
he may be known by; he has taken the designs of his counsels from Achitophel.
When David and Absalom his son were at difference, Achitophel counseled him to
go in unto his Fathers Concubines, in the sight of all Israel, that all Israel
might know he was abhorred of his Father; adding, that then his hands should be
strengthened. Such is this counsel, and given with the same expectation; and
because this Anarchical Counselor is nameless, I will call him Achitophel, who
when he reflects upon his own iniquity in this matter, especially if the hoped
for effects of his counsels fail, perhaps may set his House in order, and make
the same good end.

Libel 2. Before my intermarriage with Mr. Cage, I did by the name of Mary Okey
secure all my Estate in the hands of Mr. John Okey as my Trustee, for the
separate maintenance of my self, Elizabeth Blackwel, and Mary Okey, my two
Daughters by my two former Husbands; and that by a Deed drawn by Mr. Cage
himself: so that no surprise in the case could be pretended.

Note, That here she says, She made provision for the maintenance of her self
and her Children: and page 7. that had she known such a condition had been
foisted into her Articles, viz. of maintaining her self and her Children, she
would never have been the Wife of Mr. Cage. Here observe her justice and
affection, and how Achitophels cunning ^ailed in suffering her thus to
contradict her self: but some sort of People have had memories.

Answ. 2. This cannot be answered but by giving account of the whole
trans^ction before the Marriage, and the several times of every action; and
therefore, ^n the beginning of the Year 1669, I buried my former Wife, with
whom my ^ow Wife was well acquainted and familiar 14 Years before, and had been
seve^al times at my House with her. And about the latter end of October, the
same ^ear I and my present Wife met at Mr. Doelittles, where she took notice of
my Wives death; and shortly after came to advise with me as Counsel in her
suite, ^etween her self and Mr. John Ashburnham, and desired one of my Clerks
might ^ake care of it, which gave frequent opportunities of converse. Within a
little ^ime she desired me to dispose of 500 l. for her at Interest, thereupon
sent me the ^00 l. by Mr. Okeys Son, without taking any Note for the same;
which pray ^bserve. This I put out to Mr. Neal, in the names of Dr. Paget, and
John Okey, ^^ the latter end of November of the same Year: at which time I had
no resolution ^rrying with her. But she having carried her self very obliging
to me. (...) Friends suspecting some affection in the case, endeavored to
divert me; some giving one reason, some another, and proposing considerable
Matches; but I do acknowledge that her extraordinary carriage toward me, made
me believe there was affection, and that she would make me a very tender and
loving Wife, especially considering the circumstances she was under, of two
young Children; and the discouragement and manner of her Husband Okeys death,
which was then used as an argument against my marrying her. I then desired them
to forbear, and declared that as the truth was, I had never proposed or
mentioned marriage to her, but if I knew that she had a real affection for me,
I would marry her. At this time I knew not she was worth a Groat more than the
five hundred Pounds I had put out, unless the 250 l. in Suite with Mr.
Ashburnham, proved good, which appeared then desperate.

The truth of this Mr. Thomas Dun of Spittlefields, or Mris. Rebecka Fowk at
Mr. Buchanons House in Chancery Lane knows, who were the Persons present at
this Discourse. Notwithstanding this resolution, I suffered her to go out of
Town, I never spoke any thing to her of my thoughts of marrying her, until she
returned to her Cosen Okeys in Lawrence Lane, and had layen sick a Week there,
and sent for me, nor until ten days before we married.

Before the 15th of December, we agreed to marry on the 21th following, the
Marriage-Clothes were making before any discourse touching Estate on either
side. But I being willing to free my self from the uncertain expectations of
her Children, by seeing some provision made for them before I married, I
desired to know what her Estate was, and what share thereof her Children should
have: She told me that her Estate in all was 1500 l. good and bad Debts, and
Jewels; and showed me her Jewels, and presented them to me, as she has
confessed upon her Oath, by answer to the Duke of York's Bill, to make me pay
the value thereof, although she knows Mr. Butler the Goldsmith new set them
fashionable at my charge, which cost me 12 l. and I returned them to her again,
and never had any of them since in my custody or power, but a Sapphire Stone of
thirty Shillings. I desired a particular of the Estate: she referred me to Mr.
Okey, who gave me a particular in Writing, as follows, Mr. Neal 500 l. Mr.
Wilson, Mr. Ballard, and Mr. Okey 500 l. Mr. Garth 100 l. Mr. Ashburnham 250 l.
Mr. Rose 40 l. Jewels 100 l. Ephraim Mansil 40 l. In all 1500 and odd Pounds.
This I acquainted her with, and desired her to make some settlement, which she
refused, but left the whole to me, to propose, order, dispose, and settle as I
thought fit. But at my importunity, she declared at first that her Daughters
should have 200 l. a piece; then at my further request, that her Daughter Mary
Okey should have 400 l. and her Daughter Blackwel not so much: Thereupon I
pressed her to name some Counsel, to consult with me about a settlement of the
1500 l. which she refused also, but left the matter wholly to me, whether I
would settle it or no. Then I desired to know whether she was any way indebted,
or was likely to have any other Suite or trouble, but that with Ashburnham; to
which she and Mr. Okey answered, she had not; and thereupon I drew the Deed of
Settlement in the best manner I could: And because I did not know, nor then
enquire, by what kind of Security the said 1500 l. was secured, whether by
Mortgages* Statues (...) Estate or Moneys which might be gotten in by Suites:
but she denying that she was ever likely to have any other Suites; I put as
general words in the Deed as I could make use of, that I might be sure to pass
all the 1500 l. sent the draught of the Deed to her by Mr. Okey to advise with
Counsel, which she refused to do; but she and Okey perused the same, and the
same was sent back to be engrossed, which was faithfully engrossed accordingly,
and by me and her signed and sealed on the Marriage day.

This Deed was made thus voluntarily by me, not at her request, but to protect
and secure the 1500 l. from any accident by me, and notwithstanding that Deed,
Mr. Okey was not to intermeddle with the Estate unless some danger appeared;
and the better to secure it I gave sufficient security to enable her to
reimburse her self, if it any way happened to suffer by me. Sir, For five Years,
and until these differences were completed by him she calls Friend, Okey the
Trustee, never intermedled with the Estate, nor to defend Suites touching the
Estate, or maintenance of the Wife or education of the Children, but all was
cast upon me, as the manager of the Estate; and the truth is, I put a greater
power and confidence in my Wife and Okey than this, relating to her security,
which she has perfideously broken.

The truth of all which Allegations is proved by depositions of Witnesses
examined in Chancery, and that the Deed was engrossed according to the original
draught thereof.

Note, That the true Marriage-agreement lying only in the knowledge of Mr. Okey
the Trustee, the Court of Chancery (after the differences came there) ordered
him to be examined as a Witness, which my Wife would not suffer until he was
taken upon Contempt; and then he and his Wife submitted to be examined: and his
Deposition does agree in all the particulars with his Answer to my Bill in
Chancery against him, all which and all other proof under the hand of the Court
shall at any time be sent to Mr. Miles, Scrivener in Threed-Needle-street,
over against the Crown Tavern, to be perused by any Person that desires
satisfaction in the same, upon notice there left.

That part of Mr. Okeys testimony which relates to this matter before set
forth, I have here inserted immediately after this, and the rest of the Proofs
are at the end of this Letter all together.

John Okey being sworn and examined, deposes, that when the Marriage was in
agitation, the particular of Mrs. Cages Estate given in was 1500 l. which
consisted in these, Mr. Neal 500 l. Mr. Wilson 300 l. Mr. Ballard 100 l. Mr.
Ashburnham 250 l. Mr. Garth 100 l. This Deponent 100 l. Mr. Rose 40 l. Mr.
Ephraim Mansel 40 l. and the said Mary's Jewels 100 l. and this Deponent knows,
that the said Mary did leave the matter touching the Estate wholly to Mr. Cage,
to propose, order, and settle as he thought fit; and knows, that Mr. Cage did
voluntarily declare, that he was resolved to settle the 1500 l. in the Mothers
power for the maintenance of her and her Children, and such Children as he
should have by her; and did seal and deliver the Deed accordingly, that he
managed Mrs. Cages Estate several Years before the Marriage, but he did not
know that she was indebted, had any other Estate, or was liable to any Suites
or troubles. And that Mr. Cage did ^luntarily, and of his own accord and free
will, draw and seal the said Deed (...) Person for her; and that Mr. Cage made
the Deed purely upon the communication that her Portion was 1500 l. and in
order to preserve the same for the maintenance of the said Defendant Mary in
cohabitation with her Husband, and for the maintenance, education, and
preferment of her Children she had and might have by him. That Mrs. Cage did
acquaint the Deponent, that she had known Mr. Cage in his former Wifes days
several Years, and when he was in his troubles, that Mr. Cage gave security to
enable her to reimburse her self, in case the Estate should suffer by his
means. That he does not know when he was to enter on that trust; he did not,
nor was he desired for five Years after the Marriage, nor until Mrs. Cage and
her Husband differed, and during that five Years Mr. Cage without any control,
managed all the Estate, maintained the Wife, and educated the Children with
Music, Dancing, and other Accomplishments, so as Mrs. Cage was very well
pleased therewith, and kept a House and Servants for them and their
accommodation at Highgate. This is the substance of what is sworn, both by his
Depositions and Answers, as to this matter. Mrs. Okey the Trustees Wife in many
things swears the same with her Husband, and that Mrs. Cage was very desirous
of the Marriage, and did declare to Mr. Cage (before the Marriage) that she was
no way indebted, nor likely to have any Suites but Mr. Ashburnhams, nor did she
ever hear her say she had any Estate but 1500 l. and against the Marriage she
sold some Goods to make that up.

Libel 3. Notwithstanding this settlement, my Husband after Marriage got into
his Hands a great part of the Estate belonging to me and my Daughters, partly
by the facility of Mr. Okey my Trustee, who having several Writings and
Business in the Hands of my Husband, was afraid of offending him; and therefore
both paid him Money contrary to my order, and suffered him to receive a
considerable Debt (given by his Royal Highness to my Children,) besides other
Money; all which he still keeps to himself, and partly by other indirect means,
as by getting most of my Jewels and Plate from me, under pretense of securing
them (whilst we should be in the Country,) and then converting them to his own
use, and that I deceived her, pretending to put out Money to one Mr. Mills.

Answ. 3. The settlement was made to secure the 1500 l. Estate, for the
maintenance of her and her Children, and such Children as I should have by her,
upon confidence that she was no way indebted, nor was any way liable unto, or
likely to have any Suites but that of Ashburnhams, which was depending before I
married her. I was scarce warm in my wedding Sheets before Mr. Mead of
Fanchurch-street, by Mrs. Walters, (since Mrs. Vinor,) demands of me 300 l. due
by Bond from my Wife. Mr. Kirkham in Ludgate Street demanded 30 l. expended by
him for her use. One Rise Yates to whom there was a 100 l. due by Bond from
Colonel Okey, which she had promised to pay him for service in the management
of her affairs for several years. One Valentine demanded of me 10 l. due by
Note for nursing of her Daughter Miss Okey. One Mrs. Pool demanded of me about
4 or 6 l. for Silver Lace bought of her. Mr. Tottenham a Linnen-Draper demanded
about the same Sum for Linen. Mr. Somes of St. Paul's Churchyard demanded
about 8 l. (as I remember) for Woolen Cloth. And Mr. John Blackwel her first
Husbands Son has since demanded near 300 l. for Goods and Jewels, proved to to
be delivered to her at a price agreed on; and threatened to sue me upon a Bond
of 5000 l. she entered into to him before the (...) to claim any thing of his
but what he gave her by his Will. To stay which Suite, I obtained an Injunction
in Chancery. Several other Debts were demanded of me, and I sued for several of
them; and by this judge what a dear, a faithful Wife she was like to prove to
me, who brought me her self and two Children to maintain and educate. An Estate
rackt up at her own value at 1500 l. whereof there was not 1100 l. secure; had
I not reason then to get into my hands what Estate I could of hers to defend my
self, and to take these concealments of her Debts very unkindly? But I did
neither, for I did never receive of her Trustee Okey of her Money, more than 20
l. which was paid toward the purchase of the House at Highgate. True it is, I
did Mr. Okey some service, but I do not know that I ever had any Writings of
value of his in my Hands for three days together, and when she clamoured at him
for employing me, I voluntarily left his business. For the Plate and Jewels she
pretends to, I do affirm she had no other pieces of Plate, than a Silver
Thimble, Bodkin, and Spoon; therefore I could get none of them into my Hands.
For her Jewels, she had no Neck-lace but a black Bobbin and one of Glass. She
had indeed a Phoenix Jewel, and some old Rings, which she afterward valued at a
100 l. (not worth 50 l.) part of the 1500 l. which Ring and the Phoenix she
presented to me as an Emblem of her self the fourth day I had declared my
intention of marrying her. True it is, the 21th of December I unhappily married
her; after which, being a thing so suddenly done, and not accommodated with a
House, I brought her to my Chamber at Gray's Inn, which is none of the worst
Chambers: She thinking that too mean for her, complained she was never so
lodged in her life. Then I removed to Lodgings in a great House in Fullers
Rents; there she carried her self so imperiously, that the Mistress of the
House was weary of her; and I being desirous that she might be pleased, desired
her to choose where she would be, she chose one Mrs. Shermans in Bedfordshire,
which though it was inconvenient for me, I agreed to it; and in March after our
Marriage, waited upon her thither, where there was one Mrs. Sparks, a Widow
Gentlewoman, and an acquaintance of hers, Daughter to Mrs. Sherman, who since
married one Mr. Minors of Lichfield; there in a little time, she so deported
her self, and abused Mrs. Minors, that Mrs. Sherman was weary of her company.
Then we returned to the House in Fullers Rents again, where in a little time
she showed her self of the same temper; and thereupon I conceiving that none of
those Persons where she had lived had been educated fit for a Companion for
her, I found out a place in Grays-Inn-Lane, where one Madam Burcher, who had
been the Widow of Mr. Thomas, a Gentleman in Kent did lodge and table Persons
of Quality, and there I carried her, her Daughter Okey and her Maid; and
shortly after, her other Daughter and Sister came to me, for whom I paid the
same proportion, for whom and my self I paid 4 l: a Week. In a short time she
deported her self so haughtily, unquiet, and disobligingly toward Mrs.
Burcher, that I was forced to think of some new place, hoping that she would be
more quiet in a House where she might have none to contend with. I gave her her
choice of Houses near London, she resolved upon Mr. Archers House at Highgate,
which she had seen when she lived with the Lady Marchioness of Dorchester: Of
this House at first, I could have but part, which I took, carried her thither,
took Servants for her, and supplied her with all things necessary: In (...)
House; and in regard Mr. Archer had but a Term of Years, she desired me to
treat with Mr. Blake who had the reversion, who was unwilling to sell it; and
therefore I agreed with Mr. Archer for his Term, which was eleven Years, for
which she promised to lay out part of her 1500 l. Mr. Archer died before
Writings were sealed, the House was out of repair, the Gardens ruined, the
Fences all down; yet I agreed with Mr. (...) Mr. Archers Assignee, for a 100 l.
of which having no Witness, Mr. (...) presently sold it to a Neighbor for a
120 l. which my Wife took for such an affront, that she put me upon suing for
my Bargain in Chancery, which I accordingly did, sued for the same in my own
and Wifes name, to be settled upon her; which Suite was soon determined, a
Conveyance drawn and engrossed, of the House to her Trustee Okey, with an
Indorsement thereon, under my Hand and Seal, that the Money paid for it was
part of her 1500 l. that the Conveyance was made in trust for her, and to be
disposed of by her according to Marriage-settlement; which Deed with the
Indorsement was and is left with Mr. Okey the Trustee, and the same is proved
by the Deposition of Mr. Anthony Smith in Chancery, who engrossed the Bill in
Chancery, Deed, and Indorsement: judge therefore how true that charge of the
Libel is, that I made the Conveyance of the House to my own use.

And as to that of Mr. Mills, there is something of truth in that, but not as
the Libel declares. The Michaelmas after my unhappy Marriage, I received of Mr.
Neal 25 l. for 500 l. of her 1500 l. I had laid out with him for 100 l. p. an.
for seven Years by her consent; 25 l. whereof I did put out to Mr. Mills, and
in Michaelmas Term (her Cause with Mr. Ashburham being to be heard in Chancery)
I did take that 25 l. in to employ the same in defense of Mr. Ashburhams Suite,
but as to all other the circumstances of that allegation, the same is
abominably false throughout. And as to that part which says Mr. Okey permitted
me to receive a considerable Debt, which was granted to her by his Royal
Highness, is utterly false, for the Debt she means, was a Debt due by Bond to
Colonel Okey, from one Shepherd, and one Rogers, the remainder of some
purchase Money of a public Title. The Bond she had in her custody, which she
had sued before my Marriage, and was nonsuited, which the Defendents have also
sworn. Two Years after I married her she brought me that Bond, and told me she
had sued it, but could get nothing, and if I could get any thing she would be
glad: Thereupon I by agreement with the Dukes Attorney Sir Francis Goodrike,
sued the Obligors who lived in Somersetshire by English Bill in the Exchequer.
The Persons being so remote, and I having no acquaintance near them, was forced
to employ an Attorney at 50 Miles from them, and Commissioners (Strangers to
me) at as great a distance to examine Witnesses in the Cause. The Sheriff also
and his Bailiffs, being remote, wrought upon me; so that the expense of that
Suite cost me 105 l. I recovered by Decree but 250 l. of which Mr. Doelittle,
and Mr. Vincent being Ministers of London, applying themselves to me in behalf
of Shepherd, affirming him to be an honest Man, I remitted 50 l. so that of
that Debt which was no part of her 1500 l. nor any part of her Estate, being
before granted away to another Person with whom I have since had a contest, I
never received clear a 100 l. w^^^h I had before laid (...) her importunity
(...) hindered her at any time to repair to her Trustee, or to any Person but
this Friend, and Dr. Paget, after he had given her advice not to return home.

Libel 4. Observing these with other contrivances of my Husband, as his
pressing me to sell 700 l. which I have settled upon my two Daughters, telling
me that he could obtain a Decree in Chancery confirming the sale, grievously
abusing me for my denial of it, which was one of the reasons of his quarrelling
with me; and when in this he could not have his ends, to perfect my
unhappiness, his endeavoring to alienate from me the affections of my
Children, knowing that all the comfort I have left in this World, is their
tenderness of me, obedience and dutifulness toward me, and particularly in
tempting my Daughter Blackwel to go into France, for the advantage of her
better breeding than England could afford her; offering to go with her himself
to settle her there, which he did, that he might upon her account have a
seeming just pretense for his vexatious Suites against me, and give some show
of truth to that false and groundless Slander in his Answer to my Bill, and in
his Affidavit annexed to his Petition to my Lord Chancellor, where he makes
his reproving me for my severity to my Children one cause of our difference;
when indeed he perfectly hates them for their affection and obedience to me,
and because they will not be drawn off from me to him, and fearing that by
degrees he would get all my Estate into his Hands, and then turn me and my
Children out of doors; and also, having discovered his design of quitting me,
by a Letter under his own hand, (in answer to one writ to him by a Friend of
his, advising him to deal honestly and justly with me and my Children,) which
Letter was showed and read to me, wherein he declares that it had been, and
still was his design, which he would pursue, to part with me; and likewise,
being advised by the same Friends of his to look to my self, otherwise he would
not leave me Bread, I endeavored to hinder his receiving any more Money of
mine.

Answ. 4. I never was guilty of designing any wrong or injury to her or her
Children; nor did I ever know or hear that she settled or designed to settle
700 l. upon her Children; or did I ever move her to sell or part with any part
of her Estate, saving to her Children; nor did I ever oppose her, or differ
with her touching her Estate, or giving her Children any part of it, but the
true and only causes are as follow. About three Years after my Marriage (the
Friend mentioned, and intended in her Letter) repaired often to my House in my
absence, and never but once, and to my Chamber twice or thrice at most to my
remembrance, in my presence; and when he had been there, I found her at my
return home, always very discoursive and talkative, touching Persons not fit to
be his or her Subject of Discourse, now she was my Wife, to say no more: All
these intelligences of public affairs she derived from this pretended Friend,
which she did usually inform me of; and I perceiving them to be dangerous, did
admonish her to avoid his company. She told him this, and thereupon he sought
occasions of rendering me in an ill character to my Wife, endeavored to render
me inconsiderable, sometimes one way, sometimes another, and used this
expression, What did you marry this Cage for? I have 800 l. per annum, and if
you had stayed, I had married you? Of this (Sir) in discontent she one day told
me. I then suspecting this friend had some design of making a breach, then
begged of her to forbear his company: and yet notwithstanding my request, I had
notice that he (...) thither in my absence some considerable time after. I
having (...) and being informed that she had so cruely beaten Miss Okey, for
(with that appellation I always treated her Children) I took notice thereof to
her, with some little earnestness. Shortly after I had complaints of her
beating her Daughter Blackwel naked in her Bed, with a Hazel Stick, until she
brake it, of which her said Daughter keeps a piece to this day, I also reproved
her for it: After that, finding that she had so cruelly abused Miss Okey,
treading her under her Feet, which did so exasperate the Child, that she got a
great piece of Bread and Cheese in her Coats and ran away, and resolved to beg
rather than return to her Mother; her Mother sent about to find her, brought
her home, and for her entertainment, beat her until she was all in a gore of
Blood; the Child again hid her self, sometimes in the Hay-Loft, sometimes under
Hedges, nor ever came into the House to eat a bit of Victuals until I returned
home, which was three days; when I came home, missing the Child, I enquired for
her, who at last appeared, and her Mother complained of her, I enquiring into
the matter, endeavored to reconcile them, and when I went to Bed I seriously
discoursed my Wife, and advised her, and showed her there was no such cause of
cruelty, and for my pains I was forced to rise out of Bed at midnight, and walk
in the Garden all night. This being Saturday, and on Monday morning before I
came to Town I reconciled her and her Daughter, as I thought; I was no sooner
gone but she took her Daughter up into the Purple Closet, beat her until her
Nose bled, then locked her into the Closet, until my Wifes Woman taking pity of
the Child, looked in at the Keyhole, spied her upon the ground, lying in her
Blood, forced open the door and relieved her, who (as the Genlewoman told me)
believed she had perished had not she relieved her. Another time my Wifes
Brother Captain Rose being at Highgate, my Wife took a Broom, and with both her
hands struck at the head of the Child, which her Brother defended, using these
words to me, Brother, If you do not interpose, my Sister will spoil that Child.
Next she fell upon her Daughter Blackwel and beat her most cruelly: when I came
in I found the Daughter in the Chamber, lamenting her Mothers cruelty; I
enquired, and she told me the cause which was trivial. I must confess I was
wounded at my very Soul to see the daily affliction the poor Children were in
under the tyrannical spirit of their Mother, sometimes one, sometimes the other
hiding themselves for two or three days until I come home, and conceiving that
by the marriage of their Mother I was somewhat concerned in them, and that it
was my duty to interpose, I resolved to do it effectually, and did thoroughly
discourse with Arguments from Nature and Scripture, and I think covinced her,
but the effect was lamentable: She fell upon me saying, What have you to do
with my Children? You, you, (making hideous grimaces) and pronounced it with so
il an Accent, that I then thought it was my duty to deal more plainly with her
which I did with all the moderation I could. In short, all the return I had
from her was, You are a Rogue, a base Fellow, and several other opprobrious
words. This unexpected language from a Wife, I confess made me amazed; but
without offering the least violence to her Person, I departed to my Chamber at
Gray's Inn* leaving this resolution with her, that I would not return again to
her until I were justified or condemned by some of her own Friends or
Relations. And this I ker^ too; and thereupon Colonel Birch, Dr. Paget, and
Mr. Okey the Trustee (...) she was any way faulty, otherwise than through
discontents, (as she pretended) that her Estate was wasted, which she had never
pretended unto before that instant. They refused to intermeddle, unless I would
submit they should enquire into that, and settle the matters of Estate between
us, which I did, so that I might be secured of quietness for the future. At the
last meeting of these Persons, Colonel Birch dictated the heads of an Award
touching the Estate, which though but just, was more for my advantage than I
expected. The next day Colonel Birch informed her of this Award, at which she
railed at him at Mr. Okeys House in such a manner, that from that time he would
no more meddle; but at the same time a Person telling her that I desired she
would return home to me, Dr. Paget as I am credibly informed, said no, Let him
bite of the Bridle; either he or some other present said, if he will not submit
we will choke him with the Judgment, meaning the security I had entered into,
to secure her 1500 l. Estate after my death, in case it should fall short by my
means. From this time she absented her self; and had I not then reason to
suspect the Doctor, who not only encouraged her in this separation, but went
with her to counsel? I confess, her stubborn absence greatly afflicted me,
nevertheless I made all the applications that any Gentleman, nay Man,
reasonably could, by Friends of her own, Ministers, nay by her own Trustee, who
found her implacable. This being about August 1674, I resolved as the best way
to bring her to her self, to serve her Trustee Okey with a Sub-Poena, to answer
a Bill in Michaelmas Term following: My intent was, and so was the Bill, to
complain of her absence, and to have the Marriage-Deed, or the Award of
Colonel Birch, Dr. Paget, and Okey decreed. Upon this she complains to Mr.
Abraham Barrington of London, pretending she was willing to do whatsoever he
advised her, who applied himself to me, and offered his friendly Mediation,
which I thankfully accepted. The further account whereof, and my Grievances
then declared, also an account of the several References and Proceedings
thereon, and in what manner this pretended Friend has carried himself, you
will meet with all by and by.

As to my desiring Betty Blackwel to go with me into France; true it is, I
being in this affliction, and she desperately in love with one Mr. Browning a
Merchant who failed, and her Mother managing that business with great
indescretion and cruelty to her Daughter, and I my self being resolved to step
over into France for divertisement, not being able to mind my Employment, I was
willing for Betty Blackwels diversion also to carry her over with me, but I do
not remember or believe that ever I spoke or sent to her of any such thing, nor
would I have done it without her Mothers consent: But I well know Ingratitude
is her Mothers nature, and that I am rewarded for my kindness to her and hers
as her former Husbands for theirs, one of them with treachery, if not both with
death: Mr. Blackwels Sister told her so before me. And her abusing Colonel
Okey in his absence (she knows how,) and in the Tower her unquietness with him,
(she knows the circumstances) denote the kindness she had for him; and I
solemnly protest she has said that her Husband Blackwel was an old Knave and
deceived her, for that his agreement with the Marquess of Dorchester was to
make her a Jointure of ancient Title, and he made it of Fee-Farm-rent, which
was lost by the King's return; and (...) she importuned me to insert in a Bill
in Chancery against Mr. John Blackwel^ (...) Houses in Oldstreet which he had
settled to secure her Jointure before the Settlement. That he kept a Whore in
his House at Brogborough before he married her, but she her self routed her.
Sir, I find I shall be too troublesome to you to make the tedious recitals of
the particular Paragraphs of the rest of the Libel, I will only touch the
particular things she charges me withal, and give you some Arguments against
them, where necessary and sufficient Proofs by Depositions and living
Testimonies that the Causes of Difference are not relating to her Estate, or
any desire I ever had to possess that, but her conversing with this pretended
Friend, her cruelty to her Children, her Unkindness, Treachery and
Perfideousness to me her Husband, are the Causes, and the only Causes of my
Grief and Trouble.

And first, Sir, as to her Falsehood, in pretending that I desired to separate
my self, or break my Marriage-Vows, or that I ever confessed to her that I had
committed Adultery; these are the greatest Wrongs that ever were offered to a
Man by a Wife of his bosom: For had this been true that I had acquainted her
with such a Folly as a Secret, can you believe any Wife of Generosity could
have discovered it? it had been certainly a sin against the most common
Ingenuity. But I do solemnly deny it, or that ever I carnally knew any Woman
that was vicious to my knowledge; but for that she her self best knows. For my
other Wife, I dare answer for her, who I am sure was as virtuous and modest as
ever was any person now a Saint in Heaven. It has been her practice to asperse
all of her sex that have been any way concerned with me (either as Clients,
Witnesses, or Friends) as lewd and vicious, not sparing my Relations, Persons
of Quality, nor her own Neices, her Brother's Daughter; whom I believe was as
virtuous (if not more virtuous) than her own Daughter; I am sure more just,
grateful, and modest.

Sir, I lived forty years before I married this Woman, I was never taxed,
suspected, or gave the least cause to suspect I had any converse with any
vicious person before I married her. Give me leave to inform you of one Hellish
practice of this Woman's, to take off the Testimony of one Mrs. A. Price, a
Ministers Daughter that waited on her, a Gentlewoman well known to be virtuous
to Mrs. Pledger the Minister's Widow, her Relation is as follows.

Mr. Barrington in the time of his Mediation before mentioned, desired to
discourse some Servants who had lived with us: this Mrs. Price being my Wifes
Woman, among others was called, and speaking her Conscience touching my Wifes
Behavior toward my self and her Children; Mr. Barrington condemned my Wife,
and acquainted her, that Mrs. Price was a sober Woman, and being now married
had no dependence on us, and that Credit was to be given to her Testimony; and
she had told him my Wife was very unquiet with me, that I was forced sometimes
to leave my Dinner and Supper, other times to rise out of my Bed, and walk all
Night. Mr. Barrington's Endeavors taking no effect, the Suits at Law
proceeded, and this Friend, in the Libel named, reparired with my Wife to Sir
Francis Winnington, Solicitor General, to retain him. He took their Fee, but
with this Condition, That they should refer the Matters in difference to him:
to which I also submitted. Sir Francis appointed several days to hear the
Matters, we accordingly attended. It being demanded of me what my Grievances
were, I told him, her keeping this Friend company against my injunction the
(...) made not many Demands, and applied himself to her to show him her
Grievaances. Upon which she replied with great art, Ah Sir! (with a Sigh fetched
from the Abyss of Hell) my Grievances are such as never Woman's were; Mr. Cage
(but I am loath to shame him), and makes a Stop. Pray go on Madam, said Sir
Francis Winnington. I am loath to disparage Mr. Cage, says she: To which I
replied, Wife, we come to deal plainly with Sir Francis Winnington, he has
been pleased to undertake the Cure, he cannot heal unless he knows the Wound,
and the Bottom of it; therefore pray speak fully the whole Truth, and nothing
but the Truth. Whereupon she went on, Ah Sir! (sighing again) Mr. Cage used to
rise from my Bed, and go to bed to my Maid. How, says Sir Francis Winnington! I
was about to reply, but he stopped me, and bid her go on. Sir, said she, nothing
else could have made Mr. Cage and I at a difference: and Sir, after he had long
used this, he marries her off; and after he invites her to see us at Highgate,
and when she came, told her his House was at her service, come as often, and
stay as long as she pleased. She must sit at my Table, and if I did not cut her
the first and best piece, Mr. Cage was ready to stab me.

I being not able to hold longer, told Sir Francis Winington that I could not
have believed there could be such a Devilish Design hatched on this side Hell.
Upon which Sir Francis told her, I doubt, Madam, you are jealous. She replies,
Sir, it is past that. Madam, said Sir Francis, do not conceit such a thing. No,
Sir, (continued she) I Will give you Proofs, and with a brow of Brass begins
thus: When Price was there, Mr. Cage forced me to visit the Lady Marquess of
Dorchester, and sent the Servants and Children, and this Queans Husband to the
Garden to Stool-ball, and took his Wife up into my Chamber: I returned home
before they expected, and knocked at the door a good while: (Sir, I beseech you
observe the Cunning and Subtilty of this Woman) by and by I heard four feet
coming down stairs, two heavier and two lighter, which I thought had been the
Mastiff-Dogg; (Note, the Stairs were two Rooms from the Door) by and by Mr.
Cage opens the Door, and holds it a-jar, put it to and fro, as if he had been
jesting with me. I observed disorder in his Face as if he had been doing
something, and with that I thrust the Door from me, and I saw the shadow of
this Baggage running into the Garden: To which Sir Francis replied, Madam, Mr.
Cage and she might be in the House and not naught together; I doubt you are
jealous. Nay, says she, be gave the Queen twenty shillings a time when she
lived with me. I Will make it plain to you yet, (I protest I was never so amazed
in my life, I was wondering what would come next when she thus began again) I
went up into my Chamber, and there my Chamber was disordered, and my Bed
tumbled, I called my Maid Mary, and chid her for not setting my Chamber in
order. She told me that Mr. Cage and Mrs. Price had been there all the
afternoon, and she durst not come into the Chamber. Upon which Sir Francis took
notice, I pray, Madam, let me speak with that Maid Mary. She alleged she was
gone from her, and could not produce her: Thereupon Sir Francis advised me to
find her out, and that she might make Oath touching that matter. The said Mary,
(who was a Gentleman's Daughter, and waited on my Wife, deposed, That all this
Allegation was untrue, as by her Oath among the Depositions hereunto annexed
may appear; which when you have read, judge I beseech you, if ever such a Woman
lived before her.

And to show her further Deceit and Subtilty, observe the like about the
pretend^ (...) for a Separation, she pretended great care of me, procured her
Sister to provide a Servant for me to wait on me in my Chamber at Gray's Inn,
for I had none before; she came about Bartholomew Tide; my Wife before
Christmas absents: March following 1674 Mr. Cremor of Gray's Inn had been
informed that this Wench haunted suspected houses, acquainted me with it,
advised me to turn her away. I gave her Warning, and in June turned her away.
In August following comes a Letter by the Post, directed to Mr. A. S. of
Grayes-Inn, then my Clerk, and is as follows; The Superscription, To Mr. A. S.
at Mr. Cage's Chamber in Gray's Inn.

After the first fold opened was wrote, thus, To Mr. A. S. at some of the
Bawdy-Houses, or with the Crew in Gray's Inn. Within thus:

THis is to imform you of the truth. There is one intends to lay the third
Child on your back, which I do not really think is yours, but your Masters; he
is better able to keep it, for you have more than you can keep already, for now
you begin to want Chink, having no Suppliers but Spenders; you may lick your
Breech like a Dog, (if you have any left;) for in sometime you will not have
Money to buy you Plasters, and I believe the Squire is in as much need as your
self; but he is a Gentleman, therefore I pity him, and if his Wife were dead I
would do what I could to help him to such another, but in some things she
should not be like this, for she should be as ugly as all the Devils could make
her, no more wit than himself, like an Ostrich, and as much Heathen as he is
Turk. Take this advice young Man, though old in sin; Ponder well thy paths, and
enter no more into the house of an Harlot, lest thou sleep the sleep of death,
and so be taken in an evil hour. Thus desiring to hear you are in another
World, I conclude for ever. Amen.

Anno Domini, 1677.

Sir, Of whose contrivance can you think this Letter was, what could be the
design of it? I am satisfied (Sir) my Wife contrived it, it is certain, she
sent it to her Daughter Blackwel to be there transcribed, and sent it up by the
Post, directed as above. I suppose you will take it as a magical Prediction of
what was intended, viz. the laying a Bastard to my charge for a farther
pretense of separation; for (Sir) she knew the Wench was of ill fame, and had
layn at a suspected House, before she procured her Sister to hire her for me;
my Wife had a correspondency with the Wench whilst she lived with me, met her
several times. And Sir, is it not strange that my Wife (who for eighteen Months
before was not to be heard of,) should within four days after this Wench was
brought to Bed, (if there was any such matter) find out the Wench, examine her
with so much cunning and patience, and so unconcernedly endure to be told that
her Husband was so familiar with her nine Months, without leaving some marks
upon her?

Note, The Wench lived not above ten Months in all with me, of which my Cousin
Mr. William Cage was my constant Bedfellow for four Months before she went
away, and never lodged from me. I had warned her away in March, she went away
in June, and had the Bastard (if any) in January following: it is not probable,
that after the Wench had taken warning to be gone, she should be willing, nor
yet that I should venture after Mr. Cramer gave me notice of her haunting
Bawdyhouses.

And (...) my Wif^ (...) several Persons as witnesses for a pretense with her:
And because, when I heard of this damnable design against me, I resolved to
punish the Wench, and for that end gave to Mr. Winford in Fullers Rents (whose
Cook Maid she then was) ten Shillings to get a Warrant, and to set a watch upon
her that she should not get away before the matter was examined before a
Magistrate. But my Wife gave her another visit, pretending to search the
Bastard for a Mole I had on my Body, which no Person knew but my Wife, and this
mark she acquainted the Woman of the House with, that the Wench might the
better pretend to a familiar acquaintance with me. Sir, This Wench on the
sudden (to prevent my bringing the matter to a full examination) was conveyed
away, without either my will or knowledge, and whither I know not, or whether
there ever was any Bastard of that Wenches, (as pretended) I know not, nor did
I ever hear that the Wench was with Child until this Bastard Plot was
discovered. And Sir, although my Wife has several times declared in several
places, and to me afterward, that she had searched to the bottom of the
business, and was satisfied I was wronged in that matter, yet I have ever since
laid out to have this Wench taken; I have offered five Pounds to effect it, and
will now give the same Sum to have her taken, that the matter may come into
Judgment publicly; nay Sir, I have sued, and do now sue in the Spiritual Court
a Consort of my Wifes for it, that the truth may appear; nor certainly, would
any man think me so silly as not to have prevented the disgrace, by providing
otherwise for the Whore, and in a more remote place than Fullers Rents was,
which joins to Gray's Inn; where the Libel says, the Whore was lodged for
neighboured.

Sir, I would not have insisted so much upon this mean matter, but that my Wife
used it as her Achilean argument to justify her treacherous departing from me,
notwithstanding she was gone from me eighteen Months before.

As to those falsities of turning my Wife out of doors, and bidding my Servant
to shut the door upon her, and threatening to fire the House over her head: Thus
I say, when I bought the house at Highgate for her, and had drawn the
Conveyance ready, she refused to pay for it according to her agreement, nor had
I any Money of hers in my hands, or to command, to pay for it, I having at that
time laid out above 400 l. in Suites at Law in her concerns, as Mr. Middleton
and Mr. Barrington, who were sent on the sudden to view my Books, found: Mr.
Middleton then cast up my Book and signed it. I did, as I remember, bid my
Servant acquaint her, then (as the truth was) that I was sued in an Ejectment
for that House, and that I had covenanted that she or her Trustee should pay
the Money, or I would deliver possession of the House by such a day, if she did
not the one or the other, she would be turned out of possession: But I do not
remember, nor can I believe that I ever did threaten the firing of another Man's
House, so penal by ^he Law, no less than Felony: And I do solemnly protest,
that from the first day of my Marriage to this very time, I did never turn her,
or cause her to be turned out of any House or Place where I lived, or the door
to be shut against her: But ^rue it is, after she had disturbed me in my
business at Gray's Inn, and I provided a Lodging for her, I locked my Chamber
door, and when she had left the House at ^ighgate, and taken away and sold
several of my Goods, bought with my own (...) Chairs of my Parlour, and other
things, I did then indeed forbid my Servant to suffer her or her Daughter any
more to ransack the House. As to any Servant denying her otherwise entrance or
admittance unto me, where ever I was, or at any hour, none ever durst be so
saucy, or had any such orders. As to Mr. Middletons endeavoring to introduce
her, and sending Mr. Okey to acquaint me with it, and that I refused it, there
is nothing more false; for Mr. Middleton knows that when I heard that he was
persuading her to return to her duty, and that she refused it, and went away on
Foot toward Highgate, I was greatly troubled, and sent Mr. Okey one way, and my
Clerk another, a third Person another, to bring her back if possibly; nor did I
ever take or keep any Woman-servant against her consent, otherwise than is
hereafter set forth. When she absented her self from me for eighteen Months
together, and at last returned home, with a design to have a further advantage
against me, then I having a Servant-maid who lived with me about six Months,
and one Year before with her; and my Wife desiring to introduce another, who
lived in the House where she was concealed from me all that time, and of the
Plot as I concluded, she, I say, desiring I would turn my Maidservant away,
and admit of hers: I acknowledge I did refuse it, but declared that if she
would take a mere Stranger to all the differences, I would turn her away,
otherwise I would keep them both, that she desired to introduce, and that I
had, that I might have one Person that might testify for my Carriage, as well
as she one for hers: and this the righteous God knows was all the design I had
in keeping of that Maidservant; and as soon as my Wife had provided Elizabeth
Gun that was such a Stranger, (nay, I think sooner,) I turned my Maid away: Nor
did I ever endeavor any ways to weaken the Marriage Articles, if she would
live with me as a Wife, but endeavored to have them decreed according to the
intent and meaning thereof; which was, that an equitable proportion of the
profits of the 1500 l. might be set out for her maintenance with me, and the
residue thereof (after her Debts paid, and my just disbursements for the
maintenance and education of her Children, and in Suites at Law in defense of
her, and occasioned by her) should be given to her Children upon their
preferment in Marriage. I acknowledge in my Bill (which was commenced
Michaelmas Term 1674) I lay the cause of our Suites (but not the first
differences) upon Doctor Paget, and I still do affirm the same. It is true,
when she absented her self for eighteen Months together, I not knowing where to
find her, to reduce her to a society with me as a Wife, the Marriage-settlement
being made to secure her maintenance in cohabitation as a Wife, and she had
broke her Marriage vows with me by her absence, I did deliver to several
Persons Papers to prohibit their receiving her, or paying her any Money; yet at
the same time gave private instruction to Mr. Okey to supply her, and not to
let her want. I deny that my Bill in Chancery was ever condemned for being
scandalous or impertinent by any Master whatsoever; but true it is, Sir Miles
Cock (as I am informed) did tax 12 l. cost, without summoning me, to be paid to
Doctor Paget upon my exceptions to his insufficient Answer, for saying, my Wife
absented her self from me by the instigation of the Devil, and the Doctor the
Defendant, but I believe such Costs were never taxed before (...) Paget to
reward him in that kind for his ill advice, I need not, I have had opportunity
enough. For Stedman, I believe I have said, no Gentleman would have advised a
Wife to separate her self from her Husband, to maintain a Bill against him in
the name of another man, and that his Wife and Children too has more cause to
complain than my Wife. For Mr. Jenner, another of her Counsel, I deny that ever
I saw him to my knowledge, or that ever I wrote a Sentence, Letter, ot Note to
him; for all the rest of that Slander, there is no part of it true: Nor did I
ever desire Mr. Middleton of Hackney to acquaint her capricious Friend with the
differences, for I did never think him a man either of Brains or good will
enough to do any good office between me and my Wife, which long since appeared,
but more particularly now of late, as follows: Mr. Barrington met this
pretended Friend upon the Exchange, and moved to him, that there might be some
end put to the differences between Mr. Cage and his Wife, any end were better
then none: The pious Friend replies, There can be no end. Certainly this
upstart Dictators Decree is not unlike that advice given to the treacherous
Cateline by the Ghost of factious Scylla (one of the Council of State in the
Roman Commonwealth,) The evils thou have done cannot be safe without attempting
greater: So here, there can be no end (says he) according to the modern
principle, When the Sword is drawn against the Head, throw away the Scabbard.

Sir, It Is a thing impossible to answer this Libel in any method, because it is
confusedly, and disorderly, as well as maliciously penned: Sometimes the Friend
is mentioned in one place, sometimes in another, and so in several places, That
a Gentleman seeing this Libel in my Chamber, concluded by the Style, that the
same Pen that wrote The Worlds Mistake in Oliver Cromwell, wrote this. But now
to apply wholly to the divorcing Friend, I do (as the Libel says) lay the whole
blame of the difference upon him, not for the reason of lending his Name (to
sue me before he discoursed me,) but for maliciously endeavoring a separation
some considerable time before the differences broke out; for Mr. Abraham
Barrington of London, the first Mediator for our reconciliation, before any
Bill in Chancery was filed on either side, at Bartholomew Tide 1674, (when his
Family was in the Country,) appointed us to meet him at his house in
Suffolk-Lane for privacy, that we might have liberty to talk our Bellies full,
(as he himself expressed it:) Meet we did there, but I confess I durst not
enter the lists, (she always worsting me at that;) therefore she being in one
Room and my self in another, I entreated Mr. Barrington to deal with us
severally there: As one of my principal grievances, I complained that this
Person had sowed dissension, endeavored a breach, and that my Wife her self
had told me he had used this expression to her at my House in my absence; Is
this your man of discretion, to make Walks here, and no longer time in the
House? Another time, What did you marry this Cage for? if you had stayed I had
married you, I have 800 l. per annum. I was afterward frequently upbraided
with what a Fortune she had lost for me. Sir, his saying this to my Wife was
occasioned by my desiring her to forbear his company, she having discovered to
me his principles and usual discourse of Persons, not fit to be rendered in such
Characters by any Englishman; to my disturbance, many times when I came home,
for I (...) discours^^ Sir I confess their wo^ so (...) made then also, was,
that she would abandon this pretended Friend: which she refusing before Mr.
Barrington, I then charged her to forbear his company. This also, Sir, was long
before any Suite, I say, 'twas in August 1674. Mr. Barrington used long and
earnest endeavors of reconciliation, until the beginning of Michaelmas Term:
And now, Sir, see how obliging my Wife was to me; instead of abandonding his
company, she visits him at his Chamber frequently, and publicly goes abroad
with him in affront to me, forsakes my company wholly, and sends railing, lying
Letters, which I have by me, to one of which she subscribes my Name, and
strikes a dash through it thus, Cage. One day meeting her at Mr. Doelittles,
where she took Sanctuary, and communicated with his Hearers in the height of
this malice. I would have taken her home with me. She sends for a Constable to
have me before the Lord Mayor, and before she came before him, she ran away;
and she then (at Mr. Doelittles) told me, she would keep this Friend company in
spite of me, and declared the same at another time to Mr. Creamer. Mr.
Barrrington prevailed with her at the beginning of Michaelmas Term to come and
dine at my Chamber. I then also told her my dissatisfaction touching the design
of this Friend, and begged of her (with all the fervency of my soul) to abandon
him; after this was named, she would not by any means stay with me that night,
which Mr. Barrington cannot but remember. Sir, before the end of Michaelmas
Term I entreated her to let me know what the matter was why she was so unjust,
for I solemnly protest I did not know; nay her Daughter Blackwel knows, and
has told it to diverse, that I once gave her a Pen, Ink, and Paper, and bid her
write what she would, touching her Estate, and it should be done; but she would
not. The next news I heard of my Wife (instead of complying with me) was, that
this precious Friend had in affront to me, brought a Bill in his own name
against me, for and on the behalf of my Wife, therein abusing me, complaining
falsely I had altered the Marriage-settlement, and scandalously alleges that my
Wife had no Child by me, and we were parted, (as my Wife calls it in her
Libel;) which I never knew of, nor agreed unto, nor ever will. I am now on such
a Subject, that I know not when I should leave it; if I should suffer my self
to tell you all the unworthiness of these two precious Friends, how the one
has answered her Marriage vows, and the other the profession of Piety he
makes. I will only add this in answer to that part of the Libel, that says I so
much desired the company of that Friend, but really I never did so but once at
dinner, which was before I knew him, and that in kindness to my Wife, being
desirous to show respect to all Persons she called Friends, when I first
married her; I have ever since avoided him as much as I could; I never took him
to be a man fit for the society of any but of his own humor, his converse being
only of the Rapines and Ruins of the late Times and Persons, his own
dissatisfaction, and quarrelling with those above him. The next, Sir, is to
show you what unhappiness and misery this Woman was (as she alleged in her
Libel) ashamed to acquaint this Friend of hers with. Sir, this Woman having for
several Years laid her Snares for a considerable Prey, missing the greater,
would have taken up with a Mechanic; she lost her labor there, but at last
ensnared the Man, well read as she alleges in Machiavel. For three or four
Years so kind and hypocritically obliging she was, that all the World must know
(...) his business, and spent all his time (but that of dallying with, and
caressing her,) in securing her shattered Estate to make her Children happy,
gave them all manner of Education, and was so kind to them that their own
Fathers could not have been kinder; gave her liberty to dispose of her 1500 l.
she brought, for her self and Children; provided more than she desired for her
and them, and never asked her for any account of Money he sent; but when what
he had sent was gone, she had more: but yet (as she declared) the truth was she
did not know what she ailed, she wanted nothing, yet she could not be content:
This is the unhappiness for the first three or four Years, that she was ashamed
to acquaint this precious Friend with, as you will see by the Proofs at the
latter end.

Sir, Pray see when this misery began. At the four Years end her Husband
finding the Children grew marriageable, and although that which was desperate
of her own Estate her Husband had secured by Suites, yet because it would not
be readily paid if her Children had offers of preferment, her Husband secured
800 l. to her Children, 700 l. thereof by undeniable City-security, payable one
the day of Marriage, and in the mean time the Interest is paid to the Cildren
for their maintenance, and the Bond written in the Childrens names, and
delivered to them, of which 800 l. there was but 100 l. part of the 1500 l. nor
of her Estate. Next, her Husband at the expense of very great Sums of Money
obtained a Decretal Order for a 100 l. per annum for her life, which she had
lost, nay released: her Husband had done all this, and maintained and educated
her Children without wasting any of the 1500 l. still remaining, but what she
her self spent. Thus the 1500 l. whereof five was desperate, being made good by
Mr. Cage by expenceful Suites, 700 l. settled on the Children, a 100 l. per
annum for her Life, and in all probability 500 l. at least Arrears secured: Now
was the time to set up the Deed, and for the Trustee to enter upon the Trust
now; and never before, did she pretend to more at her dispose than the 1500 l.
but now she would separate, before her Husband had got in any part of this
Estate to recompense any of his disbursements, either for her, the Suites, or
for, or to her Children: now she brags that her Children had 800 l. settled on
them, she had her own Estate, with the 100 l. per annum, and 500 l. Arrears;
now for a separation of Persons, and Estate would follow.

Now her misery began indeed, this addition to the Estate made her talk she
might have deserved her precious Friend with his 800 l. p. an. and a better man
than he. Mr. Smith, if he had known what would have followed, would have had
her, for he was only afraid of her Children, and as things fall out, she had
brought him a better Portion than his Wife he now has. And truly, from that
very time she may date her misery, for from that time she grew so intollerably
proud, and haughty, no Servant could please her, nor Child be servile or Slave
enough; and her Husband that unhappily had made the Estate so considerable, was
now set at naught. Here began her extremity of cruelty to her Children; from
reproving her for that, her abusing her Husband; from thence Colonel Birch,
Dr. Paget, and Mr. Okey, hearing the difference, Dr. Paget not then justly
complying with Colonel Birch and Mr. Okey, advising her not to return home,
but let her Husband bite on the Bridle, adding, We will choke him with the
Judgment: to which end Dr. (...) her to one of Lincoln's Inn, who encouraged
her, and told her the general words of the Deed excluded her Husband if he
should have afterward discovered and recovered 15000 l. more than the 1500 l.
intended by that Deed: This vain conceit made her and her precious Friends
swell like Lucifer; thus sprung her misery, and henceforward, she that was not
able before to educate her Children, now should have no need of an Husband; her
Children in this five Years well educated by her Husband, her Estate thus
increased, she and her Friend would make her Husband truckle. From this time
nothing but occasions of separation was sought for. Then when I sought to her
for Peace, she told, No, you complained of my cruelty to my Children, the World
shall now see, that I value my Children before you. And about this time Mr.
Creamer, Mr. Reynolds the Minister, and Mr. Doelittle (I not present)
discoursed her touching a Reconciliation, she declared, No, let them do what
they would with the Estate, but she would never live with her Husband, (then
she never pretended whoring,) then she only pretended she durst not live with
me, I had offered to stab her with Sizars, another time to cut her Throat,
which I wonder she has omitted in the Libel, but (the Lord knows) I never then
offered her the least unlawful violence, nor afterward indeed, that might
justly be so termed.

Then began she first to absent her self, and hence follow all the Provocations
to a Separation, in the Proofs annexed. But to return again to the pretended
Friend, he goes with her, and retains Sir Francis Winnington Counsel for her;
who worthily would not receive any Fee, but upon these Terms, That they would
refer the matter to him, and if Mr. Cage would do so too, he would make an end
of the Business. This was the Reference before mentioned, wherein she falsely
accused me of Adultery with Mrs. Price. Sir Francis upon several Meetings
examining the Matter, and the Trustee Okey himself reproved my Wife very
plainly, and told her that she deserved to be bound to the good Behavior, drew
up the Heads of his Award in writing with his own hand, and delivered it to the
Trustee to acquaint my Wife with, which was as follows, That the 1500 l. made
known to Mr. Cage before the Deed was sealed, should be made good according to
the Marriage; and for the rest that Mr. Cage had since discovered, and
recovered by Suits, he ought to have. And thereupon I desired, as my free Gift,
that Sir Francis would award five hundred more out of the Irish Arrears, which
at my Request he also awarded. This being showed to her, she and her Friend
contrives a Revocation of Sir Francis Winnington's Power, and sent it to him
before the Award was published in due form, whereby a Period was put to all
those Endeavors. Then this Woman begins to rail at Sir Francis Winnington, and
her Friend threatens me in a Notice left with my Clerk of his own handwriting.
Then a Reference was had to Sir Fr. Winnigton again, and Mr. Creamer, which she
made fruitless; then to Mr. Barrington and Mr. Creamer, they resolved on every
particular, as well touching her Behavior for the future, as the Estate, and
put them into writing, those I signed, but she refused. Note, all these Persons
were of her own nomination, and Friends. But I omitted to mention the Reference
to Mr. Middleton of Hackney, her Brother in Law, and Mr. Okey her Trustee; they
agreed several, if not all the particular Differences, which also she refused
to abide by, reflecting uncivilly upon them. After this she (...) Bastard, more
particularly to Madam Broughton and the Lady Lisle, and lived above a year with
me. And indeed she might well be satisfied when she was the Foundation of that
Slander. But she not having advantage enough against me before she went from
me; for she and her Friend had advised with Civilians for a Divorce, and it was
told she could not have it but for Adultery or Cruelty; for Adultery she was
sure, and has often declared, she should never have that for a Cause, and
therefore to provoke me to some act of Severiy she continues at home, and
pretends she was sorry she had gone away, she was advised to it by -- her
Friend and his Counsel. With what Joy I received her, she and others know well,
and that I treated her with all the kindness imaginable; and for her greater
obligation, she desiring to have her Children live with her, I took another
House for her at Thistleworth, furnished it all at my own Charge, took Servants
for her, and lived there with her. And that all Causes of Difference for the
future, and Discourse of it might be taken away, I desired her to think of some
Lawyer of Repuputation and Integrity, to settle all things as they ought to be
upon the true Basis of Justice and Equity. She names Mr. Powel of the Temple,
in the Libel mentioned, who had always been of Counsel with her long before I
married her, and married an intimate Acquaintance of hers: I agreed to it, and
attended him with an Order in Chancery by consent, whereby all Matters in
difference were referred to him. Mr. Powel knows I then told him, Sir, we have
both pitched upon you to finish our Breaches, here is the Case, do as you would
be done unto, if the Case were yours, I will not restrain you, you shall not
displease me. This I often afterward declared to him, particularly before Mr.
Thornton the Earl of Bedford's Chaplain, and Madam Broughton, and by this I
thought my self secured from any further Troubles and Disquiets from my Wife,
and indeed she began to be obliging. But Sir, Betty Blackwel her own Daughter
coming again to live with us, pretended frequent Occasions of going to London,
of which I must know nothing, sometimes going in the Morning betimes, Letters
and Whisperings when she came home of great Secrets, my self and House
neglected; of this I took little notice, my Wife grew strange, nothing of
kindness from her. One day being greatly troubled, I discoursed mildly with
her, saying, Wife, what is the matter? how comes this Change? other Women are
more kind to their Husbands. She replied, She could be no otherwise, I might
help my self if I could. Sir, I was amazed, I found Affronts daily from her and
her Daughter; the Reason I knew not, they wanted nothing, the Money for the
House the Daughter kept, never without ten or twenty Pounds, they did what they
pleased, I never demanded an Account to this day. This, Elizabeth Gun who then
lived with us, and now lives with Mr. Gun at Billingsgate, can inform you. On
Friday-night my Wife began to storm bitterly, for my saying, That it would have
become her Daughter to have told me that she was going to London, and I had
deserved more Civility than that. The Storm grew so great, that I rose from
Bed, where I then was, and walked all Night in the Garden. The next day I crossed
the Thames, to wander for quietness sake, and met in the Afternoon on Richmond
Hill Mr. Thankeful Owen, whom I engaged to give me a Visit next day at my
House, by which I hoped to lay the Devil; that succeeded, and had effect for
about a fortnight. But the Daughter going to London again, when she came home
(...) attend my Business. Term came on, Mr. Powel did nothing, though
importuned by me. Her precious Friend came also to Town, whom upon my taking
the House at Thistleworth she promised me never to converse with, or see again,
if she could avoid it: but she that never kept Promise with me, no not her
Marriage Vows, could not forbear but must go to him for Counsel, as she her
self owned. And what Counsel she had, judge by the Effects following. I was
often told of her going to this Friends Lodging, I blamed her for it; she told
me, let me help my self; I replied, I would upon him, though I could not upon
her. This made her rage intollerably, so that neither Day nor Night I could
have rest, as the same Elizabeth Gun can inform you; she knows I have been
forced to rise out of my Bed, and sit up whole Nights, sometimes in Mr.
Morgan's Chamber in Gray's Inn, sometimes at Mr. Fairberds, sometimes lock up my
self in my Study all Night, then she would break my Windows, saying, Turn me
out then, turn me out of Doors. She once railed me first out of the Bed,
followed me out of one Room into another, then going out into the Court pursued
me, crying, Rogue, Bastard, thy Father and Mother were Bastards, and miscalling
my first Wife by such Names which I cannot in Modesty mention, and that I
murdered her. This was at Midnight. I confess I turned toward her with a mind
to have laid her at my foot, but I had not the Heart to strike her, but betook
me to my Heels to run from her; she followed me close round about the Court
again and again, till I was ready to sink. From this I see she designed to
provoke me, either to turn her violently out of Doors, or do something cruel
against her in passion, that she might have a pretext of separation, or living
asunder at her liberty. I sent Madam Broughton to her, also Mr. Fairbeard, who
desired her to remove out of my Chamber to a Lodging at my charge, that I might
have my Chamber quiet for my business, but she would not, but being afraid that
I should revenge my self on her precious Friend, She perjured her self to bind
me to the Peace, takes my Lord Chief Justice's Warrant, a Tipstaff, and Mr.
Powels man, one Sorrel, who comes for me at eight of the Clock at night,
supposing I could not get Bail so late at night, and that I must ly in custody
that night (being Saturday) and that next day, for want of Bail. I being not in
the way, Mr. Powel's man waits for me to give the Tipstaff notice when I should
come in; this I believe was the occasion of his being pumpt (if he was) the
next time he came, for I never called out Bailiffs, nor did I know he was
pumpt, until my Wife told me it was done, and if any Person swore any such
thing, I believe he was suborned by her.

Sir, Seeing I could not prevail with her to leave my Chamber, I removed my
self, and left her there; first, to Mr. Brooks in Bawldwins-Garden, next to
another Chamber in Gray's Inn, where I lodged to my great damage in my practice,
until her own Brother Captain Rose came to Town, who being made sensible by her
own Friends of her Miscarriages, at last prevailed with her to remove to a
Lodging at Grays-Inn-gate, which I had long before taken for her at 20 l. per
annum; and indeed he so discreetly managed the business, that he brought us
together to lodge and keep House there, which we did until the Saturday before
Whitsontide last: but she still retained her design of provoking me to give
matter of divorce for pretended cruelty, and endeavoored it; so that I was
there forced, sometimes to rise (...) this way of provocation, she put this
device in practice. I had appointed to go out of Town with her and her
Daughter, for all the Whitson-week for the Air, which they agreed unto;
Saturday after dinner was appointed, I came from my Chamber to bid them get
ready, but she and her Daughter were gone, whither, or with whom, I could not
learn, nor when they would return: I supped, lodged, dined next day, and so
till Wednesday morning, and then I left a Note in writing at the Lodging, to
this purport:

Wife, This is a new sort of provocation, I am retired to my Chamber; if when
you come home you write me word where you have been, with whom, and why you
dealt thus unkindly by me, I will come to you, but till then I will never meet
you at that Lodging where you have put such an affront upon me.

Wednesday-night she comes to the Lodging alone without her Daughter, takes no
notice of me, or what I wrote, goes away again and stays till Saturday, never
gives me any account where she was, or with whom; sends indeed for me one day
to dinner by a Girl of the House; I returned, I could not, until she gave me
the satisfaction I desired. A day or two after a Gentleman of Gray's Inn Society
informed me she was in the Walks the day before, walking with this Friend: This
Sir, (I hope you will believe) could not but provoke a Porter; but Sir, the
next day after, I walking in the Walks, see my Wife sitting with the Lady
Marquess of Worcester, I called her to me, demanded of her what she and that
Friend intended to walk in that familiar manner under my Nose, they would
repent these provocations, and 'twas such a piece of Impudence, that no
virtuous Woman would have offered against the honor of a Husband; she gave me
some base Language, but out of respect to the Lady Marquess, I protest I
departed without any further wrangling; nor did I otherwise than is here set
down treat my Wife, neither did I ever see her at any other time in the Lady
Marquesses presence. Since this time, my Wife would never give me the
satisfaction to know where she was, nor with whom, in that Whitson-week. But
this indeed, a Woman whom my Wife has prevailed withal to depart from her
Husband also, one full as wicked, (though not so cunning as her self,) and of
my knowledge a notorious Slanderer, did once say, she knew my Wife was with no
man at that time. This Sir, if there be truth in man, this was her last parting
(as she calls it) from me, without any cause given her. Therefore, see what a
Wife I have, that will for twelve Months together thus grieve her Husband,
rather than give him so easy a satisfaction; surely, there is no Person but
must conclude, that either she cannot discover with reputation to her honor
the Persons and Place where she then was, or else that she is well pleased in
this separation, and that this last affront and provocation hit her design,
though others failed. Sir, till Christmas last I paid for her Lodging, and then
declared, I would not for the future, unless she would give account of the
Whitson-week, which she has not yet done. Sir, I know not what words are in
every Letter I have wrote to her in answer to her railing Accusations, and
perhaps I might sometime in Term-time have desired her by Letter not to trouble
my Chamber with scolding and brawling, for you may believe I would never have
kept my Chamber in the Inn, which I can let for 20 l. per annum, and keep
Lodgings for her besides at 20 l. per annum, if I could live quietly with her
in either, (...) married her: But the disturbance I received from her in my
Chamber, which I made convenient for her, and intending her company there only
in the depth of Winter, was not tolerable, as too many of the Society well
know. And now Sir, what a Friend this precious Friend has been to us both (as
she pretends,) leaving the decision of the differences he created, to Chancery,
judge by Mr. Thomas Danson the Ministers deposition, and whether I did not
intend fairly by the offers Mr. Danson made him on my behalf, in order to a
speedy and right decision of the pretended difference, whatever the Libel
pretends. And Sir, for the last order of Reference, which she says I refused, I
acknowledge that it being penned different from the other order, to include the
wrongs the pretended Friend had done me, in misleading my Wife, causing this
separation, fomenting and maintaining these quarrels between me and my Wife, I
did refuse to refer these wrongs to the arbitrament of Mr. Powel; yet at the
same time, I my self, my Council, and my Clerk in Chancery did sign the same
order, with exception only of the wrongs the pretended Friend had done me, and
such Actions and rights of Action as I then had against him, for I do aver, the
first difference between my Wife and I arose from my desiring my Wife to
forbear his company, because of his censorious, dangerous, and malecontent
Spirit, for which he took a spleen, and then told her, he would have married
her if she had stayed. And after I had publicly forbidden her his company, he
brought this Bill in his own name, without any cause, and in affront to me,
which is prohibited by several Statute Laws, he being no way concerned, either
as Trustee, or otherwise than as a Fomenter of the Quarrel: For which, and
other wrongs he has done me, I have brought my Action, and laid the damages in
the Libel, and will have it possibly first or last of him, such a just
recompense of satisfaction as is fit for a Gentleman so much abused to have.
Notwithstanding, this Woman (the shame of her Sex) by her Libel contemns the
power and worth of her Huband, with regard to this perfidious Friend, and says
this Libel is only to show how little credit or belief is to be given to her
Husbands suggestions, or indeed oaths. But Sir, her Husband needs not to make
oath; read but the Proofs and Oaths of others annexed, I hope they are not all
such Persons. as this perfidious Wife would have her Husband to be.

Now Sir, as to the pretended beating of her, I once more solemnly protest, I
never did, or offered any unkind or unlawful violence to her Person, until she
had absented her self from me for about eighteen Months, nor until she was
returned home with a design of provocation, and first stroke me on the face in
the presence of her Niece Mrs. Isabel Rose, and one Mary Bucknal; her Niece is
indeed gone to Barbados to her Father, but has left a sufficient testimony
behind of that matter with Persons of credit: I confess I then gave her one box
on the Ear with my open Hand, and Sir, ought not that in justice be deemed
rather a moderate correction I was obliged unto, for the restraining her from
such like impudent attempts hereafter, than any unlawful violence or cruelty?
Could that Socrates his patience, or any more Christian have done less in such
a provocation, without emboldening her hereafter to contemn a Husband. But I
ever till then accounted it so dishonorable to offer any violence to a Woman,
that I never could, or ever did the like before: nor (...) I (...) And
certainly, had here been a little Honesty mixed with the profession of this
divorcing Jew, there had been no attempts and struglings to break the peace and
unity of a Family, united by the Ordinance of God; If you had stayed, I had
married you, and I have 800 l. a Year.

Pray observe this Passage of the Libel, After her patient waiting on the
References two Years, then and not before, she moved to have my Demur to her
Friends Bill argued. Sir, see the patience she pretends unto. In Hillary Term
1676, she brings two other Bills against me, one in the Trustee's name, another
in the name of one Wilson. Wilson I answered; that Cause was heard the 12th of
June 1677, at which hearing, the Lord Chancellor suspended the settling the
Cause upon the merits, until the Trustee Okey's Bill was brought to hearing,
and to that end, that all the matters in difference between her, my self, and
the Trustee may receive a full settlement. It was decreed the Trustee do amend
his Bill, and make the Children Parties, and bring the Cause to hearing in
Hillary Term following, and continued 300 l. in Court toward my satisfaction.
At the hearing of the Cause, she and her precious Friend finding I was like to
have Justice on hearing Okeys Cause, then indeed and not before brings on my
Plea to the Friends Bill, put in three Years before, knowing that I would never
answer that Bill to give her and him any color of converse, and by pretense of
my not answering that Bill, she has ever since, and by other vexations, stayed
the hearing of Okeys Cause, which would have settled all the matters long e're
this; for I solemnly protest, I do not wave the answering that pretended
Friends Bill, or any thing in it, but the Person, and that I would not
encourage a converse between them, I had so long since for the peace and safety
of my Family prohibited by the power of a Huband.

Sir, For suing her Daughter Blackwel in the Exchequer, I had good reason for
it as well as others. Sir, my Wife had received before I married above (...)
belonging to the Duke of York, more than ever was granted to her; I was sued at
Law for part of it, I pleaded the Statute of Limitations of Actions in Bar of
the Dukes Action: afterward, a Bill in the Exchequer was brought against me
and her for this Money; I drew a Plea of the Statute of Limitations to that
Bill, carried the Plea to Mr. Powel who was her Counsel, gave him a Piece to
peruse it and fit it for her with me; he approved of it, I got it engrossed,
she refused to join with me in it, (though her own Counsel approved it,) and
when I saw she would not join, I being altering it in my Study for my self
only, resolving to put that in for my self to prevent costs, she thereupon
raged and broke my Windows, which for that time (to satisfy her) I omitted
putting in. At Michaelmas Term following, a Sergeant at Arms was out for me and
her, then 'twas too late to plead; But I answered, and finding all other the
Duke's Counsel, as well as Sir John King who had signed the Bill in the Dukes
name, were of her Counsel, and she refusing to join with me in the Plea her
Counsel had allowed, which would certainly have put an end to the Suite; might
not I, Sir, well suspect that this Suite in the Duke's name was in trust for
her, and that she had discovered and begged by some other name what she had
before received and concealed, and would now make me pay that Debt to her
Friend, as if to the Duke? Therefore it was, Sir, that I brought this ^ill in
the Exchequer against the Dukes Grantee, Betty Blackwel, and several (...) the
Grantee of the Duke in trust for my Wife. This Sir, was the reason (and no
other) of my suing Betty Blackwel with others; nothwithstanding, when her
Mother had taken away my Goods from Thistleworth, and put only an old Petticoat
of Betty Blackwels in the Bundle, which I had stopped by the way; she goes to
the Lord Chief Justice and complains I kept her Clothes, when I never knew she
had one Rag there, and got his Warrant to convene me before him, boasted of it
publicly that she had brought her Father before the Justice, as she did one
other time, that her Mother had set her Fathers Nose awry: Was not this a
barbarous action? Ingratitude in the highest! and is not the Mother like to
make the Daughter as good as her self?

Sir, Two things pretended I had almost omitted; The one is, that I promised I
would adopt her Daughter Okey for mine, for her Fathers sake, with whom ('it is
pretended) I had an intimate friendship. Sir, If there be truth in man, I never
changed one Word with Colonel Okey but once, and that was only to have a
Commission for our County Troop to be renewed upon some of the changes of the
Government; nor have ever spoke or thought ill of the Man for any thing, but
the Fact he died for, nor did I ever in any proceedings in Chancery or
otherwise, blemish him or her upon his account, otherwise than by saying, that
my marrying her under the reproach of the manner of his death ought to have
been an obligation to her, which no man that I ever yet met withal but will
grant me; and how probable it is that I should promise to adopt her Daughter,
when I might expect Children of my own by her, and had made provision for her
Children by the Deed to the Libel annexed, judge you?

The other is, That, had my Husband designed nothing but what was just, the
validity of my Marriage-Articles might have long e're this been tried by
consent.

Answ. I never opposed the performance of the Articles, nor ever will according
to the true intent of them. And I do affirm that it never was intended, that I
maintain her Suites and pay her debts concealed, nor could I bind my self to be
her Slave to recover an Estate not then mentioned to me, nor known to her self,
and that Deed can extend no further than unto the 1500 l. made known to me
before the Deed of Settlement.

But for the plausible excuse the Libel offers for the Friend, that there would
be a Failer of Justice, if a Stranger might not sue the Husband on the behalf
of the Wife, when the Trustee is either corrupted or weary of his trust,
especially being Guardian to an Infant-party to the Articles: I answer, That if
the Trustee of the Wife should die, leaving her Husband his Heir or Executor;
there I confess there might be failer of Justice; because if the Husband should
waste the Estate which came to his Hands in trust for his Wife, she being a
Person disabled by Law to sue her Husband in her own name, there I conceive it
reasonable that she should be permitted to sue her Husband in the name of a
third Person, for the preservation and security of her Estate according to the
trust; But whilst the Trustee is in being he must sue, and if he refuse, it is
the constant course of Equity to order one of the six Clerks, or some Relation
of the Wife, to sue in the Trustees name, whether he will or no; or if the
Trustee be weary of his trust, he himself may sue to be discharged. But that a
Person no way concerned, but as a Contriver, Promoter, and (...) braided with
it, one telling me she was seen late at Night sitting between her pretended
Friend and his Secretary, like Susanna between the two Elders, but she did not
look so innocently.

Sir, she has Daughters which I hope may prove better Wives, therefore I spare
her, yet I cannot wholly excuse her from Blemishes. And I can with a good
Conscience reply, that for my Companions she calls lewd, I never had a worse
than her self. That she lived with two former Husbands is true, with the one
eight Months, with the other not four, yet with neither of them without
Contention, although but Hony-Moon. And for five years she did me that Right to
say that I loved her; which you will find by the Proofs.

For that Slander touching my Mother, I was dutiful, and shall carry the Proof
of it to my Grave, having parted with at her Command 3500 l. of my own Estate,
as Mr. Serg. Connieres well knows, and that purely out of Love and Duty to her,
and I do not know that ever I showed any Irreverence to her in word or deed.
And besides this, every one of my Sisters has had a better Portion of me, than
my Wife and all her Sisters had together. It is true, I have one Sister, who
through her own Weakness and Inconsiderateness was reduced to Straits; her I
took into my House, and she lived quietly and with respect to my former Wife
sixteen years, and was beloved by her; but after I married this Wife, I had no
quiet till I turned her out of doors; since which I have and do supply her
according to her Capacity, and that Ability my Wife has left me, and do not
know she has need of the Charity of any Person. But my Wife forgets her own
savage handling of her own Mothers Ears. And as to my first Wife, and her
Death, this is a Hellish Insinuation of her own Contrivance, false and
malicious; but indeed she endeavored to subborn Mrs. Mary Husbands to Perjury,
to diffame me in that. Read the Deposition of Mrs. Mary Husbands.

And as to that which she pretends of Courtship with so considerable an Estate,
certainly a Man of my years, and no Children, and a competent Employment need,
not use such Arguments for such a Woman with two Children, and of such
Circumstances; and that I, who never have lived above ten Miles from London,
could so deceive her that had married two Husbands before, and had lived most
of her time in London too, and had known me and my former Wife in my Troubles,
as appears by Mr. Okeys Deposition, is the most incredible thing imaginable.
Sir, she knew me in all the Changes of my Fortune, and all my Wives Relations
fourteen years before, she knew I was in considerable Business, and as likely
as some other Men to be something in the World; and without doubt I had so
been, had I missed the Unhappiness of marrying her, and thereby those
Interruptions and Distractions in my Business. But that I endeavored to tempt
her with any Arguments touching Estate, she knows there is nothing more false.
But I never pretended to any such Estate after I knew her, never promised to
settle any thing upon her. I did out of Conscience and Honesty, without any
Request of her, or any for her, settle her 1500 l. and secure it as fully as
the Art of Man could contrive, for a Provision for her and her Children, and
this I declared to Mr. Thomas Dun was my Resolution to do before I married her.

As touching my former Wife no Woman ever gave greater Testimony of (...) and
for her Satisfaction and Content with me, no Woman ever declared more: Of which
this Wife found a Letter, sent to me not two Months before she died, with as
great Expressions of Love and Unity as ever any Woman expressed. This Letter my
now Wife observing me to read before I married her, and that the Kindness of
the Expressions greatly moved me, she got it away, and will never since produce
it. But Sir, for that I refer you to her own Sisters, Mrs. Hannah and Mrs.
Rebecca Fowks, who live at Mr. Buchanans in Chancery Lane. And for her Death,
and indeed how we lived together, I also refer you to Dr. William Staynes, who
was her Neighbor and Physician many years, who with Doctor Clerk his Kinsman
opened and embowel'd her after her Death.

Sir, There are some few things more will be expected I should say something
unto, viz. That I permitted a Gentleman in Gray's Inn to abuse her before my
Face. Another is, That Mr. Okey, being a Citizen of a mild and soft Spirit, was
hectored by her Husband to neglect his Trust.

Answer. What is alleged concerning the Gentleman in Grays-Inne is utterly
false, I have known him now above twenty years, and never heard any Person but
my Wife say any thing ill of him. He is near eighty years old, she fell upon
him and beat him, because he condemned her, I never saw or heard him carry
himself uncivilly toward her by word or deed. This also is a Device to take
off his Testimony. For Mr. Okey, if he has done any wrong in his Trust, it
has been to me. He has permitted her both to use and abuse his Name as she
and her Counsel pleased against me, yet she has abused his Wife and Children
every one of them. Certainly a Woman of greater Falsehood and Ingratitude never
lived; her Usage of that Person and Family (who were as a Father and Mother to
her in her Troubles) is enough alone to convince any Person of what Spirit she
is.

I never moved the Trustee to do any thing unfair, nor to omit his Duty. I
never yet made use of any Protection, nor did I ever in the greatest of my
Troubles obtain any, but now when my Wife maliciously endeavored to have me
arrested on the Bond of 5000 l. she entered into before her Marriage to her
first Husband; nor did I ever, nor would I offer to insist on any such Shift
against any other Suit. She knows I voluntarily waved it. As to Bethel her
Confidence, of whom she will one day be ashamed, Jer. 48.13.
when that Calf cannot save her. Sir, You cannot but observe the malicious and
venomous Composition of this Libel. What is left unsaid, that might render me
odious? Yet Sir, you see there is no Proof nor Reference to any Person to
justify any thing in it. It is only the Wind of my Wives Spleen, who like the
wild Ass in Jer. is said to snuff up the Wind at her pleasure; and in her
Occasion who can turn her away? You know how Occasion is rendered in this Place
if such. When she has filled up the Measure of her Iniquity, God will find her
out.

Sir, I think I have omitted nothing that deserves to be taken notice of, only
this, I have none of her Estate in my Hands, I left it secure four years since,
and better by several hundreds of Pounds than I found it. I am out of Purse
above 600 l. for her self, Children, and Suits occasioned by her, besides the
700 l. settled on her Children. You may plainly see it is not the Estate is the
Difference by the several Awards I have agreed unto; you may as plainly see it
is a Separation (...) not. And since it is so, I hope no indifferent Person
will think it reasonable, after such unparalled Wrongs and Perfidiousness in
a Wife, that she shall go away a Gainer by me, leave me to pay her Debts,
particularly her Debt sued for by her Confederates in the Duke of York's Name,
carry away with her my Plate and Jewels I had in my former Wives days to the
value of 170 l. which I never gave her; seventy Pound more she received and
kept, which was sent me by Exchange from the Barbados, and several other Sums:
And several of my Goods she has robbed me of besides, she has scarce left me
any Bed or Table Linen; she has sold my Picture set in Gold, which before I
married she begged of me, expressing her Affection with such an Emphasis, that
no Man could have believed counterfeit. I can hardly forbear, but will say no
more, but that I am,

Sir, your honoring Servant, T. C.
The Scriptures added to the Libel, my Wife knows, I sent her long since with a
private Admonition. I now send her these.

Amos 5.5. Seek not That is the Idol worshippped in Bethel, which was a
Provocation, and Cause of Divorce twixt God and his Church.
Bethel, -- For Bethel shall come to naught. And these I send, as well to her
Friend and his Secretary Thompson, as to her self.

Psalm. 14.1. The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no God. (But)

Isa. 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee. When thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

The DEPOSITIONS of WITNESSES, proving the Premises.
THomas Danson, Minister, deposes, That he being desired by Mr. Cag^ to
endeavor a Reconciliation betwixt him and his Wife, did endeavou^ to effect
the same. Mr. Cage was very desirous of Reconciliation, an^ in no sort to
separate. That Mrs. Cage was averse, but before the Differences he has heard,
Mrs. Cage and her Children say, That Mr. Cage was careful o^ them in their
Maintenance and Education, and provided (to use her own words nobly for them;
but after the Differences Mrs. Cage complained that her Husban^ had wasted her
Estate, but this Deponent could not find any such thing. Tha^ his Wife did
abscond her self from him, but Mr. Cage often desired this Deponen^ to entreat
her to return home. That this Deponent during this Agitation, at the Request of
Mrs. Cage, did treat with Slingsby Bethel touching the Composure o^ the
Differences, and did propose at Mr. Cage's Request, That the Difference^ might
be stated, and a Trial at Law had upon an Issue out of Chancery, for speed^
determining of the Differences, or else that a Reference might be had to some
indifferent Persons touching the said Differences, or to that effect: But
says, tha^ the said Slingsby Bethel was averse to both the said Proposals, and
said, That suc^ Propositions was a Trick in Mr. Cage to put his Wife by, or off
the Advantag^ she had against him in Law. And this Deponent has been informed,
that M^ Bethel spoke very hardly of this Deponent upon the Exchange in London,
for offering such Propositions on the behalf of a Person that has been so ba^
(as Mr. Bethel said) to his Wife. Note, (the Baseness was to forbid her his
Company*

CHarles Cremer of Gray's Inn, Esquire, deposes, That some Differences betwee^
Mr. Cage and his Wife were heretofore referred to this Deponent, an^ afterward
to this Deponent, and one Mr. Barrington, one Mr. Reynold^ and Mr. Doelittle;
and afterward to Sir Francis Winnington, and after to Mr. Power That their
Differences arose from small Beginnings; that Mr. Cage wa^ not averse to a
Reconciliation, and that on such Terms, as this Deponen^ and others trusted to
arbitrate, should think fit: and remembers Mr. Cage subscr^bed to some
Proposals made by this Deponent and Mr. Barrington, the sam^ (which Mr.
Barrington informed this Deponent) Mrs. Cage refused to agree unto, which
Proposals did relate to the said Mrs. Cage's Behavior, and the Estate. This
Dep^nent remembers one Difference that grew at Highgate by the broaching of a
Barr^ of Beer by his Order against her Mind, whereupon she said she would part,
an^ accordingly desired this Deponent so to act as she might live separate. And
this D^ponent did move Mr. Cage several times to separate, but could not
prevail wit^ him, nor did ever Mr. Cage move this Deponent for any separate
living.

ABraham Barrington of London, Gent. deposes also on Oath, That Charles Cremer
of Gray's Inn, and this Deponent did often meet and endeavor a ^econciliation
betwixt Mr. Cage and his Wife; and this Deponent at all times ^und the said Mr.
Cage averse to a Separation, and would not allow of it to be ^scours'd of. That
the Differences were about very small matters. And as to ^e Estate, this
Deponent did not find it to be true, that Mr. Cage had wasted the ^me. That
Mrs. Cage did acquaint this Deponent, that she lay privately, and ^d hide her
self, that Mr. Cage might not find her, declaring that Mr. Cage ^ould compel
her to live with him; but Mr. Cage did often urge this Depo^ent to desire his
Wife to return to live with him. That this Deponent never ^und by discoursing
with themselves, or their Acquaintance, that there was any Cause by any of the
Differences considerable enough to occasion them to ^ve separate.

^Ohn Okey deposes, That Mrs. Cage often declared before the Differences, that
Mr. Cage was put to great Troubles and Charges in Suits for her and ^er
Daughter Elizabeth, and yet greatly commended him for his Love and Kindness.

SArah Okey swears the same, and that Mrs. Cage in the time of the
Marriage-Treaty declared her Daughters should have but little, at another time
400 l. piece, and she would not straiten her own Condition. That Mr. Cage did
keep ^ House at Highgate, and several Servants for the maintenance and
education of his Wife and Children, and educated the Children very well in
Music, Dancing, and ^ther Accomplishments.

^Ohn Okey swears to the latter part, and that before the Differences Mr. Cage
wholly managed the Estate, and secured to the said Daughters 700 l. by good
City-^ecurity; 400 l. to Mary Okey at the Day of Marriage, and 16 l. per annum
for loathes in the mean time; and upon Elizabeth Blackwel 300 l. and 12 l. per
annm. Which 16 l. and 12 l. they both received duly* and the Securities were
taken ^ the Childrens Names, and delivered to them.

ANthony Smith, That Mr. Cage settled 100 l. more on Elizabeth Blackwel by a
Statute from Mr. Garthe. And that Mr. Cage bought and sued for the House in
^hancery-Lane, to be settled in Trust for his Wife; and that the Deponent
engrossed ^he Deed of Assignment to Mr. Okey, and delivered it to him with a
Declaration ^gned and sealed by Mr. Cage, that the Money was his Wives, and the
House con^eyed to Okey on Trust for her, and at her Dispose without her
Husband; yet note, ^e says, her Husband would have taken it to himself;

Note, That Mr. Okey and his Wife, and many other Persons know, That Mr. ^age
was resolved before this barbarous Usage, to make each of the Daughters ^orth a
thousand Pound; they know also how he resolved to do it; and that ^lso he
resolved before this Difference to secure 200 l. per annum for his Wife, du^ng
her Life; they also know how and which way he intended to do that, and ^ould
have done it, although no way obliged to it. But pray observe how she (...)

All the Depositions following were taken at the Request of Mr. Barrington, and
other the Arbitrators, for their satisfaction, by the Consent and Agreemen^ of
my self and Wife, except Mrs. Langly, who was sworn by the order o^ Sir Francis
Winnington, Solicitor General.
MAry Husband, Wife of Thomas Husband of St. Andrew Holborn, Gent. makes Oath,
That she this Deponent lived with Mrs. Cage at the time that she married Mr.
Cage, about a year and half before the said Marriage, and about a year and half
after; and says, That during the time she lived with Mrs. Cage after the said
Marriage, and they kept House, she this Deponent did keep (by Mrs. Cage's
order) and lay out the Money for the Houshhold Expenses, which she received, and
gave her an Account how the same was expended. And this Deponent says, That
she does not know or ever heard, that Mr. Cage did ever require any Account of
Mrs. Cage of the Money received for the said Family-Expences. Nor did this
Deponent know, or ever hear, that Mr. Cage did complain, or say at any time,
that there was too much Provisions or Money spent in the Family by Mrs. Cage or
her Children. And this Deponent says, that during this Deponents living in the
Family, there was always Plenty of Provisions of all sorts convenient, and of
Money; and this Deponent has received several considerable Sums of Money for
that purpose, as sometimes Ten Pounds, sometimes Twenty Pounds, sometimes more,
sometimes less, And when Mrs. Cage sent to M. Cage for more, it was sent; and
this Deponent laid out what she received for that purpose, as Mrs. Cage thought
fit. And this Deponent says, That during that time the said Mr. Cage was very
loving and kind to Mrs. Cage and her Children, which she has since often
acknowledged. And this Deponent says as to the Quarrels and Discontents
between them, the first that this Deponent took notice of was at Wooborn, upon
some passages and provoking words Mr. Cage took very unkindly of her. And this
Deponent remembers there was a great Quarrel upon Mrs. Cage's saying Mr. Cage
killed his former Wife, which Mrs. Cage told Mr. Cage she heard from this
Deponent, and that this Deponent heard it from one Mrs. Greenhil. And Mrs. Cage
desired this Deponent to put it upon that Mrs. Greenhil, and desired this
Deponent to make Oath that Mrs. Greenhil spoke those words, which this Deponent
refused to do; for indeed this Deponent never heard any other Person but Mrs.
Cage her self speak those words, or any other to that effect. And several other
Quarrels have been upon the like Provocations. But this Deponent does not know
or believe, or ever heard, that Mr. Cage did use any Violence, Force, or Hurt
to her Person, or deny her or her Children any thing she desired for her self
or them. But knows that Mr. Cage desired several times, that both she and her
Children would wear and have better Clothes and things than they had or did
wear, but she would not. And this Deponent has heard Mrs Cage's Daughter, Miss
Okey, several times complain, that her Mother and Mr. Cage had Quarrels about
her Mothers beating her the said Miss Okey; and this Deponent knows she was
always very severe to her said Daughter. And this Deponent does not know, or
ever heard by any of the Servan^ or Children in the House that Mr (...) but
very small Trifles. And this Deponent has several times been informed by Mrs.
Blackwel Mrs. Cage's Daughter, and Mrs. Rose her Niece, that Mrs. Cage led Mr.
Cage a very weary Life by picking Quarrels with him, and vexed him with ^ross
Expressions. And this Deponent has heard Mrs. Cage several times confess ^he
and her Children were as happy in her marrying Mr. Cage, as any Person could
^e, and verily believes she and they might be happy still, in case she would
forbear her ill Words and Carriages toward him. Mr. Cage was very careful of
her in her Sickness, and when he conceived she was in a Consumption, bought her
a Cup of Massy Gold to drink new Milk and Sugar of Roses in, and many times
has put in several Pieces of Gold to boil in Broth made for her, and many
other Testimonies of great Affection he has showed to her and her Children.

Mary Husband.
Jurat. 9o Die Martii, 1674. Coram me Wm. Beversham, Per S. Poynter.
RObert Loveday, Servant to Sir Purbeck Temple, makes Oath, That he lived with
Mr. Cage and his now Wife, as their Servant, above two years, and knows, that
during all this time Mr. Cage and Mrs. Cage kept a very plentiful House for
their Family, and never heard but that they did so after this Deponent came
away. And this Deponent and the other Servants observed, that Mr. Cage was very
careful that his Wife should not want Money or Provisions for the Family, and
knows Mr. Cage paid the Butcher, Brewer, Baker, and Mealman, very well, and
never heard any of them complain, or say they were ill paid, or stayed at all
for their Money. Nor did this Deponent ever hear Mr. Cage complain, or say that
Mrs. Cage spent too much Money or Provisions in the Family, or for her Children.
But this Deponent always carried home what Money Mrs. Cage sent for, and Mr.
Cage has sent home to his Wife, when he was not there, what Rarities were in
season, either Fish or Fowl. And this Deponent has often desired the said Mrs.
Cage from her Husband, that she would send for what she had a mind to. And this
Deponent says, that he and the other Servants have observed many Quarrels
between the said Mr. Cage and his Wife about her beating her Children, and
knows that the Children were glad when Mr. Cage came home to make their Mother
and them Friends. And this Deponent and other Servants have observed, That Mrs.
Cage would be very cross, and give her Husband very ill Words, insomuch that he
has several times risen from his Dinner and Supper, and gone into the Garden,
to avoid being provoked by her, and sometimes rose in the Night, and walked the
most part of the Night in the Gallery and Garden, and in the next morning came
away to Gray's Inn in discontent. And this Deponent and the other Servants have
often wondered why she was so unkind to her Husband, and pitied him for the
unquiet Life she led him, when he was so kind to her and her Children. And this
Deponent does not know, or ever heard, that Mr. Cage was the first Occasion or
Beginning of any of the Quarrels: but has often heard the Children and other
Servants say, that Mrs. Cage was the Occasion thereof, and they (...) about
very small matters. And this Deponent remembers that one (...) were at Mr.
Cage's House at Supper, Mr. Creamer asked for some strong Beer, and Mr. Cage
bid this Deponent go broach a Barrel: But Mrs. Cage at Table spoke some cross
words about it, contradicting the same, (but the very words this Deponent
cannot remember.) But Mr. Cage taking them ill, showed some discontent,
whereupon Mrs. Cage openly at the Table, said, She cared not for his ugly
looks; which caused a very great discontent in Mr. Cage, so that he left the
Table, and Friends, and went away. But the Deponent never knew or heard that
Mr. Cage did any ways offer any wrong, violence, or hurt to her Person, or her
Children, although many times she would make him very angry. And this Deponent
has often heard the other Servants say, that Mrs. Cage might live happily and
well with Mr. Cage, if she her self pleased.

Robert Loveday.
Jurat 13 Die Martii 1674. Coram me Will. Beversham. Per. S. Poynter.
LEttice Dickman, Wife of William Dickman of Wapping, Confectioner, makes
oath, that she lived with Madam Cage as her Servant at Highgate, and waited
upon her and her Children about one Year, ending between Easter and Whitsontide
last. And has many times observed Madam Cage and her Husband very kind one to
the other, and some other times at great Differences and Discontents one with
the other: But does not know that Mr. Cage ever used any force, violence, or
wrong to her Person, but has heard very angry, passionate words and
expressions pass between them: But this Deponent knows, that Mr. Cage was very
loving and kind to the Children, and several Quarrels were about her beating of
them, particularly Mrs. Okey, to whom she was very severe. And knows, that Mr.
Cage did several times desire, and offer, that Mrs. Cage and her Children would
have more, and better Clothes, and things than they had, which she would not;
and yet neither of them wanted any thing fitting. And this Deponent remembers,
that Mr. Cage by reason of angry words between them, has rose from the Table
several times, and out of his Bed, and walked discontentedly in the Garden, and
Gallery, most part of the night, and believes that Mrs. Cage was extreme
passionate, and provoking to her Husband, upon small occasions. And this
Deponent remembers particularly a Difference between them, occasioned by her
beating Mrs. Blackwel, which Mr. Cage chiding her for, she took her Bed; and
Mr. Cage came several times to her Bedside, and asked her how she did, to whom
she answered, As well as a Woman that had so bad a Husband as she had, could
do. Mr. Cage desired to know in what he was so bad; She replied, He killed his
former Wife, and would now kill her. And this Deponent verily believes, that
they might have lived as happily as any Persons, if Mrs. Cage would have
moderated her passionate expressions, which were indeed very abusive: And this
Deponent several times told Madam Cage as much. And this Deponent believes
Madam Cage is satisfied so much; for this Deponent being since married, she met
Madam Cage in the Street, and she gave this Deponent good advice touching this
Deponents Carriage toward her Husband; and advised the Deponent to avoid what
(...) was desirous to have the Children well educated. And a Musick-master came
from London to Highgate frequently to teach them. And this Deponent remembers,
that in a Quarrel at Mr. Cage's Chamber at Gray's Inn, Mr. Cage was so provoked
by her pursuing him with provoking expressions, out of one Room into another,
that finding a Knife at his Clerks Desk, he snatched it up, tore open his
Doublet; and if this Deponent had not got hold of his, the said Mr. Cage's
Hand, verily believes his Discontent and Rage was so great, he had stabbed
himself, which this Deponent (by the Providence of God) prevented.

Lettice Dickman.
Jurat 19o Die Martii 1674. Coram me Will. Beversham.
WHereas the said Madam Cage has informed Mr. Sol. General, That at
Whitsontide last, the said Mr. Cage forced her to visit the Marquess of
Dorchesters Lady, and in the mean time Mr. Cage and Mrs. Ap-Rice were above in
her Chamber alone; and when Mrs. Cage came, she found her Chamber disordered,
and her Bed tumbled; and that she chiding her Maid Mary for not setting her
Chamber in order, her said Maid replied, that Mr. Cage and Mrs. Ap-Rice were
there all the Afternoon, and she durst not come into the said Chamber. Now

Mary Langly Gentlewoman makes oath, That she this Deponent, was Servant to
the said Mrs. Cage from three Weeks after Easter last was twelve Month, till
about Michaelmas last past, and knows all the said Information (if any such
were) to be untrue; for Mrs. Cage had appointed that visit several days before
Mr. Cage came home, and knows Madam Cage made but one visit to the Marchioness
all the time Mrs. Ap-Rice was there, and never made any other visit at any time
when Mrs. Ap-Rice was at Highgate; and knows, that during all the time Mrs.
Cage was at the Marchioness, Mrs. Ap-Rice and her Husband were in the Orchard
with the Children and this Deponent, and did not go out of the Orchard till
Madam Cage returned home; nor was the Bed or Chamber any way disordered, nor
did this Deponent ever know, believe, or say, that Mr. Cage and Mrs. Ap-Rice
were ever together alone in any Room or Chamber. And this Deponent says, that
no Maid called Mary (but this Deponent) lived with Madam Cage all last Summer.
(...) as to the Quarrels between them, this Deponent says, they were
occasioned by Mrs. Cages abusive Language to her Husband, when he has chid her
for beating her Children, which she did very frequently, and unreasonably;
insomuch, that the Children have oftentimes threatened to run away, and declared
they would marry, one a Tinker, and another a Cobbler, rather than endure their
Mothers cruelties. And this Deponent knows Madam Cage has spoken very
maliciously and unhandsomly of her said Husband, sometimes saying of him, he is
an ugly fat Bear, and sometimes ugly Dog, and sometimes said she received a
Letter from the ugly Dog when she received a Letter from Mr. Cage. And this
Deponent knows, that Madam Cage and her Daughter Blackwel agreed together not
to come to London and live with Mr. Cage, and one time Madam Cage did resolve
to remove the Goods from Highgate into the Country, and take a House and live
by her self; and said, when Mr. Cage came into the Country she would fly to her
Brother Rose, for Mr. Cage would be afraid to go thither. And this Deponent
knows that (...) ^sion of) the Children and her Sister many times importuned
her to be reconciled to her Husband, and told her how kindly he spoke of her;
but she refused and would never hearken to it, but would part from him: And
when she had wrote a provoking Letter to Mr. Cage, the Children and her Sister
importuned her to write a kind conclusion of that Letter, and set her name to
it, which she would not; and yet Mrs. Blackwel sent in her Mothers name for
Money, by the same Messenger, and Mr. Cage sent it. And this Deponent knows,
that when Mrs. Cage has grieved and discontented Mr. Cage with her ill
Language and Carriage, and she has been informed of his discontent, she has
been very merry and pleasant, and no way concerned at it, as this Deponent
could perceive. And this Deponent has heard Madam Cage oftentimes acknowledge,
that Mr. Cage was very kind to her and her Children, and that their own Fathers
could not have been more kind to them; and being desired to go to London after
the first difference, to submit her self, she said she would not go after him,
and all the World should never make her submit, calling her said Husband fat
Bear, and ugly Dog: And this Deponent did never know or hear, that Mr. Cage did
ever offer any wrong, violence, or hurt to her, or that he suffered her to want
any thing she desired, but believes, and has heard from the Children and
Servants, that she might live plentifully, happily, and well if she pleased.

Mary Langly.
Jurat. 5o Die Maii 1675, Coram me, Tho. Estcourt. Per. S. Poynter.
MAry Ap-Rice Wife of Benedict Ap-Rice of the Parish of St. Giles in the
Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Gentlewoman, makes Oath, That she came to
live with Mr. Cage his Lady on the Friday in Easter-week last was two Years,
and continued in her Service till near Christmas following, and during that
time this Deponent knows, that by agreement with Mr. Rose a Butcher, he was
to serve the Family with Beef, Mutton, Veal, Pork, Tongues, and Udders, and
also Lamb, at a certain price; and he did serve the Family with what Meat was
bespoke by Madam Cage her order from time to time; and the said Mr. Cage paid
him for the same when he required it, or in some very little time after. And
also the Mealman and Brewer. And this Deponent says, she never heard that Mr.
Cage did find fault with his Lady for spending too much, either Provisions or
Money; but when the Money that was in the House was near spent (as there were
several occasions of buying Poultry at the Door) when Mrs. Cage sent for more
Money, it was sent to her, or brought home by Mr. Cage the next time he came.
And this Deponent says, that there was not any want or shortness in Provisions
or Money for the Family at any time, whilst this Deponent lived there; for this
Deponent did keep the Money for the Family-Expences by Mrs. Cage's orders, and
gave her from time to time an account thereof; and this Deponent does not know,
or ever heard that Mr. Cage did ever deny any thing, or Money for Clothes, or
necessaries for Mrs Cage's Daughters; but knows, that Mr. Cage would have had
both Mrs. Cage her self, and Children, have had more Clothes, and better than
they had which Mrs. Cage several times refused* and (...)

And as to the Quarrels and Discontents between Mr. Cage and his said Lady,
whilst she lived there, They were occasioned about small trifling things, which
grew into words, but does not know, or ever heard that Mr. Cage ever used any
force, violence, or wrong to Mrs. Cage's Person, but has often heard from her
Daughters and Neeces, that their Mother and Aunt was the first occasion and
beginning of such Differences and Quarrels. And this Deponent has often heard
Mrs. Cage and her Daughters acknowledge Mr. Cage's love and kindness to them,
and Mrs. Cage in particular, saying, Mr. Cage was as good a Husband as any
Woman had. And this Deponent says, that when Mr. Cage came home to Highgate,
(which was commonly on Saturdays,) he spent most of his time in Mrs. Cages
company, and believes he delighted so to do; for this Deponent never knew him
accompany other Persons to any the Alehouses or Taverns there. And (excepting
when such Quarrels were) this Deponent has heard and seen Mr. Cage and his
Lady both of them, as kind and affectionate to each other as any Persons (as
this Deponent believes) could be. And this Deponent knows, that Mr. Cage sent
many extraordinary provisions from London home, and the House was very seldom
(if at all) without strong Beer, and Ale, and Wine, which Mrs. Blackwel kept
the Keys of. And this Deponent says, that when Mrs. Cage was ill, this
Deponent using her utmost care about the said Mrs. Cage, and Mr. Cage taking
notice thereof, he gave this Deponent twenty Shillings, and desired this
Deponent to continue her care to, and be very careful of the said Mrs. Cage and
this Deponent never received of the said Mr. Cage any Gift in Money,
Provisions, or other things whatsoever. And this Deponent says, that the said
Mr. Cage was never to this (Deponents knowledge) at any Lodging of this
Deponents.

Mary Ap-Rice.
Jurat. 24 Die Februarii 1674. Coram me Will. Beversham.
MArgaret Fyney makes oath, That in the Year 1672 this Deponent came to serve
Mr. Cage and his Wife at Highgate as Cook-maid, and lived that ^^mmer there
with them. And says, that she has lived several Years in several Families, of
Persons of Quality, and never did see more plenty for their own Family, than
was in Mrs. Cage's Family, and never knew that there was any want of Money or
Provisions; and when there was any thing that was rare, and in season, it was
sent home by Mr. Cage to his Wife. And this Deponent says, that all the
Servants observed, that whatsoever Mrs. Cage sent for, either Money, or other
things, Mr. Cage sent it: And this Deponent carried Money and other things home
several times to Mrs. Cage from her Husband, which she sent for. And this
Deponent knows, that Mr. Cage was very loving and kind to the Children, and
whatever they desired for Clothes, or other things, Mr. Cage bought and sent
them home, and never knew or heard that Mr. Cage did beat or discontent the
Children: But knows, that many times Mrs. Cage would quarrel needlessly at
Dinner with Mr. Cage, and that he has left his Dinner and gone out into the
Garden, and sat there; and sometimes out of the Bed, and walked about most
(...) and the Servants many times pitied Mr. Cage for the unquiet (...) times,
and turned her out of her sight, and she durst not come into her sight until
Mr. Cage came home, who usually reconciled them; and knows, that the Children
always rejoiced when Mr. Cage was to come home; and believes, that Mrs. Cage
did live as freely, and happily, as any Person need do, and might still have so
done, if it were not her own fault; for the Servants observed she would provoke
him with very ill words, upon very small for no occasion.

Margaret Fyney.
Jurat. 8o Die Martii 1674. Coram me Will. Beversham.
MAry Bucknal makes oath, That she lived about one Year, but something less
with Mr. Cage and his Lady, as Cook-maid; and knows that they kept a plentiful
House for their Family, and that Mr. Cage (during this Deponents living there)
always sent home what Provisions or Money Mrs. Cage sent for, and does not
believe, or ever heard, that he ever denied any Money, or other thing for his
Wife or Children, but knows, they might have had more and better Clothes than
they had, if she had pleased. And has heard Madam Cage many times acknowledge,
and say, that she was as happy in a Husband, and her Children in a Father, as
she could desire; but there were several Quarrels between Mr. Cage and his
Lady, sometimes about her beating her Children, and turning Mrs. Okey out of
her sight; and sometimes about some cross and unkind slighting Words or
Expressions she would give her said Husband; and sometimes about her forbidding
what he had ordered to be done: And says, that all the Servants took notice
how she would slight and cross him; and many times pitied him for the
discontented life she led him; and has heard her Daughters several times say,
that they wondered their Mother would be so cross unto, and quarrel with their
Father; and would always say, that their Mother began the Quarrels. And this
Deponent knows, that Mr. Cage has been so provoked by her ill Language, that
he has several times arose from the Table at Dinners and Suppers in
Discontent; and many times out of his Bed, and walked many parts of the night
discontented in the House and Garden alone. And this Deponent remembers, that
Mr. Creamer and his Lady coming to Mr. Cage's House at Highgate, Mrs. Cage was
displeased, and would stay in the Kitchen; and Mr. Cage entreated her very much
to walk into the Parlour and keep them Company, which she at length did: But at
Supper Mr. Cage ordered a Barrel of March Beer to be broached, which Mrs. Cage
was angry at, and gave Mr. Cage some ill words openly at Table, (as the Persons
then present discoursed in the Kitchen:) And Mr. Cage looking angrily upon her,
she then said, She cared not for his ugly looks; which caused great disconten^
between them. And Mrs. Ash told this Deponent, Mrs. Cage was with Child and
miscarried then, and that she might have prevented it if she would. But this
Deponent does not know or ever heard that Mr. Cage was ever so provoked to
strike or hurt her, but the Servants have often said, they wondered at their
Masters patience, that he would bear such usage. And this Deponent says, that
Mr. Cag^ did always express great kindness to Mrs. Cage, in sending home what
Provision were in season, (though he was not there) and Wine and other (...)
there was no want or scarcity of Provisions, or Money in the Family: And Mr.
Cage took care that the Family, Children, and Servants, should be instructed in
the fear of God; for he usually (if not every Sunday) had some Minister
preached twice in the Family, usually Mr. Reynolds, Mr. Danson, and Mr. Danson,
and Mr. Fowler.

Mary Bucknal.
Jurat 16 Die Martii 1674. Coram me Will. Beversham.
SImon Picknol Servant to Tobias Cage Esquire, makes oath, That he came the
fourth of May last to serve the said Mr. Cage at his House at Highgate, and
has lived with him as a Servant to this day. And this Deponent says, that
before this great difference happened between the said Mr. Cage and his Lady,
this Deponent bought in most of the Provisions for the House at Highgate, and
several times received Money of the said Mr. Cage to buy the same. And this
Deponent says, that until the difference happened, this Deponent did neither
know nor hear that the said Mr. Cage did suffer any want of Provisions or Money
in the Family, or that the said Mr. Cage ever found fault that they spent too
much. And this Deponent says, that since the said difference, the said Mr.
Cage often enquired whether they wanted either Meat or Money at Highgate. And
this Deponent did acquaint the said Mr. Cage, that the said Mr. Cage's Wife had
forbid him (this Deponent) to receive or bring any Money from him; after which
time, this Deponent did not receive any Money for the said House, or Provisions
from the said Mr. Cage, the said Mrs. Cage having forbid this Deponent to
receive any. And this Deponent says, that the said Mrs. Cage several times
sent this Deponent to Town about her Business, and forbad him (this Deponent)
to come at Mr. Cage her Husband.

Simon Picknol.
Jurat 24 Die Februarii 1674. Coram me Tho. Estcourt. Per S. Poynter.
WHereas this Deponent Robert Fairbeard of Gray's Inn, in the County of
Middlesex, Esquire, is informed, that the Defendatns Wife did affirm to her
Counsel at the Rolls, the last day of the last Term, that her Husband would not
allow her maintenance for her self and Servant; This Deponent makes oath that
he has known both the Defendants ever since they were married, and before, and
has been often in the Family; but this Deponent never understood that the
Defendant the Husband denied any thing necessary or convenient for his Wife.
And this Deponent being their Kinsman, was desired to prevail with the
Defendant the Wife, to remove out of Mr. Cage's Chamber in Gray's Inn, about the
beginning of the last Term, that he might have his Chamber quiet for his
Business. And in the Deponents presence, Mr. Cage offered his said Wife, that
if she would diet any where near Gray's Inn, until after Term, he would pay
twenty Shillings per Week for her self and Maid; and then offered her five
Guinies, twenty Shillings (...) Pieces of Gold, and would have delivered them
unto her, to pay for such diet for her Maid and self for five Weeks. But she
refused to receive any Money of her Husband.

Robert Fairbeard.
Jurat 13 Die Februarii 1676. Coram me Tho. Estcourt. Per S. Poynter.
Many other Depositions I omit.
POSTSCRIPT.
Sir,
SInce my Wife had notice this Answer was Penned; she, her Friend, and
Accomplices, resolved to improve the Slander of the Bastard, to justify her
eighteen Months separation, before that pretense had any Being; and the better
to color it, have by surprise drawn in the aid of Sir W. T. of London. You may
remember, the Libel pretends, I had a familiar converse nine Months with a
Wench, and lodged her in Fullers Rents, to ly in for Neighborhood. Note, She
knew this Wench she caused her Sister to hire for me, was a Comrade of a Woman
that went by the name of Mrs. Hilton, as a Merchant's Widow, but is really the
Wife of a Butcher in Puckridge in Hartfordshire, and ran away from her Husband
too, and who (as is now found out) plied at a Bawdyhouse near Bond-Stables, and
has had a Bastard, for whose cure of the Pox, there is now a Suit depending,
and Mr. Walker of Gray's Inn is Counsel for the Surgeon, and Mr. Ray is
Attorney. This Hilton was my Wifes chief Instrument in this Bastard plot, and
whilst this Wench lived with me, she often lay out with this Hilton, and was no
doubt employed as well as her self: You see that in March, upon Mr. Creamer's
suspicion, I gave this Wench warning, that for four Months after this suspicion
of Mr. Creamers, and until this Wench was gone, I procured my Cousin Will. Cage
to live and lodge with me: She had the Bastard in January, seven Months after
she went from me. I mentioned my Wifes tampering with her whilst she lived with
me. Her Daughter Betty Blackwels Prediction by Letter to Mr. Smith. You have
heard of my Wifes frequent and kind visits to the Wench; whereas a Genleman I
sent to examine the Wench, could never be admitted. And note Sir, that she
concealed her being with Child, and went about to murder it in the House of
Office, as Mr. Waingford, Master of the House, and his Wife can testify;
either of which (in all likelihood) she should have no reason attempt, if I
were concerned in it. That I left ten Shillings with Mr. Waingford Master of
the House for Charges to watch and apprehend her. And that I sue one of my
Wifes Confederates in the Spiritual Court for Slander, that the matter may
there be enquired into. And Sir, this is observable, that after my Wife heard
Mr. Creamer advised to the turning the Maid away (...) Wife (...) Wife again
accuses me, that I had sent the Wench away to ly in: Hereupon, by Mr.
Barrington's advice, I sent for the Wench, stayed her from Service, and gave
five Shillings a Week for five Weeks after she was gone from me, that she might
appear, and the contrary be observed; and after this Slander proved
ineffectual, Betty Blackwels Letter was sent.

Now Sir, since my Wife was assured I would answer her Libel, she and her
Friend rage like Satan, foreseeing the time is short, and in pursuance of her
former Practice of Subornation and Falsehood, has suborned this Whore. She upon
pretense of a Warrant sent me word by her Nephew, my Clerk, at ten of the Clock
at Night, that she was going with her before Sir W. T. a Justice of Peace. I
confess, the Suddenness of it, and the Time of the Night, made me suspect some
Design and way-laying, being as yet bound to the Peace, however I sent my Wife
word by her Nephew, that I expected she would now secure and prosecute the
Wench; but mistrusting she should not, I desired two Gentlemen of our House to
step to the Justice to get her secured; they attended, and observed that the
Justice gave the Whore that had the Bastard her Oath, and examined her.
Certainly this Justice of Peace, though a very worthy Person, was strangely
influenced by her Libel and Friend, to assume a Power as a single Justice of
Peace to examine a Whore on her Oath on the Complaint of a Wife against her
Husband. Indeed if the Bastard were living, two Justices of the Peace, in order
to discharge the Parish, may examine the Matter, but in no other Case, else the
Malice of a Wife by the Testimony of a common Whore might defame her Husband.
But Sir, the Wench being fore-instructed, prompted on and surrounded by my Wife
and her other Confederaies that Night, fware, that she having lived with me
near a year, it was half a year before I had any Commerce with her of that
sort, and that was only four times (as she says); but my Wife was overheard
putting her in mind, that she should swear I had to do with her nine Months.
Note, this was to make good her Libel: but observe, that when this Mrs. Hilton
the Agent first charged me with the Bastard, she told to Mr. Fincham and Mr.
Fairebeard of Grays-Inne, that the Wench affirmed I never had the knowledge of
her but once. And now when one of the Gentlemen prayed the Justice take notice
she was in two Tales, he favorably termed that but Forgetfulness; whereas all
other Judges allow self-contradicting to be a clear Evidence of Falsehood and
Forgery. And mark this, Sir, that when the Persons I sent earnestly moved that
the Wench should be had to Prison until I were heard next day, and that it was
for my Wife's Credit, if she would avoid all suspicion of having suborned this
Wench; yet my Wife and her Consorts opposed it; but the Justice took a
Strangers bare word for her to appear next Day at eleven a Clock, but they
never appeared more. For indeed there was no farther Design but to have the
Whore deliver this Slonder on her Oath, and so be gone. And the Justice of
Peace is now to be examined on all Occasions as a Witness, as to testify what
the Whore delivered on Oath, which they vainly think will be a stabbing
Evidence, that any Man though never so innocent had a Bastard; but I doubt not
e're long to discover more of the Matter without Bribery or Subornation. Sir,
this Woman, Hilton, was the Person that managed this Plot for my Wife from the
beginning and that came to me when the Wench (as was pretended) lay in, (...)
grace. Mark the Design: when she saw I would not be wrought upon to betray my
own Innocence that way, she applied her self to Mr. Fincham, offered him, if I
would give her ten Pounds, she would bring a Person should take off the Child,
and give Security from future Charge: but my Innocence was such; I rather chose
to abide a Trial at Law than give one Penny. And I never heard of it more until
my Wife suborned this Wench to swear this, to justify her self; nor could I
ever light of this Wench or the said Hilton since the Bastard pretense, nor can
I yet catch this Whore although I do endeavor it; but by the Grace of God as
soon as possibly I can get her Appearance, I will try the matter by a Jury upon
an Action of Slander, whether that Bastard ought to be charged on me, or no:
which Action, as the Case is, and the Damages may be laid, I think will lie.
And in order to the speedy doing of it, I shall take it kindly of my Wife, if
she will procure this Wench to give me an Appearance by an Attorney in the
Common Pleas, without further Trouble.

Sir, Something may be expected I should say as to the Deed printed at large,
with design either to insinuate some Indiscretion in giving such a Power, or
Injustice in not keeping it according to the Letter. Therefore Sir, I entreat
you to consider that Deed with the Circumstances she and her Estate were in,
and you will not (I think) conceive me guilty of much Folly, or any Fraud at
all in the penning of it. The Estate was but 1500 l. she had two Children, and
no Debts or Troubles, as she and her Trustee affirmed. The Estate was
forfeited, and all liable to be taken away by his Royal Highness, except such
Part as could be proved granted to her. Now Sir, though her Affection to me
before I married her, was by her Subtilty set out in as taking Colors as the
greatest Hypocrisy could paint it; her Carriage such, as might have prevailed
with a wiser Man to put Confidence in her who was to be a Wife, especially
considering the great Profession she made of Religion. Yet I endeavored to
secure my self, as well against her Childrens future Clamours and uncertain
Expectations, as from all Suites to discover or account for her Husband Okeys
Estate, toward which any Lawyer will allow me the pleading this Deed would have
gone very far. Sir, you will find she has not such a Power as she pretends
unto, but only the Power of appointing Proportions, as well for her Childrens
Preferment, as her own Maintenance; and that must be also according to Equity
and Justice, so that she cannot give all to her Children, and leave no
Maintenance for her self; and the whole is so limited, that she cannot dispose
of any part of the Principal, but for the Preferment of the Children she then
had, and might have by me. And if the Trustee consents to employ any part of it
to any other use, he is answerable to me for breach of Trust, and must make
good the Damage out of his own Estate. And as to the Letter or general Words
of the Deed, viz. [all her Estate]: Was it not a great Fraud in her (and her
Trustee too if he had known it) to conceal and deny her Debts she owed, and
several expenceful Suits she knew I must be engaged in, not only to defend the
1500 l. made known to me, but to recover that which I never knew of, nor was
ever mentioned before I married her? Can it be imagined by any rational Man,
that I should intend by that Deed, either that she should give away the 1500 l.
and I maintain her, and pay her Debts; or that I should sell my (...) I then
knew not of, nor she neither, and that for her and her Children. I could say
much more, but it is not convenient. The Deed is before the L. Chancellor for
his Judgment at her Suit. But this I say, I never endeavored to defeat or
avoid the true Intent and Meaning of that Deed; but I think now her denying
Co-habitation with me has taken away much of the force of it, and altered the
Case.

And as to her Pretenses, That I would have no End, that nothing would satisfy
me but the whole Estate, you see how false she is proved. And yet to give a
full Answer, and stop the Mouth even of Falsehood it self, I make her these
Offers.

First, Let her produce any Woman in England (except the Whore of her own
making) that will soberly affirm, that ever I tempted her to any lascivious act
of Dalliance, or any Gentleman that was ever in my company at any such time, or
with any such Person, I will release her Estate, and all claims to it.

Secondly, If she desires Reconciliation, and will submit her self, make such
acknowledgement and satisfaction as any two Divines (I having liberty to except
against two only, and she the like) shall think fit and honorable for me to
receive, I will not only as to her Estate give her choice of the three Awards
already made, but if she refuses them, I will submit all the matters in
difference she pretends unto whatsoever (except the pretended Friend) to any
two or three private Gentlemen, or Lawyers, that have not been concerned with
either side, to their final and absolute determination.

But if she refuse all these Proposals, judge you Sir, and all the World,
whether she can be other than as Solomon denotes, such a Woman as forsakes her
Husband, and the Covenant of her God? or, whether there ever was such a
Diabolical combination against the Laws of God, Nature, and Humanity, as is
between the pretended Friend and her self?

Sir, I foresee an Objection will be by this Woman. What, shall I give up a
Person that has espoused my Quarrel against my Husband, and make an agreement
and he not included? I cannot in honor do it.

Answ. It Is my unhappiness she is not better acquainted with true Honor: where
that is, you always find it imprinted in the Mind with indelible Characters;
The Flatteries or Pretenses of such a Friend could never have prevailed with
her to forget her Covenant, nor any ways to wrong her Husband, unto whom it is
her duty to do good, and no evil all his days.

It Is no dishonor to turn from an evil way, it is no dishonor to leave this
Seducer to the Law; if he has done well, the Law will justify him; if not,
the World will justify her Husband. Which is most honorable? to prefer the
peace and comfort of her Husband, to which she is bound by a sacred vow, or
that of such a Stranger, whose own folly has rendered him liable to question?
Methinks, the four Years distraction and wrong I have suffered, may resolve
that Doubt in honor; I am sure it does in her own Conscience.

Sir, You now see who it is that separates, and the Cause. The Libel tells you,
That she is still at the same Lodging I put her in, and never lay a Night out
but with my knowledge, at the House of a Friend of mine. It Is true, I could not
but know she lay out all that Whitson-Week, but 'twas against my Will. It Is now
twelve Months since, but to this day she will not tell where nor with whom she
was, nor do I know. Her continuing her Lodging is like that of keeping in my
Chamber three Terms (...) a design to provoke me with such Language, that
nothing could be more intolerable, and at the same time set one Sorrel to
evesdrop me.

Sir, What I have said is true, you see most of it is proved, and it is less
than she knows I can say. If I give you an Account of some Intrigues in Coll.
Okeys absence, and some relating to my self, 'twould chill your Blood to read
them. I tell you not all that I can of the Actions of the Friend and his
Accomplices, which are not wrapped up in such a Cloud of darkness, as they
conceive; nor do I mention the various Attempts, Factions, and Threats, to
effect my Ruin, nor yet the Faction set up in the Society where I live. But
Sir, I doubt not I shall write again; for this Woman is as incorrigible as that
duckt under water for a Scold, yet held up her Hands above the water, and made
Horns at her Husband. Sir, however I entreat you signify the Contents hereof to
such Persons as you think fit, who certainly must conclude upon the whole, that
although my Wife does design a Separation, supposing thereby, and by the
general words of the Deed, to carry with her all that considerable addition I
have made by my labors, and thereby hopes to defraud me of what I have
expended also; and if she be disappointed therein, yet that the Friend can
never make a recompense for the irreparable and inexpressible wrongs he has
done me, by contriving and fomenting those differences, to the utter
destruction of all the comforts of my life; and that he was the most indiscreet
and uncharitable of Men if innocent; the most unjust, if otherwise, to sue and
slander a Husband in a Court of Judicature, for, and on the behalf of a Wife,
without first discoursing the Husband, and trying whether he were faulty or no.
Yet Sir,

This I will offer him also, let him make out that I have done any thing either
imprudently, or dishonestly, relating to the Estate, my Wife or Children, and I
will forgive all the wrongs he has done me, taking the Estate as it was, the
Suits I had of hers, and the improvement I have made.

Note, That when my Wife and this Friend had contrived a Suit against me and
her self in Chancery, in the name of Martha Wilson, she petitioned the
Honorable the Master of the Rolls, that she might make answer by such Guardian
she should choose, intending to make use of this Friend for countenance: but the
Master of the Rolls declared he would not appoint any Guardian for a Wife, she
should answer with her Husband, or answer alone. And after my Wife had
contrived I should be bound to the Peace, this Friend did frequently accompany
my Wife to several Masters in Chancery, and there thrust himself into Suits
wherein he was no way concerned, merely to provoke me; so that I not daring to
trust my self under such provocations, have been forced to neglect the
attendance of my Business my self, by reason whereof, such reports have been
made, and in such a manner, as would not have been in case I were present
rightly to inform them, and that to my very great damage. There are two
remarkable Passages of this nature:

One, My Wife seeing me attending at Sir Andrew Hackets, sends privately for
the Friend, who before refused, and durst not give me a meeting till I was
bound to the Peace, though he was fairly invited to it; yet now he comes, but I
having notice of it, and not daring to trust my self, went away before he came,
and thereupon he falls to accusing and representing of me to the Master, as
falsely and barbarously as a lying tongue could utter. See the honor of this
Woman who hand in hand with a (...) ^shering my Wife to my face, whilst I with
my three Friends stood bound to the Peace.

Another time when I petitioned the Master of the Rolls, that the cause between
me and the Trustee might be speedily set down for hearing: the Master of the
Rolls appointed to hear Counsel on both sides. This precious Friend and his
Solicitor coming before my Counsel, fell upon accusing of me to him: The
Master of the Rolls, though he knew me not, and no Person there for me, was
sensible of some unfairness, demanded of him, what he was concerned, was he any
Trustee to the Wife or Children, any ways akin to them? He answered no: Then,
what reason have you to sue the Husband on the behalf of his Wife? To which he
replies, It Is often done in Chancery; and thereupon the Master of the Rolls
declared, that if it were sometimes, yet he knew no reason for it, and he
doubted Mr. Cage had some wrong; but Mr. Hutchins my Counsel coming in, they
fell upon the Business, and the Counsel press d, that the Cause might be set
down to be heard and affirmed, that Witnesses were examined, and all matters
might be settled upon the Trustee's Bill, according to my Lord Chancellor's
order of the 12th of June: But the Friend opposing that, Mr. Hutchins on my
behalf offered to refer all the matters in difference to the Master of the
Rolls himself, as a private Person, to be settled as he should think fit
without any Appeal, which the Master of the Rolls was pleased to accept, being
betwixt a Gentleman and his Wife: but this religious Fomenter of differences,
as before to Mr. Danson, now also denied all Proposals that might tend to the
settlement and the peace of my Family.

And Sir, To that seeming reflection in the Libel, as a shameful thing, that I
oppose my own Act and Deed, meaning the general words in the Deed printed. I
answer once for all, That where a man seals a general Release, whereby in
strictness of Law a Debt or Duty, that the Releasor knew not of, is discharged;
yet it is the course of Equity to relieve against that Release: so here I do
aver, that I knew not of any other Estate, Debts, or Suits, nor was there any
communication of any other Estate or things, than the 1500 l. and therefore
considering the Prize I have met withal in a Wife, I doubt not to find relief
in Equity, for it is an axiom as well of Civilians as Logicians. Verba
restringenda sunt ad presentem materiam.

The Places where the Persons live to whom I have referred you.
SIr Francis Winnington, Solicitor General, in the Temple. Dr. William Steynes
in Fanchurch-street. Mr. Middleton in Hackney. Mr. Creamer in Grays-Inne. Mr.
Fincham in Grays-Inne. Mr. Barrington in Suffolk-Lane. Mr. Okey in
Cateaton-street. Mr. Thomas Dun in Spittle-fields. Mr. Danson lives there also.
Mr. Reynolds at Bun-hill Fields. Mr. Doelittle in Monkwel-Street. Mr. Thankful
Owen in Bull and Mouth Street. Madam Broughton, and at Mr. Parsons, a Minister
in Fetter-Lane. Madam Puliston, at Mr. Parsons, a Minister in Fetter-Lane. Mrs.
Pledger at Mr. Brooks the Minister in Thames Street. Elizabeth Gun at Mr. Guns
at Billingsgate.
FINIS

