coat of arms of the City of London
By the Major.
THe Right Honorable the Lord Major having taken into his serious
Consideration the many dreadful Afflictions, which this City has of late years
suffered, by a raging Plague, a most unheard of devouring Fire, and otherwise:
And justly fearing that the same have been occasioned by the many heinous
crying Sins and Provocations to the Divine Majesty: And his Lordship also
considering the present dangers of greater mischiefs and misery which seem
still to threaten this City, if the execution of the Righteous Judgments of God
Almighty be not prevented by an universal timely Repentance and Reformation: He
has therefore thought it one duty of his Office, being entrusted to take all
possible care for the good Government, Peace, and Welfare of this City, First,
to pray and persuade all and every the Inhabitants thereof to reform in
themselves and Families all Sins and Enormities whereof they know themselves to
be guilty: And if neither the Fear of the Great God nor of his Impending
Judgments shall prevail upon them; He shall be obliged to let them know, that
as he is their Chief Magistrate, he ought not to bear the Sword in vain: And
therefore does resolve by Gods Grace to take the Assistance of his Brethren the
Aldermen, and to require the aid of all the Officers of this City in their
several places, to Punish and Suppress according to the Laws of the Land and
the good Customs of this City, those Scandalous and Provoking Sins which have
of late increased and abounded amongst Us, even without shame, to the dishonor
of Christianity and the Scandal of the Government of this City, heretofore so
famous over the World, for its Piety, Sobriety, and good Order.

To the end therefore that the Laws may become a Terror unto Ebil doers, and
that such, in whose hearts the fear of God, and the love of Virtue shall not
prevail, (being forewarned) may amend their Lives for fear of punishment; His
Lordship has thought fit to remember them of several Penalties provided by Law
against notorious Offenders: As also all Constables and Public Officers (who
are to put the said Laws in Execution) of their Duty therein;

First, Every Profane Curser and Swearer ought to be Punished by the payment of
Twelve Pence for every Oath, and if the same cannot be Levied upon the
Offenders Goods, then he is to sit Three Hours in the Stocks.

Secondly, Every Drunkard is to pay for the first Offense Five Shillings: And
in default thereof to sit Six Hours in the Stocks, and for the second Offense,
to find Sureties for the good behavior, or to be Committed to the Common Goal:
And the like Punishment is to be in flicted upon all Common Haunters of
Alehouses and Taverns, and Common Gamesters, and Persons justly suspected to
live by any unlawful means, having no visible way to support themselves in
their manner of living. And no Person is to sit or continue Tippling or Drinking
more than one Hour, unless upon some Extraordinary Occasion, in any Tavern,
Victualling-house, Alehouse, or other Tipling-house, upon the penalty of Ten
Shillings for every Offense upon the Master of such House, and upon the Person
that shall so continue drinking, Three Shillings Four Pence.

Thirdly, Every Person maintaining Houses suspected of Common Bawdry, by the
Law is to find Sureties for the good behavior; likewise all Night-Walkers and
Persons using that impudent and insufferable practice of attempting others
modesty in the Streets, are to be punished at the House of Correction and find
Sureties for the good behavior.

Fourthly, All Persons using any unlawful Exercises on the Lords Day, or
Tippling in Taverns, Inns or Alehouses, and Coffee-houses, during Divine
Service on that day, are to forfeit Three Shillings Four Pence, for every
Offense, to be Levied by distress, and where none can be had, to sit three
hours in the Stocks: And every Vintner, Innkeeper or Alehouse keeper, that
shall suffer any such Drinking or Tippling in his House, is to forfeit Ten
Shillings, for every Offense: And no Person may sit in the Streets, with Herbs,
Fruits, or other things, to expose them to Sale, nor no Hackney Coachman may
stand or ply in the Streets on that day.

And therefore all Constables and other Officers, whom it does or may concern,
are required, according to their Oaths solemnly taken in that behalf, to take
care for discovering and bringing to Punishment whosoever shall Offend in any
of the Premises: And for that end they are to enter into any suspected Houses
before mentioned, to search for any such disorderly Persons as shall he found
misbehaving themselves, or doing contrary to the said Laws, and to Levy the
Penalties, and bring the Offenders before some of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of this City, to be dealt withal according to Law.

And whereas there are other disorders of another nature, very Dishonorable
and a great Scandal to the Government of this City, and very prejudicial to the
Trade and Commerce of the same: His Lordship therefore is resolved by Gods
Blessing with the Assistance of his Brethren the Aldermen, to use his utmost
endeavor to prevent the same, by putting in Execution the good and wholesome
Laws in force for that purpose, with all Strictness and severity; Some of which
he has thought fit to enumerate with the Duties and Penalties upon every
Constable and other Officers concerned therein.

As First, the great resort of Rogues, Vagrants, Idle Persons, and Common
Beggars, Pestring and Anoying the Streets and Common Passages, and all places
of Yublick Meetings and resort, against whom very good provision is made by the
Law, viz.

That all such Persons shall be openly Whipped, and forthwith sent from Parish
to Parish, to the place where He or She was born, if known; if not, to the
place where He or She last dwelt for the space of one Year, to be set to work;
or not being known where He or She was born or dwelt, then to be sent to the
Parish where He or She last passed through without punishment.

That every Constable that shall not do his best Endeavor for the Apprehension
of such Vagabond, Rogue, or Sturdy Beggar, and cause Him or Her to be punished
or conveyed according to Law, shall forfeit Ten Shillings for every default.

Secondly, The not Paving and Cleansing of the Streets: The redressing whereof
being by a late Act of Parliament put into Commissioners appointed by Common
Council His Lordship does hereby recommend the same to the Deputies and Common
Council of the several Wards within this City, to use their utmost diligence in
that affair, and especially to mind their respective Commissioners of the Duty
incumbent upon them, and of the daily Damage which the City suffers by the
neglect thereof. And his Lordship does declare he will appear at the said
Commission of Sewers as often as his more Urgent Occasions will give him leave,
and does expect such Attendance of the other Commissioners as may render the
Act more effectual than hitherto it has been.

Thirdly, The neglect of the Inhabitants of this City, in hanging and keeping
out their Lights at the accustomed hours, according to the good and Ancient
usage of this City, and Acts of Common Council in that behalf.

Fourthly, The not setting and continuing the Watches at such hours, and in
such Numbers, and in such sober and orderly manner in all other respects; as by
the Acts of Common Council in that behalf is directed and appointed.

And his Lordship does strictly require the Fellowship of Carmen, to be very
careful in the due observance of the good and wholesome Rules, and Orders, which
have been made for their regulation: His Lordship intending severely to inflict
the Penalties imposed in default thereof.

And to the end that no Constable or other Officers or Ministers of Justice may
be any ways discouraged in their Lawful Diligent and Vigorous Prosecution of
the Premises: It is provided, That if they or any of them shall be resisted, in
the just and lawful Execution of their Charge and Duty, or in any wise
Affronted or Abused, they shall be encouraged, maintained, and vindicated by
the Justice, order, and Authority of his Lordship and the Court of Aldermen;
and the Offenders Prosecuted and Punished according to Law.

Dated at the Guild Hall London, the 29th. day of November 1679 in the 31 year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second, by the grace of God of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. God
save the King.
Printed by Samuel Roycroft, at his House in St. Bartholomew Close; Printer to
the Honorable City of LONDON, 1679.


