A LETTER to HILTON, The Grand Informer: In Answer to his Several late Printed
Libels.
Renowned Captain!
I Have Perused with no small Satisfaction, The Lamentation of a bad Market,
Or, the History of your Sufferings, Entitled, the CONVENTICLE-COVRANT, setting
forth the daily Troubles, Dangers and Abuses that LOYAL GENTLEMEN meet with,
etc. Alas! Dear Heart! what a Cursed Whiggish Age is this! wherein People have
an Antipathy to Toads, and express their Aversion against Vermin and Beasts of
Prey. What pity it is, that they will not Court their Plagues, and with the
Stupid Indians Worship the Friend that Torments them? Bless us! That two such
useful LOYAL Implements, as Natt. Thompson and thy Self, should ever be Liable
to Factious rotten Eggs and Presbyterian Turnep-Tops.

But, Courage! Monsieur, though it is a Base Ill-natured World abroad, thou art
extremely Kind and Civil at Home, and Dub'st thy self at every turn, A
GENTLEMAN; Good Sir! Oblige us in what County lies your Estate, that our
Friends the Addressors and Abhorrers may put you up for a Parliament Man next
Election? In what part of the World are we to Inquire for your Manors and your
Fee-Simples? Your Mansion House we understand was lately a Garret in
White-Fryars, and if Madam Cellier has since taken you into Protection and
Accommodated you with a Lodging in Arundel-Buildings, she may no doubt likewise
have settled upon you a large Reversion in Newgate; -- It Is I Perceive all the
Mode, now a days, for the very Scum of Mankind, to take upon them as Persons of
Quality, and the most Beggarly Cowards to Boast what Feats they will do with their
LIVES and FORTUNES.

The words Loyal and Gentleman, are grown common Prostitutes, ask any tater'd
Bulley, or Lowsy Shark o'th Town, what he is? He presently Replies -- Damn me
Sir! a Gentleman; and to show ones self a Mad Drunken Swearing Swaggering
Coxcomb, is by some counted to be Loyal. Yet as it cannot be Imagined that any
thing of Generous Birth, or Education, would ever descend to the Infamous Trade
of a Common INFORMER (especially in your way, which is but to be Journey-man to
the Devil, for he is Master of the Company, and his very Title, -- Accuser of
the Brethren) so what mighty Loyalty there is or can be in Prophaneing the
Lord's Day, disturbing* Gods Worship, Worrying our Honest Peaceable Neighbors
because they have a little more Care of their Souls than our-selves, and
Impoverishing and dividing his Majesty's Loyal Protestant Subjects, (agreed in
all necessary Points of Religion) for some Trifling Ceremonies, is scarce to be
apprehended.

Grant there be Laws unrepeal'd against peaceable Dissenters, yet since the
same were so many years happily laid to sleep by His Majesty's Prudence, and
the moderation of his Subordinate Ministers (of which the Nation have found no
Cause to Repent) on what Provocation, or for what new Misdemeanors are they
now Awakned? How come they this year to oblige your Conscience Sir, to be an
Informer! Or any Magistrates to Thunder and Lighten with their Warrants, more
then they did two, three, four, five, or six years past? (or by the way, how
comes the Act against Conventicles more to oblige peoples Consciences to
Execute it, than the Act for Prohibiting French Wine, Which sworn Officers not
only neglect to Execute, but actually do vio^^te it every day, and yet are
blameless, and counted never the less Loyal Subjects?) If Guelphs transgress,
must Gibelines be punished? Because the Papists have Plotted Horird Treasons,
and Providence discovered them, must poor Innocent Protestant Dissenters be
therefore stripped and lasht? Is it the best Course to preserve our Religion and
Government, to weaken the true Interests of both? Is worrying one another the
only way to prevent the united Designs of Rome? Are our High-Church-men so
Cock-sure of Victory over Romes swarming Priests and Jesuits, as to scorn all
Assistance, nay to fall foul and destroy those that offer it, (though never so
heartily, and never so well Armed for the Encounter) unless, forsooth, they
will wear the same Feathers in their Caps as they do? If these Tantivee-Troops
all alone, are indeed such an over-match for the Papists, how then comes it to
pass, That they have suffered so many prime Sheep to stray out of their own
Folds, and remain Trophies to Italian Wolves, as well as plagues to their
Native Country? Whereas we have scarce heard of above one Dissenter that turned
Papist these twenty years, and he too drawn rather by want and discontent, than
any Conviction of Judgment.

It Is true, had the late SHAM-PLOTS succeeded to the least degree of
Probability, there might have been some Color for these Prosecutions; but
since Heaven has unravelled those Snares, and made the Innocence and Loyalty of
the Dissenters appear no less Illustrious, than the Malice and Treasons of
their Popish Enemies are Notorious, still to seek occasions to Buffet them,
seems like to gratify none, but those Enemies to our King and Religion who
Contrived and were so disappointed in the former Hellish Projects of false
Accusation and Perjuries.

But, if neither the unreasonableness, nor the unseasonableness, yet Experience
how vain such Severities are to reach the Ends pretended, might be enough to
divert the playing over again the same troublesome Game to no purpose. What
Advantage did there accrue to this Honorable City, in STARLING's Mayoralty by
all the Busle he occasioned? Note; but on the contrary, great Charge,
Confusion, decay of Trade, neglect of the Public Worship, etc. What gained
that Gentleman to himself, but Damage, Trouble, and Infamy? Remember, O Doughty
Captain! I will not say the ends of Judas and other Ancients of your
Profession, but the Fate of your more Modern Predecessors Sir -- and Marshal;
did not One of them poor, miserable, hated, and desperate as Cain, breathe out
his loathsome Soul in a Jail; and the other live scorned and neglected, withou
ever getting Twopence by all his Devilish Industry? Was there one Dissenter
the less? nay were they not Increased? Had the Church of England thereby any
Proselytes worth owning? No, no, it is an Eternal Truth, That force may make
many Hypocrites (and is any Church either the better or the stronger for such?)
but never one Real Convert. You may as well think to cure a man of the Cholick
by Brushing his Clothes, or fill a quart Pot with Syllogismes, as to Convince
people by Distress and Mittimus, or Rectify Errors of the Understanding by
Club-Law.

Who can but observe, how jocund the Papists are at these Prosecutions, and
that none are such furious Zealots for driving all into Church as those that
very seldom come there themselves? none so fierce against Nonconformity, as
those who are Nonconformists to the Laws of God, and all the obligations of
Sobriety, Modesty and Honesty. Amongst these Spiritual Whipsters, you, most
Redoubted Captain, Lead the Van; and to show yourself accomplished ( Tam Mart
quam Mercurio, as the Schoolboy has it) with a Mastersome Pen as well as a
dead-doing Sword, will needs divert the Town with the weekly Iliads of your
Exploits in this Holy War. Where first you begin with a kind of Preachment. --
Convent. Courant, Numb. 1.
Had not the Actual Accomplishment of the many DREADFUL PREDICTIONS AND
DIREFUL PROPHECIES (that is, to say -- Dreadful and Dreadful Prophecies and
Prophecies,) etc. -- In the name of Wonder How long has the Devil turned Monk?
Is Jack Hilton also amongst the Prophets? What more Life-Guard-men set up for
Cure of Souls? Is not this a Specimen of your Talent, how fit you may be
shortly for a Fat Benefice? If Whiggism were on the Rising Ground, who knows
but we might find our Divine Captain, a Lancepessade to a Conventicle? -- To be
serious, did not Truth assure us, That the Devil himself has more than once
abused and perverted Sacred Leaves, we had been astonished at so many Texts from
such an unhallowed Mouth. But tell us by all thy hopes of Knighthood, what
Romish Priest framed that Canting Preface for thee? Or what security can you
give, after all this Fury against Dissenters, That you yourself are not a
Dissenting Papist? What Parish Church do you frequent? When and where did you
use to receive the Sacrament before the space of four or five years past? How
shall we know, that your Title of Protestant is not as falsely assumed as that
of Captain? Which undoubtedly commenced at a Bawdy House, for you never were
capable of higher Preferment than a Common Trooper, where (till you were
Casheir'd for some of your good qualities) your Passive Valor under the
Discipline of every man's Cane, was as famous, as now your Active Courage
against the Phanaticks.

However, be you Papist or Atheist, we know whose Drudgery you are doing; would
not your Foolish Outcries of a Rent, a Schism, this Earthquake, this gaping
Pit; etc. have served much better in Queen Mally's days, had your Worship but
lived then to be one of bloody Bonners Catchpoles? Or may not any Protestant
Church be Esteemed as Seditious and Unlawful under a Popish Successor, as a
Presbyterian Conventicle? would not you gladly, if you were in France, use your
Sublime Commission and that Resolution of the Council of Heaven, you talk of,
To Punish the poor Hugonotes, if they would not Conform to the Church as there
by Law Established? Our most Gracious King, as he has often expressed his
Inclinations to Indulge tender Consciences, so by his special Favors to those
Persecuted French Protestants, declares that he esteems them of the same
Religion with himself, (which also his Royal Grandfather expressly affirmed in
Print) and that he disapproves of undoing men for their Religion, and yet those
French Protestants are Calvinists and Presbyterians, names against which you
vent your Spleen and Fury; and They and these People at home whom you are so
Buisy to ruin for their Religion, are of the very same Tenets. So that it
seems a Riddle beyond Oedipus, if we should blame Persecutions abroad, and
pity and Harbor the Sufferers, and yet at the same time, practice in effect
the same Severities on our own Contrymen.

Can any thing be more ridiculously Impudent than to tell us, You Design the
Procurement of Peace amongst Christians, especially Protestants, and talk of
your Zeal to serve the King, Church and Peoples Peace? A pretty way of
Procuring Peace indeed, to fall foul with Violence on harmless People in the
Worship of the God of Peace; To dragg them from their Prayers with Tumults and
Files of Musketeers, and a whole Regiment of Oaths and Curses; To Jail their
Persons and Spoil their Goods, and force Families to fly from their
Habitations, and Compel one Neighbor against his Conscience to Prosecute
another, and when he would gladly be Serving God at Church, fright him with
five pound Forfeiture, if he do not Omit his own Devotions, to disturb those of
others, altogether as Loyal, and much more Orthodox and Godly than their
Malicious Prosecutors; If this be Promoting Peace, Commend me to the Spanish
Inquisition for a Peacemaker.

The remainder of your first Libel, and those that have been Published since,
your Lies, Scandals, Prophanations of Scripture, etc. shall be Considered at
another Opportunity, For I shall not fail (God willing) to wait on you again
next Post, and undeniably prove that the Honest Constables have no Cause to be
afraid of your Malicious Menaces, In the Interim because I have in my Baptism
Solemnly Renounced the Devil and all his Works, Excuse me if I do not Subscribe
my self,

Aug. 19. 1682. Your Servant, Philoeusebias Misonebulonides.

London, Printed for R. Lee. 1682.


