AN HISTORICAL AND Geographical DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE, Extracted from the best
Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

By J. De LACROSE, Eccl. Angl. Presb.

LONDON: Printed for T. Salusbury, at the King's-Arms, near St. Dunstans Church
in Fleet Street. 1694.

To His Most Excellent MAJESTY WILLIAM III. By the Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please Your Majesty,

THE Kingdom of France, though never so large and pow^rful, has formerly
belonged, either ^n part or in whole, to Your glorious Ancestors. The vast
Dutchies of Normandy and Guyenn, Maine, Touraine, Perch and Poictou; the
Counties of Ponthieu and Guisnes, Calais, Boulogne, Ardres (...) and their
dependencies, were the Patrimonial Estates of the King^ of England; besides
many Countie^ and Lordships that Your Predecessors the Princes of Orange have
enjoyed in Dauphine, Provence Languedoc and Burgundy; (...) that, tho the
pretended Salick Law by which the Houses of Valois an^ Bourbon, endeavored to
maintain their usurpation, should tak^ place; Your Majesty has still the lawful
claim of inheritance to the best part of the French Territories.

All the World knows that n^ such motives have engaged You^ Majest^ in this
present War: You^ generous Mind aims at nothing else than to get restored to
your Allie^ what an ambitious Prince has usurped from them. But as when Solomon
preferred Wisdom to Riches God gave him the latter too as an Overplus: So it may
be that the just Distributer of Kingdoms, being pleased with that act of
Justice of Your Majesty, will add to Your Dominions the vast Estates of Your
Forefathers, and let us s^e another Henry of England Crowned in Paris. A great
n^mber of those who appear Your inveterate Enemies are most concerned for Your
Majesty, and tru^st to Your Interest. The Secular Clergy of France deprived of
their Authority, the Nobility of their Power, the Gentry of their Estates, the
Parliaments reduced to be only the unworthy Ministers of the Passions and
Pleasures of a few arbitrary Courtiers: the Learned overloaden with
Superstitions; the persecuted Protestants forced to a Worship, which they
detest in their Heart; most or all the French Cities or Countries robbed of
their Liberties and Privileges, and even the whole Kingdom beggared and
famished, sigh and long for such a Deliverer as Your Majesty, who is not afraid
of the tempests of the Sea, and bids defiance to the Fire of Canon's who has
^eceiv'd so many Wounds, and loo^'d so many Dangers in the Face for our
Security. May Almighty God animate Your Subjects with so ^uch Zeal, and bless
Your Arms with so great a Success, that Your Majesty may afford an occasion to
Your secret Friends to declare themselves, and procure them such a settled
Welfare, and constant Liberty, as may have no other end, but the Consummation
of the World: Which is the earnest Desire, Of

Your Majesty's Most humble, most obedient And most faithful Servant, J. De
LACROSE.

THE PREFACE.
SOme Readers may imagine that it is no hard matter to describe a Country so
near, so full of Learned men and so stored with excellent Books as France is,
especially for a Native of it, because of the many helps an Author may meet
with. I have made use of all those I could come at, Books, Maps, Memoirs,
Inquiries of living persons, besides what I knew of my own. But I was soon
aware, that the Description of those who have Written before me, even in the
middle of that Kingdom, are very imperfect. All the Journeys into France I have
read, as du Verdier, Sinceri Accii Itinerarium Galliae, Le Grand Tour de
France, les Delices de la France, and the late Voyages Historiques de l'Europe
observe neither order nor method, confounding not only the several Counties
into which each great Government is subdivided, but even the great Governments
themselves. As to Geographers Comminges and Darity are too old and confused.
The Maps of Sanson the Father and the Son, are excellent, those of Du Val next
to them, and by compar^ng them together, as I have done, one may be pretty sure
of the Longitude and Latitude, situation and distance of places. But neither of
the Sansons has made a modern and particular Description of France, and that of
Du Val is too short and not methodical enough. As to Antiquities. Andre du
Chesne in his curious Inquiries concerning the Towns of France is full of
Fables, and ought not to be followed but very cautiously, tho he is a Man of a
vast reading and much to be commended for having published several Historians
of the middle Age that have Written of the French affairs, and made use of them
in his Antiquities of that Country and Monarchy. Joseph Scaliger, how Learned
soever he may be in other things, does not come near Du Chesne in this, and
proposes many bold conjectures, concerning the ancient names of the French
Cities and Countries, for which he often gives no other authority but his bare
saying. Baudrand is but a pitiful compiler of modern Books, who never looked
into ancient Authors. Sanson in his Pharus Galliae Antiquae is more accurate
than the fore mentioned Writers, and has made many curious and useful
discoveries. But the most exact of all in my Judgment is Adrian de Valois in
his Notitia Galliarum, as to the Latin names of Places, for there is hardly any
thing else in that huge Folio, besides some few hints of History to be g^ther'd
here and there with great trouble.

I have perused three other modern Geographers which I must not forget, viz.
Robbe's Memoires Geographiques, Morery's Grand Dictionnaire Historique and
Geographique, with the supplement of Perayre, and De la Croix's Geographie
Vniverselle. As to the first, he cannot commit many faults, for he has almost
nothing besides French names; but as soon as he presumes to say something more,
for instance to determine the extent of a Government or its Latitude and
Longitude, one may very near be sure to find him in an error. As to Morery, it
is pity he did not live long enough, or had not the convenience to read ancient
Authors. His want of Learning in Ecclesiastical History and Mysteries of State
makes him too passionate, when he speaks of the Protestants, and leads him into
many mistakes as to Latin names and other Antiquities. As to De la Croix, all
his performance consists in having put an ab^idgment of Morery into Rob^e's
method, and a very unjudicious one too, for he leaves out what is most curious
and essential in the Great Dictionary; and the rest he takes it word for word,
unless it be to corrupt and abridg it again, but for the most part he is so
faithful as to transcribe the very faults of the press, as p. 200. l. 29.
Anvers for An^t. Whatever he adds of his own here and there, as the Latitude
and Longitude and the distance of places is always fal^e, for he never took the
(...) of looking into one of Sanson's or du Val's Ma^s. For instance, p. 201 he
says that, No-gent-le-Roy is situated on the River Eure, betwixt Dreux and
Chartres, which is true. Then he adds Dreux or Drocum is upon the Blaise, etc.
The worst Map in the World might have shown him that those three Towns are
seated on the same River. It Is true More^y has lead him into that mistake, but
what his pardonable in the compiler of a great Dictionary, who is ^ir^d out by
the length and tediousness of the Work, and distracted by the ^ariety of
matters, is not so in a Geographer. Besides that, there is a River called Baise
in Guienne, but no River Blaise in all France.

A Vocabulary of this Authors Faults would make up a small Volume, and
therefore I shall only add an instance or two more. P. 309 he calls twice after
Rob, Briancon a Bishopric Neither Morery nor any other Author that I know of
mentions any such thing: For the Brianconnois were ever as they are still a
dependency of the Caturiges and the Prelate of Ambrun. P. 320. He puts after
Rob, Serres in Viennois, that is in the Northern part of Dauphine, tho it
lies in Gapencois or in the South of that Province. This as true as what he
says p. 17 that, at the beginning of this War, the French King put 700000 Men
in Arms; and that he alone has more Religion, Merit, Glory, Revenus and
Soldiers, then all the Crowned Heads of Europe together, without excepting his
dear Ally the Turk.

The former Description of France being so faulty, I let the Reader judge what
trouble I have been at in choosing the best, and including what ever seemed to
me most essential in the Compass of this Book. It is divided into two parts,
whereof the first is an introduction to the Second, a general survey of the
whole Country, and an explication of several Offices and terms that can scarce
be fully unde^stood without it. Tho this part be very short, yet you will find
there several things concerning the French Monarchy and Politics, the power of
their Parliaments, the state of their Nobility and Gentry, the increase of
Popery, the breaking up of the Reformation, the causes that retarded its
progress, and have altogether eclipsed it in that Kingdom; all which is not
easily to be met with any where-else. The second contains an Historical and
Geographical Description of the twelve Great Governments, into which France
uses to be divided, besides Lorraine and the County of Burgundy. There I treat
of the different Revolutions of Each Government, of its ancient Inhabitants, of
its Gaulish and Latin names and other Antiquities, of its borders, extent,
subdivisions, Air, Climate, Fertility, Rivers, Lakes, Mountains, natural
Curiosities, etc. I set down the distance of the Capital Cities from Paris or
from each other, and of the most considerable Towns in each Government from
their Capital, their Latin names, Antiquities, Lords and Titles, their Civil
and Ecclesiastical Government, with the several Changes they have undergone,
their most remarkable Buildings, Trade, Inhabitants, the Great Men they have
produced, their Soil and Territory, etc.

Books newly Printed for T. Salusbury, at the Kings-Arms next St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street.
THe Reformed Gentleman, or the English Morals rescued from the Immortalities
of the present Age; showing how inconsistent those pretended Genteel
Accomplishments of Swearing, Drinking, Whoring and Sabbath-breaking are with
the true Generosity of an Englishman. With an account of the proceedings of the
Government for the Reformation of Manners. By A. M. of the Church of England.
Bound in 8. Price 1 s. 6 d.

2. An Essay against Unequal Marriages, in 4 Chapters. 1. The Introduction. 2.
Against old. Persons Marrying with Young. 3. Against Persons Marrying without
Parents or Friends Consent. 4. Against Persons Marrying against their own
Consent. By S. Sufford, in 12's. bound Price 1 s.

20. The safety of France to Monsieur the Dauphin, or the Secret History of the
French King, proving that there is no other way to secure France from
approaching ruin, but by deposing his Father for a Tyrant, and Dostroyer of his
People. Done out of French. 12. bound, price 1 s.

21. The History of the late great Revolution in England and Scotland, with the
Causes and Means by which it was accomplished, with a particular account of the
Extraordinary Occurences which happened thereupon, as likewise the settlement
of both the Kingdoms under their most serence Majesty's King William and Queen
Mary, with a List of the Convention. 8. bound, price 5. s.

A General and Particular DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE. PART I.
THE Method I shall observe in this Description, is, To give at first a General
View of this ancient and large Kingdom; To speak of its old and modern Bounds
and Divisions; Of its Soil, Inhabitants, Government, Policy, Magistrates,
Religion, etc. And then to give a Particular Description of each of its
Provinces.

CHAP. I. Of the ancient and modern Bounds and Divisions of France; Of her
Mountains, Ports, Rivers and Forests.
FRANCE has not changed her ancient Limits to the South, West and North;
seeing, as Gallia of old, it has to the West, the Ocean of Aquitain; to the
North, the British Ocean as far as Calis, by which Sea it is divided from
England; the Mediterranean Sea on the South, which is also called the French
Sea, with the Pyrenaean Mountains that part her from Spain.

As to her Limits on the East and North-East, they are very uncertain,
especially in this time of War: Before the late Conquests, it was bounded by
the County of Burgundy Elzas, the Dukedom of Lorrain and Barrois, and part of
the Spanish Netherlands; viz. the Province of Luxembourg, Hainault, Brabant,
and Flanders, But at present the French King is Master of all those Countries,
except of a little part: So that his Kingdom has almost recovered its ancient
Limits on that side viz. the Rhine and the Mouth of the Meuse.

Her Form is almost round, and in a manner oval, so that she is as broad as
long, and may be of 25 days Journey in length, from Breast to Strasbourg, and of
as many in breadth from Dunkerque to Perpignan, that is 250 Leagues, which make
about 1000 Leagues in circuit.

The ancient Galli, called Celtae, transplanted themselves into Asia, where
they gave their Name to a whole Country, called Galatia, Gallo-Graecia, or
Gallia Minor, and now Chiangare, being part of Natoly, or Less Asia. Another
Colony of the Gallick Nation having passed the Alps, conquered a good part of
Italy, which made the Romans to distinguish them into Cisalpins and
Transalpins. However, the Country on this side the Alps retained the ancient
Name of Gallia; and falling afterward under the Power of the Romans, was
divided by Augustus into four Parts, viz. Gallia Narbonensis, called also
Gallia Braccata, because of the Braccae, a kind of broad long Coats the
Inhabitants wore. The other Parts were, the Celtick Gallia, or that of Lions;
the Belgic, and the Aquitanick, which had all three the common Surname of
Gallia Comata, because the People of those Provinces suffered their hair to
grow long.

Aquitain at Julius Caesar's time was comprehended between the River Garumn,
the Sea, and the Pyrenaean Mountains; but was afterward extended by Augustus
as far as the River Loire on the North, and the Mountains of the Cevennes on
the East, and subdivided into first, second and third Aquitain. Its ancient
Inhabitants had several different Names, which we shall mention in the
particular Description of that part of France. It suffices at present to
observe, that it is now wholly in the French King's hands, but heretofore
belonged for the most part to the English.

The Celtick Gallia, or that of Lions, was included between the Ocean on the
West and North-West, the Belgic on the North-East and East, Aquitain and the
Province of Narbonne on the South. It was divided into first, second, third,
fourth and fifth; in which Division, it is worthy our Notice, that a good part
of the 2d and 3d was either the ancient Patrimony of our English Kings, as
Normandy; or fell to them by Marriage and Inheritance, as Le Maine, Anjou, and
Touraine. As to the fifth Lugdunensis, called also Provincia Sequanorum, before
the last Peace of Nimeguen the French King possessed nothing in it: but the
Spaniards having yielded him the County of Burgundy, and he being Master of
Savoy, Newchastel, Elzas and Sungow, the Republic of the Suitzers, which lays
enclosed in his Dominions, must necessarily depend upon him.

The Narbonensis had Aquitain on the West, the Celtick on the North, the Alps
on the East, the Mediterranean Sea and the Pyrenaean Mountains on the South. It
was divided into first, second and third; but afterward extended farther on
the East, beyond the Alps and to the Appennin Mountains: then it was called
Viennensis, and subdivided into first, second, third, fourth and fifth. The
French having conquered during this present War the Dukedom of Savoy, and the
County of Nice, are now Masters of all that large Country; except the County
Venaisin, which they have restored to the Pope, the Principality of Piedmont,
and the Land of Valais, called by the Ancients Gallia Subalpina, possessed by
the Warlike Duke of Savoy.

The Belgic, divided into first and second, was of a vast extent,
comprehending not only the Seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries, except
Friese, Groeningen and Overyssel, but also Picardy, Champaign, part of the Isle
of France, Lorrain, Elzas, the Bishopric of Liege, the four Electorates along
the Rhine, and the Dukedoms of Cleves and Juliers. The French, who in the
former Reigns possessed but a small part of the Belgic, have almost swallowed
up all that Country, there remaining nothing entire, but the Dukedoms of Cleves
and Juliers, and the Dominions of the States General; for the Bishopric of
Liege and the four Electotates are either dismembered, or lie open before them.

The Division of France, as to the Civil Government, may be made into certain
Provinces: The twelve Ancient, whose Deputies had their Seat in the general
Assemblies of the Kingdom, are, 1. Picardy. 2. Normandy. 3. The Isle of France.
4. Champaign. These four lie Northward of France. 5. Britanny. 6. Orleanois. 7.
The Duchy of Burgundy. 8. Lyonnois. are situated on each side of the Loire.
9. Guienne. 10. Languedock. 11. D^^phine. 12. Provence. in the Southern Parts
of the Kingdom. To these have been added, 1. The Government of Navar and Bearn.
2. Of Elzas. 3. Of the three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and Verdun. 4. Of
Lorrain. 5. Of the County of Roussillon. 6. Of the Province of Pignerol. 7. Of
the French Plantations in America.

In reference to the Courts of Justice, France is divided into ten Parliaments,
to which the Seneschalships or Bailywicks do answer.

The Names of those ten Parliaments are, Paris; Toulouse, for Languedock and
part of Guienne; Dijon, for the Duchy of Burgundy and Bresse; Roan, for
Normandy; Bourdeaux, for Guyenne; Rennes, and lately Vannes, for Britanny;
Grenoble, for Dauphine; Aix, for Provence; Pau, for Bearn and Navar; Mets, for
the Country of Messin and Lorrain, which extends its Jurisdiction over all the
conquered Netherlands.

There are Sovereign Courts of Justice at Brisach, Arras, Tournny, Perpignan
and Pignerol; they depend, for the most Part, on the Government of Picardy; but
the Duchy of Luxemburg is annexed to that of Lorrain; however, bares not the
Title of Parliament. The Parliament for the County of Burgundy is at Bezancon,
whither the Spaniards transferred it from Dole, after that Province had been
restored to them by the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle, An. 1668.

There are sixteen Archbishopricks in France, nine of which pretend to the
Right of Primacy; the seven others are, Paris, Tours, Auch, Alby, Tolouze,
Ambrun, and Aix; the Primates are, Sens, Lions, Bourges, Narbonne, Roan,
Bourdeaux, Vienne, Arles, and Rheims. The New Conquests have since added two
Archbishopricks, viz. Cambray and Bezancon.

The Pyrenaean Mountains do not so much belong to France, which they do part
from Spain, as the Cevennes, which are in the heart of the Country, and have
been known to the ancient Greeks and Latins under the Name of (...), and
Gebenna, or Cebenna. They reach along Low Languedock to Auvergne, where they
are extremely high.

France has also her Promontories upon the Coast of her Seas, as well Ocean as
Mediterranean. On the West Side looking toward Britanny, and the North
overagainst Kent, are those of the Ocean Sea; That of Talmond, or Talon du
monde, is toward the South in the same Sea, with that of Buts, which has diverse
Names, and some others. Upon the Mediterranean Sea are the Cape of St. Sigo,
which is on the Coast of Provence, the Cape of Sete, on the Coast of Agde in
Languedock. She has but two Gulfs, the Aquitanick or Tarbellick, on the Ocean
toward the West; and the great Gulf, called by the Ancients Sinus Gallicus, in
the Mediterranean Sea.

France wants no good Ports, whether in the Ocean or Mediterranean Sea. In the
Ocean, on the Coast of Britanny, are, Breast, Conquest, Blavet; and Rochell on
the Coast of Poictou. In the Mediterranean Marseille and Toulon, on the Coast
of Provence, good and renowned Havens, by the Galleys which the French King
keeps there. That on the Coast of Agde is also considerable.

The Rivers of France are many, very beautiful, and of long Course. The
Chiefest are, the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne, and the Rhosne. The Garonne
springs from the Pyrenaeans, and has always been the separation of the
Aquitains from the Celtae, receives the Dourdogne, the Tart and Loath, and is
lost in the Ocean. The Rhosne comes from the Alps, crosses the Country of
Valais, then the Lake of Geneva, through which it runs without mixing its
Waters with it, receives the Saone at Lions, the Isere that runs at Grenoble,
the Droume and the Durance, a dangerous River, and which has no certain wading;
and lastly, empties it self into the Mediterranean Sea at the Three Mary's,
within three Leagues of Arles, by six Channels. The Seine, which has its
Original in Burgundy, in the Woods of the Abbey of St. Seine, runs by Paris,
Roan, Honfleur and Harfleur, and disgorges it self into the Sea at Havre de
Grace, with a delicate Channel, where it ebbs and flows. It receives, amongst
other Rivers, the Marn, and the Oyse, which crosses Picardy, and under Pont
Oyse, toward Poissy, mixes with the Seine. The Isle of France is enclosed by
the Seine to the East and South, and by the Oyse to the West. The Loire springs
forth in Vivarez, a small Country of Languedock, passes by Velay, comes into
Forest, to Nevers, Orleans, Blois, Amboise, Tours, Saumur, and disburthens it
self in the Sea near Nantes in Britanny, with a Channel of four Leagues
breadth. It is the largest River of France, as the Rhosne is the most rapid. It
receives the River of Allier, which comes out of Gevaudan in Languedock, and
several others.

France abounds in lofty and pleasant Forests, that are not like those of
Germany, Poland, and Transylvania, which by reason of their greatness and
thickness are not so commodious for Hunting. That of Orleance is the biggest
and broadest. Besides those of Montargis, there are a great many in the Country
of Maine, in Lower Britanny, in Poictou, in Berry, in the Country of Angiers,
in Boulonois, Vermandois, Picardy, in Angoumois, where the Forest of Brancome
is of great extent. The Provinces of Burgundy, Dauphine, Languedock, Guyenne,
and chiefly Rouergue and Quercy, abound also with great Woods.

CHAP. II. Of the Air and Soil of France, and its various Productions.
FRANCE every where enjoys a very wholesome and temperate Air, whence it
proceeds that the Plague and contagious Diseases are not so frequent and
dangerous there as in other Countries.

She is praised for her Fertility from all ^imes, not only in her fair and
spacious Plains, and in her Valleys, but also in her Mountains, which are
Cultivated and bring forth Corn in such abundance; that besides the Provision
of her Inhabitants, Spain is supplied with it from Burgundy and Languedoc. To
these Provinces ought to be added those of Normandy, Beausse, Poictou,
Xainconge, Picardy, which are also very plentiful in Corn. All sorts of Wines
grow in France, and such as are Excellent too: Britany, Normandy, and Picardy,
by reason of the cold Air produce none; but all the other Provinces do abound
with it. Those of Beausse grow especially about Orleance, and Toury: Anjou has
her White-Wines, which are in a particular Esteem; Those of Burgundy are sold
off at Baulne, Sens, and Auxerre, whereof great Quantities are brought to
Paris. Guyenne is very well provided with Wines, but those of Grave at
Bourdeaux, those of Gailla^ and Rabestens, are most esteemed; and by the
Garonne, Charante, and Loire, are Transported to England, Flanders, and
Germany. The Muscadine Wines of Frontignan, and other Places near Montpellier
in Languedoc, are carried to Paris, and Foreign Nations.

The Salt Pits make the Third Wealth of that Kingdom, in which they are both
good and plentiful. The King draws vast Revenues out of them, for the
Inhabitants of every Province are furnished therewith at a very high Rate; and
they are exported to Foreign Nations, as the Switzers, Dutch, English, and
other Northern People. The Salt Pits of Languedoc at Pecais are the
excellentest of all. There are some in Provence, Poictou, Xaintonge, Brouage,
whither the Dutch come to fetch them.

The Hemp and Linen of Lower Britany, Calis, Berry, Quercy, Rouergue, and
other Places, bring likewise a great Trade, and a power of Money into France:
H^reof are made Cables and Sails for Shipping, with a prodigious quantity of
Cloth, which is carried very far. There are but some of her Provinces that
produce Oils, whose Air is the hottest and sweetest; Such as are Provence and
Languedoc: Of these is a great Trade, not only in the very Kingdom, but even
amongst Strangers. Fine Wool abounds in several Places of the Kingdom,
especially in Berry, Soloigne, Normandy, and Languedoc; in all which Provinces
very good and fine Clothes are Woven, with Serges that are carried all over the
Kingdom; and into Spain, Italy, Piedmont, and others Nations. She abounds in
all manner of Fruit: In Normandy, Britany, and Picardy, is a huge quantity of
Apples, of which they make Cider, that supplies the want of Wine. Pears and
other Winter-Fruit are better in these Provinces, and the Isle of France, where
the Air is thickest, than in those that are more to the South; Which on the
other hand are plentiful in choice Raisins, Figgs, Granads, Musk-Mellons,
Apricots, Peaches, Nectarins, Almonds, and Nutts. Chestnuts are in the most
Mountainous Countries; such as are Dauphine, the Cevennes, Languedoc, Auvergne,
the Country of Limoges, and Perigord. Wood is found there in some Places, which
is Exported into several Foreign Countries to Dye in Blue. Several of her
Provinces do bear Saffron. Silkworms are fed in Languedoc, Provence, Dauphine,
at Tours, at Caen in Normandy; and for this purpose a great number of
Mulberry-Trees are kept. She is not lacking in good Pastures, both in the even
and hilly Soil, to feed Cattle; whence comes abundance of Meat, as also Milk,
Butter and Cheese: Capons, Pullets, and all manner of Fowl are here in Store;
And Turky-Cocks and Hens are fed by Flocks; Hares, Conies, Partridges, and
Thrushes do swarm. There is Rice to be seen in Provence, Pulse of all sorts,
Flowers, Herbs, and Simples; Rosemary, Juniper, Myrtle-Trees, Sage, and all
other Plants are to be found in it. Box grows to a great thickness in Normandy,
Languedoc, and other Places, wherewith are made several small Movables for
Service, which Strangers make use of. Stones do grow in the Quarries; And here
are very fine Slates, especially in Anjou; and Marbles in Foix, and in some
Places of Languedoc. All big Beasts for Game, as Fallow Deers, Chamois, Stags,
Wild-Goats, are to be found in her Forests; besides several good Races of
Horses, of Burgundy, Normandy, Britany, Auvergne, Poictou, the Country of
Limoges, Gascony, Foix, and Languedoc; yet they are not so strong as those of
Germany, whence they are brought to draw Carts and Coaches. Spain has Mules
from Auvergne and Gevaudan.

The Corn and Wines of France, with the Salt-Houses, and other Wares, are the
most assured Mines she has; yet those of Gold and Silver are not wanting,
though they are not wrought at. And it is not to be doubted but that in the
Pyreneans, and other Mountains of Auvergne, Rouergue, Gevaudan, Languedoc, and
in the Cevennes, may be found Veins of Gold and Silver; as Germans who have
visited and found them out have Related. There are Mines of Iron in Auvergne
and Britany, of Coals, Lead, Pewter, Azur, Copperas, etc. in other Places. Add
to these the Mineral Waters, as those of Pougues, Main, Bourbon, Vals, and the
Baths of Hot Waters at Vichy, Barlaruc, Bagneux, Encausse, etc.

CHAP. III. Of the Inhabitants of France, and of their Language.
THE French are Endowed with more Virtuos than Vices, by the Confession even of
Strangers, who praise them for their Charity, hospitality, Courtesy, Valor,
and Bravery; and for their being fit, and as 'twere, born to all that they are
minded to Undertake in Learning, War, or Mechanics; wherein they very
Expeditiously imitate whatever they see performed by Strangers. They are very
cleanly in their Diet and Apparel, and very apt in the one or the other to go
beyond their Means, Quality, and Birth; which, by comparing them to Spaniards,
Italians, and other Nations, has been taken notice of. Their Clothing, as to
the Making, is never certain, no more as to the Mode then as to the Stuff,
wherein continually they change, at least from year to year.

The Men here are Comelier and Stronger, and of a finer size than Spaniards and
Italians, but not then the Germans, Dutch, or English. As to the Women, they
are Handsomer In some Provinces than others; For in Normandy, Picardy, and on
this side the Loire, they are commonly more agreeable than in the ancient
Aquitain; that is, in Auvergne, Perigord, the Country of Limoges, Gascony, and
Upper Languedoc. The other part of Guienne, especially at Bourdeaux, part of
Dauphine, Lower Languedoc, and Provence, show more pleasing Faces, and even
exquisite Beauties: As we have said that the French Man renders himself fit for
every Thing, he is chiefly so in Arms and War-fare: He likewise gives himself
over to Study, Eloquence, to all Arts, and to Merchandise: He carries freely
his Trade to Foreign Nations, and there Manures the Land, and knows not to be
Lazy: He is very Industrious, and Works merrily, though he is found fault with
for not being Patient and willing to endure in War. The French Nobility are
above all most rare Horsemen, and have a particular Care of their Honor, even
to excess: witness, the damnable custom of Duels, which the Edicts of the
present Prince have not yet been able totally to suppress. The People of France
are generally Meek and Good every where, except in some few places, where they
are a little too Blunt and Rustic. The Vulgar bears an extreme Respect to
great Persons, whether they be of the Nobility, Officers of Justice, or of the
Revenues. Ecclesiastics, and other Men of Long Gown, are especially Honored;
And there is hardly any Nation in the World that has so many Officers of all
sorts as the Kingdom of France. The Merchant, nay, and the very Tradesman, if
at any time he becomes Wealthy, pushes his Children to it: And into several
Parliaments of France, and other Courts of Justice, the Nobility Sues for
Offices too; whence comes that infinite number of literate Men, though their
Reward be but small, and that all Offices be Sold; which is not usual in other
States of Europe. Thence also proceeds a swarm of Advocates, Sollicitors,
Registers, Notaries, and other Men of Business, whose number has been
extraordinarily increased by the late Edicts of Lewis XIV, and his Creation for
Money of an incredible number of new Officers, which must needs impoverish the
Kingdom, and bring it at last to an utter Ruin. For either these new Offices
will be suppressed in time of Peace, and consequently a great many Families
will be Ruined that have bestowed their ready Money, and some their Estates
upon these Employments: Or, if they be continued, the common People will be
oppressed by the multitude of Officers, and the number of Merchants, Trades and
Husbandmen mightily diminished.

Another great Abuse that may prove at last the Ruin of France, is the
extraordinary increase of the Gentry; For whereas in England, younger Brothers
even of the greatest Noblemen make no difficulty of becoming Merchants, nay and
Tradesmen too, if they have no inclination to Learning: The youngest Son of a
simple Gentleman in France would account it a great Dishonor to his Birth to
do any thing but to wear a Gown, or a Sword; which makes that the French
Gentry, who is almost as numerous as the other Inhabitants, can hardly subsist
in time of Peace.

Besides the Faults which the French have common, with other Nations, as to be
too much given to Play, to Women, Debauchery, Blasphemies, and Cursings, it
cannot be denied but that they are Hasty and Choleric; However you will find
amongst 'em very few instances of those secret and awful Revenges that are so
often practiced by some of their Neighbors. As to their Levity, we may in
their behalf make use of Charles the Fifth's saying, That they are Wise without
making any show of it: For though they are not so Crafty as the Italians, nor
so Vain and Proud as the Spaniards, yet do they not want Policy and Cunning.
Finally the French are very Religious, and have always feared their Gods; and
whatever Religion they Embraced, they firmly stick'd to it. The frequent Wars
which they have Undertaken or Suffered upon this account, show the Truth of
this Assertion. They are very Respectful to Ladies, and give them large
Liberty; neither do they shut them up as the Italians and Spaniards do; whence
it comes that they are cordially Beloved and served by their Wives; and that
the Visits and Practices of young Women end generally in a happy Wedlock.

The French Tongue for the most part is a Branch of the Latin: The Romans
becoming Masters of the Country, and introducing their Laws in it, changed the
Speech of the Natural Inhabitants, or by little and little made them loose it.
If the German Tongue had been there spoken before, or the British, they were at
last totally routed, and a kind of corrupted Latin took their place. Now a days
each Province has its peculiar manner of Speaking and Dialect; However there is
still a difference of Speech betwixt the Provinces on this side the Loire, and
those beyond it: The first Speak French, and the last Gascon, taking this Word
as usually taken at Paris; for those of Languedoc and Dauphine, Provence, and
Guyenne, the Latin Tongue having left deeper Footsteps of its Residence in
those four Provinces than among the other French, whose Language is purer,
especially about Blois, Orleance, and Paris.

CHAP. IV. Of the Riches, Strength, and Government of France.
THE Kingdom of France is Rich and Potent by its Situation, by the great
numbers of its Cities and Inhabitants, and by its Wares of all Sorts, of which
there is a great Trade. As to the Riches, the King takes what he pleases in his
Taxes, Excise upon Salt, Impositions upon Merchandises that go out and are
brought into France, besides his Patrimony, whereupon the Kings have lived
during a long time. The Revenues of the Kingdom before the Dutch War of 1672,
were deemed to amount to 170000000 Livres, that is, about 15000000 Sterling,
but have ever since still diminished, partly by the continual Taxes that
impoverish the People, and partly by the stop which the Wars have put to Trade;
but much more by the Persecution of the Protestants, which has made the price
of the Lands considerably fall, disturbed the Traffic of the Realm, and
deprived it of great Sums of ready Money, which the French Refugees have
brought over with 'em into Foreign Countries.

The French Monarchy strove many Ages before it came to that high Point of
Grandeur to which it has attained of late. The Weakness of Charlemaign's
Successors, and the Incursions of the Normans, had reduced it to so narrow
Limits, that the French King was hardly Sovereign in Paris. The Governors of
the several Counties and Provinces taking hold of the occasion, made their
Charges Hereditary; and soon after rendered themselves Lords of the Countries
they Governed: So that France at that time was rather an Aristocracy, or a
Confederacy of several Petty-Princes under the French King their Head, as
Germany now is under the Emperor, then a Monarchy properly so called. But the
Victories which Charles VII got over the English in the Fifteenth Age, during
the Wars of the Houses of York and Lancaster, gave him means to Unite to his
Crown the large Provinces of Guyenne and Normandy; together with Poictou, le
Maine, and Tourain. Lewis XI. his Son and Successor, after the Death of Charles
the R^sh, last Duke of Burgundy, in 1477, usurped upon his Sole Heiress Mary,
Spouse of Maximilian of Austria, the Duchy of Burgundy and some part of
Picardy. Charles VIII. and Lewis XII. by their Marriage with Ann Daughter to
Francis II. late Duke of Britany, United that Duchy to their Crown Anno 1514;
Then it was that France began to look as a mighty Kingdom: So that Francis I.
King of France, was a sit Match even for Charles V. Emperor and King of Spain,
Naples, and Sicily, Duke of Milan, and Lord of all the Low Countries, The
extent of the French Kings Jurisdiction was yet increased by the Accession of
Bearn or Lower Navarre, of which Henry IV. was in Possession when he came to
that Crown; And by his Acquisition of the Province of Bresse, with the Lands of
Bugey, Valromey, and the Bailwick of Gex, which he Exchanged with Charles
Emanuel Duke of Savoy, for some Pretensions on the Marquisate of Salusses in
1601. Lewis XIII. his Son Divested the Duke of Lorrain of his Duchy; the
Emperor and the King of Spain of a good part of Elzas and the Netherlands; and
this present King has not only Conquered the County of Burgundy, and the rest
of Elzas, but pushed so far his Conquests in the Low Countries, that what now
remains in the Hands of the King of Spain is not able to withstand him any long
time.

The Authority of the French Monarchs grew stronger and more absolute within
their Kingdom, as the Bounds of it were extended without; at least in this
latter Age. For in former times, even that mighty Emperor Charlemaign would do
nothing without the Advice of his Barons; no, not so much as establish and
endow a Bishopric: and by their means it was, that his Son, Lewis the Pious,
was re-inthron'd. The Power of the French Lords lasted not only under the
Second Race, but three or four Ages too under the Third. And as these petty
Princes were extinguished, their Authority was transferred to the States of the
several Provinces, under whose hands it remained, till the Civil Wars, under
the pretense of Religion, gave a mighty check to it; and the shrewd Policy of
the Cardinals Richelieu and Mazarine made it altogether arbitrary.

Now the French Kings pretend that they are Emperors in France, as Bodin and du
Tillet have endeavored to prove; That their Authority is Absolute and
Sovereign, and that as to the Temporal they have no other Superior than God
alone, upon whom their Crown immediately depends, it not being in the Power of
the Prelates of their Kingdom either to excommunicate them, or to publish them
to be such. By reason of their Consecration, they are looked upon to be of the
Body of several Cathedral Churches in France, where they hold the Prebends. The
nominating to Bishoprics, Abbeys, etc. belongs to them, even by the Pope's
Consent, and the Concordat made betwixt Francis I. and Leo X. They alone can
make Laws in their Kingdom, grant Favors and Pardons, naturalize Strangers, and
legitimate Bastards. They build Colleges, Universities, Courts and Companies of
Justice, create Offices, and provide for the same.

The Males only, by Salique Law, which the French call the Fundamental of the
State, have Right to Succession, and the Crown always is devolved to the next
Heir, that is, to the eldest Son of the King, and to the Issues of the eldest
Infinitely. This Firstborn, during his Father's Life, is commonly called the
Dauphin, by the Donative of Humbert, last Dauphin of Viennois, of his Lands of
Dauphine, to Philip of Valois, King of France, upon condition, that his eldest
Son should be called Dauphin, and bear quarterly the Arms of France, with those
of Viennois. It was in the year 1343. Philip at the entreaty of John his Son,
who reigned after him, gave the Land to his Grandson, who reigned under the
Name of Charles called the Wise, and was the first Son of France who bore the
Title of Dauphin.

The Arms of France are, Three Flowers de Luce Or, in a Field Azure. King
Charles VI. reduced them to Three, his Predecessors having had them without
number, contrary to the Custom even of the first Kings.

The Consecration of the Kings is solemnly performed at Rheims, where they are
anointed with Oil of the Holy Ampoule, kept religiously in the Abbey-Church of
St. Remigius, whence it is carried under a Canopy by four Knights of the Holy
Ampoule, created by Clovis IV. The Royal Ornaments are kept at St. Denis, from
King St. Lewis's time. The twelve Peers of France assist at the Consecration;
six whereof are Ecclesiastical, to wit, the Archbishop and Duke of Rheims, who
consecrates the King; the Bishop and Duke of Laon, the Bishop and Duke of
Langres, the Bishop and Earl of Bon^vais, the Bishop and Earl of Chaalons, the
Bishop and Earl of Noyon. The Six Lay Peers were formerly, the Duke of
Burgundy, the Duke of Normandy, the Duke of Guyonne, the Earl of Tolouse, the
Earl of Flanders, and the Earl of Champagne: but these Peers subsisting no
more, they are represented by as many French Princes or Lords.

The King's Guards are composed of two strange Nations, viz. Scots and
Switzers, and of his French Subjects. The Scotch Guard is the first Company of
the King's Guard du Corpse. However, it ought to be observed, that this Name is
but a remainder of the ancient Alliance between the Scotch and the French: for
since the Reformation, and the Union of England and Scotland, there has hardly
been a Scotch Man among these pre^ended Scotch Guards. However, as this Company
is the ancientest, so it enjoys the greatest Privileges, for their Captain
precedes the three others, and begins always to ser^e the first Quarter of the
Year; and when the Guard du Corpse are quartered, they choose the first Lodging.
This Company was at first composed of 100 Gentlemen, or chosen Soldiers; 24 of
whom have yet a good Stipend, are Privileged, and have at their Head the first
Man at Arms of France, who makes the 25th; and these are the Archers of the
Guard du Corpse, who wear Hoquetons, or white Cassocks, covered with gilt
Silver-Shells, whence they are commonly called Hoquetons.

The three French Companies have been instituted by three several Kings, and
wear upon their Arms and Cassocks the Livery, Colors and Devices of the
Reigning Kings. Those that are called Exempts of the Guards, precede the other
Archers; they wear neither Hoquetons nor Cassocks, and command the Guards in
the absence of their Officers: They carry a Stick, as a Mark of their Power and
Employment.

The hundred Switzers wear the King's Livery, with a Halbert, and are clothed
after their own Country fashion. These four Companies have their Captains, who
are all qualified Lords. And besides these, the King has a Regiment of
Switzers, and another Regiment of French Guards, with all their Officers. These
make as 'twere a small complete Army, kept ordinarily with a Company of
Musketeers, or Horse-Guards, whom King Lewis XIII. had instituted, and whose
Head he was.

During the Minority of the Kings, which ends so soon as they are 14 years old,
a Regent or Protector was provided by the General States of the Kingdom, or by
the Court of Parliament of Paris. He was commonly the King's nearest Kinsman,
or the Queen his Mother, as Queen Catherine of Medicis was to King Charles IX.
Queen Mary of Medicis to King Lewis XIII. But since the Monarchy is become
Absolute, the Will of the deceased King has only been regarded. And Ann of
Austria, Mother to K. Lewis XIV. now Reigning, carried the Regency against the
Princes of the Blood, who disputed it with her, though they had the Parliament
of Paris on their side, whence ensued a bloody War, in which the Queen and
Cardinal Mazarine got the better of the Princes. Patents, Edicts and Arrests
are expedited under the Name of the King, with this Title, By the King, and
Queen-Regent.

The Queens of France have often been Crowned, whereof History gives several
Examples. They were anointed with another Chrism than that of the Holy Ampoule.
Queen Mary of Medicis was Consecrated and Crowned at St. Denis in the year
1610. on the 13th of May, by Cardinal de Joyeuse. In their Widowhood they have
been formerly called White Queens, but that has not been used for some Ages.

There is no sharing in the Royal House and Succession, since the Third Stock
of the Kings of France; so that second Brothers must be contented with a
Patrimony in Land, bearing the Title of Duchy, Peerdom, and County. They may
have in their House such Officers as the King himself has, viz. Chancellor,
Secretary, and others, with the Title of Grandees; and they are styled Your
Highness, as if they were Sovereign Princes. The youngest Sons of the French
King subscribe only with the proper Name, as well as the King himself: but
their Posterity take their Title of the principal Country that makes up their
Portions, as being henceforward accounted a separate Branch of the Princes of
the Blood.

The Daughters of the French Kings have not any other Portions than Sums of
Money, instead of Lands, which they have had heretofore. It is They alone who
properly are called Dames, or Ladies, in France. The Princes of the Blood who
become Churchmen keep the Rank belonging to their Birth, and not to the
Ecclesiastical Order.

The King's Natural Sons have no share in the Succession either of the Crown or
of the Royal Patrimony, but have an Entertainment at the King's Pleasure. They
do not bear the Surname of France, but that of the Land given them, or of the
Branch which they come from; as now the Duke of Longueville is called of
Orleance, He or his Predecessors being descended from Lewis Duke of Orleance,
Brother to King Charles VI. The Duke of Engouleme, was called de Valois, as
being born of Charles IX. of the Branch of Valois: The Duke of Vendosme and his
Issue bear the Name of Vendosme, because of that Land which King Henry IV. gave
to their Fore-father.

CHAP. V. Of the Chief Officers of the Crown and Kingdom.
THE greatest Office of the King's House, is that of Grand Master of his House,
before whom, all the Officers that serve therein take the Oaths, and whom they
are to obey. There is a Chief Steward of the Household, and a Steward of the
Household in Ordinary, and others that serve quarterly, having a Stick in their
Hands, set in Silver gilt at both Ends. They precede the Serving Gentlemen,
when the Kings Meat goes by.

There is a Grand Provost of France, or Provost of the Household, which is a
very ancient and authorized Office: Justice is exercised, under his Name, by
two Lieutenants, the one in a long, and the other in a short Gown, by
Sergeants, and by fifty Archers, clothed in Hoquetons or Cassocks of Livery,
that follow him, attend the Court, and prosecute the Guilty six Leagues
thereabouts. He also makes the Procedures of criminal Causes betwixt the
Officers of the King's Household, and others that follow the Court; and when the
King is on his March, he sets a Price upon Bread, Wine, Flesh, Hay, Oats, and
other Provisions.

The Place of great Chamberlain is also very ancient, honorable and
privileged. He is Superintendant of the King's Chamber, of his Cloathings and
Movables. He lies at the King's Feet, when he holds his Bed of Justice, or at
the General States of the Kingdom, when the Kings used to call them.

There are four Chief Gentlemen of the King's Chamber that serve quarterly, a
Master of the Wardrobe, a Master of the Ceremonies, a Leader of Ambassadors,
who all take the Oaths in the King's Hands.

There was formerly a Grand Queux, or a Great Master of the King's Kitchen; but
this Charge is now abolished, there having been none since Lewis of Pry, Lord
of Buzanco^^ who died under Charles VIII. An. 1490. There are yet four Masters
Queux or Cooks, who serve quarterly in the King's Kitchen.

The Great Master of the Pantry, and the Grand Butler, or Cup Bearer of France,
do discharge their Duty but in great Solemnities, as at the King's Coronation,
and the like; but there are Gentlemen of the King's Table, and Cup-bearers in
ordinary, who make the Assay of the Meat and Drink that is presented to the
King.

There is a great and little Stable of the King, the Gentlemen of the Little,
pass upon the King when he is on Horseback. The Great Master of the Horse is
constituted upon them all, and bears the Sword in a Velvet Scabbard, marked
with Flower-de-Luces, on great Solemnities, before his Prince.

The Marshals of France judge of all Military Causes, and have their
Lieutenants and Provosts to inform against, and seize upon Vagabonds and
Deserters. They ordinarily wear a Stick, as a Badge of their Dignity, and when
they receive it from the King, they take the Oath of Allegiance to him, in the
High Court of Parliament at Paris. The Seat of their Jurisdiction is at the
Marble-Table in the Palace of that Court, where their Power is very
considerable, since the Suppression of the Charge of Lord Constable, upon whom
they were formerly depending. However, this Power is somewhat counterballanced
by their great Increase in Number of late years.

The Lord Chancellor is the Head of all the Courts of Justice, and presides in
all the King's Councils in his Absence. Besides, he cannot be destituted, but
by Death or Trespass. And therefore the Kings, to keep this great Minister in
awe, have a Lord Keeper of the Seals, whom they cause to discharge the
Chancellor's Functions, by giving him the Seals; in which Occasion, the
Chancellor retains no more but the bare Name of his Office. He has under him
the Masters of the Requests, who serve quarterly, judge the Differences between
the Officers of the Crown, and prepare such Matters as are to come before the
King's Great Council.

This Council is now a Sovereign Court of Justice, whose Sentences are executed
throughout the whole Kingdom; it is composed of the Chancellor and eight Masters
of Requests. From this Court issue all the Placates, Ordinances and
Proclamations. There are also a Council of State, a Council of the Exchequer, a
Privy Council, to determine Appeals and Contests about the Jurisdiction of
Judges, and the Cabinet Council, who manages all the Affairs, and is as the
Soul of the Realm.

Besides the twelve ancient Peers of France, there are near a hundred more
created since two or three Centuries; but though they have the Privilege to
sit in the Parliament at Paris, and not to be judged by any other Court, yet
they fall short of the Luster and Power of the first Peers.

The Knights of the Order of St. Michael instituted by Lewis XI. in 1469, are
in no extraordinary Repute; and this Order is now only considered as a step to
that of the Holy Ghost, instituted by Henry III. in 1570, whose Knights are
fewer in number and more respected, it being given as a token of special
Favor, and to such as are already of St. Michael's Order, and considered by
their Birth or Merits.

I supersede to speak of the Lord Admiral, the Vice-Admirals, and
Rear-Admirals; Of the Generals, Lieutenant Generals, Masters de Camp,
Colonels, etc. Of the Masters of the Ordnance, of the Lord Treasurers,
Counselors, and Secretaries of State; of the Ambassadors, Lord Almoner, Under
Almoners, Chaplains in Ordinary, and other Officers, either Civil, Military, or
Ecclesiastical, who are little or nothing different from the like in England.
But I must not forget to speak a word of the King's Confessor, who, though he
has originally no more Power than the Clerk of the Closet here; yet, through
the superstitious Condescension of the late Kings, and the shrewd Management of
those cunning Politicians, Cotton, Annat and La Chaize, are become so powerful,
as to get into their Hands, the Direction of the most important Affairs of the
Kingdom, under pretense of Conscience. When the Jesuits were recalled into
France, King Henry IV. was advised to take one of these Fathers for his
Confessor, who should be as an Hostage for the Fidelity of the whole Club. But
this very Caution proved his Ruin, for Father Cotton, whom he pitched upon,
having first seduced his Queen, laid his Plot so well with Spain and his
Fellow-Jesuits, that the King was murdered by Ravaillac: And that Henry's
Ghostly Father and Queen had a Hand in this horrid Business, can hardly be
doubted, after the Insinuations the sincere Mezeray gives of it.

There are two Charges in France, the like I don't know that we have in
England, or at least they are not here in such a Consideration as in that
Kingdom. The Officers who discharge them, are always Counts, or Dukes, or
Princes of the Blood, and are called the Great Huntsman, and the Great Falconer
of France. They have large Appointments, Gifts and Profits, and several
Officers under them, whose Places are at their Disposal. The Captain General of
the Hunting-Nets, and the Great Wolf-Hunter, keep likewise an honorable Rank,
and all four are sworn by the King himself.

I shall finish this Chapter with mentioning the Way of administering Justice in
France. Suits are for the most part commenced before the ordinary Judges of the
Place, which are called Royal, or Seigneurial, according as the Town or Village
depends ^mmediately upon the King, or a private Lord, except in some particular
Cases, or when one of the Parties concerned is exempted from their
Jurisdiction. Thence ^hey are brought before the Baylives or Se^eschals, who
are Chief Justices of a certain Precinct, called Baylwick, Vriguory,
Provostship, or Seneshalship. These Baylives are Noble Men, who bear a Sword
instead of a Gown, and seldom discharge their Office themselves, but have two
Lieutenants under them, one for Civil, and the other for Criminal Causes.

The last, and Supreme Jurisdiction, is ^he High Court of Parliament, each of
which is composed of ten, twelve, or fifteen Presidents, and well near eighty
or an hundred Counselors. The Power of this Court, ^s yet very great, because
of the many Noble and Privileged Men, whose Causes immediately resort to it.
But it was much greater in times past, especially that of the Parliament of
Paris, which was in some manner a standing Assembly of the General States: For
no Edict or Proclamation of the King had the Force of a Law before ^t was
^enterine, or ratified by them; and they might reject such as were not, in
their Judgments, fit for the Public Good. A Boldness of which History
furnishes us with several Examples, even under the most powerful and respected
Princes, as Lewis XI. Francis I. and Henry IV. But the late Ministers,
Richelieu, Mazarin, Colbert and Louvois, have so far undermined the Authority
of these Courts, that they not only dare not reject any of the King's Edicts,
but dare not so much as make use of the Word Enterine, their Style being now Lu
and verify en Parliament: That is, Read and acknowledged for a true Writing, or
Order of the King. The Intendants are the Men, whom the Promoters of Arbitrary
Power have made a special use of to bring down the Power of Parliaments. They
are a kind of Overseers, whom the French Kings began to send into the several
Provinces of their Dominions fifty or sixty years ago, and who, under pretense
of settling the King's Revenues, reconciling Differences about it, or seeing
Justice well done, have considerably encroached upon the Jurisdiction of
Parliaments, without that the Complaints of the last were ever regarded at
Court. The preposterous Zeal of these Magistrates against the Reformed, was
none of the least Causes of their Decay; for as often as any Suit, wherein both
Churches seemed to be concerned, came before them, we were sure to get an Arret
de Partage; or that the Protestant President and Counselors would give their
Voice in favor of the Defenders, whereas the Roman Catholics would decide for
the Plaintiffs, how ill grounded soever their Actions might be. This of course
brought the Decision of the Matter before the King's Council; so that our
Reformed seeing that no Justice was to be hoped from the Parliament, made an
Interest to remove the Cause before the King's Council, that they might avoid
expenses, which many other imitated, not without the secret Support of the
Court.

CHAP. VI. Of the Religion of the French.
THE Reader must not here expect an Account of the Bardes and Druides, or of
the Idolatrous Worship of the ancient Gauls; neither am I minded to assert, or
confute what has been said concerning St. Denis, the Areopagite, being Bishop
of Paris, or St. Martial, Bishop of Limoges, and both Apostles of the Gauls,
about the Year 70. By whomsoever the Christian Religion has been first preached
in France, sure it is, that it was early enough, since in the middle of the
second Century, there were two conspicuous Churches at Lions and Vienne, who
endured a long and bloody Persecution, under the Empire of Marc. Aurele. An.
176. By what Means and Degrees Popery corrupted Christianity, is not a Mystery
in this Protestant Kingdom; but I have some Observations to make upon the
Progress and present State of that Superstitious Worship in France.

It Is well known that Superstition began to creep into the Church by the
overgreat Honor the Faithful rendered to those Christian Heroes, the Martyrs,
who, contrary to the Heathen, that got a Name by their being troublesome to
others, signalized themselves by their own Sufferings. And with great reason
were they so much reverenced, since the Pagan Antiquity, which mentions so many
Hercules, can hardly supply us with an Anaxarchus. While these courageous
Athletes lay in Prison, Sinners were released of their Penances upon their
Intercession; after their Death, their Tombs were the Gathering-place of the
Faithful, and when God had given Peace to his Church, Temples were built upon,
or near their Graves, and called after their Names. And as the Vulgar does not
know how to keep the golden middle Path, hates or loves, despises or praises to
excess; So this due and lawful Remembrance soon degenerated into an Idolatrous
Worship. Perhaps at the beginning it had been easy to Clergymen to put a Stop
to that Superstition; but the Generality found, it seems, their Reckoning by
it, and pious Men durst not oppose the Current. However the Gauls had the
Honor to produce one Jovinian, a Monk of Milan, who endured a long Persecution
for openly disproving the creeping Practices of Coelibacy, Vows, and the
Veneration of Relics, in the time of St. Ambrose. But a greater Man than
Jovinian whom neither Italians nor Spaniards can challenge, is Vigilantius; for
he was born at Calaguri, a small Borough near Cominges in Gascony. True it is,
that St. Jerome disputed against him with much Violence; but the Learned know,
that the Conduct of this Father is not so much commended as his Science; and
notwithstanding his Out-crys, Vigilantius quietly died in the Communion of the
Church, and left a great many Disciples, who seem to have been the Forefathers
of the Albigenses; as those of Jovinian maintained the Truth in the Churches of
Italy, till Claudius, Archbishop of Turin arose, and was succeeded by the
Vaudois.

The second Step of Superstition, was the Worship of Images, which when the
Emperors of the East could no longer oppose, God raised Charlemaign in the
West, who caused it to be condemned, together with the second Council of Nice;
in another held at Francfort, Ann. 794. At the same time Agobard, Archbishop of
Lions, and Claudius of Turin, preached and wrote against these Idolatrous
Practices; which prevail'^ at last, during the Weakness and Division of
Charlemaign's House and Successors.

Transubstantiation was a casual Offspring of Image Worship; for when the
Orthodox told the Iconolatre's that God'^ Son had left us but an Image of
himself namely, the Holy Sacrament, which notwithstanding he never commanded to
adore; the last, after many Subterfuges, finally bethought themselves of this
Answer (...) That the consecrated Bread and Wine were not a simple Image of our
Lord, but his true Body and Blood. Against this strange Doctrine, Bertram, or
Ratramn, Priest and Monk of Corby in Picardy, composed a Book about the Year
850. and a little after, John Scot Erigeene, Professor of Divinity in the
University of Paris, wrote of the same Matter, both by Order of Charles the
Bald, Emperor. By the Opposition of these great Men, this monstrous Tenet was
somewhat suppressed; but as it lifted up its Head again, after their Death,
Berengarius, Archdeacon of Angers, arose for the Truth, in 1035; was a long
time maintained by several French Bishops, against the Power and Persecution of
the Popes, and died in the Communion of the Church Ann. 1088, not without
solemnly recalling the nonsensical Confession which the Popes Nicolas II. and
Gregory VII. had forced upon him.

After Berengarius, the Assertors of the Truth had more dreadful Storms to go
through; however, France was never wanting such Christian Heroes. Some rejected
all the Popish Errors, as Peter de Bruys, and Henry of Tolose, the Waldenses
and Albigenses. Some confuted Transubstantiation, as John Dr. of Paris, known
under the Name of Joannes de Parisiis; others bewailed the Corruption of the
Church, as Nicolas of Clemangis; others inveighed against the Monks, their
Luxury and Covetousness, especially William of St. Amor. As to those that
opposed the Tyranny and Usurpations of the Popes, it would be too tedious to
enumerate them, and I refer my Reader to the Learned Richer and Du Pin. De
potest. Eccles. L. 1. c. 3. De Antiq. Eccles. Discipl. Diss. 7.

The French Soil being so well prepared to receive the Seed of the Gospel, it is
not to be wondered at, if the Disciples of Luther, and the Writings of Calvin
caused such a Harvest in that Kingdom; one ought rather to be surpised that it
was not fruitful every where, and that, against all Appearance, in less than
200 Years, the Roman Tare has outwardly covered the whole Realm again. I say,
against all appearance, for it seems somewhat strange, that some Northern
Countries have generally i^brac'd, and hitherto preserved the Refo^mation, and
that the quick-sighted Fren^^ have suffered themselves to be imposed upon so
far, as to let Popery and Tyran^ prevail, after they had spilt so much Bloo^ to
obtain at least a Liberty of Conscienc^ I will not presume to enter the Secrets
(...) God: but as the ways of his Providen^^ may sometimes be discovered after
the ^vent, and the Faults of our Forefathers, (...) the Frauds of our Enemies
may make (...) wiser for the future, so it will not, m^thinks, be amiss, to
observe the Causes tha^ have put a stop to the Reformation i^ France.

1. In most of the Countries that reforme^ themselves, the Church-Revenues were
no^ all disposed of, according to the pious Intent of the Givers; but a good
part wa^ appropriated to Secular Uses; which alienated the Hearts of the Clergy
in other Countries, and gave them occasion to insinuate to the People, that
Covetousness, an^ not the Love of the Truth, was the chie^ Motive of their
Change. This Inconvenience might have been prevented by some Foundations for
promoting Learning and Piety, and erecting up Schools, Colleges, and Places
for the Retirement of the Learned, who had served the Church a certain time, or
were fitter for Writing than Preaching.

2 Calvin chancing to light upon Geneva, established there a Form of
Ecclesiastical Government, very suitable to a Commonwealth, but not at all to a
Kingdom: The French Protestants however set up the fame amongst them, which was
pardonable enough during the Persecution, since they had not the Means to keep
up Bishops, and that they had been more exposed than simple Ministers, both
because of their Dignity, and their Opposition to the Roman Prelates. But when
God had given them a Protestant King, who conquered a good part of his Realm
with the Dint of his Sword; when so many of the Bishops and Nobility resorted
to Henry IV: it is a wonder that his Presbyterian Ministers never thought of
submitting to the Prelates, provided the Prelates would submit to the Truth.

3. Thence arose another Evil, for there being no Means of Subsistence for
Dignitaries amongst the Reformed, no, not so much as an honorable Recompense
for the Learned; after the Separation was made, very few came over to them out
of the Roman Church, and a greater Number of their Ministers was seduced to the
Popish Tenets.

4. To cheat People of their Money, the Monks had invented, or adorned with
fabulous Stories, the Doctrine of Purgatory, and made them believe at the sa^^
time, that they might redeem themsel^ either with Money, or painful
Satisfaction which the Reformers perceiving, drove perhaps too forwardly the
Doctrines absolute Predestination, and free Grace. T^ subtle Controvertists of
the Roman Chur^^ let not slip this Occasion of ridiculing the Adversaries, and
traduced them as Enem^ to good Works, and such as overthrew (...) Moral of the
Gospel. These Accusation how false soever they were, being set up (...) able
Pens, were sufficient to amuse the V^^gar, and to hinder them from opening the
Eyes to see the gross Errors of Pope^ which in the mean time were not urged.

5. It Is well known, that there has bee^ pretended Holy League in France, for
mai^taining the Roman Catholic Religion, a^^ that the Dukes of Guise were
Chieftena^^ and Promoters of it; but they who ha^^ not read the Books of those
Times, are (...) so well acquainted with the Artifices the used to draw in so
many of the Nobilit^ They persuaded them that the Huguen^^ were
Commonwealth-men, who intend^ to subvert the Kingdom, and dismember (...) into
several petty Principalities and Repu^licks, just as their Brethren the
Switzers, (...) the Free Towns and Princes of German^ By these Insinuations,
great and aspiri^^ Men, who cannot make considerable Fo^tunes under a weak
Government, stuck close them.

6. As to the last Persecution of the French ^^^testants, as it has been long,
and in a ^^nner insensible, during Thirty or Forty ^ars, but at the latter end
extremely cru^^ sudden, and unfore-seen, so it could (...) be prevented, either
by any Foreign ^wer, or any Insurrection within. The ^^ench Cardinals and
Jesuits no less cruel ^^d cunning than the Wolves of the Fable, ^^ok from the
Reformed their Places of ^^rety, seduced their great Men, invaded ^eir
Privileges, and fell upon Dragoon^g them; when they were disarmed, and ^^t of
state of making any Defense: But will smart them, I hope, before it be long,
^or besides that, God never left such a per^iousness unpunished; they are so
far ^^om having extirpated the Reformation, at they have spread it farther, by
mingling ^^e Protestants amongst them. And any one ^ay easily suppose, that,
during the Separati^n, the Reformed had not so many fair Occa^ons of instilling
into them a secret Horror ^^r superstitious Practices, as they have now.

And let this suffice to the First Part of ^ur Description: I had resolved to
follow (...) the Second Part, the ordinary Division ^f France, in Twelve
Governments; but ^^nce I considered that this Method would ^e troublesome both
to me and my Readers, and perhaps make me overskip some of the Countries
included in the general Gover^ments: Besides that, there are now Ninetee^ and
not Twelve of them, so that I thought more convenient to begin at one End,
(...) with Lorrain, then pursuing my way Nort^wards, to make the Grand Tour of
France and go out of it through the County (...) Burgundy, than to puzzle my
self and others with unnecessary Bounds and Div^sions. However, I will not fail
to man the Extent of each Government, and the Countries belonging to it.

A DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE. PART II. WHEREIN ^ach of its great Provinces, smaller
Counties, Cities, Towns, Royal Houses, Forests, Mountains, Coasts, Rivers and
Lakes are Geographically and Historically described.
CHAP. I. LORRAIN, the Three Bishoprics, and the Duchy of BAR.
THIS Province is called thus from Lothaire, Grandson of Lewis the Meek,
Emperor and King of France, who was Sovereign thereof, when it was far
greater, and bore the Name of Kingdom. The whole Duchy belongs now to the King
of France, who has usurped the grea^est part of it upon Charles III. the true
S^veraign, and forced him to make over (...) Right to him. The present Bounds
of the Province, are Elzas and the Palatinate o^ the East, Champaign on the
West, Luxe^bourg and the Electorate of Triers on the North, and the County of
Burgundy on the South. The Inhabitants are Warlike, an^ the Country for the
most part covered wit^ Woods and Forests, yet well stocked wit^ Corn, Vines and
Minerals; nor does it wa^ pleasant Rivers, and good Waters. Its Town are well
built, strong and rich.

NANCY the Capital of Lorrain was the ordinary Residence of the Dukes, whose
Cour^ was crowded with great Numbers of Nobilit^ and Gentry. It was here that
those Princes Riches made a fine Sight, especially two Tables of a great Length
and Breadth, one Marble, the other Silver-gilt, or washed over wit^ Gold, with
several Figures and Emblems and Latin Verses most artificially engrave^ upon
them. There were also costly Hangings, and the Effigies of a Man in Wood whose
Muscles seemed to move, and were interwoven with so much Art, that it wa^ a
perfect Wonder. The Dukes Tombs ar^ likewise here, amongst which that of
Renatus, who overcame the Burgundians, is mo^^ considerable; that of Charles
Duke of Bu^gundy is there also. The Arsenal was well provided with all
Necessaries, and its Fortifications seemed to render it impregnable, before the
French took it. There is a Bog or fenny Place pretty nigh the Town, in the
midst of which, is a Cross of Stone, with an Inscription in French, that marks
the Defeat of the Burgundians under Charles the Rash, their last Duke, An.
1477. The Town is situated about an hundred Steps from the Meurte, which
discharges it self into the Moselle, four or five Miles from thence. Nancy is
divided into Old and New Town; the Old has the Palace of the Dukes, but the New
is greater, and better fortified. The French destroyed its Fortifications in
1664, and afterward repaired them. There is a Chamber of Accounts, and a
Seneshalship.

This Province has also Bar le Duc, Capital of the Duchy of that Name: It was
built by Frederick, Duke of the Mozellane Lorrain, in 951, and fortified with a
strong Castle, to prevent the Incursions of the Champenois. There were several
other strong Places, amongst the rest, Marsal and Moyenvic, whose
Fortifications the French have destroyed, as well as the Castle of Bar le Duc.
Near Moyenvic are commodious Salt Pits.

I must not forget the three Bishoprics taken from Charles V. in 1552. viz.
Toul, Mets and Verdun, because they are included in this Province, and are
nearly tied to it, especially in what concerns Spiritual Jurisdiction, though
as to the Civil, they make a separate Government.

Toul, Tullum Leucorum, is a Town well built, situated upon the Mosell, twelve
Miles from Nancy. It Is pretty big, and boasts of St. Bernard's Tomb, over which
is a Crown extraordinary well worked; its Diocese is pretty large.

Verdun, Verodunum, a very pleasant City, situated in a fruitful and good Soil
on the River Meuse, Twenty six Miles from Mets, Its Bishops take the Title of
Counts of Verdun, and Princes of the Holy Empire. It has a strong Citadel and
Baylwick, and is renowned for its Aniseed.

Mets is also a very pleasant Town, both for its Houses, its Cathedral of St.
Stephen, a true Masterpiece of Architecture, and the River Moselle and Seille
that wash it. It is a very ancient City, since Caesar, Plinius, Tacit and
Ptolomy mention it under the Name of Divodurum Mediomatricum, and speak of it
as the chief Town of that Country, and of the People called Mediomatrices, now
Les habitans du pais Messin. In process of time, it became still more and more
Famous; and under the French Kings of the first Race, was Capital of the
Kingdom of Austrasia, called also the Kingdom of Mets; since Theodoric, Son to
Clovis the Great, had chosen it for the Seat of his Empire. In the Decay of
Charlemaign's House, Mets erected it self into a free Imperial Town, under the
Government of its own Magistrates, who had Power of Life and Death, and of
Coining of Money. And so jealous they were of their Liberty, that Charles VII.
King of France, besieging them ^n 1444, on the behalf of Renatus Duke of
Lorrain, they rather chose to see their Country wasted during seven Months, and
to redeem themselves with 300000 Livres, than to loose their Liberty. Thus they
kept it till the Year 1552, that their City was taken by the Lord of
Montmorency, High Constable of France. In the Month of October, of the same
Year, Charles V. besieged it in vain, and as it was the last Undertaking of
this Emperor, it gave occasion to this Verse, alluding to the modern Name of
this Town in Latin, Metae.

Siste viam Metis, haec tibi meta datur. There is seen in St. Stephen's Church,
a Vessel of Red Porphyry, ten Foot long, and all of a piece, which serves to
keep their Holy Water in. This great Town has no Sub^urbs, and is all
surrounded with a strong Rampire, and deep and wide Ditches, that can be filled
at pleasure, only opening a Sluice to let in the Moselle: Yet for its greater
Strength, a Citadel with four Bastions, have been built there of late. The
People are well bred, Civil and Numerous, and drive a great Trade into Germany.
The Circumference of the Town is pretty big; its Bishop entitles himself Prince
of the Empire, and has four Archdeacons under him, with 623 Parishes.

In 1633, Lewis XIII. established there a Parliament, which the Commissioners
of the Emperor opposed, saying, That the French King was only Protector of the
three Bishoprics, and not absolute Sovereign thereof; and consequently, that
he might not deprive the Inhabitants of their ancient Laws, and the Right they
had to bring their Appeals before the Imperial Chamber at Spire. These
Complaints lasted to the Peace of Munster, in which the three Bishoprics and
Moyenvic were yielded unconditionally and for ever to the Crown of France, save
only the Right of Metropolitan to the Archbishop of Triers.

This Parliament, as it was the last, so it was at first the least considerable
next to that of Pau, the three Bishoprics only resorting to it. But since the
Conquest of Lorrain, Luxemburg, and adjacent Countries, its Jurisdiction is
mightily enlarged. It made a great Noise some time after the Peace of Nimeguen,
about the Year 1680 when the French King erected there a Chamber of
Dependencies, whose Judges summoned the Spanish Subjects to come and swear
Allegiance to the French King, under pretense that they were depending upon
some of his new Conquests. By this Shrewdness, he got more Lands during the
Peace, than he had done in the War.

The Dukedom of Luxemburg is under the Governor of Lorrain; but I supersede to
make a particular Description of it, because the Low Countries deserve a
Treatise by it self. I shall only observe, that there is a Sovereign Council in
the Capital, whereunto the whole Province resorts.

At a League's distance from the Town, is a Village called Jovy, where are
still to be seen some Remains of an Aqueduct, built by the Romans, with Arches
of a fine white Stone, cut in Form of Bricks, and above Sixty Foot high.

Besides this, there is another considerable Place near Nancy, called St.
Nicolas, that should deserve rather to be called one of the greatest Towns of
Lorrain, for the Number of its Inhabitants, and considerable Traffic, than a
simple Borough, if it were walled in. The other most considerable Places near
the Capital, are Fruart, which is but a League off it; Ormes, Bayon, Pont a
Mousson, famous for its University, founded by Charles, Cardinal of Lorrain, on
behalf of the Jesuits; An. 1573, and very pleasant by reason of its fruitful
Soil, and of the Mosell, which runs through the middle of the Town, and is
passed with (...) Bridge; whence, and from a neighboring Mountain, called
Mousson, is derived the Name of Pont a Mousson. Then Vezelize, Roziere,
Blancmont, Gerbevillier, Charms Chastenoy, Moranges, Vaucouleur, the
Birthplace of Jane d' Arc, called the Virgin, or Maiden of Orleans,
Mexan-sous-Bresse, Dompaire Deneure, Hoden, Chasteau-Rambervillier, Raon
Bellemont, Neuf-chastel, Magstat, Marchainville, Espinal Bruyeres, Darney,
Ormont, Valderfing, Beauzains, Vaigni, Estraye, Estival, Luneville, Fauquemont,
Sare-Louis, a new Fortress, with a Presidial, Vandervange, the Seat of a
Baylwick, etc.

Its Counties are Vaudemont, Chaligni, Amence, formerly the Chancery of
Lorrain, Mirecourt, Remiremont and La Mothe. At Remiremont, upon the Mosell, is
a famous Monastery of Canonnesses, where Noble Men's Daughters are only
received. The Abbess is not suffered to leave the Habit, but all the Nuns can
go out and marry if they please. La Mothe was a small Town on the Frontiers of
Champaign; but being built on a steep Rock, washed by a Brook, it was accounted
impregnable, before the Mashal de la Force took it, Ann. 1634, for the French
King Lewis XIII. who caused it afterward to be demolished. Its Lordships, are
Marsal, Remereville, S. Ballemont, Ramberville, Homburg, Mariemont and
Sandacourt. Phalzburg has the Title of Principality: It is situated at the Foot
of the Mountains, on the Frontiers of Elzas, seven or eight Leagues from
Strasburg; but is not so considerable as it was formerly.

Lorrain also comprehends the Duchy of Bar, which reaches to Neuf Chastel, or
New Castle, whereof the principal Town is Bar le Duc the less considerable, S.
Mihel, a strong Town, whose Inhabitants made bold to rebel against King Lewis
XIII. in behalf of their Duke Charles III. for which, some of them were sent to
the Galleys, after the Year 1633. Then Ligni, Moigneville, Lon-champ, Commercy,
etc. The Mountains of Vauge, Vougesi Montes, who separate Lorrain from the
County of Burgundy and Elzas, take up about an hundred Miles in length from
West to East, and from South to North. Thence springs the Mosell, near a
Village called Bussans, on the Frontiers of Franche-County and Elzas, takes its
Course toward Remiremont, where it receives several Brooks; amongst others,
the Vologne, or Voloye, increased with the Nany at a Village called Chamery;
then it goes down to Espinal, Chastel, Charms, Bayon and Chaligny, where the
Modon, with the Waters of the Illon, Vezelize, etc. discharges it self into it.
Afterward, it washes Toul and Pont a Mousson, and between these two Cities,
receives the Meurte, which comes also from the Mountains of Vauge, goes by S.
Dioy, Raon, Luneville, Roziere, S. Nicolas. Then being Increased with several
other Rivers, washes Nancy, and looses it self into the Mosell, near the Castle
of Conde. As to the Mosell, it pursues its Course toward Mets, where it
receives the Seille, that seems to issue from a Lake near Marsal; then goes
down to Thionville and Triers. There it is increased with the Sare, that
springs likewise from the Mountains Vauge, near Salms, and washes several
Places, to which it gives its Name, as Sarburg, Saralbe, Sargomine, and
Sarpruch. Finally, having made several Windings and Turnings, and received some
other Rivers, it goes to Coblentz, and mixes there with the Rhine. The Saone
takes its Source on the other side of these Mountains, which had given the
thoughts of digging a Channel to join these two Rivers, that there might be a
Communication between the Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. The Project was
begun under the Emperor Nero, but was not followed. In fine, this Duchy
comprehending the Barrois, is four Days Journey, that is, about forty Leagues
in length from Stenay to Darnay, and near so many in breadth from Bar le Duc to
Biche; the whole abounding in Wheat, Wine, and all other Necessaries for Man's
Sustenance; as in Beasts or Cattle of all Kinds, Fish in their Rivers and
Ponds, Baths that are much esteemed, and Salt Pits that are none of the worst.
It Is also rich in Mines of Silver, Brass, Iron, Tin and Lead; and at the Foot
of the Mountains of Vauge, are found Azure-Stones, with some Pearls, and the
best Stuff in the World to make Looking-glasses of; besides, Cassidonies of
such considerable bigness, that Drinking-Cups are made of them. Neither Turkey,
nor the Kingdom of Naples can furnish better Horses than Lorrain, nor is there
better fresh Water-Fish in the World than its Trouts, Salmons, Pearches, Carps
and Tenches are. The Carps in a Lake that is fourteen Leagues in circuit, are
some of them three or four foot long.

As for the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants, they have been observed to
be a Mixture of the German and French. The People will drink hard, are free and
open, and not as cunning or ingenious as other Nations: Yet the Gentry, as they
are stout and brave, so do they likewise pretend to Wit and good Breeding, some
taking to the German Fashion, but a great part living after the French. Under
their Dukes, as they were not overburthened with Taxes, and lived pretty rich
and easy, so they denied themselves no Pleasures or Diversions, and Feasts,
Plays, Balls, Music, etc. were very frequent, and in great request amongst
them. However the Country is still very good and pleasant; for Men of Business
may employ themselves in Trafficking, and they who nee^ not to take so much
Trouble, may Hunt, Feas^ and rejoice as pleasantly here as in any other place
whatsoever.

CHAP. II. The Principality of SEDAN and Dukedom of BOUILLON and RETHEL.
I Put here this Principality, because it i^ in my way from Lorrain to
Champaign^ though it belongs now to this last Government. But before I enter
into it, I must describe the famous Forest of Ardenne. Arduenna Sylva,
apparently so called, because it is so rugged and craggy, and the Ways in some
places so narrow, that Carters go along winding a Horn, to hinder that others
should meet with them. In Cesar's time, it reached from Rheims in Champain to
the Rhine, and thence to Tournay on the Scheld; so that it was extended an
hundred and thirty Miles in length, fifty or sixty in breadth in some places,
and covered part of Champaign and Lorrain, of Luxemburg and the Bishopric of
Liege, and of the Counties of Namur, Haynaut and Flanders, which are now filled
with so many fair Cities. Now this Forest has not above forty Miles in length
from Thionville on the Mosell, in the Duchy of Luxemburg, to Donchery and
Sedan. The Emperors Charlemaign and Lewis the Meek took a Delight in Hunting
there, especially in Autumn, that they made a Royal Sport of Gaming, with great
Preparations. Sigebert, King of Austrasia, had built two Abbeys in the midst of
it, which are now in the Neighborhood.

This Principality, which is but four Leagues in square, is included between
Champaign, Lorrain and Luxemburg. It belonged formerly to the famous Family of
the Dukes of Bouillon, and Viscounts of Turene, well known for their many and
great Exploits, until Lewis XIII. or rather his ambitious Minister, Cardinal
Richelieu, made bold to deprive them of it, in the Year 1642. It Is true, they
have had some Lands in exchange, but they are not to be compared to these,
either for Profit or Honor, were it but for the Title of Sovereignty. This
Country, though it is covered with Woods, as I have hinted, does not want,
however, a Competency of Corn, which makes the Abode both agreeable and cheap.
The chief Town is Sedan, whose Situation is pleasant enough, because the Mosell
runs by it, though of one side it has a Mountain; both these, with its good
Castle, render it impregnable. It Is said, the Platform is so great, that 2000
Men might be drawn up upon it; and its Magazins so well furnished, that few in
the Kingdom can equal them. The Town is not ver^ big and has but three
principal Street There was an University that has been fo^merly famous, and
filled up with gre^ Men, as Du Moulin, James Chapel Le Bla^ and Jurieu; nor
ought the Professor Tilen^ to be forgotten, though he lost his Plac^ because he
maintained Arminius's Tene^^ The Principality of Raucourt, and the Pr^vostship
of Donchery are depending upon S^dan; the first lying North, and the Secon^
South-West of it.

2. The Duchy of Bouillon, between S^dan, Luxemburg and Liege, belongs yet t^
the Dukes of that Name: It is of no great extent, and the Capital Bouillon is
but (...) good Borough, situated on the River S^moy; but has a Castle built on
a steep Rock with Lodging-rooms even in the Rock, s^ that Bombs and Mines can
have but little effect upon it. In the Year 1683, the Sp^niards having declared
War against France that they might engage the Hollanders to do the same; the
French King, by derision caused the Duke of Bouillon to give out a Declaration
of War against Spain.

3. At the coming out of Sedan, is seen the Town and strong Castle of Mesieres,
where the French King always keeps a good Garrison; and then you come into the
Duchy of Rethelois, which belongs to the Duke o^ Mantua, whereof the Capital
called Rethel is one of the strongest Places in the Kingdom. It Is now called
Mazarin, and makes part of the Government of Champaign. The Prince of Conde,
who was then on the Spaniards side, took it in 1653. In the same Duchy, is
Charleville, a very pleasant and strong Town, built upon the Meuse by Charles
Gonzague, Duke of Nevers and Mantua. On the other side of the River is Mount
Olymp, with the Ruins of an old Castle, that was, as it is believed, a Temple of
the Heathens, and where the French King keeps a Governor. Rocroy was also a
very strong Town, whence the Spaniards made Incursions into Champaign, but
since besieged it in vain, and were defeated near it in 1643, by the Duke of
Anguien. Stenay, upon the Meuse, was one of the Keys of Lorrain, but having
been taken from his Duke, was united to Champaign in 1633. Mouson, on the other
side of Meuse, between Sedan and Stenay, belonged formerly to the Empire,
having been taken from the French by Count, Nassau General of Charles V. but
was retaken Thirty Years after, and a small Hill, which commands it, was
extremely fortified. The French King keeps there a Governor too.

CHAP. III. Champaign.
THIS Province is one of the best and largest of the whole Kingdom, it has
Franche-County, Lorrain and Barrois to the East, Burgundy to the South,
Picardy, the Isle of France, and the Gastinois to the West, Luxemburg and
Hainaut to the North. It is about Ninety Miles East and West, from Tilly to
Claye in Brie, and an Hundred twenty six North and South, from Rocroy in
Rhetelois to Fontaine-Francoise in Burgundy. It Is called Champaign from its
great Plains, and divided into upper and Lower: the Upper, which is more
Northerly, has great Chalky Plains, without Trees, Rivers or Fountains; and
produces no other Corn but Rye, with great Woods toward the North. The Lower
is more fruitful, especially in Wines. Champaign is likewise divided into eight
Baylwyks or Precincts. Proper Champaign, or the Country of Troyes, Rhemois,
Perthois, Rethelois, Vallage, Bassigny, Senonois, Brie-Champenoise: For the
Province of Brie is partly a Dependence of this Government, and both were, in
Caesar's time, part of the Belgic. Three of the ancient Counts of Champaign
have been Kings of Navarre, viz. Thibaud IV. Thibaud V. and Henry III. that
left but a Daughter called Jane, married in 1284 to Philip the Fair, King of
France, who united this County to his Crown, after it had been separated from
it 326 Years, since Robert, the first Sovereign Earl of Champaign in 958. These
Counts have been once so powerful, that they made bold to war against the
French Kings, and at other times against the Kings of Burgundy, and the
Emperors of Germany. They had seven Counts for their Vassals, called the Peers
of Champaign; namely, those of Joigni, Retel, Brienne, Rouci, Brain, Grand-Pre
and Bar upon the Seine. Champaign has yet two Archbishopricks, Rheims and Sens,
four Bishoprics, Chalons upon the Marne, Langres, Troyes, accounted by most
the Capital of the Province, and Meaux, the chief Town of Brie. Its Rivers are,
1. The Seine, which receives the Yonne, the Marne, the Aube, and has been
already described. The Yonne comes from the Nivernois, three Leagues from
Clemessi, receives the Cure, the Armancon and the Venne, goes by Auxerre and
Sens, and falls into the Seine at Montereau. The Marne Matrona has its Source
in Champaign, in a Place called the Marmote, washes Langres, Roland-Pont,
Chaumont, Joinville, S. Dizier, Vitry, Chalons, Espernay, Dormans,
Chateau-Thierry, La Ferte under Jouarre, Meaux and Lagni, and being increased
with the Waters of Vannori, St. Geome, the Mousche, the Swize, the Blaize, the
Saude, the Roignon, the Moyvr^ the Soupe, and great and little Morin mixe^ with
the Seine at the Bridge of Charento^ about a League off Paris. The Aube, Alb^
and Albula, springs in the Diocese of La^gres, at a Place called Auberive,
washes L^ Ferte, Clervaux, Bar, Romeru, and discharge^ it self into the Seine
near Marcilly. 2. The Aisne, Axonia is formed from two Fountains, the one comes
from Beaulieu in Argonne, up higher S. Menehould, whereby i^ passes; the other
from the Duchy of Bar, beyond Clermont, which it goes by. The^ both Fountains
being united at Mouron wash Rethel, Chateau-Porcien, Soissons, and having
received the Vesle, that passes through Rheims and Fismes, it mixes with the
Oys^ above Compiegne. 3. The Meuse springs in Champaign, near a Village of that
Name, and Montigni le Roi, but goes soon out of it through Lorrain and Barrois,
the County of Namur, the Bishopric of Liege, Gueldres and Holland, where it
falls into the Sea below Rotterdam, and near the Briel.

1. Rheims.
RHeims, esteemed by some Capital of Champaign, is a very ancient Town, as
appears by Caesar's Fort, that is not far off it. Its Compass is wide,
surrounded with good Walls, of about a League in circuit, and embellished with
very magnificent ^tructures, especially the Archiepiscopal Church consecrated
to our Lady, which is ^ne of the most sumptuous, and most ac^omplished
Buildings in the whole King^om. Its Portail Raising as high as the very Towers:
Sixty seven Canons officiate day^y in this Church; besides, there is another
^onsecrated to St. Remy, with the Title of Abbey, wherein the Ampoule, pretended
to ^e brought from Heaven, at the Consecra^ion of Clovis, and since destined
for anoint^ng the Monarchs of France, is carefully kept, with several other
Curiosities, as the Representation of the Twelve Dukes and Peers of France,
dressed as when they assist at the King's Coronation; which Ceremo^y is for the
most part performed in this Town. Its Archbishop is the first Duke, and
Ecclesiastical Peer of France, and has for Suffragans, Soissons, Chalons, upon
the Marne, Laon, Senlis, Beauvais, Amiens, Noyon and Boulogne; and before
Cambray was erected into an Archbishopric, this City, together with Arras and
Tournay, depended upon the Metropolitan of Rheims. The ancient Latin Authors
called it Duricortorum, and Duricortora Remorum, and the Modern, Remi and
Remensis Civitas. Besides the Cathedral, that bears the Name of our Lady, and
the Abbey of St. Remy; there are three other Abbeys, and several Parochial
Churches and Monasteries, a Presidial and Baylwi^ and an University, founded by
Charles Lorrain, one of its Archbishops.

In 1677, was discovered at Rheims a ^mous Monument of Antiquity, a triu^phal
Arch, which formerly was the No^thern Gate of the City, called the Port Mars.
This Arch is composed of three there Arches, 1. The Arch of the Seasons the
middle represents the four Seasons four Children and a Woman, who deno^
Abundance, sitting amongst them; rou^ about are drawn the Twelve Months, in
many Pictures, with several Ornaments the time has partly defaced. 2. The Arch
Romulus, on the right side has a Square e^riched with Trophies, including the
Pictur^ of Remus and Romulus sucking a She-Wolf near which are two Figures,
having each Stick in their Hand; but one is covere^ with a Helm, and the other
with a Lawre^ Crown: It Is thought they were the Image of the Shepherd Faustulus
and Acca Laurentia his Wife. 3. The Arch of Leda, on the left side represents
Leda, Castor and Pollux's Mother, together with a Swan, and Cupi^ holding a
Link in his Hand. The Inhabitants are courteous and witty; but they and the
Briois are accused of being obstinate and headstrong in their Sentiments.

Going out of Rheims toward the South-west, one finds a fruitful Soil, good
Meadows, pleasant Gardens, and plenty of Vines. The City is Capital of a small
Country called ^he Rhemois, which contains Fismes, Cormicy, Pont-Favergue and
Machauld.

2. Precinct of Chalons and Troyes.
ON the South-East, and South of Rhemois are the Precinct of Chalons and
Troyes, which make up Champaign, properly so called. There you will find the
Towns or Boroughs of Chastillon, Damery, Dormans, Conde, Espernay, Montmaur,
Ay, Avesnay, S. Menehoud, Chalons. Then you will meet with Vertus,
Fere-Champenosie, Plancy, Arcy, Pont-sur-seine, Merry, Romeru, Pongy, Piney,
Vandeure, Troyes and Villemaur.

Chalons.
THIS Town, called Catalaunum by the Latins, is one of the Chiefest of
Champaign in Beauty, Bigness, Wealth and Privileges. Its Situation is very
pleasant, because the River Marn runs by its Walls, and parts it from one of
the Suburbs; besides the Convenience it gives them of transporting their Wares
and Commodities to Paris. Its Buildings are very neat, the Streets wide, and
the Walks pleasant, by reason of Trees planted on each side. It has the Ti^ of
a County, and its Bishop one the Twelve ancient Dukes and Peers France, is
Suffragan to the Archbishop Rheims. The Cathedral of St. Stephen both great and
well built, as are likewi^ its twelve Parochial Churches and thr^ Abbeys. All
this, with the Fertility of (...) Plains, the Cheapness of Provisions, and
^vility of the Inhabitants, makes the Tow^ much frequented: They that delight
(...) Whiteness, shall find here, besides the Ho^ses, several Towers in form of
Pyrami^ and the very Walls all of that Colo^ This Town is divided into three
Parts, ca^ed, the City, the Isle, and the Boroug^ and has a Generality of
Treasurers, and Presidial. It was near this City that M^rouee and Aetius,
General of the Roman overcame Attila, King of the Huns, in 45^ and gave a total
Overthrow to his Army whereof 90000 were killed on the Spo^ Others affirm, that
this happened in Ca^pis Secalaunicis at Solougne, near Orlean. However Chalons
is a very ancient Tow^ since in the time of Julian the Apostate, (...) was
already considerable.

Troyes.
SOme Authors affirm, that this Town, which is a Bishopric, under the
Metro^olitan of Sens, and Capital of all Cham^aign, was built upon the Seine
after the De^ruction of the ancient Troy; but without ^aving recourse to
Fables, sure it is, that Troyes (...) of great Antiquity, and known to the
ancient Historians and Geographers under the Names of Treca, Tricassis,
Tricassium, Augusta Tricassinorum and Augustobona. Its advan^agious Situation,
with the Strength of its Walls, and Courage of the Inhabitants, very well
trained up to Arms, renders it capable of maintaining a long Siege. It has a
very fine Palace, pretty good Buildings, ^wo Collegial and six Parochial
Churches, besides the Abbey of S. Loup, and of the Nuns of S. Bernard, called
our Lady of the Meadows, Notre-dame des Prez, and the Cathedral of St. Stephen,
which has forty Canons. Here they make a show of many fine Rarities, as some of
our Savior's Hair, a Piece of the true Cross, a Dish used in his last Supper,
one of St. John's Fingers, one of St. Peter's Teeth, the Body of St. Helena,
etc. not forgetting the Tomb of one of the Counts of Champaign. Its Baylwick
and Presidial have a large Jurisdiction, and the last consists of eight
Counselors and a Register. Money is coined in this Town. It Is though^ St.
Amateur was the first that Preached the Gospel to its Inhabitants. Troyes was
ruine^ by the Normans in the ninth Century, b^^ since repaired by Count Robert.
The plac^ is pleasant enough, and Provisions cheap.

3. Senonois.
ON the South-West of Troyes is the Country of Sens, whose Archbishop is on^ of
the Pretenders to the Primacy of Gaul an^ Germany. This City, which the Latins
call'^ Senones and Agendicum Senonum is very ancient; and if not ancienter than
Rome, a^ some pretend, at least it is sure that its Inhabitants were famous long
before the coming of our Savior: for they sent Colonies into Greece and Italy,
where they took Rome, an^ built Sienne and Senigaglia, that retain ye^ somewhat
of their Founders Name. Under the Second Race of the French Kings, some Lords
erected Sens into a Sovereign County till King Robert made himself Master of it
in 1005. The Town is large, well built and washed with two Rivers, Venne and
Yonne, that mix their Waters here. The Cathedral of St. Stephen is a sumptuous
Building, adorned with two great Towers. A^ the foot of the principal Altar is
a Golden Table, enriched with precious Stones; upon it are engraved in basso
relievo the four Evangelists, with a St. Stephen on his knees in the ^dle of
'em. The Chapter has nine Dig^ries, a Dean, five Archdeacons, a Praetor, a
Treasurer and a Purveyor; and in (...) whole Diocese are reckoned above 900
^ishes, besides 25 Abbeys. The Bishops of ^is, Chartres, Meaux, and Orleans,
depend^ upon this Prelate, before the first was ^de a Metropolitan; but now it
has no ^re than Troyes, Auxerre and Noyon for Suf^gans. Sens has a Presidial
and a Baylwick, ^ich is one of the four Ancient of the ^gdom, and the Country
depending upon is 16 or 17 Leagues in length, and 8 in ^adth. There are several
walled Towns and ^roughs, as Pont sur Yonne, Joigny, that has the ^tle of
County, St. Flore^tin, Tonnerre, Cha^s, a County between which and Fontenay ^s
given a famous Battle among the Sons Lewis the Meek; besides several places of
^ser Note, as Ville-Neuve-l'Archeveque, Ville^uve le Roy, S. Julien du Sant,
C^erny, la ^rte Loupiere, Aillant, Brignon, etc.

4. Langres.
^Ome put this Town in Bassigni, and others account Chaumont for the Capital of
it. shall here follow the last, in order to make particular Description of this
ancient City, ^lled by the Latins Lingonae, and Andomainum Lingonum, and famous
ever since the Irruption of Sigovese and Bellovese i^ Italy, that is, since
3464 of the World, 164 of Rome. Langres is seated upon Mountain near the source
of the Marne, a^ its Territory, which is not far from B^gundy, is accounted the
highest of France, because five or six Rivers spring out of The Vandals wasted
this City, and put St. ^dier, its Bishop, to death, in 704; but si^ it was so
well repaired, that in the 12th Ce^tury Peter the Venerable calls it, the N^^
the Great, and the Renowned: and therefo^ its Bishops were not forgotten in the
Instit^tion of the ancient Dukes and Peers France. The Cathedral is dedicated
(...) St. Mammez Martyr; but St. Savinian w^ its first Bishop, for ought we
know, about (...) end of the fourth Age.

5. Of Bassigni, Vallage, and Perthois.
THE Country of Bassigni is included b^twixt that of Langres and Vallage (...)
the South and North, the Duchy a^ County of Burgundy on the West and Ea^
Vallage has Bassigni on the South, the P^cinct of Troyes on the East and
North-Ea^ Lorrain on the East, Barrois and Rhemois (...) the North. Perthois
has Vallage on the Sout^ the Duchy of Bar on the East, the Territ^ ^y of
Rheims on the North, and that of Troyes ^n the West. Chaumont is the Capital of
Bassigni, and is situated upon a Hill near the Marne, between Langres and
Chalons. It has (...) very strong Castle built upon a Rock, with a Tower called
the Donjon.

There are likewise Montigni, Gaeffi, Nogente Roy, Bourbonne-les-Bains,
Monteclar, Ande^t, Bisnay, Choyseul, Clermont, with several others, that have
strong Castles for their De^ence. Vallage for its chief Towns has Vassi and
Joinville, erected into a Principality by King Henry II. for the youngest Sons
of the House of Guise, an. 1552. It is situated upon the Marne. The other Towns
of Vallage, ^re Brienne County, Vignoris, Montirandel, ^onlevand, le Chasteau
aux Forges, Esclairon, ^ar upon the River Aube, which is renown^d for its
excellent Wines, and had formerly ^s particular Counts.

The Country of Perthois has Vitri (...) Francois, fortified the modern way, or
its Capital. It was built by King ^rancis I. whose Name it bears, in the
Neighborhood of Vitri le brule, that was (...) former times a considerable
Castle. The ^ther less considerable Towns are, Argilliers, ^arzicourt,
Louvemain, St. Dizier, a strong ^own on the Frontiers of Barrois, Ser^aize, etc.

6. The Country of Brie, and more especially Brie Champenoise.
THis Country is included between the Marne, the Seine, and the Diocese o^
Chalons, and is extended about 10 or 1^ Leagues in length and breadth. It Is
fer^ in Fruits, Meadows, Corn and Wines tha^ are delicate near Chateau-Thierry,
but more rough about Meaux. Brie is divided into French Brie, depending upon
the Governme^ of the Isle of France; and Champaigne's Brie divided again into
Upper, Lower and Lou^ Brie, or the Land of Glandevesse, wherei^ are the
Boroughs of Gandelu, Montmor^ Tresmes, Orbay, etc. The whole Province h^ MEAVX
for its Capital, whose situation upon the Maine is very pleasant, and its
Dispos^tion or Order no less, being divided in tw^ by a little River that runs
through and separates the Town quite from the Marke^ called otherwise the Fort.
It Is so consider^ble, that it deserved a Bishopric, Bailwic^ and Election. Its
Cathedral, is dedicated (...) St. Stephen. Besides that, there is the
Collegiate Church of St. Sanctin, first Bishop (...) Meaux, the Abbey of St.
Faron, belonging (...) the Benedictins of St. Maur, and several Parochial
Churches and Monasteries, both i^ the Town and the three Suburbs. Mea^ had
formerly its particular Counts, whose Country was united to the Crown with the
^est of Champaign. During the Imprisonment ^f King John, the Dauphin Charles V.
his ^on, fell at variance with the Parisians, and ^etired to Meaux, thence to
Sens. The Parians would make use of the occasion, to ^eize upon this Key of the
Marne, and sent ^ome Troops thither under the Conduct of a ^rocer: but
notwithstanding the Treason ^f the Mayor, who opened them the Gates, ^ey could
not master the Market; and ^aston-Phebus, Count of Foix, cut them in^ pieces,
then ransacked and burnt the Town. However, it was in few years so ^ell
repaired, that it maintained a Siege of ^ree months against the English, who at
last ^ok it upon Charles VII. then only Dau^hin of France, in 1421. Meaux was
one ^f the first Cities of that Kingdom, wherein ^e Reformation was Preached;
for which ^ohn le Clerc and James Pavanes got the ^rown of Martyrdom, the first
being burnt (...) Metz, and the other at Paris, about the ^ear 1525.

CHATEAV-THIERRY is eight or ten ^eagues Eastwards of Meaux, upon the same
^iver; has the Title of a Duchy, a Bail^ick, a Presidial, Provostship and
Election, and (...) accounted the Chief Town of Upper Brie. ^'s strong and
pleasant by its situation, has good Castle, and several Churches. The Duke of
Mayenne took it in the last Age for the League, at which time it was plundere^
by the Spaniards.

MONCEAVX is a Royal Castle an^ Pleasure-house built upon the River O^^ near
its meeting with the Marn. It Is ador^ed with Parks, Forests, Rivers, and Garden
that yield to none in the Kingdom for Beauty or Pleasure. Queen Catherine of
Medi^ begun, and Henry IV. finished it.

PROVINS, Capital of Lower Brie, an^ formerly of the whole Province, is
situate^ upon the little River Vuzie. It has a Bai^wick, and is renowned for
its Roses, and t^ Conserve that is made of them. The other Towns and Boroughs
of Brie are, Nogen^ l'Artaud, Vieux-Maisons, Crecy, Colommie^ la Ferte-Gaucher,
and Sezanne, all four upon the Morin; Nogent sur Seyne, which has fine Bridge
upon that River; Montere^faut Yonne, so called because the Yonne fa^ there, and
mixes with the Seine. It has Bridge too, upon which John Duke of B^gundy was
murdered by the Faction of Oleance, in 1419.

CHAP. IV. Of the Isle of France, and its Dependencies.
ISLE of France is properly the Name of a small Country included between the
Rivers Seine, Oyse and Aysne, Picardy, Brie, and the Territory of Rheims; but
to make of it a Government somewhat suitable to ^he bigness of the Capital of
so great a Kingdom, part of the adjacent Countries have ^een taken from them,
and added to this Peninsula, viz. out of Champaign, part of Brie, betwixt the
Marne, the Seine, and the small River Year, with the Towns of Lag^y,
Ville-neuve-S. George, Brie-Comte-Robert, built by the first Count of
Champaign, which ^as yet a Seat of Justice resorting to the Chate^et of Paris;
and Rosoy. Out of Beausse, have been taken three Countries, namely, Hure^oix,
on the South of the Seine, with the Towns of Corbeil, Melun, La Ferte-Alais,
and Fontaine-bleau. The French Gastinois, Southwards of Hurepoix, has the
Duchy of Ne^nours, the Counties of Rochtfort and Moret, and the Towns of
Montlehery, Dourdan and Courtenay. The Mantois, westwards of Paris, contains
Mante, S. Germain, Poissy, Meu^an and Montfort-L' Amaury. The French Vexin lies
North-west of the Oyse and Seine, is separated from the Norman Vexin by the
River Epte, and has the Towns of Pontoys^ Magny and Chaumont. From Picardy, fi^
Countries or Diocesses have been separated viz. Beauvaisis, about the River
Terrai^ containing the Bishopric of Beauvais, and the Towns of Clermont,
Gerberoy and Merlo^ The Duchy of Valois, has Crespy, Senli^ Compiegne, La
Ferte-Milon, Pont S. Maixence, and Villers-Cotterets, and is included between
the Oyse and Marne. The Territory of Soissons lies about the Aysne, and
contains Soissons, Braisne and Vesly. The Lao^nois, which lies on the North of
that River has Laon, Coucy, Neuf Chatel, and Notre-Dame de Less. Beyond the
River Oyse, is the Territory of Noyon, with the Town of Chauny. However, all
these small Parcels taken together, do hardly make an Extent of Ninety Miles
East and West, from Neuf-Chatel upon the Aisne, to Gisors in Normandy, and
about as many North and South from Ham in Picardy, to Courtenay in Gastinois.

The Isle of France, in the stricter Sense, is also called Parisis by some, and
has the City of Paris, and the Towns of St. Denis, Montmorency and Dammartin;
but considered as a Government, it has Picardy on the North, Champaign and Brie
on the West, the Orleanois on the South, and Normandy on the West. The Country
brings forth excellent Wheat, Wine indifferent good, abundance of Fruits, and
Game, both in its Plains and Woods. This, with the Convenience of many Rivers,
and the Neighborhood of the Capital, has made it extraordinary Peopled, and
filled with Royal and Pleasure-Houses, some of which I shall set down hereafter.

As to its Rivers, besides the Seine, the Marne, and the Aisne, which have
already been described, you have the Oyse, which comes from Picardy, on the
Frontiers of Haynault and Luxemburg, washes Guise and Noyon, receives the
Serre, the Dellette, and the Mas, mixes with the Aisne at Compiegne, then
increased with the Waters of the Aronde, Ottenette, Bresche, Terrain, Nonnette,
Aise, and going by Pont S. Maixence, Creil, Beaumont, L' Isle-Adam, falls into
the Seine under Pontoise, about Thirteen Miles off Paris: Besides several small
Rivers which discharge themselves into the Seine on the West Side, as the
Bievre in the Suburbs of Paris; the Orge, which comes from Montlehery, and
washes Long-Jumeau, Juvizy, and Savigny, and the Juyne, which comes from about
Estampes, passes by Dourdan, and falls into the same River at Corbeil.

1. Paris.
PARIS, Capital of the Isle and Kingdom of France, is one of the biggest,
riches^ and most Beautiful Cities in Europe. I^ Houses very high, well built,
and as we^ inhabited: Its Streets and Places large an^ regular, its Churches
magnificent, its Palaces, and especially the Louvre, great an^ sumptuous; its
Colleges, Universities Bridges, Hospitals, Abbeys, Churches an^ Monasteries
worthy to be seen.

There are Forty four Parishes: Its Cathedral Notre-Dame, or Our Lady's Church
though it be built upon Piles, is extraordinary high, Sixty Paces wide, and an
Hundred seventy four long, and is said to include Forty five small Chapels.
The Frontisepiece has the Figures of the Thirty eight Kings that have reigned
between Childebert and Philip Auguste, and the two Towers that serve as
Belfreys, are Three hundred eighty nine Steps high, and have Eight great Bells,
whereof the biggest requires Twenty Men to ring it, and is heard Seven or Eight
Leagues of. There is a Crucifix over the greatest Door of the Quire, all of one
piece, with the Feet forming an Arch, that is a Masterpiece in that Kind. The
Quire, the Chapel and Body of the Church, are adorned with rich Paintings,
fine gilt Cornishes, and other Or^aments.

It has Eight Dignitaries, a Dean, a Singer, Three Archdeacons, an
Under-Singer, a Chancellor, and a Penitentiary. Sixty nine Canons, six Grand
Vicars, Two Rectors of St. John the Round, Two Vicars of St. Aig^an, Twelve
Singing Boys, besides the Clerks or Matines of Morning-Service, and ^n Hundred
and forty Chapplains.

The Sainte-Chapelle, or Holy Chapel, is another fine Building: It consists of
two Chapels, both supported by such small Pillars, that it is thought very
strange they can bear such a great weight as their Disposition and Order makes
them do. The Canons here have the same Privileges with them of our Lady, and
depend immediately on the Sea of Rome, but the French King has the Nomination
of them all. It Is called Saint Chapelle, by reason of the great Number of
Relics laid up therein; amongst the rest, they make a Show of part of our
Savior's Crown of Thorns, some of the Nails that stuck him to the Cross, with
some part of the Wood, etc. Near this is the Place that Philip the Fair built
to keep Parliaments in. This Place is considerable for its Bigness and Beauty,
but more for its great Hall for Hearing, or Audiences, very beautiful and rich.
That of the Attorneys, is very spacious, and was formerly adorned with all the
Kings Statues done to the Life, besides the Marble-Table, esteemed one of the
most curious Pieces of all Europe; its Galleries and Avenues well stocked with
ric^ Shops, furnished with all manner of Merchandise.

Monasteries are here almost numberless The most considerable are these that
follow, 1. That of the Templers, enclosed wit^ a good Wall, has a great square
Tower, a fine Church with curious Chapels, and Lodgings for a King; a Place so
considerable, that part of the Town still retains the Name of Marets-du-Temple,
though this ancient Order was abolished by Pope Clement V. under Philip the
Fair, in 1309. The Abbey of St. Germain deserves the second Place, great in all
things, and Head of its Suburb, where the Abbots Officers exercise Justice. 3.
The Convent of the Canon Regulars of St. Augustine, in the Suburbs of St.
Victor, built by Lewis the Burly. Those of Saint Geneniefue, Franciscans,
Dominicans, Augustins, Celestins, Cartusians, Feuillans, Jesuits, Les
Filles-de-dieu, Val de grace; especially these last are curious Buildings. The
Churchyard of St. John in Greve, and of St. Innocents, are the most remarkable
of this Kind. Bodies are quite consumed in the last in the space of eight days.

The Parish Churches are not less magnificent, St. Eustache has at least 35 or
40000 Communicants. To St. Nicholas des Champs, or in the Fields, St. James,
St. Sulpice, and St. Savior, do likewise resort a great number of People.

Its Colleges are also very fair, especially those of Du Plessis, Sorbonne,
and of Master Gervais, the First founded in 1322, and the Second in 1870. Nor
is Clairmont, the Jesuits College less considerable, either for its Building,
or the Number and Quality of Students. It Is also well worth while to visit St.
Lewis's Church, built by these Fathers in St. Antony's- Street.

Sorbonne is but the first House, or College of Divinity at Paris, though this
Name be sometimes given to the whole University, founded by Charlemaign about
the Year 791; but since increased and made more commendable by Lewis VII. and
Philip August. It is divided into four Faculties, Divinity, Law, Physic, and
Arts. This last is the most ancient, and composed of four Nations, French,
Picards, Normans and Germans: Out of their Body is taken the Head of the
University, called Rector, who, in public Solemnities, immediately follows the
Princes of the Blood, and at the King's Burial, walks by the Archbishop's Side.
His Robe of Ceremony is a Purple Gown, tied up with a Girdle that has go^den
Hangings, and an old fashioned Purse^ which denotes his Priority and Power ove^
all the Pursers of the University. He als^ wears a short Purple Mantle, lined
with a^ Ermine-Skin, and has a Tribunal compose^ of the three Deans in
Divinity, Law and Physic, and of the four Attorneys of the four Nations. A new
Rect^^ may be elected every three Months, but h^ that is in Office is often
continued, and ha^ such an Authority upon all the Faculties that he may cause
all public Acts to cease^ and four times in the year, at his Processio^ Day,
actually forbids all Preachers to ascend the Pulpit.

As to the House of Sorbonne, it is very ancient, being founded by Robert
Sorbonn, St. Lewis's Almoner, in 1252, or 1253. This College is one of the
most rigorous of Europe, none being admitted to the Degree of Bachelor, unless
he studies three years in Divinity in it; after he has been received Master of
Arts, and sustains nine or ten public Theses. Neither is the Degree of Doctor
given to any, without going through the Sorbonique Act, that holds from
Sunrise to Sunset, the Candidate answering all that time to such as come to
dispute against him. The Dean of the Faculty is committed to oversee these
Theses, and each Doctor that Disputes is to have a Crown from the Answerer, who
must satisfy all their Arguments without any body's Help; so that he ought to
be an able Scholar, and have a strong Purse too. Those that are admitted that
way, take the Title of Doctors of the House and Society of Sorbonne; but the
others, that only of Divinity's Doctor in the Faculty of Paris. As for the
Building, it is enough to observe, that Cardinal Richelieu has taken care to
make it one of the most sumptuous of Paris, in enriched it with vast Revenues,
and a good Library.

The second House after Sorbonne, is that of Navarre, founded by Jane, Queen of
Navarre, Sovereign Countess of Champaign, and Wife to Philip the Fair, King of
France. Humane Learning, Philosophy and Divinity are taught in this House,
which has the Privilege of making Doctors as well as Sorbonne.

There are a great many other considerable Colleges, founded by Kings,
Princes, Popes, etc. which I pass by, to speak of that called of The Four
Nations, founded by Cardinal Mazarin, and built over against the Louvre. His
Design in this sumptuous Building is said to have been to encourage Strangers
to come to this Capital of the Kingdom, to make them have an Esteem and Love
for France, use themselves to its Ways, and learn its Fashions. Of these four
Nations are kept Sixty Gentlemen, Fifteen from Pignerol, for Italy; Fifteen
from Elzas, for Germany; Twenty Flemings, an^ Ten Spaniards from Roussillon.

The Hotel-dieu, or Hospital destined for the Poor, is also very ancient, being
buil^ since the Year 660, and well worth the seeing. It Is very spacious, and
kept very clean, considering the vast number of Sic^ always attended there by
religious Women, that make their Vows in the Hands of the Dean of our
Lady-Church. Behind the House of these Ladies, is a Statue of Stone, which most
People believe to be that of Esculapius.

The Hospital of the Quinze Vints, or Twenty Score, founded by St. Lewis, in
Memory of the Three hundred Christians that had their Eyes put out by the
Saracens, ought not to be forgotten. That of St. Lewis, founded by Henry IV.
for those that should be sick of the Plague, is renowned for its Building,
Courts, Offices and Fountains. That of La Charity, kept and served by Friars of
that Name, is very neat, and the People well attended. Besides these, there is
the Incurable, and 25 other Houses for the Sick and Poor.

The great and little Chastelets are the two ancientest Buildings in that City,
said to be built by Caesar, or at least by Julian the Apostate, who called
Paris, his Delight and well beloved Town; now they are Prisons of the Civil
Lieutenant and Presidial, that keep their Courts there. The Palace of Cluni, in
the Maturins Street, where the Pope's Nuncio's generally Lodge, deserves to be
seen. It was formerly Julian the Apostate's Baths, and the Water was conveyed
thither by Aquaeducts, from the little Village of Arcueuil near Paris, as may
still be seen by some Remains of the Ruins.

The Bastille is a very strong Castle, built above the Gate of St. Anthony. Its
Form is square, with four great Towers that defend it of every side; its Ditch
very deep, and other Fortifications as regular. Here Persons of Quality,
suspected of Crimes against the State are imprisoned, and there is a Governor
to take care of it.

The Arsenal built just by the River, is a great Building with store of Arms,
fine Gardens, and curious Sets of Elm-Trees; the Great Master of the Ordnance
has his Apartment, and keeps his ordinary Residence there.

The Townhouse built by Francis I. was new built by Henry the Great; the Front
is extraordinary well worked, the Chambers spacious, the Pavilions uniform, and
the Pillars and Clock-Tower magnificent. Its Revenues are so great, that the
King very often orders Payments of vast Sums ^hence. They must be able Men that
are received Sheriffs here, and sometimes the whole Court move to have the Man
they like, chosen Lord Mayor or Provost of Merchants, because the Place is of
such consequence, and he that has it has so much Authority over the People,,
that he may raise them against whom he pleases. The Government of the Town is
in his and the four Sheriffs Hands, who stand but two years in their Office.
Besides these, there are twenty six Counselors, and ten Sergeants that serve
the Provost and his Sheriffs with sixteen Quaterniers and their Commissaries,
and other under Officers, to hinder any Disorder or Tumult; an hundred and
twenty Archers or Watchmen, who with sixty Arbalestiers, or Cross-bow-men, an
hundred Arquebusiers, or Small-shot-men, the Foot and Horse Watch, go the
Rounds every Night, commanded by the Captain of the Watch, called the Knight of
the Watch, Le Chevalier du guet. The Town's Attorney takes the Title of King's
Attorney. The Company of Wine-Cryers, to the Number of twenty four, are
employed in Funerals and twenty four Salt-Porters, that carry the King's
Bodies, are a sort of other Officers of this Town, where the Provost of
Merchants and Sheriffs are allowed Noblemen, and Knighted after two years
Employment.

As for the Justice of Paris, there is the Provost, a Man of the short Gown,
three Lieutenants, viz. the Civil, Criminal and Particular, and several
Counselors, who compose the Presidial, and keep Court in ^he Great Chastelet.
The Judge and Consuls of Merchants drawn out of that Body, ^o the number of
five, being sworn before the Parliament sit in St. Mederic's Cloister. As to
the Parliament of Paris, called also ^he Court of Peers, because the Dukes and
Peers of France, and the Officers of the Crown take their Oaths there, and
cannot be judged elsewhere, especially for any Crime; at least according to
Law; for Cardinal Richelieu passed by this formally, when he gave Commission to
try the Marshall of Marillac, and afterward the Duke of Montmorency, purposely
perhaps to derogate the Parliaments Authority, and make the Monarchy more
absolute. However, Paris has yet the first and noblest Parliament in the
Kingdom, having been founded by Pepin, Head of the Second Stock of the French
Kings in 755 or 756, and made sedentary by Philip the Fair, in 1302. The whole
Governments of the Isle of France, Picardy, Champaign, Orleannois and Lionnois,
and the Diocese of Macon depend upon it; and this Court only knows of the
King's Regalia, Peerdoms and Portions given to the Royal Children. It Is
composed of eighteen Presidents, and an hundred sixty nine Counselors, a^
divided into eight Chambers. The gr^^ Chamber has seven Presidents, besides
(...) first, and twenty nine Counselors. Du^^ and Peers, and Counselors of
Honor, m^^ sit and vote there, as well as the Arc^bishop of Paris, since his
Church was ere^^ed into a Duchy and Peerdom in 167^ and the Abbot of St. Denis
in quality (...) Counselor of Honor. The King's M^sters of Requests have the
same Priviledg^ but four only of them may sit there at o^ time. The five
following Chambers, a^ called Chambres des Enquetes, or Inquiri^^ and have each
two Presidents, and twent^ eight Counselors. The two last Chambe^ bear the
Name of Tournelle, because the^ have no proper Magistrates, but are fille^ up
by turns with those of the other Chambers. Thus the Criminal Tournelle has fou^
Presidents, and eighteen Counselors of the Great Chamber, and ten of the
Inquiries and the Civil Tournelle has four Presidents and six Counselors of
the Great Chamber and twenty of the others. In 1587, King Henry IV. had
established a Chamber of the Edict in that Parliament, on behalf of hi^
Protestant Subjects, and bestowed the Dignity of Counselor on six of their
Men; but this commendable and impartial Institution was suppressed by the
present King in 1669 During the great Vacations, beginning on the 7th. of
September, and ending at the ^2th. of November, there is a Chamber e^tablished
to make an end of Suits that cannot be deferred.

Besides these, there are several other Courts, as the Court of Accounts, fixed
at ^aris at the same time as the Parliament. The Court of Aides, erected by
Charles VI. and increased with two other Chambers by Henry II. and Lewis XIII.
The Court of ^he Mint: The Chamber of the Treasure, where the General
Treasurers of France ^eep their Court. That of the Marshals of ^rance, of the
Admiral, of the Great Ma^ters of Waters and Woods is kept at the Marble-Table.
The Baily of the Palace ^as his Chamber in the Great Hall; and ^he Great
Council have theirs without the ^alace, in the Cloister of St. Germain
^'Auxerrois, etc. The Bishopric of Paris was erected into an Archbishopric,
in 1622. and has for Suffragans, Meaux, Chartres, and Orleans.

The Place Royal, is one of the finest of ^he whole Town, both for the Symmetry
and Magnificence of the Buildings, and for ^he Piazza's and Arches that environ
it, with the cast Copper Statue of Lewis XIII. ^n the middle, on a Foot-stall
of white Marble, with Inscriptions. Here stood formerly an Hotle, or Palace
called des Tour^elles; but because Henry II. died there of the Wound he
received in his Eye at Turnament, Catharine of Medicis got the stately Building
pulled down. Carrous^ were kept in this Market in 1612, upon the Subject of the
King's and his Siste^ Marriage with the Infanta and Prince (...) Spain.

The Louvre, that was the ordinary Re^^dence of the Kings of France, from Le^^^
XII. till Lewis XIV. was built by Phil^^ August in 1214, to keep his Papers,
an^ Noble Men Prisoners. It has been increa^ed and beautified since Francis I.
by most (...) his Successors. At present it comprehen^ the Louvre, properly so
called, and the P^lace of the Tuilleries, joined together by o^^ of the finest
Galleries in Europe; the Building and Ornaments are considerable, the Depth of
the Foundations being taken from the Height and Thickness of the Work with
Convenience of Apartments and Offices. Its Form is rather long than square and,
it is said, this present King ordered (...) Piece of Tapistry to be made, that
should reach from one end to the other, representing the chief Towns he has
taken, an^ the Battles fought and gained by his Armies There is another
Monument of this Princes Vanity and Pride, but I don't know whether it is
finished: viz. His Brazen Statue o^ Horseback upon a Rock, looking as
unaccessible, as though nothing had been able to withstand him. His Enemies are
represent^d under his Feet, and amongst the rest, ^he pretended Heretics,
Rebels and Duel^ists. At the foot of the Rock, are the four ^rincipal Rivers
which he is gone over, as ^he Rhine, the Scheld, the Meuse, and the Moselle.

The Royal Printing House is in the Gal^ery of the Louvre, and the French
Academy have Lodgings in this Palace. There is ^lso a Place prepared for the
King's Library and Closet of Rarities.

The Palace of Orleance is a magnificent and regular Building, enriched with
seve^al fine Statues, and adorned with excellent Paintings, which, with its
fine Gardens, Fountains, Grotto's and Waterworks, makes ^it a very pleasant
Place. The others are, that which Mary of Medicis built in the Suburb of St.
Germain, and still has the Name of Luxemburg; those of Bourbon, Navarre,
Soissons, Angouleme, Longueville, Espernon, Maine, Montmorency, Bouillon; but
especially that of the Cardinal of Richelieu, whereof the Riches and Ornaments
are surprising. Those of Vendome, Guise, Chevreuse, Nevers, Sulli and
Schomberg, are sit to lodge any Prince in. As for public Places, these that
follow are the chief, the Place Royal, which has been already mentioned; St.
John's Churchyard, the Greve, the Valley of Misery, the Place Dauphine, the
Parvis of Notre Dame, the New Market, and Place Maube^^

A Market called La Place des Victoires, ^^tuated in that part of the Town
whi^^ bears the Name of Richelieu, is become f^mous since the mad and
blasphemous Flatt^ry of the Duke of La Feuillade. In 168^ this Lord erected to
the present King, (...) brazen Statue washed over with Gold, upon a Marble
Foot-stall, underpropt by fou^ Slaves, and adorned with cast Copper Tr^phies of
embossed Work, representing the most memorable Events of that Reig^ The Statue
is properly a Groupe, or a Compl^cation of three Figures; namely, of the Kin^
in his Royal Robes, of the Victory behin^ him, who puts a Crown on his Head,
an^ of Cerberus, or the infernal Dog kicked under the Feet of this
Sham-conqueror; by the three Heads of which, they would signify the triple
Alliance of England, Holland and Swede; or perhaps the House of Austria The
Victory has one of her Feet on a Globe, the other in the Air, and with her two
displayed Wings, seems ready to fly. There are besides, a Hercules's Club, a
Lyon's Skin, and a Helmet; so that the whole weighs above thirty thousand,
though it is said that it was all made at one Cast. On the four Avenues, or
Sides of the Market, are so many Marble-Columns, adorned with Bass^-Relievo's
of Brass, representing this Prince's Actions. Upon each of these Pillars, is a
Lanthorn of gilded Brass, where^^ Light is perpetually kept, to venerate ^is
new Idol, which is sufficiently denoted ^y this Inscription amongst others,
Viro im^ortali, to the immortal Man.

Paris, as to its Form is rather square than ^ng, and divided into three Parts,
the City, (...) ancient Town built in the Isle of the Pa^^ce, formed by the
Seine: The new Town, ^^lled La Ville, which is the Northern, or ^^west part of
Paris; and the University, which is the highest. They were shut up ^ith
seventeen Gates, leading unto ten Sub^rbs, whereof that of St. Germain likes to
^e a goodly Town; but some of their Gates ^ave been demolished. These several
Parts ^re joined, and communicate together by ^en Bridges, most of which are
filled with ^uildings.

Paris lies so convenient, that Rouen sup^lies it with what it has occasion of
from ^ther Countries, and the neighboring Pro^inces with all Home-Necessaries.
Besides ^his, its Situation is so very advantageous, that there is no place in
the Kingdom so fit ^or so great a City, or such a Court. The Houses generally
are high and spacious, the Streets kept very clean, Fountains wholesome, and in
great numbers. The Air mild and healthful, and Provisions cheap; so that People
may live there and spend much less than what is generally thought. Besides
these, there is another great Convenien^^ in that City, that Men may go any
time (...) the Night about their Occasions, as safe (...) by Day; because the
Watch are so exa^^ that no Thieves or Rogues can escape; the^^ being Lanthorns
very close, that give gre^^ Light, and Chains in every Street to (...) drawn up
upon such Occasions. Physicia^ have the Liberty of the Royal Garden (...) the
Suburbs of St. Victor, where they w^^ find many rare Simples. The Learned c^^
visit the Royal Library at the Cordeliers of St. Victor, in the Abbey of that
Name, we^^ furnished with ancient and curious Man^scripts; that of Navarre, but
especially th^^ of the President of Thou; that is well looked after, and in
good Order. Besides these each Religious House, as poor as it is, h^^ its own
particular Library. I shall conclud^ this Article by mentioning Val de Grace,
th^^ sumptuous Monastery in the Suburbs (...) St. James, belonging to the Nuns
of St. Be^net's Order, and built by the Queen Mothe^ Ann of Austria. It Is one
of the finest Place^ of this great City, which a famous Poet ha^ commended
thus: Vrbs orbi similis, toto celeberrima mundo,
Musarum seeds, Regina Lutetia salve,
Francigenae tu Metropolis pulcherrima Gentis,
Hospitio regum grato regis que ministros,
Excipis and reliquas das jura suprema per urbes


Towns and Places of Note in the Parisis, or the Territory of Paris.
ON the South Side of Paris, entering into the Deanship of S. Cel, is the
Village ^f Gentilly, upon the River Bievre, or des Gobelins, where the Kings of
the first and ^econd Race kept their General States, and ^ometimes their
Parliaments; but it was ^estroyed by the Normans, and is now on^y renowned for
its many fine Gardens. At ^he top of this Village was the Royal Castle ^f
Winchester, corruptly called Bicestre, because in the time of the English it
belonged ^o John Bishop of Winchester. It has been ^ft ruined and rebuilt: King
Lewis XIII. ^aused there an Hospital to be built for Lame Soldiers, who having
been transferred unto another Place, it was designed to shut up ^he Beggars of
Paris.

On the South-West of the City, in the Castelny of St. Maur, are the Villages
of Isi, where the Goddess Isis was adored; Van^^es, which was heretofore
inhabited by the Watermen of the River Seine, and is now ^enowned for its
Fountains, Gardens and Meadows, that furnish Paris with Milk and Butter.
Arcueuil, formerly a Pleasure-House of the Romans, whence Julian the Apostate
brought Water through Lead-Pipes into his Palace, that was built whe^^ now is
the House of Clugny.

Farther to the West, near the Sein^ is the Village of Meudon, two Leagues from
Paris, with a strong Castle built upon (...) Rock, in the middle of a pleasant
Fore^^ There is a Grotto that affords Water in abundance, and is paved with
Porphiry spo^ted with White, Red, Green, and sever^^ other Colors. The
Chambers of this Castle, built by Cardinal Sanguin under Char^^^ IX. are
adorned with Marble Statues, fi^^ Pictures of the first Roman Emperors, (...)
Aristotle, Cicero, Demosthenes, etc. and upon one of the Chimneys, is a Marble
that reflects the Rays of the Light as a Looking Glass.

The Town of S. Clou, Head of a Caste^ny, on the West of Paris, is situated
upon the Seine, about two Leagues from the C^pital. It was formerly a Village
calle^ Nogent, and has gotten its present Na^^ from Clouaud or Cloud, Son to
Clodonir Ki^^ of Orleance. This Cloud, for fear of his cr^el Uncle Clotaire
King of Paris, who h^^ already murdered two of his Nephews, r^tired to Nogent,
where he built a Monast^ry and ended his Life. There also die^ King Henry III.
being stabbed by James C^^ment, a Dominican Friar. The present King Brother has
there a very fine House.

Versailles.
THIS Royal House, about four Leagues Westward of Paris, is become of late
(...) considerable, that it deserves a particular ^escription. The present King
began to ^uild or beautify it in 1661. It consists ^f the old Castle, built by
this Prince's Fa^^er, of other Buildings of the same Syme^y, which he has added
for Lodgings, and ^f a very stately Pile of Buildings that en^^rons it on the
Garden Side. The House (...) built upon a little height in the middle of (...)
Valley, encompassed with Hills, at the ^ottom of them; on Paris side begin
three ^^e Walks, formed by four delicate Sets of ^im, the middle Alley being
twenty Fa^^oms, and the two side ones ten each wide. ^hese end at the great
Royal Place, envi^^ned with very regular Pavilions, which ^e Princes and Lords
of that Court have ^^ilt there, and with the other Houses that ^^rm the new
Town. This Royal Place is (...) have a Fountain in the middle, with such ^alks
as the former, in the other two A^enues toward it. Out of this Place you ^ound
into another, in form of a Half-^oon; it makes part of the first Court, which
from the beginning of the Half Moon, (...) the great Court of the Castle is
eighty ^athoms in length, with four great Pavilions at the four Corners to
lodge several O^ficers in. The great Court is shut in wi^^ iron Ballistres, and
two great Apartme^^ that form the Wings, having each a Bal^^ny opposite to it,
supported with Pilla^ and adorned with Statues. These, wi^^ their Pavilions,
serve for Offices, and ha^ Courts, with other separate Buildings b^hind them.
There are other double Apar^ments that join these Wings, and make (...)
Communication between the new and o^ Castle, and streightning the Top of t^^
great Court, end with much Grace at t^^ Little, which is the higher of the two.

As the French King has taken the Sun f^^ his Devise, and that Poets confound
it wi^^ Apollo there is nothing in this great Buildi^^ but has some Relation to
that God. Therefore as the two Wings of the great Cou^^ are the Provision
Offices; they that had t^^ Care of the Work, have got the four E^^ments
represented at the top of the Portiqu^ of the Wings, because these strive, as
(...) were, to furnish them with what is most e^quisite for Man's Support; the
Earth, wi^^ its Beasts, Fruits, Flowers and Liquors; t^^ Water with its Fish;
the Air with its Bird^ and the Fire with its Help, to dress an^ make all ready.
Each Element has thr^^ Figures or Statues; upon the four Balc^nies, that
represent it as the Earth, Ceres, P^mona and Flora; the Water, Neptune, The^^
and Galathea; the Air, Juno, Iris and Ze^hire; the Fire is represented by
Vulcan and two Cyclops, Sterops and Bronte. Each ^f these Balconies has fifty
foot in length; which is the breadth of each Pavilion. Out of this Court we
ascend by three Steps unto a large Resting Place, and thence, by ^ive more, all
Marble, into the little Court, which is paved with white and black Mar^le, with
Streaks of white and red Marble, and has a Fountain Basin of white Marble ^n
the middle, with gilt copper Statues. The Front and Wings are built of Brick
and Free Stone, with Marble busts upon Pendants or Brackets of the same, for
the greater Decoration. Before this Front is a Balcony supported by eight
Marble Pillars, with red and white Spots like Jasper, after ^he Dorique Order,
and their Chapters and Bases are of white Marble. In the two Angles of the
Wings of the Front, are hang^ng Bottoms or Tromps, that bear two Cabinets,
environed with gilt iron Cages and underneath are two Basins of white Marble,
in form of great Shell-works, where young Tritons spout Water.

The middle Building has three gilt Iron-Doors, leading into the Vestibule or
Porch that has two Apartments on the Right and Left.

The two Wings of the little Court, have two Stairs of white and red spotted
Marble, which lead to the upper Apartments; t^^ on the Right Hand, of one side
to a H^^ and Gallery, and of the other to seve^^ Chambers, that are the King's
Apartme^^ separated from the Queen's by a great H^^ that takes up the whole
Body of the m^^dle Building, and has three Doors to a P^^ or Platform that
faces the Garden. This (...) all paved with white, black and r^^ Marble, with a
Basin of white Marble (...) the middle, prepared to be a great Spout.

The great Castle, with the new Buil^ings that this present King has added to
t^^ old Versailles, go under the Name of Ne^ Castle: They have a Sight on the
Garden and Courts that part them from the litt^^ Castle, to which they are
joined by gre^^ Stair-Cases, that communicate with the upper Apartments. The
Building on the Right Hand, and on the Grotto's side, is composed at the lower
part of several Pieces o^ different bigness.

Coming out of the great Court, and having passed under an open Porch, you find
a great Staircase thirteen Fathoms and a half in length, and five in breadth.
Yo^ may go into the great low Apartment, by a Fort that is beyond this
Staircase, or by a^ Arch that is at the bottom, and leads into a Porch which
looks into the Garden, as all the other Pieces hereafter mentioned. Out of this
Porch you enter consecutively into two painted Halls; the different Pieces of
Architecture represented in the last, make the Place appear as environed with
several Pillars diversely adorned, and far greater and higher than really it is.
Out of this you come into that which seems as a Vestibule, when you enter by
the Court into these Apartments; the Cieling is supported by eight Pillars of
the Dorick Order, all fine Marble streaked red and white, brought from Dinan in
the Country of Liege; the Chapters and Bases being of a greener, that is called
little Breche. These Pillars are disposed into two parts, four on each side,
that divide the Vestibule into three parts near the Wall, and over against the
Pillars are Pilasters of the same Marble, that bear a Corniche which reigns all
under the Plafond, and over against the Windows are hollow Standings to place
Statues in. Next this Vestibule, is another Hall, whereof the Cornish that
bears the Cieling is supported by twelve Pillars of the Ionique Order, with
their Pilasters behind them. The four Pillars that are in the Angles with the
twelve Pilasters, are of black and white Marble, and the eight other are of a
Marble called Breche, which comes from the Pyrenees, the Ground is white, with
red, black, violet, blew and yellow Spots. The Chapters and Bases of the
Pillars and Pilasters are of delicate white Marble. Out of this you enter into
another of the sam^ bigness, whose Cieling is Octogone, wit^ twelve double
Pedestals a side of the Wi^dows, and with Doors of fine Marble, having twelve
Figures of young Men wit^ Wings to their Backs, that represent t^^ twelve
Months of the Year. All these F^gures are Copper gilt with Gold; the Pieces
over the Doors, and those that go across i^ the Windows, are of the Marble of
Languedock, Flame-coloured and White. On one sid^ of this Hall, is the Chamber
and Cabinet (...) the Baths. All the Pieces over the Doors an^ Windows, the
Props, and generally all part^ that have no Hanging, are laid with differen^
Marble in equal Divisions, so that all seem^ solidly built therewith; and this
Order is observed to make use of the rarest and most precious in the Places
that lie nighest to the King's Apartment, so that as you go out of one Chamber
into another toward it, you will observe them more and more costly, both in
Marble Sculpture and Paintings. This Order is also kept in the upper
Apartments, for there are eight Chambers or Halls, all of a Flower, that have
each their different Marble and Painting. The first, that is five Fathoms and a
half long, and five wide, where it wants Hangings, is laid with equal Divisions
of red, white, and a greenish Marble, called of Campan, which is brought from
the Pyrenees, and with a white and black from some other Place. The se^ond, the
Guard-Hall, is done with Marble ^rought out of Burgundy, mixed with white,
^lack, red and yellow Spots; the fourth has its Doors and Windows done with a
green, brown and red Marble with green Spots and Veins, ^olour of Emeraulds:
the Workmen call it green of Egypt, though its all drawn out of the Pyrenees;
the Sides or Wainscots are of white Marble, filled up by Divisions of (...)
reddish of Egypt, of a black and white, and a very fine of Agathe, brought from
the Alps. The fifth is a Cabinet of the bigness of the Chamber, done with black
Marble that has yellow Veins, is called Portoro, and ^s dug in the Pyrenees.
The sixth is a little Chamber to lie in, done with Flame colored Marble, that
has white Veins, and is called red Marble of Languedoc. The seventh, a small
Cabinet that joins the great Platform, paved with the said Marble. The Window
and Door-pieces are of a green and red Marble, with white Veins; the Sides or
Wainscots of the same, of that of Langued^c, and the Marble called of Egypt by
equal Divisions upon a white ground.

On the other side, toward the Orangery; are other Lodgings like the former;
but the Staircase is not quite so big as the King's, because the Chapel takes
up part of the Place. The Apartment underneath is the Dolphin's, and is adorned
with fine different Cielings. The Apartment above it, is the Queen's Lodgings,
consisting of the sam^ numbers with the King's, and laid with the same sort of
Stones, but otherwise ordere^ The Paintings that embellish the Cieling
represent the Actions of the Hero's of Antiquity, with relation to the seven
Planets.

Having thus far satisfied your Curiosit^ you may go by the Porch that is
against the middle of the little Court, and by the vaul^ed Galleries to the
great Plot in the Garden, which lies against the whole Front (...) the Palace,
and is an hundred Yards i^ length upon twelve in breadth. But before we enter
farther into the Garden and little Park, this part of the Building toward the
Water-Plot, and the two Sides of this great Castle, deserve to be considered,
as we^^ for the stately Greatness of the whole Mass as for the Beauty and
Workmanship of the Stones, and the choice Figures and Ornaments that embellish
it.

The principal Focade or Front toward the Water-Plot, has three Balconies tha^
shoot out, each supported with four Pilla^ and a Figure upon every Pillar.
These twelve Figures are the twelve Months; The Months of March, April, May and
June are upon the Balcony of the Pavilion on the Right; July, August, September
and October upon that of the middle of the Plot; and November, December,
January and February upon the Balcony of the Pavilion to the ^eft. In the
imbossed Works that adorn ^his Front, at the Top are little Children ^mploy'd
in the Exercises that suit each Month and Season.

The Balcony on the Side that looks to^ards the Flower-Pots, has four Figures
that preside over them: As Flora their God^oss, Zophirus her Sweetheart, that
by its ^^ild Breath makes them spring, Hyacinth ^he Sun's Favorite, and Clytie
his Lover, that were both turned into Flowers. The ^mbossed Work all underneath
these Figures, ^epresent Children that look after the Gar^en, plant and
cultivate the Flowers, and ^ake Garlands of them.

Upon the Opposite Balcony, which is at ^he other Extremity, are four Figures
that ^reside over the Fruits: As the Goddess Po^ona, her Lover Vertumnus, one
of the He^^erides, with an Orange-tree charged with ^olden Fruit guarded by the
Dragon, and ^he Nymph Amalthea, that holds the Horn ^f Abundance. The embossed
Work under^eath are Children that plant Trees and ^ather Fruit.

On the Balcony in the middle that relates ^o Comody, are four Figures that
represent ^he Muse Thalia, presiding over Drammatick Poetry, Momus the God of
Jests, Terpsicore another Muse, that pretends to serious Dance, and the God Pan
Author of the Grotesque. The imbossed Works ov^^ them, represent Children that
are Marske^ dance and divert themselves. The several ^ther ways that belong to
Comedy: are repr^sented on the Side of this Balcony, by t^^ standing Figures,
one of which is Music^ and the other Dancing. The four Figur^ upon the Balcony
near the Grotto, are t^^ Nymph Echo, that was changed into a Ro^^ Narcissus,
with whom she was in love, The^^ and Galathea, which represent the Wate^ The
imbossed Works represents Children that play in the Water.

Upon the opposite Balcony, are the F^gures of two Gods of Rivers, and tw^
Nymphs of Fountains. In the imbosse^ Work Sea-Triumphs of all Kind.

Upon the middle Balcony are these for Figures, Ceres and Bacchus, Comus the
Go^ of Feasts and Mirth, and the Genius th^^ presides over Joy, and the
Pleasures of goo^ Cheer. In the imbossed Work are Children that make merry, and
divert themselves on the Pendals or Key-stones; Heads of S^lenes, Bacchantes
and Satyrs, and on the Side of this Balcony, you may see the Figure of
Ganimedes, and the Nymph Heb^ both employed to serve the Gods wit^ Drink.

After having considered the Castle, you may go into the Gardens, and in the
little Park; but as there are a great Number of Objects that distract the
Sight, on ever side you will find it good to observe this Order.

The First thing to be seen, is the Basin of Syrene. 2 The Grotto of Thetis. 3
Reservories. 4 The Basins of the Crown. 5 The Fountain of the Pyramid. 6 The
Cascade or Water-fall. 7 The Water Alley. 8 The Dragon Fountain. 9 The Pavilion
Fountain. 10 The Walk of the Water-Cradle. 11 The Marshes. 12 The Stage. 13 The
Basin of Ceres. 14 The Water-Mountain. 15 The Basin of Flora. 16 The
Banqueting-Hall. 17 The Basin of Apollo. 18 The Island. 19 The Basin of Saturn.
20 The Bosquets, or Groves. 21 The Basin of Latona. 22 The Basin of Bacchus. 23
The Labyrinth.
This Labyrinth is a Place composed of many small Alleys, so mixed and
interwoven one within the other, that it is hard to find the way out of them,
and not easy to leave so pleasant a Place: For the great Number of Fountains
and Waterworks have Subjects drawn out of Thirty eight ancient Fables: But as
the Description of each would be tedious, so I will only name the Fables that
are represented.

At the Entry or Going in, you will find Esops Figure; then that of Love.

1 Fable is that of the Horn Owl, and other Birds. 2 The Cocks and Patridges. 3
The Cock and Fox. 4 The Cock and Diamond. 5 The Cat hung and Rats. 6 The Eagle
and Fox. 7 The Gey and Peacocks. 8 The Cock and Turkeycock. 9 The Peacock and
Pie. 10 The Dragon, Anvil and File. 11 The Munkey and its little ones. 12 The
Fight of Beasts. 13 The Hen and Chickens. 14 The Fox and Crane. 15 The Crane
and Fox. 16 The Peacock and Nightingale. 17 The Parot and Monkey. 18 The Monkey
Judge. 19 The Rat and Frog. 20 The Hare and Tortoise. 21 The Wolf and Crane. 22
The Kite and Birds. 23 The Monkey King. 24 The Fox and Buck. 25 The Council of
Rats. 26 The Monkey and Cat. 27 The Fox and Resins. 28 The Eagle, Rabit, and
Beetle. 29 The Wolf and Porcupine. 30 The Serpent with several Heads. 31 The
Bath, the Cat, and Cockerel. 32 The Kite and Pigeons. 33 The Dolphin and
Monkey. 34 The Fox and Crow. 35 The Monkey and Crane. 36 The Wolf and Head. 37
The Serpent and Porcupine. 38 The Ducks and young Water-Spaniel.
From the Labyrinth you may go to the Orangery, thence by the Flower-Garden to
the Water-Plot that lies before the Castle; this consists of five great Pieces,
and two other, which altogether form extraordinary Figures.

The little Park I have spoken of, is environed with another far greater,
divided by a great many Walks, set with differen^ Trees. The most remarkable
thing in it, (...) the great Canal, which begins at the en^ of the little Park,
over against the Roya^ Walk, and is about 200 foot from Apollo's Basin. It Is 32
Fathoms wide, and 800 long and at the Head thereof is a Plot of Wate^ that is
octogone, four of the sides drawn in a circular Line, three in a Right, and the
other joining it to the Canal. This Piece has sixty Fathoms diameter, of one
side separates the little from the great Park, and at the other end joins the
Canal, which at the other Extremity has a Water-Plot 200 Fathoms long, and 100
wide, and is crossed in the middle by one that is 200 foot wide, and of one
side leads to Trianon, and of the other to the Mesnagerie, the Place where rare
Fowls and Beasts, brought from foreign Parts are kept. In a great Court on the
Left Hand, are the Stables, Sheep-Folds, etc. with all that belongs to a
Base-court.

The little Palace has its Particular Court at the end of a great Walk set with
Trees. The chief Lodging or Apartment is Octogone, consisting only of a Hall,
with two little Pavilions before it. In the middle of of it are Stairs that
lead into the Vestibule, and thence into this Hall, which is environed with a
Court of an Octogone Figure too, with Iron Grates or Rails that part it from
seven other Courts. This Hall has also ^ound Balconies, whence one may look
into ^hese Courts, which are all full of fine and ^urious Birds, and of an
incredible number of foreign wild Beasts of every Kind. I must not forget, that
since the present King has chosen Versailles for his ordinary Residence,
several private Men have built there Houses, so that it is become a pretty good
Brough.

Trianon.
THis House, opposite to the former, on the other side of the Canal, and at the
Right Hand, as you go from Versailles to Paris, is a very fine Piece of
Building. The outward Front is 64 fathoms, sinking in form of a half Oval, in
the middle of which is the principal Door all of Iron, with two Ballisters at
the sides that join to small Pavilions, and close the Entry. By this Door you
enter into a Court that is almost oval, only squared to the Right and Left by
two Buildings, separated from that in the Middle, whereof one serves the Lords,
and the other the Warden of the Castle.

These Buildings are each twelve Fathoms square, with their separate Courts and
other Pavilions that form the Corners of the whole Front of this House. They
that go to see this Castle, enter generally by the Conciergery or Governor's
Court, and thence into t^^ great Oval; for this, besides the princip^^ Entry,
has four other Iron Doors to (...) whereof two open into the side Courts,
b^tween the great Door and great Pavilio^ and the other two into the Garden
betwee^ the same Pavilions and the principal Buil^ing. This Court is above an
Hundred for in length, and Seventy five wide, the C^stle fronts it, and is
fourteen Fathoms lon^ and seven broad, with a Ballister charge^ with a great
many Pots, joined or mortise^ at the top, and adorned at the bottom wit^ young
Cupids armed with Darts and A^rows. Over these are Porcelaine-Vesse^ disposed
by degrees to the very top of the House, with Birds represented to the Life
(...) and the Pavilions that belong to the chi^^ Building, are adorned the same
way. Ther^ is also another little Palace to pass some days in, during the Heat
of Summer. Th^^ has but one Story; the Walls of the Ha^^ that has but seven
Steps up to it, is covere^ with White, and polished, stuck with Ornaments of
Azure; the Cornish and Cieling are also adorned with diverse Figures of Azure
upon White, the whole worked aft^^ the China's way; the Floor, Wainscot and
Cieling are the same, being all Porcelain.

All these Places look, and have Doors into a Plot over against the Chambers,
where are Spouts that throw up Water out of four Basins, built upon Piedestals.
Out of this Plot you go down into another Garden that is always well stocked
with Flowers.

Other Towns, Royal Houses, and Places of Note in the Parisis.
REpassing the Seine, you find, a League westwards of Paris, the Royal Castle
of Madrid, built near a pleasant Wood by Francis I. upon the Pattern of the
Escurial, or the Palace of the King of Spain. It was designed for a very fine
House, but the French Kings having since delighted in other places, and little
care being taken of it, it decays every day. There is still to be seen a
Window, representing that where the Spaniards showed King Francis I. to the
People before Madrid.

Two Leagues higher, on the Southwest; is a Village called Haubert de Villiers,
with the famous Church of Notre Dame des Vertus, or our Lady of Virtues.

Descending to the North, toward Paris, you find, a little Mile off it, the
Village of Montmartre, called in Latin, Mons Martyrum, because, as it is
pretended, St. Denis and his Companions were beheaded there, before the Idol of
Mercury. And therefore when Christianity had got the better of Paganism, a
Chapel, and afterward an Abbey of the Nuns of St. Bennet, were bu^ on that
Mountain.

On the Northwest of Montmartre, is the Village of Clichy, where formerly was
(...) Royal House called the Palace of Clich^ then the Hostel of St. Oven
beyond Part There King John instituted the Order (...) the Knights of the Star,
as du Haillan relates; or rather he renewed it, and setle^ the Knights in that
House, as Favin wi^ have it, who asserts that it was instituted b^ King Robert,
Son to Hugh Capet. The Knighthood's Badge was a golden Colla^ with three Chains
interwoven with gol^ Roses, white and red enameled. The^ wore, besides a Mantle
of white Damask, (...) short Mantle, with Lining of incarnate Damask, and a
Coat of the same Stuff. However, this Order, so honorable and glorious at the
beginning, became in process of time too common, and being despised by Princes
and Lords, fell to the share of the Knight of the Watch and his Comrades From
the top of this Mountain one may have a full sight of Paris.

Vincennes, commonly called Le bois de Vincennes, is a strong Castle in a Wood,
not quite a League off Paris; toward the East, it is surrounded with a good
Ditch, and eight great square Towers for its Defense. Philip August raised up a
Wall about the Wood in 1185. Philip of Valois begun the Tower or Castle in
1337, which K. John and Charles V. ended. Q Mary of Medicis begun the Gallery
that is on the side of Paris in 1614, and Lewis XIV. added new Buildings to it.
Its Court is spacious and fair, a side of it is the Holy and Royal Chapel,
dedicated to the Blessed Trinity by King Charles V. in 1379. Here are also the
Chains of the Streets of Paris, sent thither by Charles VI. to punish that
City's Rebellion. This Place is so very pleasant by its fine Walks in the Woods
about it, that several Kings have chosen it to end their Lives in, as Philip
the Fair, Lewis Hutin, or the Proud, and Charles the Handsome. Farther into the
Woods, is a Convent of Minims, surnamed Les bons Hommes, which is one of the
pleasantest Monasteries that can be seen. As for the Castle, the Inside is
every whit as magnificent as what appears without. The Princes of the Blood,
who were taken in the beginning of the last Troubles of France were confined
here, as had been several others before them. Cardinal Mazarin died at
Vincennes in 1661.

There is still seen an Oak, under which King Lewis IX. was wont to render
Justice; for though he went to Vincennes, as to a retired Place; however, that
the least Absence should not prove hurtful to the poorest of his Subjects; at
certain hours of the day he sat at a Table covered with a Carpet, and ordered
his Ushers and Heralds t^ cry out, whether there was any that wante^ Justice.
Thence apparently comes the Frenc^ Proverb, Mettre une chose sur le Tapis, To
put (...) thing upon the Carpet, for to propound a Business.

St. Maur is a Castle built upon (...) Height, joining a pleasant Forest near
the Marn, about three Miles off Paris; but in imperfect, because Francis I.
that begu^ that Building, had not time to finish it; ye^ its considerable for
several Rarities, as Francis the First's Head very well worked i^ Copper; his
Devise, a Salamander environed with Lillies, and these Words, Non deflorebimus
isto Praeside and istis ducibus. Henry IV. gave this House to the Prince of
Conde.

Returning to Paris, along the Marne, you find, a League from that City, the
Village of Charenton, which by some old Ruins, seems to have been formerly a
strong and considerable Town. Between this and the Palace of Conflans, was an
admirable Echo, which repeated Words to ten times, with such a Noise and
quickness, as though they had been as many Canon-Shots

It Is great pity that the Cloister which the Carmelites have built there upon
the Ruins of a Church, have deprived the World of so great a Wonder. Some
years ago, Charenton was yet more famous for the Temple the Protestants of
Paris had there, to which have at one time or other belonged so many great and
learned Men, as Aubertin, Du Moulin, Mestrezat, Daille, le Faucheur,
Dre^ncourt, Gache, Claude. I supersede to name ^wo late Ministers, one of which
was ac^ounted one of the learnedest Men in France, and the other one of the
Eloquentest, because they are both living, and in England.

The Palace of Conflans, where Jane, Queen ^f Navarre died in 1349, belongs now
to ^he House of Villeroy. The most considera^le part of it is a vaulted
Gallery, enriched ^ith a great many Pictures drawn to the ^ife, as two
Sibylles, three Roman Empe^ors, four Popes, several Sultans and great
Commanders, especially the famous Scander^eg or Castriot. Several Learned Men,
as ^eneca, Scot, Thomas Aquinas, Platina, Guic^iardini, etc. The Kings of
England, of Navarre: The Dukes of Savoy, and of Lor^ain; the Families of
Valois, Bourbon and Nassau, all set in gilt Frames, and brought from Italy, and
21 among the rest out of ^he House of Medicis.

Three or four Leagues East of Paris, ^s the Village of Chelles, with a Church
founded by Queen Clotilde, Wise to Clovis the Great, and since repaired and
erected into an Abbey of Nuns by Queen Baudour, Wife to Clovis II. Their Son
Clotaire, King of France, was interred in that Abbey in 666, and King Robert had
a Palace in the Village.

Higher up to the North, four Leagu^ from Paris, is the Borough of Gonnesse,
r^nowned for its Bread, and Francis the First Answer to Charles the Fifth's
Letter, stuffe^ with ample Titles; for he writ nothing el^ but Francis King of
France, of France, an^ so to the end of the Page, where he p^ these Words, Lord
of Vanves, and Gonnes^ A Joke not much unlike to that of Hen^ IV. who answering
a Letter of the Span^ards, filled up with Bravado's of the sam^ Nature, called
himself King of Gentilly.

St. DENIS, a pretty Town, two League from Paris, situated on a Brook called
(...) Crou, in the middle of a fruitful Plain, an^ full of Game. At the
beginning it was b^ a Country House of the Lady Catulla, wh^ buried there the
Bodies of St. Denis, Bisho^ of Paris, and of Eleuthere and Rustic, his tw^
Priests, beheaded in the Persecution of Decius, after the Year 250. For the
Fable (...) St. Denis the Areopagite, coming over in^ Gaul to preach the
Gospel, has been so solidly confuted by Launoy, and other learne^ Roman
Catholics and French Men too that I need not to disprove it. I shall only
observe, that it has been invented by Hildu^ Abbot of St. Denis, in the Ninth
Century, and that though in this and subsequent Ages, shrewd and Deceitful
Monks gulled (...) much as ever the Ignorant and Credulous Vulgar; however this
ridiculous Opinion did not want Opposers; among the rest, ^^e Learned John Scot
Erigene, who unde^eived the Emperor Charles the Bald.

The Church was built by Dagobert I. and ^e Abbey founded by the same King, who
^ave to the Abbot an absolute Authority over all the Inhabitants of St. Denis,
and such, that it extended upon their Lives and For^unes, and that they were in
a manner his ^laves. Moreover, he instituted a yearly ^air, of four Weeks
length, to be kept in a ^ield near the Church, during which he ^orbad the
Merchants of Paris to sell any ^ares or Commodities. Charlemaign or^ered that
all the Kings and Bishops of ^rance should obey this Abbot; that the ^ings
should neither be crowned, nor the ^ishops ordained without his Leave, that all
^is Subjects should pay him a Tax for each ^f their Houses, that Slaves who
should ^illingly pay it, should be put at Liberty, and called the Freemen of
S. Denis. In 834, ^ewis the Meek, who had been deposed by ^is Sons, had his
Crown restored to him in ^his Town by an Assembly of the Clergy, together with
the Advice and Consent of ^he French Nation.

It seems that part of these Privileges were either lost or contested in
process of ^ime; for Charles the Bald, Emperor and King of France, who
confirmed to these Monks the Grants of Dagobert, and added to them the Lordship
of Ruel near Nanter^ with its Dependencies, and a Country (...) nine Leagues
extent about the Seine: The Prince, I say, being buried in S. Denis Church, had
these Verses engraven upon h^ Tomb.

Multis ablatis, fuit nobis his reparator,
Sequanii fluvii, Ruoliique dator.
It Is observed that this Church was never burnt nor plundered, during the Civil
Wars nor when the Normans, and then the Engli^ were Masters of all the Country
there^bouts; but apparently it was fallen to decay in the XII. Century, since
Sugar, Abb^ of St. Denis, and first Minister of State (...) Lewis VIII, was
fain to rebuild it; b^ how rich soever he was, he could not giv^ it its former
Magnificence.

The Abbot of St. Denis is born Cou^sellor in the Parliament of Paris; he is
fre^ from the Subjection to any Bishop; nay, h^ may bless Church-Ornaments,
admit People into inferior Orders, and even communicate this Power to any of
his Monks They are likewise enabled to build Abbeys i^ any place of the Kingdom
under his Authority, and to choose their own Bishop.

The Town of St. Denis has been much bigger than it is now, which appears by
the old Ditch, that is at 200 Steps distance from the present Walls; for it
began to di^inish, and its Fairs to be less frequented, ^hen the Parliament was
made sedentary at ^aris, and the Inhabitants of St. Denis sub^itted to the
Jurisdiction of the Chastelet in that City. However, there are still eleven
^arishes, besides the Abbey of St. Remy, the Collegiate Church of St. Paul, the
Priory ^f St. Denis de Lestree, and the Ruins of an ^ncient Hermitage, called
St. Quentin.

In the Plains that are near this Town, ^as given a famous Battle, between the
^rotestants under the Prince of Conde and ^e Admiral of Chastillon, in 1567,
and the ^oman Catholics under the High Consta^e of Montmorency. The first were
routed, ^ut the General of the last was killed, which ^ade the Chance pretty
equal, so that a ^eace ensued two or three years after.

The Abbatial Church of St. Denis is ^oo Foot in length, 200 wide, and 80 in
^eight. This great Building is supported by ^o Pillars, and has Copper Doors
that were ^ormerly gilt with Gold. The Quire is di^ded into three parts,
whereof the first, ^8 foot long, and 35 wide, is made use of ^y the Monks; the
second is 45 foot wide, and 35 long, and the third but a little less. ^s for
the Kings Tombs, which are the ^niefest Beauty of the Place, they are in ^ree
Ranks; in the first whereof is Charles ^e Bald's Tomb, the Bodies of Lewis and
Dagobert to the Right, Hugh Capet's and O^do's to the Left, and St. Denis's
Relique^ richly enchased, in the middle. The secon^ as well as the third, are
the Depositaries (...) several other Monarchs. Charles the Fifth Chapel,
wherein he lies buried with all (...) Posterity: Francis the First's sumptuo^
Monument, where he and his Children ly^ with his Wars and Victories represented
o^ fine Marble, deserve to be particularly considered, as well as Lewis XII.
and Ann (...) Bretaign, his Wife's Tombs of Alabaste^ The Bodies of Henry II.
and Catharine (...) Medicis, with their Children, Francis (...) Charles IX. and
Henry III. are in the ne^ round Chapel; those of Lewis XIII. a^ Henry IV. are
in a little Cellar on t^ Churchyard side; which besides the King has also
several other fine Tombs of famo^ Persons and Officers of Note, as that (...)
Bertrand, du Guesilin, Lord High Constab^ of France, and of the Marshal of
Turen^ In the so much celebrated Treasure of St. D^nis, are many things which
the Protestan^ would not overvalue, as a pretended Na^ of our Savior's Cross,
St. Denis's Hea^ enchassed in Silver, and adorned with f^ Pearls, the Finger
St. Thomas put into (...) Savior's Side, St. Simeon's Arm, St. Ben^ Head, one
of Solomon's Cups, a Pot the served at the Wedding of Cana in Galil^ Judas's
Lanthorn, the Maiden of Orlean^ Sword, Charlemaign's Oratory. But this Abbot
has in his Custody the Ornaments of the French Kings, as the Crown, the
Scep^er, the Hand of Justice, the Royal Mantle, the Dalmatick, the Golden
Spurs, enriched with precious Stones, which he is bound to send to the Place
where the Kings are consecrated. Besides other Crowns of several Kings, a
golden Crucifix, a great many gold and silver Crosses, Images and Books covered
with Jewels and Diamonds, a golden Cup, enriched with Hyacinths, Emeralds, and
a Saphir, upon which is engraven the Figure of Solomon. Some of these Jewels
are esteemed 50000 Crowns a piece. There are likewise ancient Medals of the
Roman Emperors, whose Price can hardly be known, so rare and curious they are.
This Abbey has, besides a Fountain very considerable, for the ancient Figures of
Idols that are round it.

Two Leagues higher to the North, is the Town of Montmorency, the ancientest
Barony in the Kingdom, that was considerable enough before the English took and
burnt it in 1359, as appears by its Ruins. It had then 600 Manors depending
upon it, and gives yet its Name to a Deanship, and Chastelny, and a pleasant
and fertile Valley, in which it is situated. Henry II. erected it into a Duchy
and Peerdom in 1551, on behalf of Ann of Montmorency, High Constable of France.
But this ancient Family, who h^ lasted 600 years, and produced so man High
Constables, Marshals, Admirals, an^ other great Officers of the Crown, was
e^tinguished in the middle of this Centur^ there remaining but a Daughter,
marrie^ to Henry of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, (...) 1650, on whose behalf the
Lordship (...) Montmorency was again erected into (...) Duchy and Peerdom, in
1633.

Dammartin, which Robie puts in the P^risis, lies in the Diocese of Meaux,
accordi^ to Sampson. It Is a good Borough, with the T^tle of a County, six or
seven Leagues Nort^ East of Paris, and seven Miles from G^nesse.

Three Leagues on the North-West of P^ris, is Argentueuil, upon the Seine, whi^
forms there a small Island. Our Saviour^ Coat without Seam, was found in the
Town in 1156, if we believe Lege^daries.

French Brie.
LAgny, upon the Marne, six Leagues Eastwards of Paris, has been a considerabl^
Town, and born the Title of a County; b^ has been twice ruined, by the Normans
i^ the Ninth Century, and by the Duke o^ Parma, who took it upon Henry IV. for
the Leaguers, in 1590. John, Duke of Bu^gundy, stayed two Months at Lagny, in
1416, ^ooking for an Occasion to go to Paris, and wait upon Charles VI. but
returning without an Answer, his Flemings called him by (...) Joke, John of
Lagny, who makes no Speed, which turned afterward into a Proverb. Lagny, in
Latin Lasiniacum, has an Abbey very ancient, as its Walls testify.

Brie Comte Robert, six Leagues South-East of Paris, is esteemed by some
Capital of the French Brie; other give that Honor to Rosoy, which has an
Election, and is situated five or six Leagues farther on the same side.

Ville-Neuve-S. George, is a new Town, well built, situated in a pleasant
Place, where the River Yerre discharges into the Seine, three or four Leagues
Southwards of Paris.

Hurepoix.
GOing up the Seine toward the South, to enter into the Hurepoix, the first
considerable Town you meet with, is Corbeil, situated thirteen Miles off Paris,
upon the same River, where the Essonne discharges it self into it. This Town
had its particular Counts in the Tenth and Eleventh Centuries, one of whom,
called Aimon, built the Collegiate Church of St. Spire, and appointed yearly
Incomes for its Canons. Lewis the Burly got this small Sovereignty from Hugh du
Puiset, since which time it r^mained united to the Crown of France, a^^ was the
Head of a Provostship and Chaste^ It Is said, that Caesar, who calls this Tow^
Metiosedum, built the great Tower, name^ in Latin, Castrum Corvolium, which
serv^^ still as a Citadel to Corbeil, and whence t^^ French Name seems to be
derived. Quee^ Isemburg having been divorced from Phi^^^ August, built there a
Pleasure-house, (...) which some remains are still to be seen, ne^^ the
Essonne, in a place called old Corbe^^ where she lies interred. In 1418, the
Du^^ of Burgundy besieged this Town, but w^^ persuaded to raise the Siege by
the I^treagues of Elizabeth of Bavaria, Charles the Sixth's Queen.

MELVN upon the Seine, four League^ South-East of Corbeil, and ten of Pari^
Rob puts it in Hurepoix, but Du Chas^^ makes it the Head of Justice in
Gastinois* for it has a Presidial, Baylwick, and Election, upon which the
greatest part of Gastinois and Hurepoix, and some part of Bri^ are depending.
Melun is divided into three Parts as Paris, viz. the City, the new Town, and
the Isle. This last was already on foo^ in Caesar's time, who calls it
Melodunum, and has now a Castle and two Churches. The Normans destroyed Melun
in 845, but since it was repaired, and given by Hugh Capet to Bouchard his
Favorite. From about that time it began to have its Viscounts, whose Family is
yet subsisting in the Princes of Espinoy. Eudes, Count of Champaign, took this
Town by Money, but King Robert retook and restored it to its Viscount, in 999.
It seems that Melun became every day stronger, for in 1410, the English could
not take it but by Famine, nor the French retake it in 1435, but by
Intelligence. Melun is yet strong, big and well Peopled, the Seine runs through
it, but the Communication is kept by fine Bridges. It has a Collegiate Church,
four Parishes, and several Monasteries.

Fifteen Miles North-west of Melun, and ^welve South of Paris, is the Town of
Mont^lehery, built by one Thibaud File-estoupe, in 1015. There was formerly a
strong Castle, but it was all razed (besides the Tower that is yet on foot) by
Lewis VI. surnamed the Burly, because of the Rebellion of Hugh de Crecy, Count
of that Place. Guy his Father, was Great Seneschal of France, and married his
Daughter Luciane to the Son of Philip I. afterward King Lewis VI. But the
young Prince not liking the Match, repudiated Luciane, in 1107; upon which Hugh
raised a Civil War, and so caused the Destruction of his Lordship and Family.
However, this Town became famous in 1465, for the Battle which was fought near
it on a Tuesday, the 6th of July, between Lewis XI. and Charles Duke of Berry,
his Brother, who had entered a League, called the Public Good, with the Duke of
Bretaign, the Count of Charolois, and several other French Lords, against that
Monarch. The King had some Advantage, though the Confederates remained Masters
of the Field; but what was pretty singular, was that a Gentleman fled out of
the King's Army a^ far as Luzignan in Poictou, that is near 150 Miles; and
another out of the Allies, to Quesnoy in Hainaut, about 120, both giving out,
that they had lost the Day. Montlehery is built upon a Hill near the River
Orge, and has the Title of a County, Provostship and Chastelny. King Lewis
XIII. united it to the Duchy of Chartres, and gave it in part of his Portion
to Gaston-John-Baptiste, his Brother, Duke of Orleans.

Upon the same River, two Leagues South of Montlehery, is the Town of Chartres,
nea^ whose Walls are the Gardens of Chantelon, which in King Henry the Fourth's
time, had not the like in the whole Kingdom, and were especially admired for
their Box and Myrtle-Trees, Harbors and Hedges clipped into Figures of the
ancient Gods, Heroes, Roman Gladiators, etc. But this fine Place, being fallen
into the Hands of some covetous or lazy Nuns of St. Bennet's Order, is
extremely decayed.

Rochefort, on the River Remande, is an Earldom, four Leagues West of Chatres,
and almost five North of Dourdan, a pretty good Town, and a County too, on the
River Orge ^ear its Spring, and the Frontiers of Beausse. It was the
Patrimonial Estate of Hugh Capet, before he ascended the Throne of France, and
has since been alienated, and reunited to that Crown several times.

La Forte-Alais, lies twenty Miles South of Paris, and thirteen West of Melun.
Between these two Places, thirteen Leagues South South-East of Paris, in the
Forest of Biesvre, is the Borough of Fontaine-Bleau, so called for the great
Number of its fine Fountains. It Is said the Royal House was built by Francis I.
at the Solicitation of his Daughter Claudia, who one day seeing a Hound or
Spaniel discover a Spring, desired her Father to build an House there. This
Design was since continued by most of the succeeding Kings, and perfected by
Henry the Fourth, and is now one of the finest in France, by reason of the
great Number of its Springs, the vast Scope of its Forests, the Beauty of its
Gardens, the Length of its Canals, the Richness of its Apartments, Paintings,
Statues, and other Curiosities. It would be too tedious to describe all these
in particular, there being about 900 Chambers, Cabinets, Halls and Galleries
that belong to this great Place, therefore I will only hint at the most
principal. The First thing to be observed in going in, is the great Court of
the White Horse, round which are the Apartments of the Officers; henc^ are fine
Steps to the Queens Apartmen^ in which there is a Garden with a Fountai^ that
represents Diana holding a Deer b^ the Horn, and followed by four Dogs, an^ as
many Bucks at the bottom. There is also a curious Copper Statue in this Garden
that represents a young Man naked, an^ pulling a Thorn out of his Foot. The
Figure of Laocoon with two of his Children and Serpents stinging them to Death.

The Tennis-Court and Bird-house an^ sideways, as also the Queens Gallery;
after that is the Deer-gallery, which is very long and beautified with fine
Paintings and above 46 Bucks-heads. Hence you may go into the Council Chamger,
where is the Picture of the Count of Ombe, Queen Mary of Medicis's Uncle.
Thence into that of the Baths which has a St. John the Baptist at the Door, and
an Adonis and Venus upon the Chimny. This leads you into the new Chamber, where
is represented the Duchess Gabrielle, under the Form of Diana, holding a
Hunting-Horn in her Hand. Next comes the great Gallery, built by Charles IX. in
which are these Emblems that follow. The First, Hunc Ventus sed me spes fouet.
2. Puro a^det and uno. 3. Nunquam labitur icta fides, with a Man that helps
others out of a Shipwreck. 4. Perrumpe obstacula lent, There is one who
removes Brambles, and the like Impediments out of the way. 5. Tutum secreta
silere, with an Harpocrates. 6. Pretiosior ipse Lapillis, a Cupid that picks up
small Stones. 7. Rex floret ab armis. 8. Vigilantia regna tuetur. 9. Amat
Victoria curam. 10. Plebis amor regis custodia, Under the Figure of a Swarm of
Bees. 11. Cor Regis in manu Dei, Under the Figure of a Hand that comes out of
the Clouds. 12. Arcani custodia fida. 13. Men's Ardua tendit in altum. 14.
Eloquium tot lumina Claudit. 15. Nulla altius ardet. 16. Non frangunt obstacula
vires. 17. Animos alligat aequos, Representing Justice and Religion. 18. Manet
victoria constans. 19. Hoc foedere lilia Florent, Representing France in good
Union. 20. Ortus occasibus aequat. 21. Obsequium nil impedit umbra. 22. Casus
haerebit in omnes. 23. In splendore tuo labor and quies. 24. Agitatus cresco, A
Fire a blowing. 25. Comitantur furta Dolores, A Boy breaking a Bee's Swarm. 26.
Mox toto radiabit in orb. 27. Mea clauditur hic spes. 28. Innocuo non uritur
igni.

Then comes the Chamber and Cabinet of Madam Gabrielle, that have each of them
an Adonis and Venus. The Gallery of Francis I. otherwise the little Gallery,
has at the going in Bacchus, Venus and Cupid. This Place is remarkable for a
Conference upon Matters of Religion, between the Papists and Reformed; or
rather betwixt Du Pless^ Mornay, and Cardinal Perron. There is another hard by,
that is full of Marble Statues.

The King's Chamber comes next, wherein Marshal Biron was disarmed by King
Henry the Fourth's Order; and the Queen's Antichamber, where Lewis XIII. was
born. The Guards Hall is enriched with Paintings, and a Tapestry that
represents Charles the Seventh's Victories over the English. The^ the
Feasting-hall, where on the Chimny is Henry IV. a Horseback, the whole of pure
Marble, and extraordinary well worked, having at his Side Clemency and Peace,
and trampling upon his Enemies. Then the Hall for Balls, which is very big, and
has an Arch, or half Round with these Words, D^ nec totum impleat orbem.

Next these, you must see the Gardens, especially the King's, where there is a
Cleopatra of Brass very well worked by Angel^ Politian, and brought out of
Italy into France by Catharine of Medicis. A Neptune also of Brass, with a She
Wolf at his Feet, that gives Suck to Romulus and Remus. There are also three
Canals covered with Swans, and well stocked with good and great Fish, among
which, that of the Fountain has all the Beauty that Art could give it.

French Gastinois.
FIve Miles East of Fontainbleau, is the Borough of Moret upon the Loing, near
the Mouth of the River into the Seine. It has the Title of a County, and gave
its Name to one of King Henry the Fourth's natural Sons, Antony of Bourbon,
Count of Moret, killed in the Battle of Castelnaudary, in 1632.

Nemours, upon the Loing, is five Leagues higher to the South, and eighteen off
Paris. It Is a good and pleasant Town, which has the Priory of St. John, the
Church of St. Peter, and the Abbey of Our Lady of Joy, belonging to the Nuns of
Cisteaux. Charles VI. erected Nemours into a Duchy and Peerdom, An. 1404, and
exchanged it with Charles the Noble, King of Navarre for, some other Lands. But
in 1425, this Duchy returned to the Crown of France till the Year 1461, that
King Lewis XI. gave it to James of Armagnac. This Line was soon ended, and
Nemours reunited to the French Domesne, in 1507, and given by Lewis XII. to
Gaston of Foix, his Nephew, who died in the Battle at Ravenna, An. 1512. Three
years after, the same King invested with this Duchy, Julian of Medicis, who
had espoused Philiberta of Savoy, this Monarch's Aunt. By this Julian was
continued the Line of the Dukes of Nemours of the House of Savoy, during 144
years; Henry II. Duke of Nemours dying without Issue in 1659.

Eight Leagues South-East of Nemours, near the River Clary, is the small Town
of Courtenay, with the Title of Principality, famou^ for having given its Name
to the Royal House of Courtenay, that refers its Original to Peter of France,
seventh Son to Lewis the Burly, and has given Emperors to Constantinople,
Marquesses to Namur, and Counts to Nevers, Auxerre and Tonnerre. In process of
time this Family was divided into several Branches, of which that of the Lords
of Chevillon is yet subsisting. In King Henry the Fourth's time, they much
insisted upon being acknowledged for Princes of the French Blood, as descending
directly by Males from that Peter of France. But how eager soever they were,
they could never be heard, because they are too low in the World.

Between Courtenay and Nemours, seven Leagues North-West of the first, and
about five Miles South of Nemours, is Chateau-Landon, on the River Fuzin, and
the Road of Paris to Lions. It Is a very ancient Town, if we admit the
Conjectures of Vigenaire, who takes it for the Vellaudunum of Caesar.

Three Leagues lower to the North, is a Village called St. Mathurin de
l'Archamp, situated in a Sandy and fruitless Plain, whether superstitious
Papists bring Naturals and Fools to be cured.

Pursuing your way to Paris, you find the Town of Milly, which Vigenaire takes
for the Agendicum of Caesar. It Is situated upon the River Escolle, between
Melun and Nemours, about five Leagues from each, and has a Royal Seat of
Justice.

Mantoan.
MANTE, which gives its Name to that Tract of Land that is between the Seine
and the Vegre lies twelve Leagues North-West of Paris, fourteen North of
Chartres, on whose Bishop it depends, and three miles from the Forest of Rosny,
on the North-East. It Is surnamed the Pretty, and had formerly the Title of a
County, with a strong Citadel, that was demolished by Henry IV. at the Request
of the Parisians. And therefore it had hardly been taken from the English by
Charles VII. in 1449, were it not that the Inhabitants sided with him, and by
their overgone, got a Confirmation of all their Privileges, Offices,
Freeholds, and Estates. Philip August died there in 1223, as well as a Daughter
of France, called Jane, who built its Collegiate Church, and is interred under
the great Altar. Charles V. founded in that Town a Convent of Celestin Monks,
who within the Enclosure of their Monastery have a Hill renowned for producing
the best Wine of Franee. Mante has a Bailwick, Presidial, Provostship,
Salt-Gra^ry, and Town Hall.

Meulan, a good Borough upon the Sei^ is three Leagues nearer Paris than Man^
Next to Meulan is a strong Castle in (...) Island joined to the Shore on both
sides b^ a Bridge. During the Wars of the League Henry IV. took easily the
Borough, b^ could not master the Castle.

Eleven Miles South-East of Mante, upon the River Eure, is the Borough and
Principality of Anet, belonging now to the Duke of Vendosme. There is a
magnificent Castle built by Henry II. on behalf of Diana o^ Poitiers. Upon the
Gate is a Clock the bears a Buck or Stag made of Bell-metall, which strikes the
Hours with his Feet, afte^ which fifteen or twenty Dogs, of the sam^ Metal, are
heard running, and opening i^ the Chase. The great Hall and Chamber^ are Glased
with Crystal, the Gardens embellished with a great Number of Fountains and
artificial Rocks, with a Diana of Marble, adorned with several Branches of
Coral, and fine and rare Shells; but what is most curious, is a Marble Statue
in the Garden (where the Dwarf, the Citron, and the Orange Trees are kept)
representing a Woman with a white Smock on, so to the Life, that People, though
told of it before hand, are deceived at the Sight. Besides these there is a
Chapel served by twelve Canons, that is paved with white Marble, and supported
by delicate Pillars, of the Corinthian Order.

Passy is along the same River, but six Leagues off Paris. It had its beginning
from a Royal House, where the Queens of France were wont to lie in. And
therefore Lewis IX. called himself Lewis of Poissy, being Born and Baptized
there. This Town, though not very big, is nevertheless famous for the
Conference held in it between six Cardinals, about forty Bishops, and a great
Number of other Roman Catholic Doctors, against twelve or thirteen Reformed
Ministers. It was begun the 4th of September, 1561, and broken up the 25th of
November next ensuing, by the Jesuit Layner, who observing the Stress his Party
was put upon, concerning Transubstantiation, made use of Injuries instead of
Reason, and threatened the Queen Regent, Katharine of Medicis, with the Anger of
the Pope, for meddling with Ecclesiastical Affairs. This is a Matter of Fact,
confessed even by that partial Scribler, Moreri. Poissy is yet a pretty Town,
the Head of a Chastelny, situated in a fine Valley, with a pleasant Wood on the
East.

The Borough of St. Germain en Lay, at the end of a Wood near the same River,
three Miles off Poissy, and nine off Paris, is considerable for its Royal
House, built by Charles V, continued by the English, bea^tified by Francis I.
and finished by Henry I^ though Lewis XIV. has added some ne^ Buildings and
Ornaments to it, as the Te^rass, the Valley-House, the Flower-Ga^den, etc. I
would be too tedious, should describe all the Chambers of this Palac^ with
their rich Furniture; but I cannot se^ bear speaking of a Mall, with square
Pa^^lions, built all along, for the Convenien^ of the Players and Spectators;
near which are Grotto's, and Places where Outland^ and curious Beasts are kept.
In the Castl^ built by Henry IV. is a Gallery with the Emblem, Duo Protegit
unus, meaning, the he governed two Kingdoms, viz. that (...) France and
Navarre. Upon the Gate is see^ the Castle of Fontain-bleau, and on the Side are
the Towns of Venice, Prague, Namur, Mantua, Adem, Sion in Swisserland, Tanger,
Terracine, Ormus, Bellitri, Wittemberg, Nimeguen, Passaw, Mastricht, Florence,
etc. The next thing that deserves to be seen, are the dry and wet Grotto's; the
dry are only for Refreshment in the Heat of Summer; the other are more rare and
curious. The First of these having a Dragon that raises his Tail, and moves his
Wings, spouting up Water in abundance, whilst artificial Nightingales and
Cuckows make a charming Noise. On the Sides are two black Marble Statues, that
likewise spouts out Water.

The second wet Grotto, has a Serpent upon the Door, that throws up Water,
whilst a great many Nightingales that are ^ll round it, charm the Beholders,
who are ^ore surprised still to see a fair young Maid play upon Organs, and
turn her Eyes ^o pleasantly, that several have been puzzled ^o determine whether
it was an Effect of Art or Nature. There is also a fine Table of black Marble,
with a Pipe in the middle of it, that throws Water several ways, and unto
different Figures. Another Marble Table of different Colors, besides
Look^ng-Glasses, Shell-works, and a Dolphin extraordinary well done.

The Third Grotto shows a Neptune, with a crowned Globe, that is carried up on
the Water, whose Drops represent Pearls and Diamonds. Here are also Vulcan's
Furnace, Paper-Mills, Nightingales singing, with two Angels, that with their
Trumpets, open the Doors over against them. Then appears Neptune, armed with
his Trident, seated upon a triumphal Chariot, drawn by two white Horses that
come out of a Cavern, and after they have stood a while turn back again with a
great Noise of Trumpets. There is also a Form that seems to be placed on
purpose for People to sit upon, but they will find themselves much mistaken, if
they do not know how to turn the Nail that lies under, for they will be soundly
wetted; but if they understand the Knack, Wate^ suddenly spouts out of a
thousand unpe^ceptible Holes in the Pavement, that w^ the Beholders in a moment.

The Fourth Grotto, is, without Contradiction, the finest of all, but its hard
(...) come into it, the Water, unless stopped hindering the Passage. The most
remarkabl^ thing in it, is an Orpheus, that plays upon his Lute, moving his
Hands and Body (...) keep time with the Instrument, to the great Admiration of
the Beholders, who are n^ less suprized with the great Number of Beasts and
Birds, that charmed with h^^ sweet Melody, follow him; of Rocks, Trees and
Plants, that stoop to make him their profound Respect. Besides these, there are
the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, that run according to their Course in the
Firmament: A Bacchus seated on his Throne, that holds a Glass in his Hand. In
fine, Heaven, Hell, the Sea, Men of War, the four Elements, the Castle of St.
Germain, the King, the Princes and Court are so well represented upon the
Waves, that it is hardly possible to believe it. The Dolphin of France also
appears there, with Angels that come dow^ from Heaven. There are yet a Neptune,
a Mercury, a Jupiter, with the Representation of the four Cardinal Virtues in
white Marble, and several other very curious things, that make it one of the
finest Places in Europe.

A small League from this Place, toward ^aris, is a Copse, or Underwood, along
^he Highway. This Wood has a strange ^roperty, for the Branches cut on one
side, ^ill swim atop, if thrown into the Water, ^ut those on the other will
sink down; and therefore the Vulgar calls it the Treason^ood: adding further,
that it was in this ^lace, upon a great Table, which is still to ^e seen, that
Ganelon brewed his horrid ^erfidies, whereby he betrayed the House ^f Ardennes,
a great many of the French ^eers and Captains of Charlemaign, and caus^d the
Loss of the Battle of Roncevaux, near ^he Pyrenean Mountains, in 780.

About two Leagues from St. Germain, and ^hree from Paris, is the Borough of
Ruel, which is considerable for a costly House, ^ormerly belonging to the
Cardinal of Riche^eu. This House has four great separate ^partments, surrounded
with good Ditches, and a fine Court in the middle, where are ^wo great Dogs of
Brass, that spout Water through their Genitals, and empty the Court ^o fill the
Ditch. A little farther, is a ^ountain, in form of a Rose, in which ^tands
Hercules with his Club, with Cerbe^us at his Feet, that Vomits up Water as ^ear
as any Crystal. There are also fine ^lleys, Gardens, Labyrinths, Aquaducts, and
the like.

A Mile higher to the North, at the sam^ distance off Paris, is another
considerabl^ Borough, called Nanterre, where it is sa^ that St. Genevieve was
born and fed her F^ther's Cattle, in a Park now walled in, (...) which the
Country People tell you, that (...) is never covered with Water, though all the
neighboring Fields be overflown.

Chateaufort is a good Borough too, fi^ Leagues South-West of Paris, and two
(...) Versailles. It Is the Head of a Chastelny, (...) which is the fine Town of
Limours, eigh^ Leagues South-West of Paris, and thre^ West of Montlehery.

At the North end of the Forest Liveli^ nineteen Miles West of Paris, and
eleve^ North-West of Montlehery, lies upon a Hi^ the Town of Montfort-l'Amaury,
with the Title of a County, and an Election. Whether the Castle of Montfort has
been buil^ and the Town walled in by King Rober^ Who gave them to its natural
Son Amaulr^ is controverted among the French Histo^ans, some of whom deny that
King Rober^ ever had any Bastards; but sure it is, tha^ one Amaulry, Lord of
Montfort, lived between the Years 1053 and 1073, and wa^ Father to Simon, Count
of Montfort-l'Amaur^ whence is descended the illustrious Famil^ of these
Counts, which has produced several great Captains, a High-Constable (...)
France, and nine Sovereign Dukes of Little Britain; from John IV. in 1345, to
Claude ^f France, last Duchess of Britain, who ^arryed Francis I. and was
Mother to Henry II. Kings of France, by which means ^his Duchy was for ever
united to that Crown.

At the South-end of this Forest is the Marquizat of Rambouillet, and Three or
^our Leagues Eastward upon the Yvette ^he Borough of Dompierre, and the Duchy
^f Chevreuse: Four Leagues upon the same River is the pleasant Town of
Long-junieau.

French Vexin.
Pont-Oyse, Oesiae Pons, Briva-Isarae vel Bri^isara, Capital of this Country,
included betwixt the Rivers Oyse, Seine, Epte, and ^rosne, is a strong place,
which had former^y its particular Counts. It Is situated Fif^een Miles
North-west of Paris, and Four off ^he fall of the Oyse, into the Seine. The
English signalized themselves in defending ^his place six Weeks against the
French King Charles VII. in 1442. Henry III. took ^t from the Leaguers in July
1589, but the Duke of Mayenn retook it January next. Pontoyse is seated upon a
Hill near the Oyse, and the Town is commanded by a strong, Castle. There are
several Churches and Monasteries, with a Bailiwick, Provostship and Castelny.

L'Isle-Adam is an Important Passage up^ the same River, Two Leagues above
Ponto^ It has given its Name to a Noble Famil^ whence Two great Masters of St.
John Order, John and Philip de Villers L'Isle-Ad^^ were originary. The Isle of
Rhodes was taken under the Government of the last (...) 1522, by Soliman II.
Emperor of the Tur^ at the head of an Army of Four Hundre^ Sails an near Three
Hundred Thousand M^ after a Siege of 6 Months. The Great Mast^ would perhaps
have defended it longer, b^ that the Divisions of the Christian Prince^ gave
him no hope of relief, besides that ^ Jewish Physician, and Amarat a Spaniard
Chancellor of the Order, betrayed his Counsels to the Infidels.

Beaumont a Town and a County The^ Miles higher, is another important Key (...)
the Oyse, situated upon the steepness of Hill. The Counts of Beaumont upon O^
have been in credit from the beginning (...) the Eleventh Century, till Lewis
IX. boug^ it of them. This County was erected into (...) Peerdom by Philip of
Valois on behalf (...) Robert of Artois, in 1328. Charles Duke (...) Orleance
was Master of it in 1416, when (...) was brought Prisoner into England, and
dur^ his absence, the Burgundians his sworn E^mies took and plundered it. Since
that time t^ Dukes of Vendosine have possessed Beaumont under the Title of a
Duchy, which was born by Henry IV. while King Anthony his Father was alive. It
has a Royal Seat of Justice.

Chaumont situated upon a Hill near the River Trosne, Thirteen Miles
North-East of Beaumont, has the Title of a County, Election, and a Provostship.
Magny Seven Miles South of Chaumont, has likewise an Election and Provostship.
The Castle of Rocheguyon near the Seine, Three Leages South-West of Magny, has
the Title of Duchy and Peerdom.

Beauvaisis.
Beauvaisis upon the Terrain or Therein, Capital of this County, Sixteen Leagues
North-West of Paris, and almost Eight from Beaumont, is a very Ancient Town.
For Duchesne pretends that it was built by one Belgius XIV. King of the Gauls,
long before Troy it self; and Servius calls it Belgae. Whatsoever it be, sure
it is that in Caesar's time it was very considerable, that its Inhabitants were
the most powerful of the Belgae, and those who withstood him the longest, their
Jurisdiction was bigger than the Beauvaisis ^s now, for it extended as far as
Vermandois and Soissons on the East, the Norman Vexin, and the Country of Caux
on the West, the Parisis on the South, and the Territory o^ Amiens on the
North. Besides Beauvais Casaromagus and Bellovaci, there was another great and
strong City which Caesar call^ Brantuspantium, but no body can certainly tell
where it was seated; Oysel, Sanson, and Adrian de Valois pretend that it was
Bea^vais it self. After this first Emperor (...) subdued Beauvais, it remained
under the Romans, till the French became Masters o^ the Gauls, to whom it was
so faithful, tha^ we do not read that it was ever taken b^ their Enemies; for
which reason it is calle^ by some Authors the Virgin City. The ^^glish
endeavored in vain to surprise it i^ 1433, and Charles the Rash, last Duke o^
Burgundy was not happier in 1472, for after Six Weeks, he was forced to Raise
the Siege. It Is said that this Prince's Ordinan^^ was Extraordinary good, and
that upon the account he boasted to carry with him the Keys of all the Towns of
France. Henc^ his Jester not long after the Raising of th^^ Siege took occasion
curiously to pry in^^ the Mouth of all the Cannons, and wh^^ the Duke asked him
what he did, I loo^ sais he, for the Key of Beauvais, but I cannot find it. For
this Warlike Resistance, the Inhabitants got several privileges, as t^ be free
from the Duty of Arrear-ban, wit^ the liberty of enjoying Noble Mannon without
paying any Money to the Crown But the Women as they showed a Courage much above
their Sex, so they were honored above the rest. For they were allowed to adorn
themselves at their Wedding Day as sumptuously as they would; a Liberty very
unusual in those Days: Likewise to precede the Men at a Procession to be made
every Year at the Festival of S. Agadresme, and to bring their Offerings to the
Altar before them.

Beauvais is a very fine City both for its Buildings as the Episcopal Palace,
the Cathedral Church of St. Peter, which has Eight Dignitaries, and Forty
Canons, Six Collegiate Churches, and Three Abbyes; and likewise for its
Territory, which is pleasantly interrupted with Plains, Vallyes, and Hills that
are Fertile in Wine, Corn, Hay, and all sorts of Fruits, nay the Meadows are so
good that Muttons are here bigger and fatter than in other parts of France:
This Town besides is well fortified, the Walls being thick and strengthened with
Bulwarks and Rampires, the Ditches deep and broad, with Sluices to let the Water
in or out.

S. Lucian is thought to have been the first Bishop of Beauvais in the
Primitive Ages of Christianity; but either of him or his Successors is little
certainty, till the VIII, or IX. Century.

Odet of Coligni, Cardinal of Chastill^^ was Bishop of this Town in the last
Age and being persuaded of the Truth of the Reformation, refused to say Mass in
the Cathedral on Easter Day 1561, and mad^ bold to Celebrate the Lords Supper
in h^^ Private Chapel. The French Kings, and the Counts of Blois and Champaign
have endowed this Bishopric with great Revenue^ and Privileges, so that its
Prelate is Spiritual and Temporal Lord of this Town and County, and the first
among the Eccles^astical Counts and Peers of France. H^ Power howsoever is not
so great as it w^^ before the Year 1539, that there was (...) Royal Officer but
a Judge of Priviledg^^ Men: Since that time a Bailiwick, Presid^^^ Election,
and Mayoralship have been founded there. In 1609 that Duchesne wrote h^
Antiquities, all the Judges depended ye^ upon the Bishop. He has Nine
Archdeacons, and Three Hundred and Seventy Parishes under him.

The Chief Trade of Beauvais consists in Serges, Clothes, and the like Stuffs;
is Earthen Vessels, which are made of an excellent Potters-Clay, that abounds
in this Country, in lines which are transported into Holland and Flanders.
There are a great many Villages round about the Town, and several Noble
Families, whence are issued Four great Masters of St. John's Order, John and
Philip de Villiers L' Isle-Adam, Claudius de la Sengle, and Vignacourt. But the
most Illustrious of all is John of Bechencourt the first King and Discoverer of
the Canaries, in 1402.

Among the Titles of the Bishop of Beauvais is that of Vidame, or Vicedominus
of Gerberoy, because he is Lord Temporal of that Borough situated on the
Frontiers of Picardy, upon a Mountain which has the Terrain at its foot, Five
Leagues North-West of Beauvais. It is famous for a Battle between the English
and the French fought in 1435, where the Count of Arundel lost his Life.

Bulls a Borough Four Leagues East of Beauvais is renowned for its Lines, and
known since the Year 1075: Clermont Eleven Miles South-East of Beauvais, and
Six of Bulls is a pretty good Town, seated upon a small Hill. It has the Title
of a County, and has given its Name to a Noble Family, known since the Eleventh
Century. It was extinguished within Two Ages, and King Lewis the IX. gave it to
Robert of France, his Son, about the Year 1291, but in 1327 Charles the fair
exchanged it with Lewis, Roberts Son for some other Lands, and erected the
Barony of Bourbon into a Duchy and Peerdom, which made this House change their
Surname, and rake that of Bourbon. It Is from this Robert that the present Kings
of France are descended. Clermont was restored to these Lord by Philip of
Valois, who would not keep t^^ Match of his Predecessor, but confiscated b^
Francis I. upon Charles of Bourbon, Hig^ Constable of France, because he had
revolt^ from him to the Emperor Charles V. T^^ other Towns or considerable
Buroughs o^ Beauvaisis are Merlou, Bury, Ansac, Ang^ Money, Monchy, Tillart,
etc.

Valois.
Going over the Oyse, you enter into the Country of Valois, called Pagus
Vadensis in the Statute-Books of the Emperor Charles the Bald. Mention is made
of it since Philip I Afterward this County was often given (...) the Children
of the French King for the^ Portion; whence it came, that the Frenc^ King
Philip VI. Son to Charles Count o^ Valois, Alencon, etc. and Grandson to Philip
the Bold, was surnamed de Valois, and communicated this Appellation to Thirteen
Kings descended from him, until Henry IV. in whom began the branch of Bourbon
Charles VI. Erected this County into (...) Duchy and Peerdom in 1402, and it
makes yet part of the Portion of Philip of France Lewis XIV. his Brother.

Creil upon the Oyse, with a Fine Bridge, and a Provostship resorting to the
Bailiwick of Senlis is the first Town you meet with coming out of Beauvaisis.
Charles V. built there a strong Castle, which fell in the hands of the English
under Charles VI. and was retaken by Charles VII. in 1442. Creil is Two Leagues
North of Senlis, and Eleven of Paris.

Chantilly upon the Nonnette Three Miles South of Creil is a Royal House with
fine Gardens and Water-Spouts, belonging now to the Prince of Conde.

Verneuil upon the Oyse a League East of Creil, has been Erected first into a
Marquizate, and lately into a Duchy, and Peerdom by Lewis XIV. Anno 1652.

Sonlis, Augustomagus Silvanectum, is situated on a Hill betwixt Two small
Rivers, which mix their Waters near it, and bear the Name of Nonnette, with the
Forest Halatre on the North, and that off Senlis on the South, Nine or Ten
Leagues of Paris. It Is the most considerable Town of this Duchy, having a
Bishopric, Bayliwick, and Presidial, Seven Parochial, and Two Collegiate
Churches. St. Proculus was his first Bishop. The whole Diocese is interwoven
with woods which has given it its Latin Name. In 873 Charles the Bald assembled
there the Bishops of Sens and Rheims, to try his Son Carloman, who was a
Deacon, and had revolted against him. The Young Prince wa^ condemned, and his
Eyes pulled out, and wa^ put close Prisoner in the Abbey of Corby (...) Thence
he made his escape to Lewis the Germanick his Uncle, who gave him the Abbey of
Epternack, where he died someti^^ after. In 1589 the Leaguers besieged th^^
Town, but were forced to raize the Sieg^ by the Duke of Longueville, and the
Lord o^ la None, King Henry IV's. Generals, leaving Fifteen Hundred Men upon
the spot.

Crespy Eleven Miles East of Senlis, an^ Thirteen Leagues North-East of Paris
w^ formerly a considerable City, and the Capital of Valois. It had the Title of
a County, or was the Seat of the Counts of Val^^, who are indifferently called
by these Two Names. This Title has likewise been borne by some Children of the
French Kings. In Castle which is now almost ruined, is said to have been built
by K. Dagobert, and keeps still some remains of its Antiquity, and of the
greatness of the Town, that ha^ not at present above Five Hundred Houses
However it is yet the head of a Provostship and Castelny. Francis I. concluded
a Peace in this Town with the Emperor Charles V. on the Eighteenth of
September 1544.

La-Ferte-Milon upon the little River O^^e, 4 Leagues South-East off Crespy,
and almost 6 North-East of Meaux is another Provostship and Castelity. It is
called in Latin Firmita Milonis, that is the Castle, or Fortress of Milon,
having been built by a Count of that Name, under the Reign of Lewis the Burly.
For as the Authors of the middle Age of the Latin Tongue said firmare for
munire, and firmitas for munimentum; So the French who formed their Language
upon this corrupted Speech called Ferte, such places as were strong by Art and
Nature, and distinguished 'em from one another either by the Name of their
Founder, or by some particular circumstance of their situation. As to this
it is a pretty good Town with a Castle and Suburbs.

Villers-Coste-Res on the West Side on the Forest of Res, Five Miles North of
La Ferte Milon, was formerly a Royal House, where the French Kings often dwelt,
to take the pleasure of Hunting.

Pont St. Maixence is a considerable Borough upon the Oyse, Three Leagues
North-East of Senlis.

Bethisy upon the River Ottenete, a Mile Southwest of the Forest of Compiegne,
is a good Borough which had formerly a strong Castle, that is now almost
ruined. John of Bethisy Physician to King Philip the Bold, was Famous under his
Reign. This Borough is still the Head of a Provostship and Castelny, as well
as Pierrefons, a Mile East of the same Forest.

Compiegne. Compendium, at the meeting (...) the Rivers, Aisne and Oyse, above
Eig^ Leagues North-East of Senlis, was built (...) the Romans, or at least
before the Fren^ mastered the Gauls. It Is still a considerab^^ Town, and has
often been the Residence o^ the French Kings; for Clotaire I. died, a^^ was
buried there in 564, and the Empero^ Charles the Bald repaired and increased i^
and called it after his Name, Carlop^^ Charles VI. took it from the Duke of
B^^gundy, in 1415, and Fifteen years after the same Duke besieging this Town,
assisted by the English, the Virgin of Orleans was taken in a Sally. Besides
King Cloatire, Lewis II and V. and Henry III. have been inter^^^ in this Town;
in which are made sever^^ Manufactures, and whence a great quantity of Wood is
carried down to Paris.

Soissonnois.
The Diocese of Soissons above the River Aifne has the Duchy of Valois on the
West, Laonnois and Champaigne on the West, Brie on the South, and Picardy on
the North Soissons its Capital City is a very Ancient City, for in Caesar's time
it was already the Head of the Suessiones, whose Jurisdiction was pretty large:
William the Britain, a Latin Poet of France, who lived in the Thirteenth Age,
says that it was built by some banished Sueves, who imposed that Name upon it.
Whatever it may be, sure it is, that when Coesar subdued the Gauls, Soissons
had Twelve other Towns under it, and could put Fifteen Thousand Men in Arms,
which were Smeden in their Capital. During the Roman Emperors, the Praetors of
Belgic Gaul made their ordinary Residence in this City, and under the French
Kings of the first Race, it has been some time the Capital of a Kingdom of that
Name. It is yet somewhat big, and as a Bayliwick, Presidial and generality, and
an Academy of Humane Learning; which was the first that was associated to that
of Paris. It Is Bishop is the first Suffragan to the Archbishop of Rheims, he
has the right of anointing the French Kings in the absence of his Metropolitan,
and has sometimes performed that Office. This Diocese has Seventeen Parochial
Churches besides the Cathedral, Six Abbyes in the Town, and Eighteen in the
Country thereabouts, and several Monasteries. It Is Territory is fruitful in
Corn, with which Paris is chiefly provided.

Laonnois.
Laon was but at the beginning a Castle seated on the top of a Hill, and called
by the Inhabitants, Laudunum, and Lugdimum Clavatum, in the Territory of
Rheims. Clovi^ the great increased it into a City, and St. Remy, Archbishop of
Rheims erected it into a Bishopric, making his Friend Genebaut, Partner of the
Gifts and Possessions he had received from that Prince. Hugh Capet made this
Bishop the Second of the Six Ecclesiastical Dukes and Peers of France, because
th^^ Prelate had betrayed into his hands Charles of Lorrain his Competitor.
This is related by Du Chesne; but if it be true, it is a wonder how this Bishop
is not mentioned among the Suffragans of Rheims, in a Notice or Catalogue of
Bishops ending at the year 1220, and that in others of latter Date, all quoted
by Valesius, he is put in the last rank Whatever it may be, this Prelate
assumes still the Title of Duke of Laon, Peer of France, and Count of Anisy,
and it appears that he had already some Temporal Jurisdiction in 1112, since
Waldric Bishop of Laon was then killed, endeavoring to keep his Citizens from
entering into an association, they had sworn against the Kings Consent. Another
named Roger fared better in an undertaking of the same Nature; for at the head
of some Troops, he routed his Diocesans, who had sworn an Association with the
French King Lewis the Burly's leave. This Town was besieged Twice, by Lewis IV.
who was taken Prisoner there. This Diocese has Two places, renowned for many
pretended Miracles: The first is Nostre-Dame-de-Liesse, or our Lady of Joy; the
second is called St. Marcoul, whether the French Kings must needs undertake a
Pilgrimage, immediately after their coming to the Crown, if they will get the
power of curing the King's Evil.

Noyonnois.
Noyon is seated betwixt Three small Brooks, called La Versette, La Golle, and
La Marguerite, near the River Oyse, Nine Leagues East of Laon, and almost Eight
of Scissons: It Is an Ancient City, called by the Latins, Noviomagus. The
Bishopric of St. Quentin was transferred thither, in 524, after the Town had
been ruined by the Vandals. This Prelates Jurisdiction was formerly very great,
since all Flanders depended on him, before Tournay was erected into a
Bishopric in 1146. However the Bishop of Noyon is still one of the Ancient
Counts and Peers of France. This City has had several misfortunes, for it was
plundered by the Normans in 859, and burned three times, viz. in 1131, 1152,
and 1228: Notwithstanding it is yet a considerable Town well built, and has
Four Suburbs. King Henry the Great took it from the Leaguers in 1591, but the
Duke of Mayen having retaken it, Two years after the King besieged and took it
again in 1594. In 1516. a Treaty of Peace was negotiated there, between Francis
I. and Charles of Austria, since Emperor, and Calvin was born in it the 10th.
of July 1509.

Chauny Contraginnum, and Calniacum upon the River Oyse, Three Leagues East of
Noyon, is a Royal Town, and the Head of a Castelny. After the Battle of St.
Lawrence in 1557, the Imperialists, having taken several Towns in Picardy, put
a strong Garrison in Chauny, it being a Key of the Oyse.

CHAP. V. Of Picardy.
THIS Province has the Isle of France on the South, Champaign, Haynaut, and
Flanders on the East, the County of Artoys and the Streights of Dover on the
North; the British Sea and Normandy on the West. It is one of the principal
parts of the Ancient Belgae: Though the Name of Picardy be Modern, and its
Original contested. The Opinion that seems to me the more reasonable, is that
of Adrian de Valois, who derives it from Pique and se Piquer, to have a Pick,
or to be passionate. He conjectures that it was first a Nickname given by the
Scholars of the University of Paris to their Fellows of that Province. And
indeed we see that it was first the Surname of some Private Men, as of one
Clement in 1023, and one William in 1099; and that in process of time it became
at last the name of the whole Province, as may be read in Nicolas de Bray,
about the year 1215. Besides that the French, especially in those Ages, were
wont to end in ard, the words signifying the defects of the mind, as Babillard,
Bavard, Musard, Fetard, etc. It was formerly one of the greatest Governments of
France, before the Country of Beauvaifis, Noyon, Soissons. Valois, and Laon
were taken from it. To make amends, the County of Artois, which by the Peace of
Nimeguen in 1677, was wholly yielded to France, has been added to it, together
with the old Conquests of Landrecy, Quesnoy, and Avenes, in Hainaut.

This Country is extraordinary fruitful in Corn, and has the convenience to
send it away by Sea to Paris, and other places; whence it is esteemed the chief
Granary of the Isle of France; but there grows no Wine; either because the
Inhabitants neglect to plant Vines, or rather that the Country is too cold.
There is a great number of Nobility, and of the Antientest in the Kingdom,
which has propagated in them the Martial Humor of the Ancient Belgae: Its
Inhabitants are said to be free, civil, generous, and good Natured, but
somewhat (...) passionate.

As to the Seats of Justice, Elizabe^^ Charles VI. Queen, erected a Soveraig^
Court of Justice, or Parliament at Amie^^ during her Regency; but as the
Parliame^^ of Paris had an ill Eye upon this instit^tion, which restrained its
Jurisdiction (...) narrower limits, and that the Supreme Power did not remain
long in her hands, (...) did not this Parliament likewise long subs^^^ So that
all the Bayliwicks, Presidials, an^ Justices of this Province are still
resorting to the Parliament of Paris. Part (...) this Country, viz. all that is
beyond the River Sum was formerly alienated from (...) Crown of France, by
Charles VII. a^^ yielded for ever to the Duke of Burgundy, (...) 1435.

Picardy is divided by some into upper a^^ lower, but the most common and easy
Division is into Seven Precincts or Countyes, which last shall I follow here,
goin^ from the East to the West, and from the South to the North; their Names
are Tierache, Vermandois, Santerre, Amienois, Ponthicu, Boulenois, Pais
Reconquis, or the Recovered Country.

Its Rivers are besides the Oyse, that has already been described: The Serre
that comes from the Borders of Champaigne, washes Crecy, and mixes with the
Oyse at La-Fere. The Sum, that takes it source in ^ermandois, at a place
called Fonsomme, washes St. Quintin, Ham, Peronne, ^orbie, receives the Avregne
increased with the Noye, goes through Amitens; ^ext to it receives the Celle,
washes Pequigny, Abbeville; and near its mouth being increa^ed with the Try,
Damboise, Damerise, falls unto the Ocean at St. Vallery. The May ^omes from
Gapennes near the Forest of ^recy, makes a Lake between Bernay and ^ue, and
discharges it self into the Sea, Six ^^r Seven Leagues from its Source. The
Authie rises in the Amienois, at a place called Chasteau d' Authie, goes
through Dourlans, ^ompierre, Douriers, Nempont, and runs into ^he Sea five
Miles North of Crotoy, and Six South-West of Montreuil. The Canche ri^es in
Arroys, near Hermanville, washes Estree, H^sdin, Montreuil, and discharges it
self into ^he Sea near Estaples. Lianne is a small Ri^er of the Boulenois, upon
which Boulogne is ^eated. Ostouvre, Veredicque and Souduvre, are Three small
Rivers of the Recovered Country, which join together Two or Three Miles above
Calice, and then fall into the Sea.

Tierache.
This Country, the most Easterly of Picardy is full of Woods, and has taken its
Name from a Forest called Teoracia Sy^^ which separates it from Hainaut on the
Nort^-West. It has several considerable Tow^ whereof Guise upon the Oyse is
accounted t^^ Capital. It was formerly a County, an^ the ordinary Portion of
the youngest So^ of the House of Lorrain, but erected into (...) Duchy and
Peerdom by Francis I: on b^half of Claudius of Lorrain, in 1528. T^^ is that
same Family that would have usurp^ the Crown of France, on pretense of
Religion, for which purpose they raised sever^ Civil Wars in France, especially
that calle^ the Holy League, to exclude Henry of Bo^^bon, the Lawful Successor.

Seven Miles lower, along the Oyse, is the Town of Ribemont, Ribodi Mons. It
has a^^ Abbey under the Title of St. Nicholas des Pr^^ Ansell of Ribemont was
one of the Lords th^^ went to the Holy Land in 1096, and wa^ killed in the
Siege of the Castle of Ptolema^. Seven Miles still lower in a Marshy place,
where the Serre falls into the Oyse is the strong Town of La Fere, with thick
Brick-Walls, good Bastions, and Rampires, and a Castle. It was already a strong
hold i^ 958; so that it seems a Colony of the Ancient Francs, who called Fara
such Boroughs as were inhabited by one Family or Race, without mixture of any
other. During the Wars of the League, the Marquess of Maignelay, Governor of
that place, had: promised to restore it to the French King Henry IV. but he was
murdered before he could perform his promises. The Duke of Mayenn gave the
Government of La Fere to one Colas the Marquess's Murderer. Colas delivered it
afterward to the Spaniards, who allowed him to enjoy it under the Title of a
County; but Henry IV. got it from his hands in 1597, by a Capitulation, that
Colas subscribed with the Title of the Count of La Fere.

Four Leagues East of La Fere is the Town and Castle of Crecy, upon Serre,
Creciacum ad Saram; Seven Miles North-East of Crecy, the Town of Marle; Marna
Castrum, which had formerly a strong Castle, and its particular Lords, Mayor,
and Sworn Officers. Seven Miles to the North of Marle lies the Town of Vervins,
famous for a Treaty of Peace concluded there, between the French King Henry IV,
and Philip III. King of Spain, in 1598. Seven Miles Eastward is the Town of
Aubenton, upon a River of that Name, and at the same distance over against
Marle, the Town of Moncornet, Mons Cornutus, or the Horn-Mountain, because it
is seated upon the Two Tops of a Mountain, that have the shape of a pair of
Horns.

La Cappelle is a strong Town on the Frontiers of Haynaut, Seven Miles North of
Vervins, built in the last Age to stop the Incursions of the Netherlanders. It
has b^^ often taken and re-taken by the Spania^^ and the French. There are some
other plac^ less considerable, as Hierson, Iritio, abo^^ Five Leagues from the
Source of the Oy^^ it was ruined under the last Reign by (...) Spaniards.
Estree-au-pont Strata ad Pon^^ on the same River, Two Leagues South of L^
Cappelle. Rosoy, Rosetum 2 Leagues North-E^^ of Moncornet. S. Michael and
Foifny, Two A^byes; the first of St. Bennets, the second (...) Cisteaux. Fleo
Major, le grand Floyon, (...) Native Country of S. Vrsmar, Abbot (...) Lob, Le
Petit-Floyon, Autrepe, Altaripa. A^ this Country depends for the Spiritual
(...) the Bishop of Laon, except Ruminiacum, (...) the Borders of Champaign,
Three Mile^ South-East of Aubenton, which is under the Archbishop of Rheims.

Vermandois.
This Country, which retains still the Name of its Ancient Inhabitants, called
by Caesar Veromandui, was much larger than (...) is now, since it comprehended
the Dioce^^ of Noyon, Soissons, and Laon, but now it ha^ not above Six Leagues
East and West, and Nine or Ten North and South. I shall not determine whether
St. Quentin upon the Sum is the Augusta Veromandu^um of the Ancients, or
whether it be Vermand upon the ^ronignon, that is now but an Abbey. The ^urious
may consult Cluvier and Sanson, who ^aintain the last Opinion, and de Valois,
^ho defends the first. Sure it is that St. Quentin has got its Name from one
Quin^inus, who was Bishop of that Town, and ^s said to have been beheaded there
under ^he Empire of Dioclesian. Before the Bishopric was transferred to Noyon,
the Colle^late Church of St. Quintin was a Cathedral. This Town was formerly a
County belonging to the Counts of Vermandois, but (...) was reunited to the
Crown of France, ^ome time after the year 1156. In 1557 the Spaniards, knowing
that St. Quintin was ^nprovided with Men, and ill fortified, laid siege before
it. The Admiral of Coligny had got into the place with a few Troops, and his
Name and Valor were for some time the best ^ampier of that Town, which says
Morery, as partial as he is against the Protestants, was not able without him
to withstand such an Army Four and Twenty Hours. The High Constable of
Montmorency, attempting the relieving of this place, was defeated, and taken
Prisoner with the Dukes of Mon^pensier and Longueville, the Marshal of St.
Andre, Ten Knights, Three Hundred Gentlemen, and Five Thousand Soldiers. The
Number of the Dead was not less, and because this Ba^^le was fought the 10th.
day of August; it was called the Battle of (...) Lawrence; in memory of which,
Philip I King of Spain, dedicated to that Saint t^^ Palace called the Escurial
near Madrid. The Victory made the Spaniards Masters of a^ Vermandois, and the
Diocese of Noyon. Ho^ever St. Quentin was restored to the Fren^ by the Peace of
Chateau-Cambresis in 155^ though this Treaty was not much otherwi^ to the
Honor of France.

Three Leagues South of St. Quentin (...) the Durchy of St. Simon, and Three
Mil^ farther the Town of Ham, both upon the Sum. This last is strong and well
fortifi^^ being built in a Plain, and having the R^ver on one side, and a Marsh
on the other^ a Citadel with Four Bastions, and a Squa^^ Tower: It was fitst a
Borough built b^ the Ancient French, since Ham in the German Tongue signifies
a Borough. Durin^ the Wars of the League, the Lord of M^^ Gomeron, Governor
of the place, dying (...) 1595, his Three Sons went to Bruxels (...) demand
their Arrears; and were detaine^ Prisoners by the Spaniards till they should
deliver the Castle into their hands* B^^ Dorvilliers their Brother by the
Moth^^ side, whom they had entrusted with (...) Government of the Town in their
absen^ would not consent to it, and having call'^ the Nobility of Picardy to
his help, H^^ was taken by Storm, and the Spanish Garr^son cut into pieces.

The Castelet is a strong Fortress on the Fron^^ of Cambresis, which was
restored to the ^^ch by the Peace of Pyrenees, in 1659.

Santerre.
^Oing Westwards from the Castelet, you enter into the Country of Santerre,
which ^e call Seme-terre, because of its fertility. ^is above twenty two
Leagues Northwest, Southeast, and but seven or eight East and ^st where it is
broadest. Peronne, its ^pital, five leagues South-West of Castelet, al^^st
seven West of St. Quintin, and eleven East (...) Amiens, is a very strong Town,
both by ^son of its situation upon the River, and a^ng Marshes, and of its
Fortification. It was (...) a Village wherein Erchinoald, Mayor of the ^ace
built a Monastery 1070, on behalf of (...) Irish Monk, called Furseus, whence
it got (...) name of the Abbey of the Scots. King Charles (...) VII. had yielded
Peronne to Philip the good ^ke of Burgundy, in 1435; however, that ^ewd
Politician King. Lewis the XI. was so ^sident as to come to Peronne, in order
to ^ferr with Charles the Rash, the then Duke of ^rgundy, at the same time that
he had raised (...) Liegemen against him. This Prince, tho (...) otherwise very
cunning, made use of so fa^^rable an occasion, kept the King a Prisoner, ^ced
him to yield Champaign and Brie to his ^other, and brought him before Liege, to
be ^ectator of his Victory, as really he was; for, that City was taken by
Storm, ransacked burnt the 30th. of October 1468.

Eleven miles West of Peronne is the T^ of Ancre, upon a River of that Name; it
(...) the Title of Marquizate, and is known at (...) sent under the name of
Albert.

In 1600, a Florentin, called Concino C^^ came out of Italy, under the Quality
of Ge^man Usher to Mary of Medicis, Henry the IV. Queen, and by his shrewdness,
or good p^ came to be Marquess of Ancre, Lord Marsh^^ France, Governor of
Normandy, and the ^tadel of Amiens, and to have the chief ma^ment of Affairs
under the minority of K. L^ XIII: But at last, either by Envy, misusi^^ his
Favor, or the weakness of that Mona^ who, as Bassompiere expressly observes,
con^^ed to his Death; he was murdered by a Con^racy of the Great, upon the
Drawbridge of ^vre, the 24th. of April 1617.

Moreuil upon the Auregne, is above (...) leagues Southwest of Peronne, and
Mondidier (...) This last is strong, has a particular Govern^ and has often
repulsed the Spaniards. (...) Town of Roye is four leagues Northeast of
^^dider. It is a Lordship, which has given (...) Name to the noble Family of
Roye, that sub^ from the tenth or eleventh Century. Cre^^ is a small Town, with
the Title of a Marqui^^ 8 leagues West of Mondidier. Nesle is an^^ small Town,
which has given the Title of M^quess to a noble and Ancient Family in t^
Country, whence are issued high Constables France, as Raoul de Nesle, under
Philip the b^ It is situated upon the little River Igno^^, ^gnon, above four
Leagues South of Peronne, and ^e miles North-east of Roye. It was taken by
^arles the rash, last Duke of Burgundy, in 1472, ^d all its Inhabitants were
either put to the lord, hanged, or had their Fists cut off, be^use they had
killed one of the Dukes Heralds, whom he sent to summon them, and withal two
^his men during a Truce. Chaunes, a Duchy ^d Peerdom, erected by Lewis XIII.
in 1621. ^scituated between Nesle and Peronne. Halluin, (...) Maignelay, is
another Duchy and Peerdom, ^rdering to Beauvaisis, six leagues South-west
(...) Roye.

Amienois.
THIS Country is otherwise called Proper Picardy, and is extended about ten
leagues ^^st and West, where it is broadest, and twen^^ North and South: But
formerly it reached ^uch farther, as appears yet by the Jurisdicti^^ of the
Bishop of Amiens, which compre^ends, besides this Country, that of Vimeux and
Ponthieu, and a good part of the County of ^rtois: It is watered with several
Brooks and ^ivers, and beautified with diverse small Woods. ^he first Town you
meet with coming from ^anterre, is the Town of Corbie upon the Sum, ^ear its
receiving another small River, that ^kes here the name of Corbie. It has the
Title ^f a County, and was but at the beginning an Abbey founded by King
Clotaire the III. and his Queen Bathilde, in 662. The famous Rair^ who opposed
the monstrous Tenet of Tran^stantiation in its very Birth, was Monk in (...)
Abbey. Corby is yet a strong Town, which (...) Spaniards had surprised in 1636;
but so^time after being besieged in it, and streight^ by the French, it is said
that they wrote to Pri^ Thomas of Savoy their General, in the follow^ words, O
Lord have mercy on us, as we have tr^ed in thee: Fiat miserecordia tua, Domine,
s^^ nos quem ad modum speravimus in te.

Four Leagues farther upon the same Ri^^ is the Town and Bishopric of Amiens,
suff^ ^gan to Rheims, and Capital of this whole G^vernment: Its Foundation is
uncertain, tho (...) be very Ancient, since the Ambiani, who dou^^less signify
the Inhabitants of the Ami^^ were already powerful in Caesar's time. The
Capital was then called Samarobriva, a Gaul^ name, that signifies Samara's
bridge, for the ^ver Sum was then called Samara, and aft^wards Sumina; as
Samarobriva it self lost (...) name in process of time, and took that of
A^biani from its Inhabitants. Several Roman E^peror^ strove to beautify it,
and some took (...) for their Residence-place, when they were (...) the Gauls;
but in the fifth, sixth, and follo^ing Ages, it was much annoyed and impaire^
by the Incursion of the Alains, Vandals, a^^ Normans, so far, that it was
almost wholly bu^^ed in 925. In 1329, Edward III. King of En^land, made here
homage to King Philip of V^lois, for the Dukedom of Guyenne, and Coun^^ of
Ponthieu, in the presence of the Kings (...) Aragon, Navarr, Bohem, and
Majorque, (...) were then gathered to undertake a Journey and ^litary
Expedition into the Holy Land. This ^onarch began to fortify Amiens in 1347,
but (...) was Lewis XI. who brought this Design to ^y perfection. In the Month
of March 1597, ^e Spaniards took this City by a War-strata^m, having caused a
Cart full of Nuts to be ^oken, as by chance, within one of the Gates, ^d while
the Garrison was gathering the ^nts, and the Gate could not be shut, the Spa^sh
Army that was hard by fell upon them, ^d mastered the Town. But Henry IV.
retook (...) with plain Force before the end of the Year, ^d then raised there
a Citadel, which was ^counted in his time one of the best, and most ^gul^r in
Europe: This City has a Bailiwick, ^residial and Generality: Its Rampires are
a^orned with great Alleys of Trees. The River ^omme enters into the Town by
three Chan^^ls, and serves for the use of several Manufa^ures: Its Cathedral is
one of the biggest and ^nest in the Kingdom: There they make a ^ow of several
pretended Relics, as the Bo^y of St. Firmin, first Bishop of Amiens in
Dio^esian's time, of St. Dominick, of St. John the ^aptists head. Amiens had
during an Age or ^wo, its particular Counts, but they were de^rived of their
Sovereignty by Lewis the Burly, about the year 1109.

Pequigni, three leagues almost from Amiens, upon the same River, is remarkable
for the Death of William, surnamed Long-sword, Duke ^f Normandy, whom Baldwin
Count of Cambray, ^r Arnoul Count of Flanders caused to be killed ^here: And
for defeat of the English, who were known in a Pass from the French, bec^^ they
could not pronounce the word Pequi^^ as directly as a Frenchman born. Add to
(...) that the Steward of the Bishopric of A^^^ bears the Title of Vidame of
Pequigni.

Four leagues South of Amiens, is the Pr^cipality of Conti upon the River
Celle, and ^miles more Eastwards the Principality of (...) upon the same River;
they are both s^^ but very pleasant, because of the many W^^ and Game with
which they abound.

Two leagues East of Poix, on the Frontier (...) Normandy, three miles
North-west of A^^^ lies the Borough and Lordship of Ligneres, (...) famous for
having given its name to the Fa^^ of that late Traitor Bartholomew of Grandval,
(...) at the instigation of the French King, and (...) Counselors, would have
murdered His M^sty William III. King of Great Britain.

Seven leagues almost on the North of A^ens, lies the strong Town of Dourlens,
or D^lens, Donincum upon the Authie near the bord^ of Artoys: It was already a
Strong-hold in (...) when the French K. Raoul took it upon one ^ribert. It
belonged afterward to the Co^^ of Ponthieu; but was yielded by the Cou^^ Mary
to Lewis VIII in 1225, and since ali^^ted from the Crown of France, and given
(...) Philip III. Duke of Burgundy, in 1435, and (...) united to it in 1463,
Antony of Bayencourt e^joyed Dourlens in the last Age, but the Ki^^ Attorney
seized on it, in 1559, and caused it (...) be reunited to the Royal Demesne.
Dourle^s (...) divided into high and low Town, both very w^ fortified.

Vimeux.
^Amson the Father confounds this Country with that of Ponthieu; but more
modern Geo^phers, as Rob and Samson the Son distinguish ^em, and the Learned
Collections of Adrian (...) Valois, in his Notitia Galliarum, are agreeable
(...) it. According then to the last Pagus Vine^cus, the Land of Vimeux is
included between ^nienois and Normandy, from which it is se^^rated by the River
Bresle, called likewise Au^^, and betwixt the Sea and the River Sum ^at
divides it from the County of Ponthieu: ^s extended above 14 leagues East and
West, ^om Molien le Vidame in Amienois to Cayeu on ^e Sea-cost, and 5 North and
South from S. ^^lery to Bauchen upon the Bresle. S. Valery ^^e Capital is
seated on a Hill, near a Bay made ^y the mouth of the Sum, and called S.
Valery ^r mer, to distinguish it from another Sea-town (...) Normandy, called
S. Valery en Caux, or S. Va^ry les Plains. It Is Port is not extremely good,
because of the great quantity of Downs that ^re about it; neither are Cayeu
Cadocum, Augst (...) Augusta better, tho they seem to have formerly ^een of
some Consideration. Notwithstanding ^he Country is filled with a vast number
of Villages and good Buroughs, whereof the chief ^re Bauchen, Gamaches, a
Marquizate, Anssennes, and Sennerpont, all upon the Bresle: Arguel, Riencour,
Oysemont, Bailleul, whence John de Bailleul, that became King of Scotland,
w^^ther Lord, or Ordinary, or of another ^leul in the Country of Dieppe.

Ponthieu.
THis County, included between the Ri^^ Sum and Canche on the South and No^^
the Ocean on the West, Amienois and Artoi^^ the East, is about nine leagues
East and W^^ and nine or ten North and South: It is wa^^ed with many fine
Rivers, as the Sum, (...) May, Authie, etc. It was in former A^^ but thinly
inhabited, because of the m^^ Woods that almost took up the whole Country, but
its now very thick peopled, t^ there be still several Forests. This County
(...) been often given in Portion to the C^^dren of the French Kings, and has
had bef^^ its particular Counts, since the tenth Centu^^ In 1279, Eleanor of
Castile, Heiress of Ponth^^ was Married to Edward I. King of England, (...)
brought this County to these Monarchs, wh^ was the occasion of many bloody Wars.

Abbeville, upon the Sum, is the Cap^^ of this County, eight or nine leagues
Nort^west of Amiens. It is one of the biggest a^ strongest in this Province,
and some will (...) it was never taken, for which reason they (...) it the
Faithful, or the Virgin City of that Co^^trey: It has a Bailiwick, Presidial,
five Ga^^ twelve or thirteen great Parishes, and seve^ Monasteries. The River
Sum, and the small ^ver Cardon, which discharges it self into it, ^ake it a
great Trading Town, and give it the ^nveniency of exchanging its Linen, Cloth,
^ooll, and Corn for other Commodities, that ^e brought in Boats from the Sea
into the very ^own. It Is uncertain in what time this City ^as built, for I find
no mention made of it be^^re the tenth Century, That Hugh Capet gave (...) in
Portion to his Daughter Giselle. How^er, it seems by the Original of the Name
of ^bbeville, Abbattis villa, that it was built by ^me Abbot of St. Riquier,
for there is yet a ^own of that Name two leagues North-east, ^on the River
Cardon, which Opinion Adrian (...) Valois seems to confirm.

Abbeville has lately produced the best Geo^aphers of France, as Nicolas
Sanson, who dy^^ 1667, William Sanson his Son, and Peter du ^l, who are yet
alive for ought I know, and the ^esuit Philip Briet who died in 1669. It is
said, ^at in 1636. some Women disguised in Men's ^oaths fought the Spaniards
near S. Riquier, ^d brought away two of their Colors.

Nine miles North-west of Abbeville, on the ^orthside of the mouth of the
Sum, is the Sea^ort Town Le Crotoy. Two leagues South east (...) Abbeville,
is an important passage in an ^land formed by the same River, called
Pont^-Remi, near to which are to be seen the re^ains of one of Caesar's Camps.
Rue upon the ^aye, five leagues North-west of Abbeville, is a ^rong Town by
reason of its situation, being ^viron'd with Marshes, and having a Pond or
^ake on the East Side.

Near the source of the same River, is (...) Borough of Crecy, which gives its
name (...) Forest hard by, but is much more famous (...) a Battle fought there
between the English (...) the French, in 1346, King Edward III. co^ into
Ponthieu, of which he was Lord, enc^^ed at the Village of Crecy: King Philip of
V^ came to encounter him on the 26th. of A^g^ But the last was totally routed,
and left 30^^ Foot upon the spot, and 1200 Horse; be^^ that, he lost fourscore
Colors, and the F^^^er of his Nobility, as John of Luxenburg, (...) of Bohem.
Charles Count of Alencon, the Ki^^ Brother, Raoul Duke of Lorrain, the Count
(...) Flanders, Harcourt, and Sanserre, the Dauph^^ Viennois, etc: But the
greatest mischief for (...) French, was, that a Fog having kept them s^^ the
sight of the Enemy till nine or ten a Cl^ in the morning, the English in the
mean w^ planted the Colors they had taken f^^ them upon a height, which the
decei^^ French taking for their own, resorted to the and received a greater
overthrow than the (...) day. Their dead Bodies were Interred by K^ Edward's
order, at Monstreuil, and the bur^^ lasted 3 days.

Crecy had formerly a Royal House, wh^ Ebroin Mayor of the Palace besieged,
when (...) Warred against K. Thierry, and his Mayor L^^^sius, and took both the
King and the Town, Fredegarius relates. The Town of Monstre^^ situated upon
the Canche, nine leagues (...) of Abbeville, five North-west of Crecy, and t^^
East of the Sea. It was but at first a Villa^ which increased into a Town by
the buil^^ (...) a Castle and of a Monastery, by S. Salvius ^^shop of Amiens,
where he would be Intterr'd, ^d whence it has gotten the name of Monaste^^lum,
Monstreuil, or Monstrelet. Besides, there ^e still two Ancient Abbyes of St.
Bennets Or^r, one of Monks, and the other of Nuns. ^ng Philip I. having
divorced from him his ^ife Berthe, sent her away to this Town, upon which he
assigned her Dowry, and where ^e dyed in 1093. Monstreuil is divided into ^pper
and lower Town, and has a strong Cit^del and Baillwick: Great B^ats can go up
^he River, by the help of the Tide, to this ^own.

Boulenois.
THis County is but 13 or 14 leagues long, North and South, and about 7 broad
East and West. It was Anciently inhabited by the Morini: as well as Teronane,
if it be true that Boulogne is the Gesoriacum of Pliny and Ptolomy. It is still
the most mountainous part of Picardy, especially along the Coast, which render
them almost unaccessible: However, it does not want either Woods or Rivers, and
affords such a good race of Horses, that the Inhabitants can furnish 3000
Troopers. It was erected into a County together with St. Paul, Guines and
Artois, by Charles the Bald, Emperor and King of France, when he married his
Daughter Judith to Baldwin Ironside Count of Flanders, in 863. The County of
Boulogne was successi^ enjoyed by several illustrious Houses, wh^^ allied
themselves at one time or other with (...) Kings of England, France and
Portugal, but fi^^ly remained to the Counts of Auvergne. T^^ last of them
called Bertrand the second, exch^^ged it with Lewis XI. for the County of
La^^gais, in 1477; and that this Agreement mig^^ never be broken, the shrewd
King prese^^ our Lady of Boulogne with it. In 1544. H^^ VIII. King of England
took Boulogne, fortified (...) lower Town of it, and built several Forts i^ the
Country; but seeing that the keeping (...) this Town would cost him much more
than (...) was worth, he agreed with the French King Henry II. to restore it to
him, for the Summe^ 80000 Crowns, to be paid in eight Years. The Treaty was
concluded in 1549, but I do not he^^ that is was ever performed as to the
paying o^^^ the money.

Boulogne, Capital of this County, is a Se^port, formerly Renowned for being
the ordinary passage from Gaul into Great Britain, b^^ at present not very
commodious; some say the it was spoiled by a Bank that the Emperor Maximinian
caused to be raised before it. It is divided into upper and lower Town, and
seated upon the River Liane, sixteen leagues north of Abbeville. It has a
Bishopric, suffragan to Rheims since the year 1566, nine years after that
Teroanne was razed: But De Valois pretends that the Bishopric was rather
restored to that City, or fired in it, than instituted anew, because those
Prelates were styled Bishops of Boulogne and Teroanne, that the first as well
as the last are called Givit^^ Morinorum, and that the name of City is never
given by Ancient Authors, but to an Episcopal See. There was formerly near the
Haven an Octogone Tower, called in French la Tour d'Ordre, and by the English
the Old man; its said to have been built by Caesar. It was eighty foot in
Circuit, and Charlemaign looking upon it as a fit place for a Beacon, caused it
to be repaired; but his Successors given either to Wars or to Pleasures,
suffered it to decay so far, that it fell some 20 years ago. The most
considerable Buildings of Boulogne are the Citadel, the Cathedral Church of
our Lady, to whom the French Kings at their coming to the Crown, are bound to
offer a Heart of pure Gold, weighing 2000 golden Crowns. There are besides the
Parochial Churches of St. Nicholas and St. Joseph, the Abbey of St. Willmore,
and the Palace where the Baily keeps his Seat: Some take Boulogne for the
Portus Iccius of Caesar; but Adrian de proves that it is the Gesoriacum of
Pliny, which name about Constantine the Great's time changed into that of
Bononia.

The other Towns and considerable Buroughs are Bournonville, Monthulin upon or
near the Liane, four or five leagues East of Boulogne, Ambleteuse, a Seaport
two leagues north of the same; its the same that Beda calls Amfleat or Amfleot,
which denotes a place where the Sea ebbs and flows. Estaples, Stapulae, upon
the mouth of the Canche, almost six leagues south of Boulogne. De Valois
believes it to be the Portus Iccius of Caesar, because Ptolomy distinguishes
Portus Iccius from Gesoriacum, and puts them in the Country of the Morini.
It Is a small Town well fortified, famous for being the Native Country of James
le Fevre, who for his Learning did deserve the Praises of the Roman Catholics,
tho he was one of the chief Promoters of the Reformation.

The Recovered Country.
THat which the French call Pais Reconquis, is a small Tract of Land that has
not above five leagues in length North and South, and as much East and West,
where it is broadest, coming from Boulogne, you enter into the Principality of
Ardres, Arda or Ardea, the chief Town of which is seated upon a Hill, and
divided into upper and lower, both well fortified. Before the year 1067, it was
but a Village erected into a Town out of the Ruins of the Castle of Selnesse,
by one Arnoul Lord of that place, or as others pretend, by one Arnold, Lord of
Ardres, with the Consent of Baldwin Count of Guines, by reason of the great
number of Shepherds who resorted to that place for its excellent
Pasture-ground. In 1520 Francis I. and Henry VIII. had an Interview near this
Town; their Court was so brisk, and their Attendants so richly adorned, that
the place is yet called, The Field of the Golden Cloth. Cardinal Albert of
Austria took this Town in 1596, but restored it to the French King Henry IV.
three years after, by the Treaty of Vervins.

Guisnes is a small Town 3 miles North-west of Ardres, and above 3 leagues from
the Sea. It has the title of a County, and formerly the Towns and Buroughs of
Ardres, Fiennes, Witsant, Andriae, Bredenarde, Sangate and Colemude depended on
it. Sifri a Dane took it from the Monks of Sithiu or S. Omer, and made homage
of it to Arnoul Count of Flandres, who countenanced him. Before the French took
it from the English, it was environed with strong Forts as Blanes, and St.
Inglevert. It came in the hands of the English under King John of France, the
same way that a late Conqueror has usurped so many Towns. The Governor of
Guisnes being gone to a Festival of the Knights of the Star, Edward K. of
England bought the Town from his Lieutenant. There was then a Truce between the
two Monarchs, and therefore the wronged King John would have resented this
match as a breach of it: But Edward answered, That this Assertion was contrary
to the doctrine of late Philip of Valois, the French Kings Father, for when an
English Traitor that would have sold to him the Town of Calice was discovered,
this Prince coldly answered, that such Negotiations did not break a Truce.

The County of Oy^ is separated from that of Guisnes by a small River, which
Duchesne calls a Channel drawn from the Sea. It Is a Country of about 4 leagues
in length, and 3 in breadth. Modern Geographers speak of some wavering Marshes
and swimming Islands between this Country, and that of Guisnes.

Calice is now one of the strongest Towns, and the very Key of France toward
England; for its Fortifications consist in nine great Bastions, besides those
of the Citadel, and several Outworks lined with stone. It has a double Ditch,
very large and deep, that can be filled with the River Hames, that runs along
its Walls. There is also a Marsh and several Brooks, that render the approach
of this Town very difficult; neither can one go to it, but upon the Causey or
madeway, called the Bridge of Nieullay. As to the Haven, its Entry is defended
by a Fort called the Risban, and it is divided into two; the smaller is called
Cadegray, the bigger is shut up by two Moles faced with stone. Five years ago
the present French King begun to build a Mole, upon great piles droven into the
sand, beneath the low-Water-mark, which will be 30 yards wide, and make an
Harbor fit to receive third or fourth Rates Men of War, whereas a good
Merchant-man cannot get into the present Havens: This Work, if once finished,
will be of dangerous consequence to the Trade of England, the rather for that
the Port of Dover is not capable of receiving Men of War, at least but at high
Spring-Tides. However, it is not yet so far advanced, but a stop may be put to
it by our Men of War. Calice is not very big, but well built, and well Peopled;
there is a Townhouse, the Palace of the Baily, the Tower of the Watch, and
several Churches: Calice was but a Borough before the Year 1228, that it was
Walled in by Philip Count of Boulogne. In 1347 King Edward III. besieged
Calice, which John of Vienne, its Governor defended 10 or 11 months; but being
almost starved, and having no hope of Relief, he proffered at last to
Capitulate, which the King of England refused, unless six of the chief Citizens
brought him the Keys bear-headed and barefoot, with Ropes about their necks,
and upon that condition, that he should have an Absolute power over their
Lives. Tho these Conditions seemed somewhat hard, and that those upon whom the
Lot of his Embassy should fall, might scarce hope to escape with their Lives,
however there were Men so Zealous for the public Good as willing to undertake
it: but the Generous Monarch of England sent them back without doing them any
wrong. The Town was Peopled with English, and remained in their power 200 and
ten years. The French had not been Masters of it 38 years, when the Cardinal of
Austria took it from them in 1596, but he restored it by the formentioned Peace
of Vervins.

CHAP. VI. Of Normandy, especially the Higher.
Though this Government comprehends only the Ancient Duchy and Peerdom of
Normandy, and the French Vexin has been cut off from it, however it is still one
of the biggest of France, being extended East and West from Aumale to the
Coasts of Coutantine above 62 leagues, and 40 three South and North-east from
Alencon on the Frontier of Maine, to the Town of Eu near the Coasts of Picardy.

As the Kingdom of France was very large under the first Race of their Kings,
since Clovis the great, and that youngest Sons had a share in the Succession to
the Sovereignty; so this Realm was divided into two great parts, whereof the
most Easterly, which reached from Picardy and Champaign to Upper Germany, or
from the Meuse to the Rhine, and beyond that River was called Ausstrie, or
Austrasie. The other more Westerly extended it self from Normandy the Isle of
France, and Beausse to the Coasts of that Kingdom, and was called Neustrasia,
Neustria, sometimes Neptricum, and in French Neustrie. It was at first included
between the Meuse and the Loire, then between the Seine and the Loire, and at
last this name was appropriated to the second Lyonnoise, considered as a part
of the Kingdom of Soissons, until the Year 912, that Raoul, or Rollon, a
Swedish or Norwegian Prince, having wholly subdued this Province, embraced the
Christian Faith, and settled himself there with the consent of Charles the
simple, King of France, and then Neustrie took the name of Normandy from its
Northern Conquerours.

The Normans began to show themselves under Charlemaign, by Privateering in
Low-Saxony, Freeze, and the Northern Coasts of France. Their strength increased
through the Weakness of Lewis the meek, for then they began to extort
Contributions from the Freezons: But the Civil Wars of Lewis's Sons made them
so bold as to undertake Conquests, which they at last performed under Charles
the simple.

This Ancient Dukedom has the Isle of France on the East, the British Sea on
the North and West, Bretaign and the Government of Orleanois on the South. It
is divided into upper and lower: The first contains the Roman Vexin, the
Countries of Roumois, Caux, and Bray, and the Bishopric of Evreux: The second
includes the Diocesses of Lizieux, Bayeux, Coutance, Avranches, and Seez. The
Soil is every where fruitful enough in Corn, Meadows, Hemp, Apples, Pears, and
all sorts of Fruits. There are a great many Forests, and several Iron-mines,
but there grows little or no Wine, except it be on the Southern parts toward
the Isle of France and Orleanois. This Province has many Noblemen, but the
Country people is extraordinary Oppressed, because the Tailles, or Impositions
are not real, or upon Lands, but personal; so that a Peasant that has nothing
to live upon but his Spade, must pay to the King ten or twelve Crowns yearly
for his head, and proportionably if he have a Family, though he be not the Richer
for that. True it is, that Provisions are cheap enough, especially Fish along
the Seacoast, and every where Cider, which is the ordinary drink of the
Country people; their chief Trade consists in Wood, Coals, Linen and Cattle,
and some Herbs fit for Dyers, which the Inhabitants call Garence, Guesde, and
Pastel.

The chief Rivers of Normandy, besides the Seyne, that has been mentioned
elsewhere, are the Bresle that comes from the borders of Picardy, washes
Aumale, Blangis, and falls into the Ocean at Eu, the Sart that runs into the
Sea at Criel, the Arques that receives the Eaune, and discharges it self into
the Sea at Dieppe, the S^ye and the Seane running to the Ocean not far from the
said Town; then you find the Aubette, the Robec, the Andelle, and the Epte,
which run all into the Seyne, on the north-side of it. O^ the South Side you
meet with the Eure, which comes from some Lakes in Beauce, on the Frontier of
the Bishopric of Seez, receives the Vaupillon, the Loupe, washes Chartres;
receives the Gas and the Blaise near Dreux; then increased with the Vegre and
the Iton, that goes through Evreux, falls into the Seyne at Pont-de-Larche: The
Rille comes from a Forest in the Diocese of Seez, hides it self into the Earth
near la Ferriere; then coming out, washes Beaumont le Roger, receives the
Carenton, and runs into the Sea two leagues North of Ponteau de Mer. The
Touques, receives the Lezon, the Orbec, washes Lisieux, Pont l'Evesque,
receives the Calonne, and falls into the Sea near a Town of the same name,
called Touques. The Dive receives the Ante, the Lesson, the Meance, the Vye,
and discharges it self into the Sea near St. Sauveur. The Orne comes likewise
from the Bishopric of Seez, and being increased with the Nereau, and Drance,
washes Pont d'Olly, Tury, receives the Oudon near Caen, and falls into the Sea
at Estrehan. Along the same Seacoast you find the Seille, which runs into the
Ocean between Gray and Barnieres: Then the Aure and the Drome, or Dronine,
which lose themselves into a great Ditch called Fosse du Soucy. The little
River of Triviers, the Vire and the Carenten run all three into a Bay of the
Ocean called Groin de la Dune; the Vire is the longest of all, washes St. Lo,
and receives the Elle; the Carenten is increased with the Rivers of Baupteys
and Ouve: Betwixt la Hogue and Barfleur runs the River Sart, and farther on the
North that of Cherbourg. On the West coast you meet with the Souille that
receives the Herouille, and the Burd, which go by Coutances. The Sea and the
Ardee fall both into the Bay of Avranches.

I would begin here the particular description of this Province, were it not
that I think my self Obliged to say something of the first Dukes of Normandy,
from whom our Kings of England are descended, and by the way to show the just
claim they may still lay to that Noble Dukedom their Ancient Patrimony. Raoul
having settled himself in Normandy, not only by Conquest and force of Arms, but
also by the voluntary yielding of Charles the simple, and his Marriage with
Gisele, Niece to that King, gave good Laws to his Subjects: Among others, that
the Poor might have right done to them without any Expense, he ordered, that
any Murderer, Robber, Incendiary, or any one that should pursue another with a
naked Sword, should be stopped, and brought before a Justice, without any other
Warrant than the Outcry of the Wronged Person. This is the Origin of what the
Normans call the Clamor of Haro, which they make use of, when they think
themselves wronged or oppressed, perhaps too often, as they are accused to be
of a litigious Temper. Howsoever it may be, Haro seems to be an abbridged word
for Ha Raoul, as though they would still implore the Justice of their first Duke.
Raoul took the name of Robert at his Baptism, was succeeded by William I.
surnamed Longsword in 917, or 920, and was succeeded by three Princes, named
Richard, Robert II. Son to the last of them in 1028. was Father to our William
the Conqueror, whom he got from Helen, Grand Daughter to Edmond Ironside, one
of our Saxon Kings, if we may believe Thomas Rudborn, who quotes several
Authors for this History. Thus England and Normandy were quietly enjoyed by our
Monarchs, till the French King Philip August taking hold of the Civil War,
which the English Barons raised against King John, deprived him of his Duchy
of Normandy, under pretense that he had caused his Nephew Arthur to be
murdered. It was reconquered by Henry V. but lost again under Henry VI. during
the Civil Wars between the Houses of York and Lancaster. However, it remains
uncontested, that this Province has been possessed successively by fourteen
Dukes of the same Race, six of whom were Kings of England.

I must not forget that the Normans are Witty and Ingenious, especially in
making Establishments, which their Envious Neighbors would find fault with,
and on that account stain them with Treachery. Their Country is so great and
so Populous, that there are reckoned a hundred Towns, and a hundred and fifty
considerable Buroughs: So that the Reader may not expect I should describe
them all, but only such as are most Eminent, and of which some Particulars are
come to my knowledge.

Norman Vexin.
THis Country was anciently inhabited by the Veliocasses, Velocasses or
Belocasses, whose Territories reached from the Andelle to the Oys^; but after
the Normans had conquered the best part of Neustrie, it was divided into two
parts, whereof that which obeyed the French King was called the French, and the
other the Norman Vexin. De Valois relates a remarkable thing, namely, that the
feuds between these two People are yet as great, as if they were still Enemies,
and had not the same Master; so that they seldom marry together, nor will they
Trade, or have any thing common one with another. The Norman Vexin confines
upon the Isle of France, from which it is separated by the River Epte. The
first considerable Town you meet with is Gisors, situated upon the same River,
fourteen leagues Northwest of Paris, with a Bailiwick resorting to the
Parliament of Rouen. Under the Reign of Philip I. King of France, William the
red King of England took it from a Knight called Payen, and fortified it in
1228. Henry III. King of England had an Interview between this Town and Try
with Philip August King of France, upon the news of the taking of Jerusalem by
Saladin: And having consulted about the means to recover the Holy Land, they
resolve to take the Cross, together with many other Princes, in memory of which
they erected a Cross in the Field where they had made this Agreement, and
promised one another to leave off their differences till their return.

Pont de l'^rche Pons arcus, eleven leagues almost West of Gisors, and seven
miles South of Rouen, is an important passage upon the Seyne, near the fall of
the Eure into it, and therefore it has a particular Governor. It was the first
Town which surrendered it self to Henry IV. after his coming to the Crown in
1589. D^ Chesne esteems that Pont de l'arche is the Castle Pistae, which
Charles the bald built to withstand the Incursions of the Normans; but most of
the other Geographers believe it to be one of these two neighboring places
Pistres or Poses.

Rouen, nine leagues South-east of the mouth of the Seyne, and above thirty
North-west of Paris, situated upon the same River, and is one (...) the
biggest, richest, and most populous Ci^^^s in that Kingdom, and the Capital of
Nor^^^dy. Its Archbishop calls himself Primate (...) that Province, has the
six Bishops of it un^^r him, and does not acknowledge the Me^^opolitan of Lions
since the Year 1457. The ^athedral Church under the Name of our La^^ has ten
Dignitaries, fifty Canons, eight pet^^ Canons, and a great number of Chaplains:
(...) has three great Towers; the first called the ^^ower of St. Romain is
covered with Lead, ^^d has one of the finest Steeples in the World, ^^ith 500
fifty steps; the second is called the ^^tter-Tower, built out of that Money
which ^ardinal George of Amboise, the Pope's Legate (...) France, gathered from
the Inhabitants to give ^^em leave of eating Butter in Lent; the third ^^ower
is all made of Wood, and raised upon a ^^orch with great Art. Duchesne speaks
of two ^^eat Bells; the first in the Tower of St. Ro^ain, is one of the biggest
in France, and bears ^^e name of George of Amboise, who caused it to (...)
made; the other is in the Wooden Tower. (...) this Church are also to be seen
the Mausoleys, (...) Sepulchers of the Dukes of Normandy, and (...) the
Archbishops of that City, a white Mar^^e Statue of the French King Charles V.
and ^^at of the Count of Bedford, who was Prote^or of France during 13 years,
under our Hen^^ VI. He is represented on Horseback, upon ^^s Monument, in the
Chapel of the Virgin ^ary, behind the great Altar. Lewis XI. visit^^g this
Church, some body told him, It was (...) shame that so great an Enemy to his
Crown should have so fine a Tomb, and that he (...) to be removed from thence:
No, answered French King, It is well that he lies the for if he were alive he
would frighten (...) away.

There is likewise a Chapel under the (...) of the Saints Innocents, where is
repres^^^ St. Romain, Archbishop of Rouen in the (...) Century, with a Dragon
he is said to have ^^vercome. This History is too remarkable (...) to be
mentioned, and tho it be perhaps rel^^ in a fabulous manner, however there must
(...) be something of truth, because of a C^^^ that is still kept to this day.
In the Forre^^ Rouvray near the Suburbs of Rouen was a S^^ which much annoyed
Men and Beasts: (...) Pious Prelate resolved to rid his Citizen (...) this
Monster, and as no body was willing to company him, he got two condemned
Cr^^nals, a Thief and a Murderer, to go a^ with him; as soon as the Serpent
perce^^ them, it ran to devour them, whereupon (...) Thief took the flight, but
the Saint not afrighted, threw his stole at the Monsters (...) which so well
twisted it self about it, that fettered Monster was forced to follow the
^^derer, who brought him as a tied Dog (...) the great market of the Town,
where it (...) burned, and its Ashes thrown into the ^^ver.

It would be uncivil to ask whether the ^^^minal was pardoned: But St. Oven did
(...) for being Lord Chancellor to King Dag^^^ and Successor to St. Romain, he
obtained (...) his Master, that a Fortnight before Asc^^^ (...), four Canons
with their four Chaplains should have leave to visit the King's Prisons, (...)
supersede all extraordinary proceedings a^^inst them, to hear their
Confessions, and (...) to deliver whomsoever they pleased, which is performed
every year on the said As^^sion day, with a great deal of Ceremony. ^^e
released Prisoner is obliged to nothing ^^e, but to appear the seven years next
fol^^wing, to accompany the new delivered, and (...) Romans Coffin in a solemn
Procession.

On the great Gate of this Church, is a Tri^^mphal Arch, representing the
French King ^^nry IV. driving Lions and Wolves out of ^^s Flock: On the other
side are the League, ^^nd up in Chains, and gnawing its Fetters, ^^d the King
of Spain standing near a Bell, with ^^^mournful and Heart-sick Countenance.

Besides the Cathedral, Rouen with its Suburbs (...) 35 Parochial Churches, and
24 Monaste^s, the whole Diocese extending it self through ^^e third part of
Normandy, and comprehend^^g both Vexins, all Caux, Bray, and Roumois, (...)
Rural Deanships, 1388 Parishes, and 26 131 Abbeys, under 6 Archdeacons. The
^ench King Philip the fair, founded there a ^ourt of Exchequer, in 1286. which
Lewis ^^I. made Sedentary in 1499, and Francis I. ^^dow'd it with the name and
privilege of a ^^rliament. There are other Courts of Ju^^ce besides that, as a
Bailiwick and Presidial, (...) Chamber of Accounts, a Chamber of the ^^nt,
which coyns Money with the Letter B. ^^ere is a Bridge built upon Boats, which
is ^^k'd upon as a Masterpiece of Art, because it rises and goes down with the
Tide, t^ be paved, and 270 steps long: And there^ Rouen lies very conveniently,
for the (...) brings into its Key Vessels of 200 T^^ and makes it one of the
Richest and most ^^ding Cities in France. Rouen is not only st^^^ by its
situation, but also well fortified (...) Castles, Bulwarks, Bastions, Rampires,
Terr^^ ^lined with Freestone, large Ditches into w^^ fall the small Rivers of
Robec, Aubette and ^^^nelle, after they have passed through several ^^ter-mills.

It Is uncertain whether the Latin name (...) Rouen Rotomagus comes from the
Idol R^^ or Rothon, Worshipped there, or from the s^^ River Rodobeccus, Robec;
so that it should (...) compounded name, signifying the Town o^ (...) God Roth,
or of the Red Brook. The tim^ its foundation, and the name of its Fou^^ are
still more uncertain, but sure it is (...) Rouen was already in Caesar's time
the hea^^ the Veloicasses, that is mentioned by P^^ Ammian Marcellin, and the
Tables of The^^ the Great, under the name of Rotomagus. (...) had formerly an
Amphitheatre, and thr^^ ^^tifi'd places, viz. the Palace, the Castle, (...)
called Mount S. Catherine, or Fort S. Cat^^ and the Bridge. This City has
produced ^^veral Men of Parts, as that great and inco^^^rable Protestant Divine
Samuel Bochart, (...) Learned Emery Bigot, who has published ^^ral Writings of
the Fathers, amongst oth^^ the Epistle of S. Chrysostom to Caesarius. (...)
Family of Basnage, renowned for Lawyers, ^^^ter Corneille, the Prince of the
Tragic P^^^ among the French, Thomas Corneille his Brother, ^^^d Pradon, two
other Drammatick Poets of ^^ote, Mr. De Fontenelles one of the Wittiest
^^riters in France, Mrs. Bernard, who has ^^ly carried the Prize of Poetry in
the ^^^ench Academy. I may well also give a place ^^^ong these Ingenious, to
Mr. Le Motteux Au^^or of the Gentleman's Journal.

Caux.
THis Bailiwick North, and North-east of Rou^^ en, is esteemed to be the Land
of the An^^ent Caletes, and is included between the Ri^^rs Seyne and Bresle.
Caesar, who makes the ^^^re the limits of the Celtae, ranks the Velocassi ^^d
the Caleti among the Belgae; but by the di^^sion of August they were included
in the ^^cond Lyonnoise, with their Capital Rotoma^^s. Adrian de Valois reckons
nine Rivers in ^^is Country, viz. the Vitefleur, Guitefleda, ^^e Dun Dunus,
the Seane or Saane, Sedana, the ^^une, Belnaium, the Sie, or Seye, Seda, the
^^rennes, Guarenna, the River of Dieppe or Ar^^es, Deppa or Arcae, the Eaune,
Heldona or ^^na and Alna; the Iere, Eara, which Samson ^^lls the Sart, and the
Ou, or Bresle Aucus.

Through the whole Country of Caux, the ^ldest Sons both of the Gentry and
Common people are Heirs of all, and there is but a ^^all Portion allowed for
the Sustenance of the Youngest Sons and Daughters, which C^^^ seems to be
derived from the Ancient N^^ man's, who used it to maintain the luster (...)
their Families, and to make their Young^^ Sons look to themselves, and seek
their F^^tune with the dint of their Sword: And (...) perhaps was the Cause
they conquered N^stria.

Caudebec, Calidum: Beccum, that is, warm ^^^vulet, because its built upon a
small Brook (...) mile from the Seyne, and three leagues East (...) its mouth,
is a Town renow'd for several M^nufactures, especially Hats. Three leagues West
(...) Caudebec, upon another Brook near the Sey^^ is the small Town of
Lillebonne, which is ta^^ by Sigebert and Ordericus Vitalis for Jul^^^
Caletorum, Capital of the Country of Caux, (...) De Valois denies it:
Howsoever, it gives (...) its name to a branch of the House of Lorr^^^ William
the Conqueror called thither a Co^^cil of the Prelates of Normandy, in 1080.
(...) mile South of Lillebonne lies the Lordship (...) Tancarville upon the
Seyne. Tancardi or ra^^ Tancredi Villa, for it seems to have gotten (...) name
from that famous Tancrede Lord of H^^reville, who lived in the time of Rollon,
or ^^^bert I. Duke of Normandy: This Nobleman ^^ving a numerous Family, sent
into Italy his t^^ Eldest Sons Dreux and Fierabras, who joyn^^ with Robert
Guischard, and some other N^^ man Lords, Warred against the Saracens, (...)
expelled them out of Sicily; their Posten^ settled themselves in that Island,
conquered C^^labria and Appulia from the Greeks, and T^^poli from the
Barbarians, and made themselv^^ famous during the Wars of the Holy Land, by ^^e
Conquest of Antioch, which they possessed (...) long time under the Title of
Principality.

I find a small Town in this Province called ^^auteville, near the Sea-cost,
five miles South^^st of Coutance, and eleven Northwest of ^^^vranches, but
cannot tell whether it was the ^itle of the Lord Tancrede.

Nine leagues West of Caudebec, upon ano^^er small Brook near the mouth of the
Seyne ^^es Harfleur, Hareflotum, so called, because it is ^^^ed on a Bay, where
the Sea ebbs and flows. (...) was formerly a considerable Town before (...) de
Grace was renowned. The English ^^ok it by Storm some time before the Battle
(...) Azincourt.

Havre de Grace Franciscopolis, two leagues ^ell of Harfleur, is now one of the
strongest (...) a Port Towns in France. The French Kings ^ancis I. and Henry
II. fortified it, in 1562. ^^nder Charles IX. the Vidame of Chartres, and
^^eauvoir la Nocle seized upon this Town for the ^rotestants, and having
treated with Queen ^^lizabeth, delivered it into her hands. The ^^ench King to
recover this place, flattered ^^^e Protestants so well, that they themselves
^elp'd to besiege and retake it. The Count of ^arwick very courageously
defended the place ^^r some time, but the want of fresh Water, ^^nd the Plague
destroyed 3000 of his Men, for^ed him to Capitulate on the 28th. of July, in
^he same Year. Lewis XIII. did since increase ^he Fortifications of that place,
and built there (...) Citadel flanked with four Royal Bastions: However as the
Town is not strong on the Land-side, it could still be taken that way, (...)
the Citadel blocked up. Havre de Grace is (...) pleasant and well Trading
Town, with (...) Buildings and Markets.

Seventeen miles North-east of Havre de Gr^^ is the Ancient Borough of
Fescamp, fam^^ for an Abbey of Nuns founded by one W^^gen, a French Lord, under
Clotaire III. Rich^^^ II. Duke of Normandy repaired it, and wo^^^ be buried
there in a Stone Coffin, which s^^^ that time he caused to be filled up every
F^^ day with Corn, and to be distributed to (...) Poor, together with twenty
pence: This A^^^ by is now possessed by Benedictine Mo^^ Fescamp would be very
fit for a Landing, (...) great Vessels can run aground very near t^^ Shore, and
then go off with the Tide.

Eight leagues almost East of Fescamp is anot^^ Town called St. Valery, by the
name of an A^cient Abbot. It Is more considerable than (...) camp, but not so
fit for a Descent, because (...) the banks that reach above a league into the
S^*

Seven leagues East of S. Valery is the famo^^ Seaport of Dieppe, the
Juliobona Caletorum (...) Ptolomy and Peutinger's Tables, as appears by (...)
distance from other Towns noted in the Iti^^^rary or Journey of Aethicus. It is
seated (...) the foot of Mountains, whence flows the ^^ver Arques, that
separates the Town from th^^ Suburbs, and forms a long and strait Hav^^^ that
can harbor a great number of Vessels and those of 500 Tuns too, but is of hard
access. The Town is pretty big, and well bu^^^ has a great Kay, a Fort called
Pollet, and a Castle* The Inhabitants Trade into the East and We^^ Indies,
England, and the Low Countries, and ^re esteemed good Mariners, and
Handicraft^en also, especially in working Ivory-horn, and Tortle-shell, and
making Bussols and other ^nstruments of Astrology. Dieppe has been often taken
and re-taken during the Wars be^ween the English and French, since the Year
^195. The Protestants have often been Ma^^ters of it in the last Century, and
it served ^or a place of Refuge to King Henry IV. whence ^^t came that the
Country thereabouts was fil^ed with Protestants. The Citizens in imitati^n of
Rouen have instituted Floral Games, where ^hey give Rewards to such Poets and
Orators ^^s get the Victory over their Competitors.

Rigord, and William the Breton, testify that this Town was anciently burnt by
the French, and we and among the Subscriptions of the Council of ^^halon in
Burgundy, that of Betto Bishop of Ju^^^hona; but as there was never a Bishop of
Di^^p^, nor any other Prelate in the whole Diocese ^f Rouen, besides that of
Rouen, so De Valois believes that it must either be Angers or Troyes.

Two leagues South of Dieppe and the Sea, ^^ies the Town of Arques, upon a
River of that ^ame: In Latin Arcae, or rather Arcus. It was ^ormerly called
Hasdans, and had a good Road, ^ut is now more famous for a Victory that ^he
French King Henry IV. obtained over the Duke of Mayenn, and the Leaguers, the
21st ^f September 1589. This great Prince had not ^bove 500 Horse, 1200
Footmen, and 2000 ^witzers, but he posted himself so well be^ween two Hills,
and the River Bethune, that with this small Army he routed 30000 men.

Dieppe and Arques, together with some Vilages, as Pierre-Pont, Val-le-Roy,
Tilly, St. Supli a^^ Criel upon the mouth of the Iere, between th^^ River and
Seye, constituted the Country (...) Tellau or Taloui, Tallogus Pagus, which
h^^ excellent Salt Pits, but both the Salt Pits, a^^ the name of the Country
are perished.

Seven leagues East of Dieppe, lies the To^^ of Eu, Aucum or Auga, near the
mouth of t^^ Bresle, or Ou, a small league from the S^^ and a Village called
Tresport Ulterior Portas th^^ lies upon it, and has an Abbey of St. Bea^^^
Order. The situation of Eu is pleasant because of the Meadows that encompass
it. R^lon first Duke of Normandy had planted there (...) Colony, but the French
took the Town by Sto^^^ and killed all the Males. It has the Title of (...)
County and Peerdom erected by Charles VII. (...) 1458. and has been possessed
by several Il^^strious Houses, as those of Lusignan, Bri^^^ and Guise, since
the twelfth Century, till (...) Year 1664. that it was given to a Daughter
(...) the Royal Blood, the Lady of Orleance: Ra^^l (...) Brienne, second of
that Name was High Constable of France, after Raoul the first his Brother was
taken at the Battle of Cressy in 134^ and brought Prisoner into England: But at
(...) return being convicted of High Treason, (...) favoring the English, he
had his Head cut o^ on the 18th. of November 1581. The Counts (...) Eu have
given another High Constable to Fran^^ under the Name of Philip, who in the
time (...) the French King Charles VI. brought a considerable Succor to
Sigismond King of H^^^ry, against Bajazet II. Emperor of the (...) John Count
of Nevers, and since Duke of Bur^undy was with him, followed by 2000 French
Gentlemen. The Battle was given near Nico^olis, a Town of Bulgary on the
Danube, in ^396. but the Christians totally routed, and 600 French Gentlemen
that had been taken Prisoners cut into pieces before the Eyes of the two
Counts, whom he kept alive with fourteen ^other Lords, to get a Ransom of
200000 Ducats.

Nine leagues South of Eu, near the source of the Bresle is the Town of Aumale,
Alba-marna, or Alga-marla, that is, white Earth, with the Title of Duchy and
Peerdom, erected by the French King Henry II. in 1547. in behalf of Claudius of
Lorrain, Youngest Son to the Duke of Guise. Aumale had its particular Counts in
the twelfth Century; afterward it fell to the share of the House of Ponthieu,
and then of the House of Lorrain. This Town is Noted for its Woollen Cloth, and
an Ancient Abbey of St. Bennets Order.

Eleven miles South-west of Aumale, near the source of the Epte, is the Village
of Forges, renowned for its Medicinal Waters. Longueville, Longa villa, or
Longus vicus, a Borough upon the River Sie, eight leagues North of Rouen, and
four South of Dieppe, was formerly a County, and has been enjoyed under that
Title by the famous Bertrand du Guesclin High Constable of France. In 1443.
Charles VII. gave it to another great Warrior John Count of Dunois, Bastard of
the House of Orleans, whence are descended the Dukes of Orleans, Longueville,
who enjoy still that Lordship, erected into a Duchy and Peerdom in 1505, b^
Lewis XII. Five leagues West of Longue^^^ and ten North-west of Rouen, lies the
B^^rough of Estouteville, Stota villa, with the Title of a Duchy, erected by
Francis I. in 153^ It has given its Name to an Illustrious Famil^ ever since
the 11th. Century: However, Na Sanson the Father has forgotten it in his Map.

Eight leagues Northwest of Rouen, and 5 mile North of Caudebec, lies the small
Village of Yvetot, with the Title of a Principality, and formerly with that of
a Kingdom, as many French Authors pretend. It was erected by the Frenc^ King
Clotaire I. to make amends for the Death of Walter Lord of Yvetot, whom he had
murdered in a Church at Soissons: In consequence of the Law of the manors that
frees the Tenant of any subjection to his Liege Lord, if the said Lord breaks
any of his Bones, or cuts any of his Members. In an Ancient Record of the Court
of Exchequer in Normandy, and Patentees of the French Kings, in the Years 1392,
1401, 1450, 1464, the Lords of Yvetot are entitled Kings, and their
Sovereignty and Independency is asserted. At the Coronation of Mary of Medicis,
Henry IV. Queen: This Prince observing that the Master of the Ceremonies had
assigned no place to Martin du Bellay Lord of Yvetot, I will, says he, that an
Honorable Place be given to my little King of Yvetot. Four leagues North-east
of Rouen is another Village called Cailly, which seems to be some remains of an
Ancient Town ruined by the Romans, that bore the Name of Casletum, if we
believe Duchesne.

Bray.
BRAY is an ancient Gaulish word, that marks a Marshy and Dirty place, and it is
the beginning or end of several Towns in France. As to this Country, it is
included between the Bailiwicks of Gisors, Rouen and Caux, and so very small,
that several Geographers forget to mention it. The most considerable places are
La Ferte, Fleury, and Gournay, of which I find nothing in my Authors, unless
that near Gournay was given a Battle between the English and the French, in
1112, where the last were routed.

Roumois.
BEtwixt the Seyne and the Bishoprics of Lizieux and Evreux, is included the
small Country of Roumois, Rotmensis pagus, which by the Original of its Name,
seems to have made part of the Territory of Rouen. It has not above eight
leagues in length, and as many in breadth, from Brienne upon the Rille, to
Quevilly two leagues off of Rouen, where the French Protestants of that City
had their Temple. The other Buroughs are Quillebeus upon the Seyne, which
might be extraordinarily fortified, Montfort, Mauny, etc. These four Countries
last described, make up the Archbishopprick of Rouen.

The Bishopric of Evreux.
THis Diocese is included between the Rivers Seyne and Carenton, the Country
of Roumois, and the Bishoprics of Seez and Chartres: It is above 17 or 18
leagues North and South, and 15 or 16 East and West. It was the habitation of
the Aulerci Eburovices. The Capital Evreux Mediolanum Aluercorum, is seated
upon the River Iton, in a fruitful Plain, and has several good Buildings,
Churches, Abbeys, and Monasteries, a Bishopric, Bailiwick, and Presidial. It Is
said that it was converted to Christianity by St. Taurin, who was the first
Bishop of it. The most renowned of his Successors was Cardinal Du Perron, that
subtle Controversist, who was a Protestant Apostate. In Caesar's time the
Senonois, the Parisians, and their Neighbors had a General of Evreux called
Camalogenus Aulercus, whom they opposed to Liabienus. Evreux has had its
Particular Counts issued from the Dukes of Normandy. It was erected into a
County and Peerdom, by Lewis X, in 1316, thence it came into the hands of the
Kings of Navarr, from whom it was redeemed by the French King Charles VI. in
1404. erected into a Duchy in 1569, by Charles IX. and given to his Brother
the Duke of Alencon, after whose Death it was reunited to the Crown of France,
in 1584, and exchanged with the Duke of Bouillion for the Principality of
Sedan, in 1652.

Five leagues West of Evreux, near a place where the Rille hides it self under
the Ground, lies Beaumont le Roger, Bellus mons Rogerii, with the Title of a
County: It was built by a Count, called Roger, whose Name it bears, and
strongly fortified. Raoul of Meulant sold it to the French King Lewis IX, in
1255, and Charles III. King of Navarr, to whom it did belong, ^s being Count of
Evreux, exchanged both Counties with the French King Charles VI. for the Duchy
and Peerdom of Nemours, in 1404.

Two leagues North of Beaumont le Roger lies the Castle of Harcourt,
Harecortis, formerly a good Borough, which has given its Name and the title of
Counts to a Noble Family, that has been renowned since the beginning of the
twelfth Century, to the end of the last Age, that it fell to the share of the
House of Lorrain, by the Marriage of Renatus of Lorrain, Marquess of Elbeuf
with Louise of Rieux Heiress of Harcourt, in 1574.

Vernon upon the Seyne, lies 7 leagues East of Evreux, and ten South-east of
Rouen. Some think that it had formerly a Royal Palace or Castle called Verno or
Vernum, where two Councils were kept in 755, and 844. but De Valois proves that
Verno was the Name of this place, and that the Royal House of Vernum was either
Ver near Crespi en Valois, between Paris and Compiegne, or Verneuil upon the
Oyse.

Seven leagues South of Evreux upon the River Aure, lies the Borough of
Nonancourt, which has given its Name to Cardinal Nicholas of Nonancourt, who
was famous about the end of the thirteenth Age, and descended from an Ancient
House.

Five miles higher to the West, upon the same River is the Town of Tilleres, or
Tuillieres; Tegulariae, so called from the Stichel-stones that were prepared
there: It was built by Richard Duke of Normandy, but is now almost ruined.
Remounting the said River, one meets with the Town of Vernueil, Vernolium,
erected into a Duchy and Peerdom by Lewis XIV. in 1652. The Duke of Alencon
took it in 1424. but the English retook it, and gave a great overthrow to the
French in the same Year. The French King Charles VII. got it again from the
English by the Treachery of a Miller, who on a Sunday the 19th. of July, 1449.
while the Inhabitants were at Mass, introduced the French Soldiers into the
Town, by the means of a Ladder laid to the Walls. The English retired into the
Castle, which was fortified with Walls and Ditches, but being immediately
besieged, and without hope of Relief, were forced to surrender. Several Towns
in France bear the Name of Verneuil, and De Valois observes that they are all
built near Forests, whence he conjectures that Verne or Verneuil had some such
signification in the Gaulish Language.

Six leagues Westwards is a fine Forest, and near it the Town of Laigle Aquila
upon the Rille, with the title of a Barony. It got this Name from an Eagles
Nest that was found upon an Oak at the time of its foundation. Rugles, Rugulae,
Lyre, Lyra, are lower down to the North upon the same River. Lyre has a famous
Abbey of St. Bennets Order, Yvri, Ibreium Castrum is situated upon the Aure,
between Passi or rather Paci, Paciacum and Paceium, and Nonancourt, six leagues
South-east of Evreux, and is renowned for the Victory which the French King
Henry IV. got there over the Leaguers.

Breteuil, which seems to preserve the Name of the Brittons its Founder, lies
two leagues North of Verneuil, upon the River Iton near a Pond. Our Henry II.
gave it to one Robert of Montfort, whose Sister Amicia sold it to the French
King Philip August. Damville is seven miles Eastwards upon the same River: It
was erected into a Duchy and Peerdom by Lewis XIII. in 1610. but this title is
now extinguished, tho the Lordship belongs still to the house of Ventadour.
Duchesne mentions a place called Hermein ville, where he says that Robert Count
of Normandy routed Thibaud Count of Chartres, but I could not find it, either
in Sanson or Du Val's Maps.

Conches, Capital of a small Country called Ouche, Pagus Ebroicus, is seated
near the source of a small River four leagues West of Evreux, and has a
renowned Abbey of Benedictin Monks under the Name of St. Peter, and St. Paul.
Louviers upon the Eure, four leagues North of Evreux, and six South of Rouen,
is but a small Town, however famous for the noise that some Nuns, who pretended
to be possessed by the Devil, made in the beginning of this Age.

CHAP. VII. Of Lower Normandy. The Bishopric of Lizieux.
THis Country, called by the Inhabitants Lieuvin, and by Caesar Lexovii, or
Lexobii, is above seventeen leagues North and South, and sixteen East and West:
It is included between the Sea and the Bishoprics of Evreux, Seez, and Bayeux,
and is one of the most fruitful parts of Normandy, because of the many Rivers
that water it. Lizieux, Noviomagus Lexoviorum the Capital, is situated upon
the River Lezon Tolca, six leagues South of the Sea. Its Cathedral is dedicated
to St. Peter, and the first Bishop of it recorded in History, is one Lithare,
who assisted to the first Council of Orleance under Clovis the Great, in 511:
This Town is renowned for its Fountains, and Earthen Wares.

The other Towns or considerable Buroughs are Pont l'Eveque, four leagues
North of Lizieux: It is renowned for its Cheese. Honfleur, Haneflotum, a
Seaport Town four leagues Northeast upon the mouth of the Seyne, over against
Harfleur. Pont Audemer, Pons Audmari, or as the Vulgar write Ponteau de Mar,
built by a French Nobleman of that Name, is situated upon the Rille eleven
leagues West of Rouen; and renowned for its Saucizes, which are brought down to
Paris. The Inhabitants had formerly their Mayor, Sheriffs, and Charters. Andre
of Villars, since Admiral of France, took it for the League in 1592. But while
he was fortifying it, Bosse-rose one of his Captains got into Fescamp, and
delivered it to King Henry IV. In 1279. a Council was kept there for the
Reformation of Manners. Brionne, Brionia, formerly a strong Town with the title
of a County, is seated upon the same River six leagues higher to the South.
Bernay, Bernacum, upon the Carentone, is four leagues South-east of Brionne,
there is an Abbey of Benedictin Monks founded by Judith, Richard's of Normandy
Duchess. Montreuil Largille upon the River Ternant lies five leagues
South-east of Bernay. Mongommery upon a small River nine miles South-west of
Lizieux, has the title of a County; it belonged first to the House of Ponthieu,
thence to that of Harcourt, and has been enjoyed by the Dukes of Longueville,
since the Year 1485. Cormeilles, Cormeliae, upon the River Callone four leagues
North-east of Lizieux, has an Abbey of S. Bennets Order, and Orbec upon a River
of that Name lies four leagues South of the same Town; there is also
Tiberville, Tibertivilla.

The Bishopric of Seez.
THis Diocese, included between the Government of Orleanois, the Bishopric of
Evreux, Lizieux, and Bayeux, reaches above 25 leagues North-west and
South-east, and has not above 10 or 11 leagues extent, where it is broadest.
The Capital Seez is an Ancient Bishopric, since in the Year 540, it had
already had ten or twelve Bishops, of whom Sigebold is accounted the first by
Duchesne. This Town is not mentioned by the Ancient Geographers, for ought we
know, for the Sessavii of Caesar were a Maritime People, whereas the Saji or
Sagii, as the French Historian call the Inhabitants of Seez are separated from
the Sea by the Lexovii. The Town is situated near the source of the River Orne,
13 leagues South of Lizieux, and the Civil Jurisdiction is partly Royal,
depending upon Falaise, and partly Dukal, resorting to Alencon. There has been
of late Years a Contestation between a Jansenist Clergyman, and the Bishop of
this Town; this Clergyman is the same who has written the Court's Bishop, and
several other Treatises, in which he most cruelly exposes the Prelates,
contrary to his Party: His Name is Le Noir, as I take it to be, and he was
Theologal of Seez.

Alencon, Alentio, six leagues South-west of Seez, is a good and fine Town,
with a Bailiwick, and the title of a Duchy and Peerdom, erected by the French
King Charles VI. in 1413: It lies in a fruitful Soil between the Forests of
Escouis and Perseigne, and is seated upon the Sarte, where that River receives
the Briante, which forms a small Island within the Town. In the Parish of our
Lady are to be seen the Tombs of the Dukes of Alencon: There was formerly a
Court of Exchequer, but it was suppressed in 1584. after the Death of Francis
last Duke of Alencon: It is the same that would have Married Queen Elizabeth,
and who was Crowned Duke of Brabant in 1582. This Town and adjacent Territories
the Alenconois, have been first possessed by the Posterity of these Normand
Lords, who conquered the whole Province from the French. Robert, the last of
them left but one Sister called Helie, that sold this Country to the French
King Philip August. Lewis IX. gave it to Peter his fourth Son, and since it has
often been the Portion of the Children of the French Kings. In 1572. the Lord
of Matignon hindered there the bloody effects of St. Bartholomew's Murder,
however, as he kept the Protestants low, the Leaguers took it 3 years after.

Four leagues North of Seez, is the Borough of Hiesmes, which gives its Name
to the Country thereabouts the Hiesmois, Pagus Oximiensis, or Oxmensis, that
was formerly much larger, comprehending the Alenconois and Seois. Hiesmes
Oximus or Oximi seems also to have been a considerable Town, and sometimes the
Seat of the Bishops of Seez, who are called Oximensis Ecclesiae Episcopi.

Argentan, called by the Latin Geographers Argentomum, or Argentomagus, lies
upon the River Orne, 3 leagues West of Hiesmes, and 5 South-west of Seez.

Falaise upon the River Ante, eleven miles North-west of Argentan, is an
Ancient Town, built in a Valley between two Hills in the form of a Boat, of
which a strong Castle dug upon a Rock seems to be the Stern. It is a high,
big and round Tower, that was the Palace of the Ancient Dukes of Normandy in
time of Peace, and their place of Arms in time of War. It has gotten its Name
from the Rocks upon which it is built, or wherewith its encompassed which in
the Franco-German Language are called Fales or Fels, and the Normans give still
the Name of Falaise to great heaps of Snow. Tho this place was so very strong,
yet it was surrendered, upon the first Summons to Philip August in 1203, but
having been retaken by the English, it was kept by them one of the longest of
all, and defended by the Warlike Talbot till the Year 1450. There is yet a Fort
environed with Ditches, and said to be built as well as the Castle by Julius
Caesar, to be a Bulwo^k against the Galli, if they chanced to rebel during his
Voyage into Great Britain.

Next to this Town is the Borough of La Guibray, anciently Wibray, renowned
for its free Fair in the Month of August, said to be instituted by our William
the Conqueror.

A league West of this Town is the Mountain of Airiennes, where Hawks,
Faulcons, and other Birds of Game are caught. About the Year 1570. some
Peasants digging near this Mountain, found several Medals and pieces of Brass
money with the stamp of Julius Caesar.

In the Territory of this Town is the Village of Arnes, situated in a Plain,
destituted of Brooks and Rivers; and the Sea however, which is ten leagues
distant from it, sometimes conveys thither by subterraneal Channels such
abundance of Waters, that they form a Lake or Pond, furnished with several
sorts of Fishes, and when the water retires, the place drys up again.

The Bishopric of Bayeux.
THE Inhabitants Name their own Country Pays Bessin. Ausone calls them
Biocasses, and Gregory of Tours Baiocassini; they are esteemed by Adrian de
Valois, the Viducasses of Pliny, and the Biducasses of Ptolomy.

The chief Town Bayeux, is seated upon the River Aure, which loses it self into
a kind of Abyss, or great Ditch, a small league Southwards. This Town has the
title of Viscounty, Bailiwick, Prefidial and Bishopric: Its first Prelate is
accounted to be St. Exupere, whom the Vulgar calls St. Spire: In this Diocese
are reckoned above 200 Parishes under 4 Archdeaconships, and 16 Deanships: The
Cathedral Church has 50 Canons, of whom 17 are Dignitaries: Its Towers, Clock,
Gates, Columns, and the whole Building is sumptuous, and it ^ear the Name of
our Lady. Its Bishop is the ^^st Suffragan to Rouen, has Jurisdiction over
^^en, F^laise, Vire, and above 200 Parishes, under 4 Archdeaconships and 16
Deanships: It ^as likewise a Bailiwick resorting to the Presi^ial of Caen.
During the Civil Wars of Religion, a Protestant Captain, called Francis of
Bricqueville, Lord of Colombiers, took it from the Roman Catholics, whose
Worship was abolished there for a short while. William Bonnet, called there a
Synod, about the Year ^200, he is the same who founded a College ^n the
University of Paris in 1308, that has the Name of the College of Bayeux.

Caen upon the River Orne, six leagues South^ast of Bayeux, and four leagues
North of Estre^an, on the mouth of that River, is accounted the Capital of
Lower Normandy, and has a Bailiwick, Presidial, Generality, Election, and
Offices for receipt of the King's Money. Some will have it to be a very Ancient
Town, and that it be called Cadomus, for Caji Domus: But ^he Learned Bochart,
one of the grea^est Ornaments of France, but especially of this Town, wherein
he was Minister of the Protestants, thinks not Caen to be of so great
Antiquity, and derives its Name from a Saxon word made La^in, Kadomum, which
signifies a pleasant and Godly Habitation. King William the Conque^^n, and Maud
of Flanders his Wife are Inter^ed in two Abbeys of S. Bennets Orders, un^er the
Name of St. Stephen, and the Holy ^^^nity, which they founded in this Town, the
first of Monks, the other of Nuns. It is a very Trading place, because great
Boats can g^ from the Sea to the Bridge of St. James's (...) the help of the
Title; and of its three days after Easter, instituted by our K. William. (...)
Townhouse is built upon another Bridge o^ St. Peter: This House is a
remarkable (...) with four Towers, and a Clock, which (...) only shows the
Hours, but also the I^a^^ and Decrease of the Moon. Here the G^^^ ^ceives the
Oudon, after it has passed through se^^ Mills. At the upper end of the Town, (...)
strong Castle built upon the Rock, fo^^ with a Platform, having in the middle a
(...) square Tower, flanked at the four Corners (...) four other Towers, and
encompassed with a Ditches. Besides the Courts already n^on'd, there is a
Vice-Admiralty, an Ecclesi^cal Court depending upon the Bishop of ^eux, an
Overseer of Waters and For res^^ Salt Granary, a Mint, and a University ^^ed in
the Year 1431. It has three Colle^ and is governed by a Rector, a Chance^^ the
Bishop of Bayeux, and two Conser vn^^ its Privileges, the Bishops of Lizieux
and ^^ance: There is besides an Academy or 8^^ of Learned Men, erected some 30
years (...) It Is said that this Town became conside^^ by the Residence of the
English during (...) Wars in France, and by the many Privile^ they allowed it.
In 1562. the Protestants (...) came Masters of the Town, but the French (...)
Charles IX. having gotten it from their (...) by a sham Declaration of Liberty
of C^ence, the Garrison of the Castle plo^^ Quarrel with the Inhabitants, who
were (...) st^ts for the most part, the last besieged the ^t, and expelled them
out of that Nest, with (...) help of the Admiral of Coligny.

The small Country of Auge, Algia, toward ^e South-east, and the borders of
the Bishop^^^k of Seez, is depending on this Bailiwick (...) the Temporal and
for the Spiritual of Li^ux. It has gotten its Name from a Forest ^rd by, and
is remarkable for the fertility of (...) Meadows, chiefly at a place called
Bieux-ville ^d Saint Barbe, where Grass grows so quick, ^pecially in the
Spring, that if it be browz'd (...) the Evening, and one lays there a Stick, he
^ll find it in the Morning half covered with ^^ass, for which reason a great
quantity of black ^ttel are sent thither to be fatten'd.

Nine leagues higher to the South lies Pont (...) Olly, an important passage
upon the Orne, ^here it receives the Nereau. Three leagues West^^rds is the
Town of Conde, Condate, where ^e small River Drance falls into the Nereau. 5.
leagues farther to the West is the Town (...) Vire, upon a River of that Name
not far ^om its source: It has a Castle, an Election, (...) a Bailiwick,
resorting to the Presidial of ^en. It has the Title of a Viscounty, and has ^en
formerly so considerable, that its Inhabi^^ts having stuck to the English till
the Year ^50, they got Letters of Pardon from the French ^n^ Charles VII.

Six leagues lower to the North lies the Town ^origny, Tauriniacum, formerly
very consi^rable, as appears by the ruins of its Walls (...) Gates. It has
still the Title of a County, and a Bailiwick depending on the Presidi^^ Caen.

I must not forget what is observed by chesne, that the meeting of the Rivers
Aure Dromine, a small league North of Bayeux (...) the Village of Maisons, form
a fine Haven o^ Port Bessin.

The Bishopric of Constance or Coutance.
THis Country called Constantin, and contively Coutantin, is shut up between
Sea and the Bishoprics of Bayeux and Avra^ and is thought to be the habitation
of Unelli of Caesar, or the Venelli of Pliny. It ^bove 20 leagues North and
South, but hat^ 12 East and West, where it is broadest. (...) is an Ancient
County, which Robert Duke Normandy pawned to his Brother William red King of
England, and soon after his wh^ Duchy for the sum of 10000 Marks of Sil^ that
he might undertake a Voyage into the ^ly Land.

Constance, or Contance, Capital of (...) Country, is situated upon the small
River ^ro, 3 leagues East of the Sea, and almost West of Torigny: Some take it
for the Asta Ramanduorum of the Ancient Geograp^^ Amian Mercellin calls it
Castra Constantia, (...) he seems mistaken as to it is situation. The (...) ^ent
Notices of the Gauls call it Constantia Ci^as, Gregory of Tours, and other
Ancient Au^ors of the French History Constantina, or ^onstantiensis Urbs. It Is
likely that Constantius ^lorus encamped thereabouts, when he went ^ver into
Great Britain, and that f^^m a Mili^^ry Station it became a Town by degrees;
or ^ther that the Emperor Constantius beautified with Triumphant Arches, of
which he erect^^d a great number in the Gauls, and in Panno^: For it is not
probable that these Emperors ^ould have built a Town, which some Years ^^ter
was a City of Note, and an Episcopal See; (...) that it seems that they only
repaired or en^^rg'd Constance, which thereupon lost its old ^ame of
Crociatonum Venetorum, mentioned by ^tolomy. St. Ereptiole is taken by Duchesne
^r the first Bishop of Constance, in the fourth ^entury; but the first Prelate
of it mentioned in ^uthentick Histories is one Leoncian, who as^sted to the
first Council of Orleance, in 511. ^he situation of Constance is pleasant,
among ^eadows and Brooks, and not far from a Forest. ^he Town is big, and well
Peopled, but without Walls and Ditches, the French King Lewis ^I. having
demolished them because the Inha^itants had too openly sided with the Prince
^harles his Brother. In 1562. the Lord of Colom^iers besieged it, took it, and
sent Philip of Cosse ^^o Governor Prisoner to St. Lo. The Cathedral church of
our Lady is a fine Building, and beauti^^ed with Towers, upon one of which the
whole Neighboring Country may be discovered. This Town has a Bailiwick and
Presidial, Vis^ounty, Election, and Ecclesiastical Court.

Seven or eight leagues South-east of ^stance, on the borders of Avranches, is
the B^rough of Ville-Dieu, with a Commandership (...) the Knight of St. John's
Order, institute^ (...) Richard III. Duke of Normandy, and the (...) King of
England of that Name.

Near to it is a Parish called La Land Her^^ or Airou, which was formerly a
good B^rough of half a league extent, as may be supp^sed by some Ruins. There
was a Castle (...) of which nothing is remaining, but the b^ Name, in a
Neighboring Field called the C^stles Meadow. Duchesne relates out of Sige^^
that in the year 1158. there happened a Wh^^^wind, which raised up all that it
met wh^ and rising in the Air, there appeared at (...) blew red Columns,
against which were (...) Arrows and Darts from several places, (...) a great
number of Birds of several Kinds to^ about it: He adds farther, that this Pro^
was followed by a violent Plague, which deppulated whole Towns.

Four leagues North-west of Ville-Dieu is (...) Borough of Gouray, with the
Ruins of an ^^cient Castle, upon a small Hill near the Ri^ Souille.

Five leagues Southwest of Gouray, and (...) of Constance, is the Seaport of
Granville: (...) Town is partly seated upon a Rock, and pa^^ in a Plain, where
it has its Haven. Nine (...) ten leagues Eastwards are the Borough of M^on,
the Barony of Fessy, and the Castle of (...) Motte l'Euesque, belonging to the
Bishop (...) Constance.

Seventeen miles East of Constance, lies (...) strong Town of St. Lo, upon the
River Vire, (...) Named from the fifth Bishop of Constance, ^u^o, and in Latin
Briovera, or Vire's Bridge, a^^o and his Successors have for a long time ^orn
the Title of Bishops of St. Lo, because this ^own belonged to them, and that
they kept unto their ordinary Residence. It is now en^ved by the Lords of
Matignon, and has a Bai^wick, Election and Viscounty, an Abbey of St. ^nnets
Order, and a Church under the Name (...) our Lady, founded as it is said, by the
Em^eror Charlemaign, under the Title of the Holy ^his.

Seventeen miles North-west, you meet with ^^e Barony of Hommet, divided into
two Ca^^les, the Lords of which entitle themselves ^ign Constables Hereditary
of the ancient Dukes (...) Normandy.

Five leagues North-west of St. Lo. upon the ^^ting of the Rivers On and
Carenton, lies the (...) of Carentar, or Querentan, Carentonus or ^^^onium,
which is a well trading Place, be^^use it lies but three leagues from the Sea,
and ^^at the Ti^e brings up great Boats to it, be^^des the strength of ^s
situation it has a Ga^e, Walls, and Ditches filled up with Water: ^he Vulgar
believe, that C^rus, one of C^^st^s ^ontains was the Founder of it. Whatever it
^ay be Carentan is pretty considerable, having ^wo Suburbs, a Bailiwick,
Election, and the ^itle of a Viscounty. In 1574. the Count of Montgomery took
it for the Protestants, but ^he Lord of Matignor retook it some time after, and
De Lorges Montgomery's Son was made Priso^er of War.

Five leagues Northwards lies upon a so^^ Hill the Borough of Monte-Bourg,
Montis Ba^^gus, with an Abbey of St. Bennets Or^^^ built by our King Henry I.
There is (...) kept every Saturday one of the greatest Marke^^ in the Country.

Three miles South-west, near the sourse of t^^ Ouve, and a large Forest, lies
the Town ^^ Valogne. Walonia, built by one Walo, which word in the Old Language
of the French b^yond the Seyne signified a Good man, but is no^ surnamed La
Hogne; a word not quite so o^^ intended to express the litigious and
quarr^^some Humor of its Inhabitants. This Tow^ has a Castle, the title of
Viscounty, and Elec^^on, a Bailiwick, and a seat of Justice for Wa^^^ and
Forests.

Five leagues North-east upon the Sea-co^^^ lies the Borough of La Hogue,
Ogae, and (...) leagues North-west upon the same Coast (...) Town of Barfleur,
Barhaflot. These two pla^^^ were renowned formerly, because our K^^ used to
Land there when they went over in^^ France. The first is yet in some Esteem for
(...) Fishing, and the second for being seated in ^ Valley most fruitful in
Corn, and therefore called in Latin Vallis Cereris: But both w^^^ be more known
to Posterity, for the late Sel^ fight between the English and French, (in 169^
where the latter had 20 of their best Shi^^ burnt or sunk without the loss of
one man o^ War on our side.

Seven leagues West of Barfleur, is the strong Town of Cherbourg, in Latin
called Caro burg^^, and by more Ancient Authors Caesaris Burg^^ ^ome pretend
for that reason, that Julius Caesar was the Founder of it; but in nine years
which ^^e bestowed on the Conquest of the Gauls, he ^ould hardly spare so much
time as to employ it ^n building: so that such Towns as bear his Name, seem
rather to be the Work of August, who took the Name of Caesar after his
Adoption, or of the Roman Forces quartered in the Country. Besides the
strength of its situation, ^n a sandy place overflowed by the Sea twice a ^ay,
the French have fortified it lately. It is ^he last Town which remained in the
hands of ^he English, under the French King Charles VII. ^o whom they were
forced to yield it in 1453.

Four leagues West of Cherbourg lies the Town of Beaumont, a league from the
Coast. Six leagues Southward is the Seaport Town of Barneville: Four leagues
to the East upon the River Baupteys over against Barneville, is the Castle and
Borough of St. Sauveur le Viscounte, an Ancient Viscounty erected into a
Bailiwick about the Year 1560. Seven leagues Southward is another Burough
called St. Sauueur Landelin, erected into a County by the French King Charles
VI. and given for part of his Portion to Lewis of Orleance. It has a Bailiwick
and Viscounty, upon which the Borough of Periers is depending. Three leagues
Westwards upon the Sea cost lies the strong Castle of Pirou, renowned for a
vast quantity of wild Swans and Geese.

The Bishopric of Avranches.
THis Country called by the Inhabitants A^ranchin, or Avranchinois, has little
Britt^^ and the Main on the Sputh and South-east, (...) Bishoprics of Bayeux
and Coutance on the North-east and North, and the Sea on the West: (...)
reaches about 14 leagues East and West, (...) 8 North and South; some take its
Inhabitant^ for the Ambiliates of Caesar, but it is more probable that they are
the Abrincatui of Pliny a^^ Ptolomy. The chief Town Avranches, Inge^^
Abrincatuorum, is seated upon the Rivers See a^^ Selune, Seva and Senuna upon a
Hill, a goo^ mile from the Bay of St. Michael. Its not a v^ry big City, but
strengthened with good Wa^^ and Ditches: It was erected into a Bishopric^ by
Clovis the Great, and Nepus its first or second Prelate appeared in that
Quality in the first Council of Orleance in 511. The Episcopi^ Palace is said
to be one of the finest and strongest in Normandy. Besides the Cathedral under
the Name of St. Andrew, there are several Parochial Churches and Monasteries, a
Bailiwick, Viscounty and Election.

Seven miles West of Avranches lies in the Sea a Rock formerly, the dwelling
place of Anacherets. In 708. a Bishop of Avranches, called A^bert by Duchesne,
and Pattern by De Valois, consecrated a Church upon the top of it to St. Mi^hael
the Archangel, and placed there 12 Ca^^ons. The Dukes of Normandy having since
endowed this Church with good Revenues, and Richard I. repaired or beautified
it in the middle of the tenth Century, People began to build there Houses, and
it became in process of time a good Borough, bearing likewise the Name of St.
Michael. A wholesome Fountain, which cures several Diseases, and the Convenience
of making Salt by throwing Seawater upon a Sand that is to be found in this
Mountain, did not a little contribute to the increase of this place, which is
rugged and unaccessible all round about, except on a side that is Walled. The
Soil is a Gravelly Ground that is overflowed by the Tide, which makes the Latin
Authors call it Mons S. Michaelis in periculo Maris. Over against it is another
Rock called Tombelaine, which had likewise a strong Castle that has been
demolished. Both Rocks are Named in Latin Tumbae, but because that of the Abbey
of St. Michael is the greatest of the two, the other got the Name of Tumbella,
whence the French have made Tombelaine.

Three miles Southwards near the mouth of the Couesnon, lies the Town of
Pontorson. Pons Urstonis, that bears the Name of its Founder.

Mortain, Moretonium, is a small Town seven leagues South-east of Avranches,
with the Title of a County, erected in 1041. There is a Bailiwick, Election and
Viscounty, upon which the Castelny of Tinchebray is depending. Mortain was
formerly a place almost impregnable by reason of its situation and Outworks.
Two or 3 leagues Eastwards lies a famous Wood called la Foret des lands
pourries. About the same d^stance toward the North you meet with a H^^ Named
Brombalium, la Bute de Brimbal, when^ spring four Rivers that take each a
differe^ ^course, viz. the Sea, Seva, the Vire, Viria, the Egraine, Egrannia,
and the Nereau, Nigra Aqua.

CHAP. VIII. Of Brittanny.
LIttle Britain is a kind of Peninsula, being included the Sea on the North,
West and South, and having part of Poictou, Anjou, le Maine and Normandy on the
South-east. It is one of the biggest Provinces of France, comprehending the
greatest part of the third Lyonnoile, and being extended above 70 leagues East
and West, and above 45 North and South from the Sea near Normandy to the
Borders of Poictou, but its none of the fertilest, having but little Corn, and
that black too, little or no Wine, but a great many Meadows, a vast number of
Marshes and Forests, some Iron, Lead and Silver Mines, and the best Seaports
in the whole Kingdom. They reap a great quantity of Hemp, of which they make
Linen; their Woods and Meadows give them the convenience of breeding good
Race-Horses, and a vast number of black Cattle and Sheep that furnish them with
abundance of Butter and Milk, and their Seaports make them the best Fishers
and Mariners in France. The Inhabitants appear Clownish, but are really shrewd
and cunning.

Though Pliny asserts, [ l. 4. c. 17, 19.] That the Galli called in their own
Language Aremorica, the Country included between the Garumne, the Sea, and the
Pyrenean Mountains, which the Romans named afterward Aquitain, yet it appears
that Caesar, and other Ancient Geographers understood by Armorica and Armorici,
the Nations and Cities bordering upon the Ocean, from the mouth of the Seyne,
to that of the Loire; so that the Ancient Armorique comprehended all Brittany,
and a good part of Normandy, that is, all the third Lyonnoise, and about one
half of the second, but this Name derived from an old Gaulish word, Armor, Ad
mare, or near the Sea, became in process of time proper to Britanny.

Beda relates, [ l. 1. c. 1.] That in old times some Armoricans came over into
our Island, and mastered the Southern parts of it; however it is not from them
that our Ancestors got the Name of Britains, since these Gauls were only known
by that of Armorici, whereas it cannot be doubted but that our Britains gave
their Name to Brittanny: Annal. Egin. ad An. 786.
For Eginhard testifies, that about the Year 441. at the beginning of
Valentinian's Empire, the English and Saxons having invaded our Island, a great
part of the Inhabitants put to Sea, and Landing on the borders of Vannes and
Cornouaille, made themselves Masters of the Country: Accordingly we find one
Mansuetus Bishop of these Britains subscribing to the Council of Tours, in 461.

Our Refugees made not long since a great Figure in the World, for about the
end of the fifth Age their King ^^othimas having made a League with the Emperor
Anthemius against the Goths, was defeated by them on the borders of Berry,
before he could join with his Confederates, and lost in that Battle the best
part of 12000 men.

So great a loss however was not able to run them altogether down, for we find
that even in the following Century they were a Terror to the French, so that
Clovis the Great's Grandchildren, Theodebert and Thierry, were forced to keep
Counts and Marquesses on the Frontiers, to oppose the Incursions of the
Britains into the Territory of Nants.

They being so Warlike, and their Castles and Forts being surrounded with Woods
and Marshes, the Captains of Charlemaign were not like to have subdued them as
they did about the end of the eighth Century, had they not divided themselves
into several petty principalities; notwithstanding they recovered their liberty
under Charles the Bald, by the Valor of Nomenoius and Herispoius his Son, to
whom Charles yielded the Territories of Rennes, Nantes and Retz, when he saw
that he could not recover them.

Others relate the Settlement and Adventures of our Britains somewhat
differently. They say, that about the Year 393. a British Captain, called
Conan. Meriadoc, Lieutenant to Maximus, who had been saluted Emperor in
England, in 382. obtained leave of his Master to erect a Kingdom in Little
Britain, which his Successors enjoyed independently from any other till about
the Year 570. that Chilpric I. King of France made them Tributary. After the
Death of Judicael about the Year 700: This Kingdom was rent into several petty
Principalities, so that Charlemaign had no great trouble to subdue them as he
did in 787.

Neomenes, or Nomenoius descended from the Ancient Kings of Brittany, was made
Lieutenant to the Emperor Lewis the Meek, but he revolted against him, took the
Title of King, and dyed in 852. Heruspeus, or Herispoius his Successor
maintained the War against the French King, till 866. that he was killed by his
Cousin Solomon. This last reigned 12 years, and was murdered in 878. After his
Death this Province was rent again by several Lords, who made themselves
Sovereigns in their respective Countries. This lasted to the Year 930, or 935.
that Alain I. subdued the whole Province, and enjoyed it under the Title of
County. He was succeeded by twelve or thirteen more, who possesesed it under
the same Title, but in all Sovereignty, till a French Prince, called Peter of
Dreux, Grandson to the French King Lewis the Burly, having married Alix Heiress
of this County in 1213. consented to acknowledge the French King Lewis IX. for
his Liege Lord, who in recompense gave him the Title of a Duke: And for having
thus betrayed the Liberties of the Britains, he was surnamed by them the Duke
Mauclerc, that is, The Ignorant or unskilful Duke. Philip the fair King of
France made John II. Grandchild to Peter Mauclerc Duke and Peer of France.
After the Death of John III. surnamed the Good, in 1341. there happened a long
and bloody War between two pretenders to this Duchy, John IV. surnamed of
Monfort, and Charles of Blois. John was Son to Arthur II. by a second Wife:
Charles had Spoused Jane Countess of Ponthievre, Grand Daughter to the said
Arthur. The French King Philip of Valois maintained Charles, and Edward III.
King of England took the part of John. This Quarrel lasted about 14 or 15
Years, till John V. Son to the said John of Montfort, totally routed and killed
his Competitor Charles at the Battle of Aury in 1364. This Great Duke, surnamed
the Warlike, and the Conqueror, was succeeded by six others, the last of whom
Francis H. left but one Daughter Ann, Duchess and Heiress of Britain, Married
to the French King Charles VIII. and then to Lewis XII. She had a Daughter by
the last called Claudia, Married to the French King Francis I. whose Son Henry
II. was the first King of France that was Duke of Britain by Succession, and
United that Duchy inseparably to his Crown.

The chief Rivers of Bretagne, besides the Loire, of which we have spoken in
the General Description, are the Vilaine, Vicenonia, which comes from a Place
in the Maine, called la Croisille, washes Vitrey, receives the Pinelle, mixes
with the Lille at Rennes; then increased with the waters of Seiche, Bonau, and
Sevonne, St. Aubin, Ouste, Adon, falls into the Sea near the Isle of Mait, six
leagues South-west of Vennes, and four North of the mouth of the Loire. The
Blavet comes from the Bishopric of Quimpercorentin, runs through the Bishopric
of Vennes, washes Pontivy and Hennebont, and having received the Elle at his
mouth, discharges it self into the Sea at the bay of Blavet. The Laita
separates the Bishoprics of Vennes and Quim, percorentin; and having received
the Isotte at the Abbey of St. Croix, runs into the Sea at the Abbey of St.
Maurice, three or four leagues West of the Bay of Blavet. The Rivers of Oder
and Benaudet meet at Quimpercorentin, and run into the Ocean at a Village
called Benaude^. The River Ausen or Auen washes the greatest part of this
Bishopric, and falls into the Bay of Breast on the South Side, which on the
North-side receives the River Eloen. The River of Morlaix washes the Town of
that Name, separates the Bishoprics of St. Pol and Triguier, and empties it
self into the Bay of the Torean. The Trieu, receives the Lier, and falls into
the Sea between the Isles of St. Mande and Brehacy The Arguenon separates the
Bishopric of St. Brieux from that of St. Malo, and runs into the Sea at Port
of St. Cas. The River Rance comes from the borders of the Bishopric of St.
Brieux, washes Dinant, and empties it self into the Bay of St. Milo. The
Couesnon washes Fogu^res, Romazic, Antraim, where it receives the Aisance, goes
through Pont-Orson, and falls into the Sea near Mount St. Michael.

Britany is divided into upper and lower, or Eastern and Western. Others
divide, it according to the Idioms that are spoken in its several Diocesses The
Bishopric of Rennes, Dol and St. Malo speak French, those of Quimpercorentin,
St. Pol. and Triguer speak British, and those of Nantes, Vennes and St. Brieux
make use of both. These nine Bishoprics are all suffragans to the Archbishop
of Tours: There are several Islands round about this Province, but for the most
part inconsiderable and unhabited, except it be the Isles of Wessant and
Belle-Isle, of which I shall speak under the Bishoprics on which they depend.

Of High Brittany. The Bishopric of Rennes.
RENNES Capital of Britanny is situated upon the meeting of the Rivers Vilaine
and Lille, eighteen leagues South of the Sea and Mount St. Michael, and was
already considerable in Caesar's time, who calls its Inhabitants Rhedones, and
Ptolomy the City it self Condate Redonum. It remained under the Romans till
Conan made himself King of Britany, and established there the Seat of his
Empire. About the end of the fifth Century part of our British Ancestors went
over the Sea, ransacked and plundered this Town: However, it took its former
luster again, and was still the ordinary Residence of the Dukes of Brittany,
who bore the Title of Counts of Rennes. The most Ancient Bishop of Rennes is
one Artemius, who assisted at the first Council of Tours, in 461. and to that
of Vennes, in 465. Before Henry II. instituted a Parliament at Rennes for the
whole Duchy of Brittany, and made it Sedentary at the same time, viz. in the
Year 1553. there was a Senelchalship, to which resorted the Diocesses of
Rennes, Dol, St. Malo, Cornouaille, Vennes, St. Brieux, Leon and Triguier. The
Parliameat of Rennes was transferred to Vennes in 1675. for some discontent the
French King had taken against its Citizens, who unwillingly saw their
privileges invaded, and were loath to pay his Exorbitant Taxes, this Monarch
little remembering how faithful this Town had been to his Ancestors during the
Civil Wars: Nevertheless he was not in such a Passion, but that he restored
them their Parliament in 1687. for a Sum of Money. Besides the Cathedral
Church of St. Peter, Rennes has several Parochial Churches, and Monasteries,
and the Abbeys of St. Melaine, St. George, and St. Sulpice. The Palace of its
Parliament is built on the modern way, and the Bell of its Clock is esteemed
one of the biggest in the Kingdom.

The other Towns and considerable Buroughs of this Diocese, are Vitrey,
Vitreium, near the source of the Vilaine, ten leagues South-east of Rennes,
with the Title of a Barony. The French Protestants had there a considerable
Church, St. Aubin du Cormier, perhap^ Cornutius Vicus. Gregory of Tours
testifies, that in 579. the Britains made an Incursion into the Country of
Rennes, and penetrated to this Cornutius Vicus. Lewis of La Trimouille K.
Charles VIII. his General, defeated here the Duke of Brittany and his
Confederates in 1488. July 28. It lies upon the River Couesnon, four leagues
North-west of Vitrey: Fougeres, near the source of the Couesnon, Coetnus, is
about twelve leagues North-east of Rennes. It has given its Name to a Noble
Family, and one of this Lords called Raoul de Fougeres fortified it, and built
there a good Castle. It is so called from the quantity of Fern, Fougere, that
grows thereabouts, and this Country is so remarkable for Health, in French
Lands, that two other Buroughs take their Name from thence, viz. S. Sauveur
des Lands, and S. Gilles des Lands. Antraim lies upon the same River five
leagues Northwest of Fougeres. The Latins call it Interamnis, because its
seated upon the meeting of the Couesnon and Aisance. There was formerly a
famous Monastery, and the Emperor Charles the Bald had an Interview with
Solomon King of the Britains at this place in 863.

Of the Bishopric of Dol.
THis Diocese, the most Easterly of those that lie on the Seacoast, is bound
on the West and South by that of St. Malo, on the East by those of Rennes and
Avranches, and on the North by the Ocean. It is hardly seven leagues North and
South, and three or four East and West. Dol its Capital City is only
considerable by its Bishopric: It is situated in a Marshy Plain above ten
leagues North of Rennes, four or five Northwest of St. Malo, and seven
North-east of Mont St. Michael. The most ancient part of this Town is the
Castle, near which was founded an Abbey by a Bishop called Samson, in
remembrance of a Serpent he had forced to fly thither. It was erected into a
Bishopric in 566. whereof this Samson was the first Prelate, according to
Duchesne, or rather in 844. under Neomenes King of Brittany, according to the
Jesuit Sirmond, and De Valois. The Dukes of Brittany labored a long time to
have this Church erected into an Archbishopric, and one Baldric Abbot of
Bourgueil in Anjou calls John Archbishop of Dol, and Metropolitan, but at last
Hugh one of his Prelates yielded of its Pretensions in behalf of the
Metropolitan of Tours. Near to this Foundation is an Abbey of the Order of
Cisteaux called Vicuville.

Of the Bishopric of St. Malo.
THis Diocese reaches 20 leagues in length North and South, 9 or 12 leagues
East and West where it is broadest, and in some places handly 2 or 3. It is
included between the Sea and the Bishopric of Dol on the North, those of St.
Brieux end Vennes on the West and South, and that of Rennes on the East. The
Capital St. Malo is one of the best Seaport Towns in France, though its access
be somewhat difficult, and defended by a strong Castle flanked with great
Towers, surrounded with Ditches, and kept by a good Garrison. This Town is one
of the Keys of France, and considerable in time of Peace by its Trade into the
Northern parts of Europe, but much more in time of War, for being a Nest of
Sea-Robbers. It is said that St. Malo is guarded by Dogs, because the Garrison,
lest they should be surprised, lets out 12 Dogs that go round about the Walls,
which do not fail to bark at the Goers by. This Town was built in an Island, a
mile from the Ruins of another more Ancient, called Alet, the remains of whose
Walls, Port and Castle are still to be seen. It got this Name of St. Malo, from
one of its Prelates Named Maclovius, or Machutes in the tenth Century: It was
also called the Isle of Aron. The Cathedral under the Name of St. Vincent, is
said to b^ very Ancient: but one of its greatest Ornaments was James Cartier,
who in 1534. made a Voyage to Canada, and at his return published an exact
Description of the Islands, Capes, Coasts, Seaports, Streights, Gulfs and
Rivers which he discovered, and to which he gave Names that are yet in use.
Three leagues North-east of St. Malo lies the Borough and Seaport of Cancale,
renowned for the fishing of Oysters.

Dinant, Dinannum, is the most considerable Town of this Diocese after St.
Malo, from which it is six leagues distant toward the South. It Is built upon
the River Rance, and is the head of a small Country called le Dinanois: It was
formerly the frequent Residence of the Dukes of Brittany, and the Portion of
their Youngest Sons under the Title of a County.

Ten leagues Southwards upon the River (...) lies the Town of Montfort, with an
Abbey of St. Augustins Order, and ten or twelve leagues South-west the Towns of
Ploermel and Jocelis, near the River Ouste. There are three other Abbeys of St.
Augustins Order in this Diocese, viz. Plaimpont, St. Mehen, and Beaulieu.

Of the Bishopric of St. Brieux.
THis Diocese lies in the middle of Brittany, between the Sea and the Diocese
of Triguier, Corn^aille, Vennes, and St. Malo. It Is about twenty or one and
twenty leagues North and South, and seventeen or eighteen East and West along
the Seacoast, and has the figure of an irregular Triangle. The Capital St.
Brieux, St. Brioci oppidum, is seated on the mouth of a Bay, between two small
Rivers, in a pleasant and fruitful Valley. The Town is well built, and well
Peopled, but there is a Rock before it which hinders the sight of the Sea to
its Inhabitants, though the Ocean be but at half a leagues distance. Near this
Rock is a Church dedicated to St. Michael, and a Castle, which commands the
Town and the Port, that is convenient enough for great Boats. This Bishopric
was erected in 552. by Pelagius, or as others pretend more probably in 844. by
King Neomones: It Is said of this Town, that it was the only one in the Duchy
that remained in Peace during the Civil Wars between the Houses of Montfort and
Blois. The Buildings of the Cathedral Church under the Name of St. Stephen, the
Episcopal House, and the Palace of the Justice are in some Esteem.

The other Towns and considerable Buroughs of this Diocese, are Beauport on
the Seacoast (...) leagues Northwest of St. Brieux, with an Abbey of the Order
of Premontre. Pontrieux six leagues South-west of Beauport, Busquien, an Abbey
of St. Bennets Order, eleven miles Southwest (...) St. Brieux. Quentin, nine
miles South of the same, near a Forest of ten leagues Circu^^. Lamballe, six
leagues North-east of Quentin, is thought to be the habitation of the Ambill^
of Caesar. It belonged formerly to the House (...) Clisson, and is yet
considerable for its ab^^dance of Cattle, for the Trade of Parchme^^ and for
its good Pioneers. Jugon, four leag^^ East of Lamballe, was formerly a
considera^^^ Town, where the Dukes of Brittany did (...) times reside, but it
is now almost rui^^ Montcontour, Mons Contorius, lies between Q^^tin and
Lamballe, five or six leagues South-^^^^ of St. Brieux, and has a Priorate
dedicated to S^ Michael. Avaugour has the Title of a Cou^^ and was the
Patrimony of an Illustrious F^^^ly, descended from the first Dukes of Britt^^^
St. Jacut, St. Aubin, and Lantenac, are the Abbeys of St. Bennet's Order, along
the Conf^^^ of the Bishopric of St. Malo.

Of the Bishopric of Nants.
THis Diocese lies on the South-east of Brittany, between Poictou, Anjou, and
the Bi^^opricks of Rennes and Vennes. It is above 20 ^^agues North and South,
and 24 or 28 East ^^d West. The Capital Nants, called by Pto^my Condivicnum,
and by other Ancient Geo^^aphers Civitas Namnetum, is seated upon the ^eeting
of the Rivers Ardre and Loire, 17 leagues ^ast of the Sea, which by the help of
the Tide ^^rries the greatest Boats, and small Vessels to ^ur leagues distance
of it, and makes it a great ^rading Town. It has the Title of a County, ^ll'd
by the Ancient Records and Historians of (...) French Media, Consulatus
Namnetensis, and ^omitatus Namneticus, which was the ordinary ^ortion of the
Eldest Sons of the Dukes of Brit^ny during their Fathers Lives; and tho the
City of Rennes has been so far preferred to it, ^s to be the Seat of the
Parliament, however ^he Bishop of Nants enjoys still the Privilege ^f
Councellor born in that Court, and the ^own it self has a Presidial,
Generality, and Chamber of Accounts, and an University. ^his County has been
some times in the Posses^^on of the Counts of Anjou, as it was in 1080. when it
was enjoyed by one Foulques, and still distinguished from the rest of Brittany,
as (...) Principality of Wales is from England; wh^^ apparently it comes that
it constitutes yet a p^^ticular Government, independent from the ^^neral of
Brittany. As to the Capital City, is well fortified, has a good Haven, and a
C^stle, strengthened with big round Towers, (...) half Moons. Besides the Suburb
of St. Cle^^ Nants has three others, and its Cathedral Chu^^^ dedicated to St.
Peter, is adorned with (...) high Towers, and some Monuments of (...) Dukes of
Brittany. I pass over the Colle^^ Church of our Lady, founded by Alain, su^med
Twisted-beard. It Is observed, that the ^^habitants mortally hate the Normans,
of wh^^^ this may be the Cause. After the bloody ^tel of Fontenay, between the
Sons of the Emp^ror Lewis the Meek, in 841. Neomenes desc^^ed from the Ancient
Dukes of Brittany, (...) himself Sovereign of this Duchy. He was the
Confederate with Count Lambert, who (...) this Occasion to avenge himself of
his Comp^titor Renauld, Count of Poitiers, to whom (...) Emperor Charles the
Bald had given Nants (...) that Lambert with the help of the Britains (...)
ster'd this City, and killed Renauld. In (...) mean while there arose some
Fewds betw^^^ Neomenes and Lambert, so that the last went (...) implore the
help of the Normans, retur^ with great Succors, laid Siege before N^^ took it
by Scalado, killed most of the Inha^^tants, who thought to shelter themselves
in (...) Church of St. Peter, Murdered even the Bi^^^ upon the great Altar, and
took away the (...) of the Men. This happened in 844. and in (...) ^^e same Count
took Nants again from the ^rench, who had seized upon it. In 1598. the ^rench
King Henry IV. residing at Nants to take ^he Oath of Allegiance from the whole
Pro^ince, which had revolted from him to the ^eague, made that Famous Edict of
Nants, in ^ehalf of his Protestant Subjects. This Edict ^as Registered in the
Parliament-Court of Pa^is as an Unrepealable Law the 25th. of February, ^599.
It was since confirmed by Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV. himself, who nevertheless,
to ^ew that he is far above the Laws, and even ^bove his own Promises and
Oaths, has made ^old to Repeal it in the Month of October, 1685.

I^dre, or l'Isle d' Aindre, Antrum: It was ^^mous for a Monastery founded by
one Her^^^land of Nimeghen, who from Cup Bearer ^o K. Thierry, became Monk of
the Abbey of ^ontanelles, in the Diocese of Rouen, and then Abbot in this
Convent, which was ruined by ^he Normans in 843.

Ancenis is esteemed to be the Ancenisium, or Angenisium of the Latins, Capital
of the Am^^ites, a People that lived about the mouth of ^he Loire. There was
formerly a strong Ca^tle built by Aremberg, Wife to Gueree, a Brit^ish Count:
but it is now ruined as well as the greatest part of the Town, which lies 7
leagues ^ast of Nants upon the same River, near another place 3 miles
South-west, called Oudon, which makes De Valois take 'em for the Uldo and
Andenisium of Rigord.

Chasteau-briant, Castrum Brientii or Briani, 13 Miles North of Nants, has
taken its Name from its Founder. In 1551. the French King Henry II. renewed
there all the Ancient E^^^ against the Heretics, and gave even power the
Judges of Presidials to determine Causes (...) Heresy without Appeal, ordering
farther, (...) none should be admitted into any Royal O^^^^ or the public
Profession of any Science wi^^out a right Certificate that he was a Ro^^^
Catholic: and withal, that certain Ass^^blies called Mercurials should be
kept (...) Wednesday, in all the Sovereign Courts of J^stice, to examine the
Sentiments and Conduc^ the Judges about Matters of Religion.

Clisson, Clichio upon the River Sevre Sep^^^ six leagues South-east of Nants,
is a Town (...) a Castle which gives its Name to a small Tr^^ of Land, called
le Clissonnois, but is much (...) famous for having been the Title of Oliver
(...) Clisson, High Constable of France, under t^^ French King Charles VI. it
is the same w^^^ routed the Flemmings, in 1382. and killed 400^^ of their Men
upon the spot.

Between this Town and Montesgu on the b^^ders of Poictou, is the Forest of
Gralla, where that famous Highway Robber Guillery (...) built a strong-hold,
wherein with his two Brothers and Companions, they stood out a Siege against 17
Provosts, and 5000 Men, but were taken at last and broken upon the Wheel, in
160^.

Machecou, Capital of the small Duchy and Peerdom of Raits, Ratiatensis, or
Ratiensis Pagus, erected by the French King Henry III. (...) 1581. This Town
lies near a Forest 11 leagues South-west of Nants. The Bishops of Po^tius have
sometimes subscribed Episcopi Ratiatenses, or de Civitate Ratiatica, as did
Adelphius in the Synod of Orleance, because they kept in this Country their
ordinary Residence: It was there ^lso that the Emperor Charles the Bald
invested Herispoius Neomenes's Son with the Kingdom of Brittany, adding the
Counties of Nants, Rennes, and Raiz to his Dominions, in 851.

Guerande is situated near the mouth of the Loire, between Lakes and large
sandy grounds, 18 leagues West of Nants: there are some good Salt Pits. Two
leagues North-east is the small Town of Asserac, with the Title of a
Marquisate. The Abby's are Meleray of Cisteaux, Blanche-Couronne of St. Bennet,
Pornie, and Geneston of St. Augustine, all of Friars.

CHAP. IX. Of Lower Brittany. The Bishopric of Vennes.
It Is undoubted but this Diocese is the Country of the Ancient Veneti, whose
Capital was so powerful in Caesar's time, and whose Inhabitants were the most
skilful of the Gauls in Sea Affairs, so that some have pretended that the
Venetians were descended from this Veneti, as the Ancient Geographer Strabo
relates. What were the bounds of their Dominions is uncertain; but now this
Diocese is included between the Sea, the Bishopric of Nants, St. Malo, St.
Brieux, and Cornoaille, and reaches 25 leagues East and West, and about 13 or
14 North and South. This Country was Conquered from the Romans by our fled
Britains, but Clovis the Great took it from them, and the French kept it 90
Years, till Waroc a British King reconquer'd it. His Successors maintained
themselves against their mighty Neighbors to the time of Pepin and
Charlemaign. In remembrance of this Conqueror, this Diocese was called
Broguerec, that is, the Land of Gue^ec, or Waroc.

The Capital Vennes, called Venetia by Cae^ar, and in some Notices of the Gauls
Civitas Cintium, or Cinesium, is thought to be the Da^iorigum of Ptolomy by De
Valois, it is situated two leagues from the Sea, which Ebbs and Flows there
along the Channel of Morbihan, and has a Haven of the same Name. This Town has
kept its Ancient luster long enough, for the Duke John of Montfort built there
a Castle named Ermine, where his Successors have often kept their Court. Vennes
is by no means so considerable as formerly, however, it has yet some Parochial
Churches besides the Cathedral, under the Name of our Lady, and the Apostles
St. Peter and St. Paul. St. Pattern, whom the Vulgar calls St. Poix, is thought
to have been its first Bishop.

Auray, four leagues West of Vennes, is seated upon the same Channel of
Morbihan, and famous for the Victory which John V. got over his Competitor
Charles of Blois, the 29th. of September 1364. This Battle left the former in
possession of the whole Duchy, which was confirmed to him by the Treaty of
Guerande, on the 12th. of April 1365.

Blavet, now better known under the Name of Port-Louis, is one of the best and
strongest Sea ports of France, situated on the mouth of the River Blavet, so
called for the blew Color of its Water. The Leaguers gave it to the Spaniards,
who restored it to the French King Henry IV. by the Peace of Vervins, in 1598.
The Lord Soubize took this Town for the Protestants, in 1625. but was forced
(...) leave it, because he could not master the C^tadel. Some time after the
French Prin^^ Confederated against Lewis XIII. seized upon this Town and
Castle, and when the Peace (...) made, the French King caused the
Fortific^^^ons of Blavet to be demolished: but after ^^cond Thoughts he raised
them up again, (...) made them stronger than before.

Hennebont, Cosedia, according to Adrian de V^lois, p. 291. is a small Town 7
leagues No^^ of the Sea upon the River Blavet, with a ^^mous Abbey of Nuns, of
the Order of Ciste^^ Pontivy lies upon the same River, betwixt (...) Forests,
11 leagues North-east of Hennebont.

Rohan, upon the River Ouste, 3 leagues South-east of Pontivy has the Title of
a Duchy a^^ Peerdom, erected by the French King Hen^^ IV. in 1603. and since
renewed by Lewis XIV. In 1645. but much more famous for having g^ven its Name
to a Family issued from the Ancient Princes of Brittany. Several Dukes o^ Rohan
are Renowned in History, but the mo^^ Illustrious of all is Henry II. Duke of
Roh^^, who dyed in 1638. of the Wounds he had received at the Battle of
Rhinfeld, or rather of the Poisonous Apparel that a Physician (corrupted by the
Jesuits) applied upon them: For th^^ great Warrior had been a long while one of
the French Protestants Generals, and had maintained them a long time against
their Persecutors: He has left us Memoirs so extraordinary well written, that
they will make one doubt, whether he could better sway the Sword, (...) manage
the Pen.

Guimene, near the source of the Elle, 15 miles West of Rohan, has the Title of
a Principality. Malestroit lies upon the River Ouste, 17 miles South-west of
Rohan.

The Island of Belle-Isle, Calonesus is depend^ng upon this Diocese, and lies
about 5 leagues from the Coast, and 13 or 14 South-west of Vennes. It is about
five or six leagues long East and West, and three or four leagues broad North
and South: It has a Port called Sau^on, and two or three Castles, whereof that
which lies near the Port is somewhat strong. This Island is considerable for
its Salt Pits, and for the Vessels that pass often near its Coast. If we were
Masters of this Island, 10 or 12 light Frigates, and as many at our Islands of
Jersey or Guernsey could keep in awe all the French Privateers from Dunkirk to
Bayonne, and then we might really boast our Empire of the Sea.

Of the Bishopric of Quimper-Corentin.
THis Country, anciently Inhabited by the Curiosolites, or corruptively
Corosopites, reaches 36 leagues East and West, about 16 or 18 North and South,
where it is broadest, and but 5 or 6 where it is narrowest. The Capital City
Ben, situated where the River Benaudet falls into the Odder, after its gone
round about its Walls, is called Quimper-Corentin, or Coruoaille. The last Name
seems to come from our fled Britains, and to have comprehended the Diocese of
Treguier. As to the first, it is composed from the Ancient Name of the Town
Quimper, or Kemper, and that of Corentin its first Bishop, established by St.
Martin of Tours, in the fourth Century. Adrian De Valois (Not. Gall. p. 291.)
supposes it to be the Alauna of Aethicus, and p. 166, 167. the Vagorgitum of
Pulomy, Capital of the Arvii, by reason that he makes them Neighbors to the
Aulerci Diab^intes, and the Namnetes, and that neither he nor Strabo mention
the Curiosolita. The Sea ebbs and flows into the Port of Kemper, and carries
thither great Boats. The Cathedral Church is a fine and Ancient Building, with
two great Towers. Near the Gate, called Tourbic, is a Tower extraordinary big,
that formerly was the Towns-Castle. Cornouaille, called in the Ancient Charters
Cornubia, or Cornugallia, had formerly its particular Counts, and has now a
Presidial. It lies 4 leagues North of the Sea, and 28 West of Vennes.

Concarneau lies in a Bay 5 leagues East of Cornouaille, and 11 West of Blavet:
It has an extraordinary strong Castle.

Quimperlay, lies 7 leagues East of Concarneau, and 2 North of the Sea, on the
meeting of the Rivers Laitta, Isotte, and another small River. It was founded
by Alain Coignard, Count of Cornouaille. Betwixt this Town and the Sea, on the
East Side, are two famous Abbeys of St. Bennets Order, St. Croix, and St.
Morice, separated by a Forest.

Four leagues South-west of Quimper-Corentin, are the Towns of Pol-David, and
Douarnenes near a Bay that bears their Name, and is about 4 or 5 leagues deep,
and 2 or 3 broad.

Eight leagues North-west of Quimper-Corentin, lies in a Bay the Sea port of
Audierne, and 4 leagues farther the Isle of Sain, Samnis or Sena, remembered by
Mella, because of an Oracle of the Gaulish Mercury that was in it.

Chasteau-lin^ is a considerable Borough upon the River Aufen, 7. leagues
North of Quimper-Corentin, and 6 North-east of Douarnenes. The whole Country
is mighty full of Woods, and well watered with Rivers. Besides the Abbeys
already mentioned, you have there Langonet of St. Bennets Order. Coetmaloen of
Cisteaux, or Cisternian Monks, Bonrepos of Cisteaux too, according to Du Val,
or of Premontre, a sort of Austin Friars, according to Sampson.

Of the Bishopric of Treguier.
THe Inhabitants of this Diocese make part of the Ancient Osismii, who took up
besides the Diocesses of St. Pol de Leon, and St. Brieux; and it is not easy to
determine whether of them is Vorganium, accounted by Ptolomy the Capital of
that People. This Country lies on the Seacoast, and is now but 12 leagues
broad and long, being included between the Bishoprics of St. Brieux,
Quimper-Corentin, and St. Pol de Leon. The Capital Town called Treguier, or
Lantriguet, is situated on the mouth of a Bay, almost 11 leagues North-west of
St. Brieux: Its Bishop takes the Title of Count, and the first is esteemed to
be an English man, called Tudwal, under whose Name the Cathedral Church is
dedicated; but this Town having been since ransacked several times by the
Saxons, Danes and Normans, we find no mention of its Prelates in History, till
the Year 1175. The famous Lawyer St. Yves, who lived under the Reign of the
French King Philip the Fair, and having been related into the number of the
Saints, has been taken by the French Lawyers for their Patron, was a Native of
this Town.

Guingamp upon the River Trieu, 8 leagues South-east of Treguier, is the
Capital of the Duchy and Peerdom of Ponthievre, erected by Charles IX. in
1569. and an Ancient Lordship of the House of Estampes, issued by Alliance from
the Dukes of Brittany. Lannion lies upon the small River Loquet, 2 leagues from
the Sea, and 5 South-west of Treguier. A mile North-west near the same River,
are the Ruins of an Ancient City, called in British Cozqueoudet, which is
esteemed by some the Civitas Osismiorum of the Latins, and supposed to be
demolished by the Danes.

Morlaix, Mons Relaxus, situated upon a Hill between two Valleys, on a River of
that Name, is a considerable Town, with two Suburbs, several Churches, a
Townhouse, and an Hospital, that is esteemed one of the finest Buildings in
the Province: It has also a good Haven, into which the Tide brings up great
Boats and Vessels of a hundred Tuns, great Merchantmen lie at Anchor at the
Bull-Fort, or Fort du Taureau, which is built in an Island 3 leagues
Southwards. This Town is renowned for its Trade in Hemp, Line, and Linen: On
the top of the Hill are to be seen the Ruins of an Ancient Castle. Three miles
South of Treguier, lies a Borough, called La Roche-Derrien, famous for that
Oliver of Clisson, Father to the High Constable of that Name, was Captain of it.

Of the Bishopric of St. Pol De Leon.
THis Country was under the Jurisdiction of the Osismii, as I have already
observed, though Caesar gives to its Inhabitants the distinct Name of Lemovices,
which in process of time degenerated into that of Leonenses. Its the most
Northwestern part of Brittany, but at present not above 18 leagues long, and 8
broad. The Capital St. Pol de Leon, or Leondoul, is an Ancient Bishopric,
founded under the French King Chilprick I. in the sixth Century, and its first
Prelate was one Paul, who has left his Name to the Town. The Inhabitants who
speak the British more naturally than their Neighbors, call Leondoul Cozque
Oudet, or the Ancient Town, and tell us, that its Jurisdiction was at first
very large; but that this their Capital having been ruined, its Dependencies
were divided into the three Diocesses of St. Pol de Leon, Treguier, and St.
Brieux. It is likewise one of the Ancientest Viscounty's of Brittany, which has
been possessed by the House of Rohan, issued from the first Christian Counts of
this Province, during 700 years, till they sold it to John I. Duke of Brittany,
in 1254. This Town is pleasant enough, and some of the Dukes of Brittany have
made it their Abode.

There are some inland Towns, as Lanhouerneau, Lesneven, Carvilis, Lenvilis,
Landerneau, of which I find nothing in my Authors, neither of some small
Islands on the West of this Diocese; save that Landerneau is seated upon the
River Eloene Herium, six leagues North-east of Breast, in the fertilest Soil of
Brittany; and that the Isle of Ouessant, or as we pronounce it Ushant, is
called by the Latin Authors Axantis, Uxantis, Osa, or Ossa; that it is about 4
leagues in compass, defended by the Castle of Lampool, and by several Banks and
Rocks.

And therefore I shall finish with the Description of Breast, called (...),
Brivates Portus by Ptolomy. This famous Seaport Town, lies 16 leagues
South-west of St. Pol de Leon, 11 miles East of Conquests-Bay, and 12 leagues
North of Quimper-Corentin. It Is seated on the South Side of a Bay of 5 leagues
in length, and 3 miles broad, whose depth is in most places from 10 to 15
Fathoms, and no where under 7. The entrance of the Bay is two leagues in
length, and half a league broad where it is largest, and but half a mile where
it is narrowest. The Town is situated on the steep of a Hill, on the side of
the Port, whose Entry is defended by a strong Castle dug in a Rock. This
Port is seated in a Gulf, whereinto flows the Sea by four different places, and
is esteemed the best in Europe, because the greatest Men of War may continually
float therein. The Town is strongly fortified, inhabited by many Privateers,
and is the Storehouse of the French Admiralty for the Ocean. On the South Side
of this Bay is the Seaport of Landevenec, which seems to be the Vindana Portus
of Ptolomy; it has an Abbey of Benedictine Monks.

CHAP. X. Of the Government Orleannois.
THis Government is the biggest as well as the Fertilest part of France, for it
reaches 110 leagues East and West from Chauteau-Chino^ in Nivernois, to the Sea
or the Isle of Nermouslier in Poictou, and 70 North and South from the River
Aure in Normandy, to Monbrun in Angoumois. It has part of the Isle of France
and Normandy on the North, Brittany and the Ocean on the West, Saintonge,
Perigort, Limousin, and Auvergne on the South, la March, Bourbonnois, Burgundy
and Champaign on the East.

In this Government are included 14 or 15 smaller Countries, situated North and
South, and along the River Loire, which divides the whole into two parts very
near equal. Maine, Perch, High-Beauce, or Land Chartrain, Vendemois, and part
of Gatinois, lie on the North of that River going from West to East. Nivernois,
Orleanois, or lower Beauce, Blaisois, Touraine, and Anjou, lie round about the
Loire East and West; Poictou, the Land of Aunis, Augoumois, and Berri are the
most Southern parts.

All these Countries are fruitful in Corn, Wine, Fruits, Cattle and Game. There
are a great many Woods, especially in upper and lower Beauce, the most
considerable of which is the Forest of Orleans, said to contain 70000 Akers of
Land, and to have been of greater extent in Francis I. time, since it then took
up 140000. The Forest of Senonches, in the Country of Chartres, is 7 miles
long, and 5 broad. That of S. Cyr les Antrain in the Election of Clamecy, is
well near 10 miles in length, but of no considerable breadth: There is no
Province in France which has so many paved ways.

As to its Rivers, besides the Loire, which is rather a River of France, since
it waters 3 of its Governments, than of Orleanois, there are the Loing Lupa,
which comes from the Mountains of Auxerre, near Linsec and the borders of
Burgundy, goes by S. Sauveur, S. Fergeau, Blesneau, Chastillon, and at Conflans
receives the Ouane, which rises at a Village of that Name, and waters Thoussy,
and Chateau-renard. The Loing pursuing its course, goes through Montargis, and by
Cepoy. Here is dug a Canal for the Communication of the Seyne and Loire,
which intercepting part of the Water of the Loing, and that of several
Rivulets, is divided into two branches, both Navigable by small Boats; the
Eastern goes through Montargis and Chatillon, ends at Briare upon the Loire,
and is called the Canal of Briare; the other passes by Chevillon, runs through
the Forest of Orleans, discharges it self into the Loire near St. Denis en
Vallee, 3 miles East of Orleans, and is called the Canal of Orleans.

Down Montargis and Cepoy, the Loing becomes still more and more Navigable,
being increased at Fontenay, with the Clairy that comes from St. Martin-Dordon,
and washes Courtenay and Ferrieres: It receives another Rivulet near
Chateau-Landon, goes by Nemours and Moret, and a mile Northwards discharges it
self into the Seine. The Escolle and Essonne, which fall into this last River,
are neither of them Navigable. The Eure issues from a Lake near the Forest of
Senouches, washes Bellomer, Pont-gouin, Courville, Chartres, Nogent-le-Roy,
Dreux, and mixes with the Aure, at Nonancourt.

The Huisne rises at some Mountains in the Country of Perch, washes Mauves,
Conde, N^gent-le-Rotrou, la Ferte-Bernard, Connarey, and mixes with the Sarte
at le Man's. This comes from the borders of Normandy, waters Alensson, Fresnay,
Beaumont-le-Vicomte, and having received the Orne near la Guierche, and the
Huisne at le Man's, goes by la Suze, Malicorn, Sable, Pince, Chateauneuf, and
mixes with the Loir and the Mayenne at Angers. The Loir Ledus Lidericus takes
its source from the Lake of Villebon, in the Province of Perch, waters Illiers
and Alluie, receives the Ousanne near Bonneval, the Conie, which is a Marshy
River near Marboe, and the Yerre near St. Hilaire below Chateaudun, after it
has hidden it self under the ground. Then pursuing its course, goes by Cloye,
Moree, Freteval, Vendome, Montoire, Chateau du Loir, Durestail, and Angers. The
Mayenne, Meduana, rises on the borders of Normandy, waters Domfront, Mayenne,
Laval, Chatean-gontier, le Lion-d' Angers, Angers, and here uniting with the
other two Rivers, fall together into the Loire near Pont-de-ce.

The Charente, Carantonus, rises at a Village called Cheronoc, on the borders
of Limosin and Angoumois, goes by Chantrezat, Vieille-Chaize, Bendis, Sivray
and Rufec; it is then increased with the Rivers Argent and Or, the Son, and
the Tardouere. This takes likewise its source in the borders of Limosin, washes
la Vauguion, les Salles, Pont Chabrot, Mont-beron, la Rochefoucaud, and mixes
with the Charante at Mans-les its Genous. The Charante thus swollen waters
Montignac, Balsac, Angoulemes, Chateau-neuf, Balsac, Vibrac, Jarnac, Cognac,
receives in its way the Bandiat, the Touvre, Toluera, the Noere, Notra, the
Boueme and the Nay, and at its entrance into Saintonge, the Seugne at
Pont-Chauveau. Then it washes Saints, Taillebourg, St. Savinian du Port,
Tonnay-Charante, near which its increased with the Boutonne, Vultonna, that
washes Secondigny, Chizay, l'Isle, Availle, St. Jean d' Angely, Tonay-Boutonne,
la Vallee, and falls into the Charante at a place called Port: This pursuing
its course, goes by Rochefort, Soubize, and disembogues it self into the Ocean
near Port-Lupin.

Sevre, Savara, or Separa, is the Name of two Rivers of Poictou; one is now
called, Sevre Niortoise, and in the ancient Records Marinel, which has its
source near a Village called Sevre, washes S. Mexant and Niort, goes 6 or 7
leagues through Marshes, where it is increased with several Rivulets, and then
discharges it self into the Bay of Pertuis Breton near Marans, betwixt Lacon
and la Rochelle. The Lay rises near la Mallerat, not far from the Sevre
Nantoise, washes Mareuil, and falls into the Ocean at St. Benoit, betwixt
Talmond and Lusson. The Sevre Nantoise springs near Secondigni, goes by
Ma^contant, Mortaigne, Clisson, Chateau-Thibaus, and discharges its Waters into
the Loire, a mile West of Nants: The Rocks that are spread along its Channel,
hinder it from being Navigable. The Vye an inconsiderable River, washes
Asprem^nt and St. Gilles, where it enters into the Sea over against Isle de
Dieu.

The Vienne, Viane or Vignane, Vincenna or Vingenna, issues from the Mountains
of Auvergne, on the borders of Limosin, waters S. Leonard, ^imoges, S. Junien,
Brigueuil, Confoulens, Availle-Limosine, Lisle-Jourdain, Lussac-le-Chateau,
Chauvigny, Chastelleraud, Novastre, L' Isle-Bouchard, Chinon and Candes, where
it falls into the Loire, four leagues East of Saumur. The Rivers it receives
are the Taurion near Limoges, the Clain, Clennum, near Chastelleraud, after it
has been increased with the Dive, the Vonne, and the Miossan, Medioximi, and
has passed through Vivonne, Poictiers and Dissay. The Creuse, Crosa, which comes
from the Mountains of Auvergne, goes by Aubusson, Ahun, Glenic, Celle, Crozans,
in the Country of la March, Argenton, S. Marcel, S. Gautier,
Ruffec-le-Chateau, Blanc en Berry, la Roche-pouzay, la Guierche, la Hay, and
Port de Piles, near which it mixes with the Vienne, after it has been increased
with the small Creuse, the Gartempe, Vartimpa, the Angolin and the Claize.

The Indre, Anger, Andria or Endria, waters the Countries of Berry and
Touraine, and is not otherwise considerable, but that it divides it self into
several Branches, and is interrupted with diverse Marshes that create much
difficulty to Travelers. It rises in Berry, and goes by la Chastre,
Chasteau-Rou, Castrum Rodulfi, Bourg de De^ls, Mehun sur Indre, Buzansais,
Estree, S. Geno^^, Paluau, Chatillon, Loches, Beaulieu, near which its
increased with the Indroise, that goes by Ville-Loin, and Montresor; then
waters le Fau, Cormery, Mont-bason, Azay-le-rideau, and discharges it self into
the Loire, 3 leagues East of Candes.

The Cher, Caris, springs in Bourbonnois, on the borders of Auvergne, washes
Auzance, la Marche-Combraille, Mont-Lusson, Ainai le Vieux, S. Amand and
Monrond in Bourbonnois, Chateauneuss, le Coudray, Villeneuve, Vierzon, Menetou
sur Cher, Selle, S. Aignan, Montrichart, Blere, St. Avertin, and renders it
self into the Loire, 3 leagues East of the mouth of the Indre: It receives at
Vierzon the Eure or Yeure, that goes through Bourges and Meun, and is increased
with the Lovatier, Collin, Soulangis, Mouron and Auron; besides the Arnon that
waters Reuilly and Sury, the Naon increased with the Fouzon and Fourion; the
Saudre that issues near Sancerre in Berry, waters Notre-Dame de Boncard,
Vailly, Concressant, Argent, Clement, Pierre-Fitte, la Ferte Imbaut,
Remorentin, Chatillon sur Saudre, near which it mixes with the Cher, after it
has received the Nerre that goes by Aubigny, the small Saudre that waters la
Chappelle d' Angillon, and Menetreol, and the Raire that washes Nansay.

The Amasse runs but 4 or 5 leagues, and is considerable only by that it goes
through Amboise, a Town pretty famous, seated on the banks of the Loire, five
leagues East of Tours.

The Cisse increased with the Ramberres and Branne fall into the Loire, on the
North-side, 5 miles East of Tours The Beuvron on the borders of the Election of
Gien, near the Village of Coullons, washes Cerdon, the Isle of Chaon, la Motte
Beuvron, la Ferte Aurain, Villeneuve, Newvy Brassieux, receives the Boneuvre,
the Cenon and the Bievre, and mixes with the Loire between Cande and Onzain, 10
leagues North-east of Tours.

The Cousson has its source in the proper Orleanois at the Village of Senely,
passes between la Ferte-Seneterre and St. Aubin, makes the small Isles of Ligny
and St. Aignan, goes through the pleasant Forest of Chambort, and discharges
it self into the Loire, almost two miles East of the mouth of the Beuvron.
Going up the Loire toward the East, you meet with several Rivulets falling
into that great River, as the Dixme, the Doure, the Loiret, which begins to be
Navigable at Olivet, 3 miles from its mouth, though its whole Channel has hardly
3 leagues in length.

On the side of Orleance, and the North side of the Loire, you meet with the
Rivulets of Meun and the Aisses: And after having passed the Canal of Briare,
going Southward up, you will find the Bonny, the St. Amand, the Rivulet of Cosne,
the Argent, the Mazau, the Niere, etc.

Of the Country of Maine, or La Maine.
MAine, or Le Maine, Cenomania, or Cenomanicus Pagus, has Normandy on the
North, Perch, Vendomois, and Beauce on the East, Bre^agne on the West, and a
part of Touraine with Anjou on the South. This Province is 20 leagues North and
South from Bourg-le Roy near Alen^on in Normandy to Galerande on the borders of
Anjou, and about 34 East and West from la Ferte Bernard to the Frontiers of
Brittany. It is ordinarily divided into Higher and Lower, abounds with Corn,
Wine, Linseed, Cattle, and has some Mines of Iron. It is watered with three
principal Rivers, viz. the Huisne, the Sarte and the Mayenne, which in their
course receive the Yaigre, the Jeayu, the Dive, the Veuve, the Grain, and many
other little streams. Its principal Forests are Bersay, Perfeigne, Longaunay,
Sille, Dandaines, etc. The Inhabitants of Maine are very Witty and Courteous,
and so shrewd in the management of their Affairs, that this has given occasion
to a Proverb, Qu' un Mansea^^ ^aut un Norman and demi, That an Inhabitant of
Maine is worth one entire Norman, and the half of another; but others ascribe
the Origin of that Proverb to the Money formerly used in this Province, that
was worth once as (...) as that of Normandy.

Caesar, Pliny and Ptolomy speak much to t^^ praise of the Inhabitants of this
Country, ^^der the Name of Cenomani Aulerci. Tit. Liv^^^ Polybius and Leander
Alberti talk of their Co^quests in Italy. In the Year 160, from t^^ building of
Rome, Elitovius chief of the Peop^^ of Maine, and their Prince Belovesus made
(...) Eruption into the North-eastern part of Ita^^ whence they drove the
Natives, and the built the Cities of Bresse, Verona, Trent, C^^^ Bergemo,
Mantoua, and many others. Thus is that the Poet John Baptist Ignatius
expr^^seth himself in their Favor, Cenomanique acres and non ignobile semen,
etc.

This Province was subject to the Gauls, t^^ Romans, the Francks, and the
English. In t^^ middle of the eighth Century, Pepin, Head (...) the second
Stock of the French Kings, gave the County with 12 others, to his Brother Gris^
or Grippon: But the Names of the succeedi^^ Counts are not known till Hugh I.
in 1020. (...) fell by Inheritance to our K. Henry II. but (...) confiscated by
the French Monarchs upon o^ K. John, under pretense of the Murder of A^thur of
Brittany. Since that time it has bee^ several times detatched from, and
reunited ^gain to the Crown of France. In 1674. Le^^^ XIV. made bold to give it
as an Appanage, o^ Portion to one of his Bastards called Lin^^ whom he had got
on the Wife of the Mar^^^^ of Montespan; bestowing upon him the Ti^e (...) Duke
du Maine, and the Charge of Colonel Ge^eral of the Switzers.

The City of Man's or le Man's, in Latin Ci^tas Cenomanorum, Suindinum, or
Subdinnum, is ^^tituted upon the Confluence of the Sarte, and ^e Huisne, having
the Title of a Bishopric ^^ffragan of Tours. It is said that this City was
^uilt by Sarrhon, Grandson of Samothes, K. of the ^auls, and being afterward
ruined by the Druides and the Sarrhonides, whilst they contested for it, (...)
was rebuilt by Lemant King of the Gauls, who ^ive to it his Name. However it
be, for this ^ccount is looked upon as fabulous, le Man's is (...) very Ancient
City: And in Charlemaign's time ^as one of the most flourishing in the Celtick
Saul, but the incursions of the Normans, and ^he War with the English have much
abated of ^s former Grandeur. It is now built upon a ^ountain, which is raised
up high beyond the ^irte, between the North and the West, and as a Bailiwick
and a Presidial Seat, with a Ca^^edral Church under the Name of St. Julian, ^ho
is esteemed the first Bishop of it. The ^rench Kings by a Prerogative of their
Crown, ^e Canons born in this Church. It Is observed ^^at the English, during
the Siege they laid to ^is City, in 1425, were the first who made use ^f great
Artillery in France.

Mayenne-la Juhel, Meduana, has its Name ^^om the River Mayenne, upon which it
is seat^d, and from the Lord Juhel, who lived under ^he Reign of Philip August:
It lies not far from (...) Frontiers of Normandy, being distant from le ^^^s
about 18 leagues toward the North-west. (...) a Town very agreeable with the
Title of a Duchy, under which Charles of Guise beca^^^ so famous during the
Wars of the Leag^^ whereof he was Head. In 1661. Cardinal M^zarin bought this
Duchy from the Heirs o^ that House, to give it in Portion to his N^^^
Hortensia Mancini, Married with Armand Char^^ de la Port Duke of Mazarin; it
had before the Title of a Marquizate.

Laval, or Laval-Guion, Vallis-Guidonis, is upon the River Mayenne in lower
Maine, about (...) or 7 leagues from Mayenne toward the South It has the Title
of a County, and belongs t^ the House of la Trimouille: it is famous for the
fine Cloth which is made there, as als^ for a Council which was held there, A^^
1242.

La Ferte Bernard, Firmitas Bernardi, a Bar^ny, is situated upon the River
Huisne, bei^^ distant from le Man's about 9 or 10 leagues toward the East, and
the Frontiers of Perc^^ there is a seat of Justice, which resorts immediately
to the Parliament of Paris. It ga^^ Birth to Robert Garnier, who at the end of
the last Age, before Tristan, Mairet, and P. Corneil^ arose, was accounted the
Prince of the Tragi^^ Poets amongst the French. The Territory about this Town
is called by the Latin Autho^ of the French Affairs Ager Firmitatensis.

Sable a Marquizate, is situated near the S^^^ between the little Rivers of
Vergete and Er^^ about 10 or 11 leagues from Man's toward (...) South-west.
Beaumont le Vicomte is a fine Tow^ with the Title of a Duchy, it lies upon
(...) Sarte, 6 leagues North of Man's, and 5 South (...) Alencon. Raoul, who was
Lord of it, Ass^^^ Anno 1093. at the Translation of the Relics of St. Julian,
the first Bishop of Man's.

Chateau du Loir, a Barony, is situated upon the River Loir in the Frontiers of
Vendomois, distant from le Man's about 8 or 9 leagues to ^^wards the South-east.

There are other places of some Note, as Lavardin, Villaine-la-Juhel, Gesvres,
Vibray, Vasse, Ballon and Galerande that are Marquizats, Brulon, Suze, and
Belin, are Counties, Bresseau is a Viscounty, and S. Suzanne is a Barony.

Of the Country of Perch, or Le Perch.
LE Perch has Normandy on the North, (...) Maine to the West, Vendomois and
Blais^^ on the South, and toward the East it has Beauce. This Country seems
not to have bee^ known to the Ancients, the reason of which I imagine to be,
that the middle-part of it was all covered with Woods, and the borders belonged
to the Neighboring Nations: And therefore it was that an Anchoret, whom
Posterity has since venerated under the Name of St. Avy, S. Avitus, retsred
into these Forests as into a wide and impenetrable Solitude. The Country was
yet for the most part Woody, at the beginning of the third Race of the French
Kings, about 700 years ago, and called for that reason Perticus Saltus, the
Forest of Pearches, perhaps because it consisted in great part of Fir-trees,
or other long and even Wood. And you may observe by the reading of the Latin
Authors of the French History, how they were felled down, and the Country
peopled by degrees; which however is still Woody enough: Its therefore labor
lost to look for its Ancient Inhabitants, since there were none, for the
Ilnelli and the Aulerci Diablintes were an Armo^ick Nation, who seemed to have
dwell'd the first in the Western Coasts of Normandy, and the ^ast on the
Southern of Brittany.

Le Perch is divided into higher and lower; ^he higher part is the County, and
the lower ^s called Perche-Gouet, or rather it is divided in^o Grand Perch,
Perche-Gouet, (from the Name of its Ancient Lords) Terre Francoise, or French
Country, and Terres Demembrees, or Dismembered Lands.

1. Grand-Perche contains Nogent-le Rotrou, Mortaigne, Bellesme, Perriere, the
Barronies of Loupe, Illiers, Courville and Pontgoin.

Nogent le Rotrou, Novigentum Rotroci, or Rotroldi, so called from Rotrou its
Founder, Count of Perch, is seated upon the Huisne, where it receives the
Run, and is the Capital of Upper Perch, though it be commonly accounted a
Borough, but one of the finest and richest in France, by reason of its
Manufactures of Serges, Linen and Leather, and of its excellent Knives, called
also by the Name of the Country Coutaux Pergois. The Inhabitants having
rebelled against the English, the Count of Salisbury took it, and caused many
of them to be hanged; but the French King Charles VII. retook it in 1449. It
lies 30 leagues South-west of Paris, and almost 22 North-west of Orleance.

Mortagne, Moritolium, or Moritonium, near the source of the Huisne, 8 leagues
North-west of Nogent le Rotrou, is a goodly Town, well peopled, and adorned
with several Churches. It has a Castle, and had formerly the Title of a County.
Perriere is now of little consideration, having been ruined by the Wars. ^e^me,
Bellismum, or Bellissimum, (sup. Castru^ is seated on a Brook that increases
the Huif^^ la Ferte-Bernard, and has near it a Mines Fountain as much esteemed
as those of Poug^ and Forges. The States of the Province use (...) be kept in
this Town, which has the first Vo^^ and is distant 6 leagues from Nogent le
Rotrou (...) the South-west.

The Barony of Pontgouin belongs to the Bishop of Chartres, and has several
Lordships depending on it, Conde sur Huisne, Condate ad Eg^^nam, is of some
Consideration, and lies 2 leagu^ North of Nogent le Rotrou.

2. Perche-Gouet has 5 Ancient Barronies, t^ wit, Auton, Monmirail, Alluye,
Basoche, and Brou.

3. La Terre-Francoise consists in the Bailiwick of La Tour-Grise, upon the
River Aure, over against Verneuil in Normandy. 4. Les Terres ^membrees, have
the small Country of Timera^^, the Town of Chateau-neuf, and the Principality
and Town of Senonches.

This little Province is about 18 leagues in length, and almost as much in
breadth: It Is very fertile in Corn, and well furnished with Meadows and
Pasture-ground, which together with their Forests, and the Manufactures
formerly mentioned, make the Inhabitants subsist. Remy Belleau, a Lyrick Poet,
famous in the last Age, was Originary of this Province.

Perch has a dependence upon the Generallty's of Orleans and Alencon as to
the Court of Exchequer, on the Parliament of Paris for secular Justice, and for
the Spiritual; it resorts to the Bishops of Chartres and Seez. It had its
^articular Counts, the most Ancient of whom ^s named Agombert, or Albert, in
the time of Louis le Debonnaire, in the IX. Century: But ^hey were called
Counts of Bellesme, Alencon or Mortagne, and the first who took the Title of
Count du Perch was Rotrou II. in 1149, that Country having been before of too
little Consideration, to give Title to a great Lord.

Of Beauce.
DU Val, and several other Geographers comprehend under the Name of Beauce,
Belsa, or Belsia, several small Countries, as the Territory of Chartres, le
pais Chartrain, that part of Gastinois which is annexed to the Government
Orleanois, besides Vendosmois, Dunois, Puisaye, proper Orleanois, Sologne, and
the Southern part of Blaisois, which make up an extent of 35 leagues North and
South, from Dreux to Remorentin, and above 50 leagues East and West, from the
borders of Champaign and Burgundy, to the Frontiers of Maine, being included
with Berri and Nivernois on the South, Perch on the North, Maine and Touraine
on the West, and Champaign and Burgundy on the East. These Countries taken
together, consist in large and fruitful Plains, so very abundant in Corn, that
they are called the Granary of France.

The Learned Adrian de Valois, following Ancient Authors, gives to this
Province an extent of 15 leagues, and divides it into three parts, Belsa
Carnutensis le pais Chartrain, Belsa Dunensis, or Dunois, Belsa Pitiverensis,
the Election of Pithiviers. To avoid confusion, I shall speak first of the
County of Chartres, or Pays Chartrain, which is called by some.

Proper Beauce.
THis Country is situated between the Isle of France, Perch, Blaisois and
Orleanois. The City of Chartres, called in Latin Autricum Carnutum, from the
River Autura, Eure on which it lies, has a Presidial Seat and Bishopric,
formerly suffragan of Sens, and now of Paris, since the Year 1622. This City is
so Ancient, that some Authors believed that the Issue of Gomer having passed
into the Gauls, some time after Noah, did lay the Foundation of it. Others
maintain, that the Druides and Sarrhonides, the Ancient Priests of the Gauls,
did build it, and foretold, that a Virgin should one day grow big with Child
without the Company of a Man. It was this which obliged Pris^ns, Governor for
the Romans, to erect a Temple to that Blessed Virgin, with this Inscription,
Virgini Pariturae, or to the Virgin who is to bring forth. Thus it was that
they adored at Athens an unknown God. But whatever be of it, the People of this
Country made a long and bold Resistance to the Romans, killed one Tasgetus,
though he was of the Royal Blood of their own King's, because Caesar had set him
over them, and after that great Conqueror had subdued them, he was glad that
they would accept of the Alliance of the Romans, and keep their Peace.

The Bishops of this City are thought to be of very Ancient Institution, for
Solemnis, who informed K. Clovis in the Christian Religion is, reckoned its 14
Prelate by Duchesne. At least it is probable, that under the French Kings of the
first and second Race they were Lords Temporal as well as Spiritual of it, if
what the same Author relates be true, that one Elias the 40th. Bishop gave the
Revenues of the Abbey of S. Pere en Vallee to the Nobility of Chartres, and that
Hardwin the 50th. Prelate was the first who Dismembered the County from the
Bishopric, to enrich a Nephew of his called Odo, or Eudes. I know not whether
his Posterity forfeited their Estates; but Hugh the Great, Father to Hugh
Capet, the first French King of the 3d. Race, being then very powerful in that
Kingdom, gave this Country together with those of Blois and Tours to a Kinsman
of his called Theobald the Old, or the Tricker. His issue in process of time,
viz. in 1037. acquired the County of Champaign, and had been the greatest Lords
in France, had they not weak'ned themselves by the Portions they gave to
Youngest Sons. In 1286. Lewis IX. bought the County of Chartres from Jane of
Chatillon, the Heiress of it. It has been since united to the French Crown, and
separated from it several times, and now it makes part of the Portion of
Monsieur, Lewis XIV.'s Brother; his Eldest Son bearing the Title of Duke of
Chartres.

This City and Country have under gone several Revolutions, for at the end of
the sixth Age Thierry K. of Burgundy, took it by Storm from his Brother
Clotaire. In 743. Hunold Duke of Aquitain took Chartres and burned it. Francis
I. erected it into a Duchy, in Favor of Madam Rene^ of France, Duchess of
Ferrara. Anno 911. Rollon chief of the Normans besieged it, and Anno 1019. it
was almost quite burnt down, Anno 1568. the Protestants laid Seige to it under
the Reign of Charles IX. and would certainly have taken it, the Admiral of
Chatillon having defeated la Valette, who came to relieve it, and the Duke of
Anjou not daring to ventu^e a Battle against that great Captain: But the
Protestant Nobility lured with the fair promises of Liberty of Conseience, by
that entreaguing Princess Katherine of Medicis, raised voluntarily the Siege,
whereupon ensued the short Edict of Pacification at Longjumeau. Ever since
Chartres followed the party of the League, till Anno 1591. Henry ^he Great took
it, and was there Crowned and Anointed King of France, the City of Rheims still
persisting in its Rebellion. If you ask, whether they took Consecrated Oil to
perform that Ceremony, Du Ker^^er will answer you, that there is another holy
Ampull, or Vial kept at Marmoutier, an Abbey near Tours for that purpose, and
that the Oil of that Vial is no less Sacred than that of Rheims.

The River Eure divides Chartres into two inequal parts, which lie partly on a
Valley of difficult Access, and partly at the end of a large Plain, the Streets
are generally narrow, as ^t uses to be in Ancient Towns; the Houses ho^eve^ are
fine, the Walks pleasant, and the Churches Magnificent. The Cathedral dedicated
to the Holy Virgin is very considerable, its Quire, the Church under ground,
and its 2 Steeples, are the Admiration of all Strangers. The Chapter has 72
Canons, 17 whereof are Dignitaries, among whom are 6 Archdeacons, viz. of
Chartres, Blois, Dunois, Vendome, Dreux, and Pincerais, 4 Provosts, namely,
those of Ingre, Normandy, Mesange and Anet. In this Diocese are reckoned 30
Abbeys, 257 Priories, and more than 1300 Parishes, the Churches of St. Julien
and St. Agnan are very fine.

In a word, it is one of the biggest and richest Diocesses of France,
comprehending four other Cities, the heads of so many Countries, each of which
might conveniently enough be made the Seat of a Bishop, viz. Blois, Chateaudun,
Vendome and Dreux, if we believe De Valo^s. In the City it self are 3 Abbeys,
viz. those of St. Josaphat, St. Pere en Vallee, and St. Cheron, besides many
other Religious Houses. Several considerable Manufactures are made at Chartres,
by reason of the waters of the River Eure, which are esteemed very proper for
that purpose. This City lies 14 leagues North-west of Orleance, and 16
South-west of Paris.

Nogent le Roi is situated upon the Eu^e, 5 miles South of Dreux, and 9 North
of Chartres. It Is called Novigentum Regis, because, as some say, King Philip
VI. dyed here, or as others pretend, because it was given by one Isaselle to K.
Philip August.

Dreux, Durocassae Carnutum, and corruptively Drocae, and Drocum, lies also
upon the Eure, 13 miles North of Chartres, on whose Bishop it depends, as
likewise on the Governor of Orleanois, though as to the Exchequer, its Election
resorts to the Generality of Paris. It has the Title of a County, and the
precedence of Chartres in the Assembly of the General States, it being one of
the Ancientest Cities in the Kingdom. Nay, if we believe the suppositious
Berose, it was built Anno 410. or thereabouts, after the Deluge, by Drius IV.
King of the Gauls, and Founder of the Druides. So much at least is sure, that
these Druides, who were together the Priests, the Teachers, the Judges and the
Physicians of that Nation, kept here their Assemblies, as esteeming this Place
blessed and holy, and the middle or Center of Gaul. Here also it was that they
gathered the Misletoe from the Oaks, with many Ceremonies, after the solemn
Sacrifice of two young white Bulls, on the sixth day of the Moon, the Priests
cutting the Shrub with a Gold Sickle, and the People receiving it on white
Cloth: For those crafty fellows made the Vulgar believe that the Misletoe was
an heavenly Gift, a Sovereign Remedy and preservative against all Diseases.

Robert Son of Lewis the Burly, had the County of Dreux given him Anno 1137.
when he married the Widow of Rotrou Count of Perch: He is the Stock of the
Counts of that Name, and the Dukes of Brittany descended from him. His Grandson
Peter of Dreux having married Guy Alix, Heiress of that Sovereignty in 1250.
About the end of the twelfth Century, our K. Henry II. and his Son Richard
burned this Town and Vendome, because Count Robert of Meular, their Kinsman and
Vassal, had made Homage of his Lands to the French K. Philip August. This Town
is likewise famous for the Battle which the Roman Catholics gained over the
Protestants Anno 1562. in which the Generals of both Parties, the Duke of
Monmorency, Lord high Constable of France, and the Admiral of Coligny were made
Prisoners. Gaillardon, Galardo, is scituted upon a little River, which emptieth
it self into that of Eure, 3 leagues and a half from Chartres to the
North-East: It Is remarkable for the Birth of St. Hildeburg, whose Life has been
not many years since published by Don Luke d' Achery.

Espernon Sparno lies 5 leagues North-East of Chartres and 5 Miles East of
Nogent le Roy. It has a Priory under the Name of St. Thomas, but is much more
famous for having been erected into a Duchy and Peerdom in 1582. by the French
King Henry III. on behalf of John Lewis of la Valette Nogaret, whom he raised
to the highest Dignities in that Kingdom, and mad^ him his chief Favorite.

Bonneval is situated on the Frontiers of Blaisois, in a fruitful Soil, where
the Loir receives the Mesuve, 6 Leagues and a half South of Chartres: There is
a famous Abbey of Benedictines, of which one Arnauld an intimate Friend of St.
Bernard was Abbot in the 13th. Century.

Maintenon, Mesteno, 7 Miles North-East of Chartres, and 3 South-East of Nogent
le Roy, upon the River Eure, is now famous for giving the Title of Duchess to
the Widow of the Poet Scarron Fransoise d' Aubigne, the principal She-minister
of State, and Cabinet Counselor of Lewis XIV.

There are some other Towns or considerable Buroughs in this County, as
Auneau, Ouerville, Voves, Viabon, etc. In 1682. the Duke of Guise defeated the
Germans near Auneau.

Of Vendomois.
VEndomois, Vindocinensis, or Vindusnensis Pagus, has Perch on the North,
Maine on the West, Touraine on the South, and Blaifois on the East. Here is
especially remarkable Vendome, Vindocinum Castrum, situated upon the Loir, and
the Capital of Vendomois, with the Title of Duchy and Peerdom, erected by
Francis I. in 1514. on behalf of Charles of Bourbon, Father of Antony of
Bourbon, and this of Henry IV. During the first Race of the French Kings, this
Country made part of the Kingdom of Orleance, and was since possessed by the
Counts of Anjou. In 1342. Godfrey Martel, one of them built here the Abbey of
the Holy Trinity, after he had overcome William Count of Poictiers, and
Conquered from him the City of Saints: He filled it with Benedictine Monks,
and presented it with a pretended Tear of our Savior, said to have been wept
on the Grave of Lazarus. The Popes, who never failed of gratifying the Monks at
the Expenses of the Secular Clergy, freed these from all Episcopal
Jurisdiction, and Innocent III. granted them this vain Privilege, that their
Abbot might take upon him the Title of Cardinal of St. Priscus.

In 1563. the Protestants being Masters of this Town, broke down the Images,
and it having since followed the League the French King Henry IV. took it by
Storm in 1569. and caused Maille Benehard, the Governor, and a Franciscan
Friar to be Executed, forgiving the rest of the People.

In this Town there is a very ancient Castle, a College of the Fathers of the
Oratory, and some Religious Houses. It is distant from Paris about thirty two
Leagues to the South-West. Peter Ronsard, a Poet famous in the last Age, was
Originary of Vendomois, in which I find no other considerable Places but
M^ntoire and Ville aux Cleres.

Of Anjou.
ANjou, Ducatus Andegavensis has Maine on the North, Brittany on the West,
Poictou on the South, and Touraine on the East. This Province is about 30
Leagues in length, and 20 in breadth. It abounds with great Quarries of
Slate, wherewith most of their Houses are covered, and even often employed by
Masons instead of Stones. There are reckoned about 36 or 40 Rivers, whereof the
principal are the Loire, the Sarte, the Loir, the Mayenne, the Dive, the
Vienne, the Couesnon, the Oudon, the Authion, the Tonay, the Layion, the Eure,
the Guinate; and such a number of Lakes, Ponds, Brooks and Fountains, that
several believe the Name of Anjou to be derived from that of Aiguade. Du Chesne
rejects this Conjecture as impertinent; but when I consider that most of the
Names of Countries have a reference to their situation, that the Gascons, who
in their vulgar Language have preserved many ancient Gaulish Words, call a
River Gave; that the Romans named the Inhabitants of Anjou, Andicavi or
Andegavi; and that the Celtick Speech had a great affinity with the Teutonish,
I am apt to look on the Name Andegavi as a word compounded of three,
An-degaven, In the Brooks, to denote Men inhabiting a Country washed with many
Rivers. However it be, this abundance of Water makes the Riches of Anjou, both
by a vast quantity of sweet Fish, and the great number of Gardens and Meadows
they make therewith fruitful. This Province is partly Champian, and has many
Woods and Forests, where abound Stags, Hinds, Bucks, Does, Hares, and all
sorts of great and small Game; and partly mountainous and covered with
Vineyards, that produce as delicate Wine as any in France, most of which
together with their Brandies and those of Orleanois are transported along the
Loire to Nantes, and thence into Foreign Country; for Brittany has none, or
but very little of its own.

This Country is divided into higher and lower, following the Course of the
River Loire. Angers is in the lower, and Saumur in the higher. The other most
considerable Towns are la Fleche, Montreuil-Belley, Chateau-Gontier, Beaufort
en valee, the Dutchies of Brissac, Beaupreau, Breze, Vaujour and le Lude; the
Marquisates of Jarzay, Bellay, Touarce; the Counties of Monsoreau, Maulevrier;
the Barrony of Craon, etc. the Abbeys of Fontevraut and Borgueil; the Castle
and Convent of Verger, etc. The ancient Inhabitants of Anjou, called in French
Angevins, and in Latin Andes, Andi, Andecavi or Andegavi, had their own
Commanders; afterward the Romans, and since them the Kings of France and those
of England enjoyed it. In 861. the French King and Emperor Charles the Bald
bestowed the Countries included betwixt the Sein^ and Loire upon Robert the
Strong, Duke and Marquess of France, on Condition that he should defend them
against the Incursions of the Normans: But the Posterity of Robert having
obtained the very French Crown, (for his two Sons were Crowned Kings, viz.
Eudes in 898. and Robert in 922. and his great Grandson Hugh Capet began the
third Race of the French Kings) the Issue of Tertulle or Terculf, to whom the
same Charles had given some part of Anjou, were accounted sole Counts of it,
during part of the Ninth, the Tenth and the Eleventh Century. They grew so
potent and famous, that Fulk V. became King of Jerusalem in 1131. and Henry
Plantagenet, Son to Godfrey III. Count of Anjou and le Main, succeeded in the
right of his Mother Mathilda to the Crown of England, under the Name of Henry
II. His Son Richard I. surnamed Lions Heart, enjoyed likewise these Counties;
but they were Confiscated upon his Brother K. John by Philip August, whose
Successors gave them since several times in Portion to their Sons. The French
K. John erected Anjou into a Duchy in 1360. in behalf of his second Son Lewis,
who became afterward King of Naples and Sicily, Count of Provence, and Titular
King of Jerusalem. Charles the last of that Family instituted K. Lewis XI. his
Universal Heir, and ever since this Province has been an Apannage, or part of
the Portion of the second Son of the French Kings, as it is now enjoyed by
Philip Duke of Orleance, Lewis XIV's Brother.

The City of Angers, or Juliomagus Andegavorum, Andegavae, or Andegavi, is
situated on the River Mayenne, after it has received the Sarte and the Loire.
It Is the Capital of this Province, having diverse Seats of Justice, Presidial,
Seneschalship, Bailiwick, Election, a Mint where Money is coined at the
Letter^, an University and a Bishopric suffragan to Tours. It is seated in a
Plain very fertile, producing delicate Fruits, and very good Wine; the River
Mayenne divides it into 2 parts, whereof the greatest which is called the City,
lies on the steep of a little Hill, where the Church of St. Maurice, and the
Castle of Angers are to be seen. This Church (which is the Cathedral) is
distinguished from all others by 3 high Steeples raised up on the body of the
Church, the middle of which, being built on an Arch, and underpropt only by the
two others, is accounted a Marvel. On solemn Days are shown the Relics, as the
Sword of St. Maurice, one of the pretended Pitchers wherein our Lord changed
Water into Wine, said to be brought from Jerusalem by Renatus K. of Sicily, and
resembling a Jasper. Here is the Tomb of this Prince, whose Body was brought
hither from Aix in Provence, as also his Picture drawn by himself. The Chapter
of the Cathedral is composed of 29 Canons, a Dean, a great Archdeacon, a
Treasurer, an Archdeacon beyond the Mayenne, an Archdeacon beyond the Loire, a
Singer, two other Treasurers, and a Penitenciary.

This City has been beautified and increased from time to time by its Counts,
but especially by our King John, who built that part which lies now beyond the
Mayenne; some surname it the Black City, because its all covered with Slates.

Angers is much resorted unto, at a Festival, which the Roman Catholics call
La-Fete-Dieu, the Feast of God. Then you may see all the Priests and Monks, and
4000 Inhabitants, bearing as many kindled Torches; and withal as many engraven
Histories of the Holy Scripture, as there are Wards in the City. This Ceremony
has been instituted to atone for the pretended Crime of the Archdeacon
Berenger, who opposed Transubstantiation in its birth.

At the solicitation of some studious Persons, Lewis XIV. instituted lately a
Royal Academy at Angers, with the same prerogatives as that of Paris, save the
right of Committimus, that is, the Privilege of bringing the Suits wherein its
Members are concerned before his Masters of Requests, at the first motion. This
Academy is composed of 30 Members, who must all be Angevin Men born, or at
least settled Inhabitants of Anjou. They are not to meddle with Matters of
Religion and Divinity, nor with Politics, unless it be by the King's
Directions, nor to judge of any Composures besides their own: They have four
Officers, a Director, a Chancellor, and two Secretaries. The Bishop, the King's
Lieutenant in the City and Castle of Angers, the President, Lieutenant General,
and King's Attorney in the Presidial, and the Mayor of the City may assist at
their Assemblies, tho not at the time of the Elections.

Going out of the Suburbs toward Saumur, you meet at a place called Grehan
with some remains of a Roman Amphitheatre, and several Medals have been
extracted thence. The French Kings are Canons of this Church by their very
Title to the Crown. The most Ancient Bishop of this Church was one Defensor,
who has bee^ since related into the number of Saints, and lived in the fourth
Century. Here are likewise many Collegiate Churches, diverse Parishes, 3 Abbeys,
viz. those of St. Aubin, St. Nicholas, and St. Sergius, as also Monasteries and
Seminaries, and the Chapel of St. Savior, built in remembrance of a Victory
gotten by the Inhabitants of Anjou on one Lord of St. Sauveur, who together
with the Normans had laid Siege to that City. The Castle is flanked with 1^
great round Towers, and a half Moon, and built upon a Rock, with a large Ditch
at the foot of it. There is a rare Engine by which they may lift up such things
as they stand in need of: However, in 1585. the Protestants mastered this
Castle, but were soon expelled by the Inhabitants. By reason of the strength of
this place, Prisoners of State are often sent thither.

This City of Angers is governed by a Mayor and 24 Sheriffs. The University
founded in the Year 1^98. by Louis II. is famous for the Civil and Canon Law,
and has had famous Professors, and bred up many Learned Scholars. Angers lies
17 leagues East N. E. of Nants, 25 West of Tours, and 66 South-west of Paris.
The Fathers of the Oratory have here a College for Divinity and Philosophy.

Saumur is situated upon the River Loire, about 10 leagues from Angers to the
South-east: it is as pleasant a place as can be seen, and Strangers are
mightily taken with it, for the Town is seated at the foot of a Hill, Walled i^
and defended with Towers, but commanded by a Castle fortified with three
Bastions, lined with large square Stones. The prospect of the Castle on the
Loire, and the neighboring Plains, is very delightful. The strength of this p
ace gives occasion to the Learned De Valois to derive its name from the Latin
Salvari, because its Fortifications preserve its Inhabitants from the attempts
of their Enemies, so that Saumur should have been said for Sauf-mur, and
Salmurus for Salvus murus.

Saumur is a new Town, being not much above six hundred years standing. There
is a Chapel under the Name of Our Lady des Ardillers, which has been much
frequented by reason of pretended Miracles; but since the Reformation, that
Trade being much decayed, Saumur, which was then but a small place, would not
have grown considerable, had it not been given to the Protestants for one of
their Towns of Security. It Is in that Quality that Phillip du P^essis Mornay
was Governor there in Henry IV's time, that famous Assertor of the Christian
and Protestant Religion, whose Works are still the admiration of the Learned,
and did so puzzle the Roman Catholics of his time, that they would needs have
all the Ministers of France to have contributed to their Perfection. But what
drew most People to Saumur, was a Protestant University for Divinity and humane
Learning. Here have flourished about the end of the last Age and the beginning
of this, that renowned Scotch Divine J. Cameron, who was succeeded by 3
Professors, the like neither France, nor perhaps Europe, ever saw read by turns
in one Chair, viz. Lewis Cappel, Moses Amyrauld, and John de la Place, as
famous for their Learning, as for their mutual Friendship. At the same time
lived that great Critic Tanneguy le Fevre, who has left a Daughter yet living,
Heiress of his knowledge in the Greek and Roman Antiquities and Tongues, as
appears by her Translations and Commentaries. Stephen Gaussen lived not long
enough to show his Parts, but by four small Treatises we have of his, it may be
judged what great man he would have been, had God been pleased to grant him
longer to the French Protestants. In 1684 Lewis XIV. pulled down this
University, which, together with the following Persecution, depopulated Saumur
at that rate, that it looks now as a Solitude to what it was be ore. The
Fathers of the Oratory have here a fine College, and the Church of St. Peter,
newly built, is considerable. A Mile from the Town are subterraneous Vaults,
reaching half a League in length.

La Fleche, Flecchia or Fixa is situated upon the Loir, toward the Frontiers
of Maine, being twelve Leagues from Angers to the North-East. There is a very
fine College of Jesuits founded by Henry the IVth. Anno 1603. It consists of
three bodies of Lodgings capabl^ to l^dge the King with all his Court. The
Heart of Henry the Fourth is buried in one of the Chapels under the Steps
whereby they ascend the Altar, according to his desire, having ordered that the
most noble Part of him after his death, should be put in that Castle where he
was conceived.

The Jesuits have another College at Dole in the Franche-Conty, at a place
called Arc, which gave occasion to this ingenious Distich, alluding to the
signification of Arc a Bow, and la Fleche, an Arrow: Arcum Dola dedit Patribus,
dedit Alma sagittam
Gallia, quis funem quem meruere dabit.
Dole to the Fathers gave a Bow
Kind France an Arrow gave,
Will none a String on them bestow,
They long deserved to have


Lude Lusdum is situated on the River Loir, about 14 Leagues from Angers to the
North-East, having the Title of a County since 600 years.

Pont de Se, or Ponts de Ce, Pons Sai, or Pontes Caesaris, is a Town and a
Castle seated in an Island of the River Loire. The Town consists of a long
Street with a Bridge of half a Mile in length, at each end toward Brissac and
Angers, from which it is at two Leagues distance. Some pretend that these
Bridges have been built by Caesar, who kept here a Garrison, but since the
Latin Authors of the French History call the place Saium or Seium, it seems not
natural, to fetch from so far, and without Warrant too, the original of that
Name.

Brissac, Braccum Saccum, or Brisiacum, in old French Brachesec, or Brochesac
lies on the River Aubance, Albantia. It Is a little Town with the Title of a
Duchy, erected in favor of Charles of Cosse, Marshall of France. It is
situated in a very fine Country, nigh to Pont de Ce, seven Miles South-East of
Angers. There are at Brisac a very fine Castle, a great Park, and a large Pond
of about a League in length.

Dove, Theotuadum Castellum, Doadum or Doeum, lies seven Leagues South-East of
Angers, near the source of the Touay Toedum, which discharges it self into the
Loire, after it has received three other Rivulets, the Toeret, the Argenton,
and the Dive. It Is the Tradition of the Vulgar, that this Town has been
considerable in the Romans time; and that they built there an Amphitheater,
which, though it had but 1600 foot in Circuit, was able to contain 15000
Spectators. The remains of this Building are still made use of by the
Inhabitants to act Comedies every Year; there are twenty two steps cut for the
most part in the Rock, and the Walls are raised without Mortar. Besides this
Monument there are vestigies of an old way from Dove to Pont de Ce, several
subterraneous Vaults, and a Wall of an extraordinary depth. Nevertheless the
Learned De Valois pretends that Dove was not a Roman work, but one of the four
Palaces or Country-Houses of the Kings of Aquitain, and grounds his opinion on
several passages of the old Historians of the French; besides that the Frame of
this Amphitheater was not adapted to Public Shows. The French King keeps a
Garrison here.

Bauge, Balgeium or Balgiacum, had yet in D^ Chesne's time a Presidial-Seat,
which has been since transferred to la Fleche. However it has still an Elect^on
as well as Angers, Saumur, la Fleche, Monstreuil-Bellay and Chateau-gontier,
which depend all six on the Generality of Tours. Beauge has been built by Fulk
Nerra, Count of Anjou, near the source of the Couesnon, seven Leagues
South-East of Angers. In 1286. the French King, Philip the Bold, assigned a
Portion of 2000 Livres to Queen Margaret his Mother upon the Chastellenies of
Bauge, and Beaufort en Vallee, which I observe, to show how scarce money was at
that time. Du Val speaks of a Victory, obtained by the French over the English
at Bauge in 1420, which should then be the very year of Charles the VI's Death,
when the English and Burgundians were most powerful, and the affairs of the
Dauphin Charles VII at the lowest ebb.

Beaufort en Vallee, Bellum forte in Valle, is a pretty Town and Castle, as its
name signifies, lying betwixt the Rivers Couesnon and Authion, five Leagues
East of Angers. It has the Title of a County, and being of the ancient Demesne
of the French Crown, has been often separated from and reunited to it. Now it
belongs to the House of Beaumanoir-Lavardin.

Monsoreau, Mons Sorelli, near the Confluence of the Vienne and Loire, and the
borders of Touraine, thirteen Leagues East South-East of Angers, has the Title
of a County, and is noted for a Battle fought there against the Normans in 879.

Brese lies three Leagues Westwards upon the Loire, has the Ti^le of a
Marquisate, and a Castle fortified with deep Motes and subterraneous Vaults.
There are a fine Garden and a Wood of Cypresses belonging to it.

Monte-jan, Mons Johannis, upon the River Loire, five Leagues South-West of
Angers, is noted for having given name under the Reign of Francis I. to a
Vainglorious Marshal of France, who to mimick Kings, sent and received
Ambassadors, and was much laughed at the Courts of France and Spain. Ingrande
on the same River, a League farther to the West, is a good Trading Town.

Font-evraud, Fons Everardi, a famous Abbey of Nuns, Chief of an Order of that
Name, founded by Robert of Arbrissel, in 1100, lies on the borders of Poictou,
fourteen Leagues South-East of Angers. It Is said that the Sermons of Arbrissel
drawing great number of People after him, he built them Cells or Cabins in the
Forest of Fontevraud, and afterward shut up the Women in a separate place.
Whether it was to make a Serrail or a Cloister, I know not, but it is reported
of this H. Man that he lay in Bed with them to mortify the flesh. However it
be, this Monastery has been successively governed by fourteen Princesses.

Craon, Credo, is a little Town seated on the Oudon, toward the Frontiers of
Maine and Bretaign, twelve Leagues North-West of Angers. It has given Name to
the Illustrious Family of the Barons of Craon, known since the XIV Century.
This Barony fell Ann^ 1586, to the House of la Trimouille, by the Marriage of
Guy the VI. Lord of la Trimouille, with Mary of Sulli, only Daughter and
Heiress of Louis of Sulli, and Isabella of Craon. This Town suffered much
during the Civil Wars, Anno 1562.

Chateau Gontier, Castellum Guntherii, is on the River Mayenne, ten Leagues
North of Angers. It was raised from a Country House to a Castle and a Town by
Fulk 111th. Count of Anjou, who gave it the name of his Tenant there. The other
Towns or Buroughs of any consideration in this Province are Cande Condate, le
Lion d' Angers, Segre Secretum, Poiiancey, Chateauneuf, Durestail, etc.

Of Touraine.
TOVRAINE, or Turonus, Ager, is situated between Blaisois, Vendomois, Maine,
Anjou, Poictou and Berri; it has the Title of a Duchy; is twenty four Leagues
in its greatest length, and as much in breadth. Because of its fertility in all
things, especially in Fruit, many term it the Garden of France. The chief
Rivers which water it are the Loire, the Indre, the Cher, the Indroise, the
Vienne, etc. whose course may be seen in the general description of this
Government. The Inhabitants of Touraine, called in French, Tourangeaux, and in
Latin, Turones and Turoni, were already powerful in Caesar's time, since their
Cotta, for the relief of Alesia, besieged by that General, amounted to six
thousand Men. In the fourth Century, when Gaul was divided by the Romans into
seventeen Provinces, Tours became the Capital of the third Lyonnoise, and
consequently, a Metropolitan; though the City it self, and a great part of its
dependencies, lying on the South of the Loire, seem more properly to belong to
Aquitain. And therefore when Charlemaigne divided his Dominions between his
Sons, it is expressly noted, that he gave all Aquitain and Gascony, excepting
Touraine, to his beloved Son Louis.

The City and Archbishopric of Tours Turonum, or rather Caesarodunum Turonum,
is situated upon the Loire, and much frequented by Merchants, because of the
convenience of that great River, and the Cher, but especially, because of their
Brocards, and other Silk Manufactures. The Metropolitan Church of St. Gratian
is worth the curiosity of Strangers. This Saint was the first Bishop of it at
the end of the second Century: he had for his successors, many famous Prelates,
particularly St. Lidoire, St. Martin, St. Gr^gory of Tours. Since I have made
mention of St. Martin, I cannot forbear this History, related by Du Chesne.
King Clovis, soon after his Conversion to Christianity, made an Offering of his
own Horse, to the Tomb of this Saint, sending immediately an hundred pieces of
Gold to redeem it; but when he would mount it, the Horse could not go until he
had sent five-fold the Money. It seemed, says my superstitious Author, as though
its feet had been fastened to the Ground. And so I believe they were, or
something very like it; for I never read in the H. Scripture, that God wrought
Miracles, only on purpose to enrich his Prophets or Apostles, at the expenses
of Kings or People. The French Papists have still an extraordinary veneration
for this H. Man. It were to be wished they would imitate his Christian
moderation; for this good Bishop would never communicate with Idacius and
Ithacius, who had procured the death of the Heresiarch Priscillian.

The Diocese of Tours is very large, being distributed under three
Archdeacons, one of Tours, another beyond the Loire, and the third beyond the
Vienne, comprehending twenty great Abbeys, above an hundred Monasteries, twenty
Collegiate Churches filled up with Prebendaries, four hundred Parochial
Churches, whereof sixteen are within the City. Besides the famous Abbey of
Marmoutier, and the fine Church of St. Ma tin, on which six Abbotships depend,
viz. Beauieu, Cormeri, Villeloin, Pruilly, Noyers and Chinon. But the
jurisdiction of the Metropolitan is far much larger, for the Bishops of Angers
and le Man's, and the nine Prelates of Brittany are his Suffragans.

Th^re is a Gate called corruptively, la port Fourgon, whose right name is la
port du Roi Hugon, King Hugon's Gate. Some derive from thence the Nickname of
Hugonots, given to the French Protestants, because they used to assemble at
Night in subterraneous Vaults, near the Gates of this City, to avoid the rage
of their Persecutors, and therefore were called Hugonoti, Hugonots, as though
they had been Disciples of King Hugon or Huguet. This Hugon seems to have been
an ancient Count of Touraine, who repaired this Gate, but it is now looked upon
by the superstitious Inhabitants, as a kind of Hobgoblin that goes about the
City Walls, and beats the Night-Walkers he meets with.

Others feign a more illustrious original of this name, pretending that it was
imposed on the French Protestants, when the League was most powerful. And that
as the House of Guise gave p^ivately out to have a better Title to the Crown
than the Kings that then were, as being descended from Charlemaign; so the
Leaguers nick-nam d the abettors of the Reformation Hugonots, as favorers of
the Posterity of Hugh Capet, the head of the third Race of the Fr nch Kings.
However it be, the Protestant Religion made at first great Progresses in this
City; and for this reason it was that it stood firm by the French Kings, Henry
III. and Henry IV. So that when the Parliament of Paris declared for the
League, the Loyalists that could make their escape, r^tir d to Tours, and
erected there another Court of Justice, which cashiered all the Edicts of the
Parliament of Paris, tending to prom^te the Rebellion.

Near St. Martin the Fair, is still shown the Plain, where Charles Martel Duke
or Generalissimus of the French, defeated the Saracens in 726, ki^ling 375000
of their Men with their King Abderame, though he lost but 1500. But some m^derate
and very accurate Authors pretend that there is a mistake, or overplus of
300000 in that Calculation.

Tours has a Bayliwick and Presidial-Seat, an Election and a Generality, to
which those of Amboise, Chinon and Loches, all those of le Main and Anjou, and
some of Poictou, do resort. Here was formerly Money coined, that went throughout
all the Kingdom, whence come still the names of Deniers, Sous and Livres
Tournois. The form of Tours is somewhat oval, the streets being long and clean,
and the Houses covered with Slates, as well as the Walls of the City.

Near a Village called Columbiers, two Leagues East of Tours, is a
subterraneous Vault called la Cave Gouttiere, or the dropping Cave, where the
drops of Water freeze and petrifie as they fall along the Walls. The cold is
here extraordinary in Summer, though this seems not to be the sole cause of it.
There is also the House and Castle of Plessis, worthy to be seen for the fine
Orchards and Gardens belonging to it. But as to the Castle of Tours, it is old
and ruined. Tours lies twenty five Leagues West of Angers, and 46 South-East of
Paris.

Amboise or Ambacia, situated on the confluence of the Loire and Amasse, having
a Royal Castle built by Charles the Eighth to distinguish the place of his
Birth, which was also that of his Death. This Town is pretty ancient, for
Gregory of Tours says, That Clovis and Alaric had an Interview in the Island
nigh Amboise, which Island is now within the Town. The Normans afterward
ruined it, but it was soon repaired by Fulk III. Count of Anjou, and is now a
very fine Town, though not very big. The Healthfulness of the Air has often drawn
the French Kings hither; and at such a time it was that some French Protestants
designing to rid themselves of the Guisards, who kept K. Francis II. in a
manner Prisoner, were discovered in their Attempt, and paid for it with their
Lives, in 1560, Amboise belonged a long time to the Counts of Anjou, as to its
Founders or Repairers then it had particular Lords. Charles V^I. seized it from
Lewis Viscount of Thouars, etc. because he took part with the English. Lewis
XI. Instituted here the Order of St. Michael, August 1. 1469. Amboise lies 5
Leagues West of Turs, and 9 East of Orleance. It seems to owe its first
Original to a Bridge of Boats, which the Romans made here.

The Town of Loches, Luccae or Lociae, is situated upon the River Indre, Nine
Leagues South-East of Tours. Eustochius fifth Bishop of Tours founded here a
Monastery, whereof he constituted one Vrsus the first Abbot, under the Reign of
Alaric, King of the Goths L^ches was already a strong Place, under the first
Race of the Kings of France; but Carloman and Pepin, Brothers and Generals of
the French took, and raised it in 742. It was since repaired, and fortified
with a Castle built on the top of an unaccessible Rock, defended with Towers
and Bulwarks, and being 12000 Steps in Circuit; so that it could not be taken
by the English.

This Country was the Patrimony of the first Counts of Anjou; there they kept
their Prisoners of State: But Charles the VII. did make his ordinary Residence
in it. Louis the XI. did add diverse Appartments to the Castle, particularly a
dark Dungeon, where he kept Cardinal de Balue Prisoner a long time. Here it was
that Louis the XII. imprisoned Ludovic Storce, where that Duke died, and was
buried in the Church of Notre-Dame. Here also is to be seen the Tomb of Agnes
Surelle, or Sorel, Mistress of Charles the VII. the fairest Woman of her time;
with her Statue of white Marble, done to the Life. Hard by is a fine Forest,
where the Counts of Anjou, and the French Kings used to Hunt. Du Chesuc
relates, that in this Castle there was an Iron-Gate, which through a long Lane
cut in the Rock, lead to a square Room, where was found a Man 8 Foot long,
sitting on a great Stone, and leaning his Head on his Hands, as though he had
slept; but it went all to Dust, as soon as it felt the Air, excepting the
biggest Bones, and the Cranion, which were long preserved in our Ladies Church.

On the South Side of the River lies the Abbey of Beaulieu, founded on behalf of
the Benedictines by Fulk Nerra, Count of Anjou. There is a Pyramide 10 or 12
Fathoms long, in the hollowness of which are some Characters, that could never
be Uncifer'd; so that it is still doubted, whether this is a Monument of the
Goths, or of the ancient Gauls? Loches has a Bailyff, and a Royal Seat of
Justice, resorting to the Presidial of Tours.

The City Chinon, or Caino, almost 10 Leagues South West of Tours, is situated
upon the Vienne, with a Castle, having a Governor, and Regal Seat of Justice.
Gregory of Tours relates, that the Romans besieging this Town under the Conduct
of Aegidius or Gill^n, turned off the Course of the Vienne, and stopped a Well
whence the Besieged drew their Water; so that they would have been forced to
surrender, had not a violent Rain fallen on a sudden, which filled up their
Ditches, and terrified the Romans so, as to make them raise the Siege.

Here Charles the VII. made his Re^reat, and here it was that Jeanne d' Arc,
since called the Maid of Orleans came to find him, Anno 1426. Francis the first
Duke of Bretagne, did Homage to the same King in that place, Anno 1443. Here
are the Canons of the College of St. Mesme are immediately subject to the Pope.
This also was the Country of Fr. Rabelais, famous for his Comical Tales.

Cande, Condate, lies on the Confluence of the Vienne and Loire, 7 Miles North
West of Chinon. L' Isle-Bouchard lies in an Island of the River Vienne, 9 Miles
South East of Chinon, with a Castle and fine Meadows. La Hay, ^aga Turonum, 9
Leagues South of Tours, and 6 South-East of L' Isle-Bouchard is sea^ed on the
River Claise, with the Title of a Barony, and is now famous for being the
Native Country of that great Philosopher Descartes. Prully, Prulliacum, 6
Leagues higher to the East on the same River, has been sometime the Residence
of the Learned Joseph Scaliger, who taught the Children of the Lord of Prully.
Paumy, betwixt La Hay and Prully, has an ancient Castle, and the Title of
Viscounty.

Maizieres on the Claise, near the Borders of Berry, is the Capital of the
small Country of Brenne, abounding with Game and Fishes, because of its many
Ponds.

Chatillon, on the River Indre, has a Royal Seat of Justice resorting to the
Presidial of Tours, but its Election depends on the Generality of Bourges.
Langest, near the Loire, 11 Miles West of Tours, produces excellent Melons.
Chenonceaux, upon the Cher, 8 Leagues South East of Tours is renowned for a
Royal House and Castle belonging now to the Duke of Vendome. It was built by Q.
Katherine of Medicis, and adorned with fine Marbles and Statues, brought from
Italy, among which, that of Scipio Africanus is much esteemed. Mont-Louis a
Borough, near the Loire, betwixt Amboise and Tours, has all its Houses cut in
the Rock, nothing appearing on the ground, but the top of some Chimneys amongst
the green Turf.

The other places of note in Touraine, are Montbazon and Maille or Luynes two
Dutchies. St. Maure a County. La Roche-Pozay. a considerable Lordship, seated
on the Creuse, near the Borders of Berri. St. Christopher, Chateau-Renaud, near
the River Bransle, and the Frontiers of Maine. Montrichard, on the Cher,
Montresor on the Indroise, etc.

Of Blaisois.
BLaisois lies between Berry, Orleanois, properly so called V^nd mois and
Touraine. It c^mprehends 3 small Countries, Dunois, Blaisois and Soul^gue,
which are as many Elections depending on the G^^erality of Orleans, and
reaching together to an extent of twenty five Leagues in length North and
South; but of a very inequal breadth, as six or seven Leagues in Blaisois, ten
or twelve in Soulogue, and even sixteen in Dunois.

The soil in Blaisois is very fertile, agreeably interrupted with Mountains and
Hillocks, covered with Vineyards, with Forests full of Game, and with Plains
abounding with Gardens, Orchards, Meadows and Cornfields, besides that it is
watered with many Rivers and Brooks. It has had its particular Counts, since
the year 920, that Charles the simple, King of of France, to gain the Normans,
whom he could not subdue, was forced to divide in a manner his Kingdom with
them. Thus he gave the Duchy of Normandy to Raoul their General, and the
County of Blois to Gellon, Raoul's Cousin, and one of his chief Captains. His
Posterity were for a time the most powerful Lords in France, having acquired
the Counties of Chartres and Champaign. And even after that Thibaud the IV.
C^unt of Champaign had bestowed the Counties of Blois and Chartres on one of
his youngest Sons Thibaud or Theobald the good; these Counts made yet a great
figure in France, till the year 1391, that Guy of Chatillon, IId. of that name,
having no hopes of an Issue, sold his Estates to Lewis Duke of Orleance,
Grandfather to the French King Lewis XII. since which time they were united to
the Crown, and the County of Blois became often an appanage, or part of the
portion of the youngest Brethren of the French Kings, as it is now of Philip
Duke of Orleance.

Dunois, Dunensis Pagus, is almost as fruitful as Blaisois, though the Air be not
so much esteemed, nor the Country so Trading. Before the French Monarchy was
fully settled, they were often at variance with their Neighbors the Blaisois,
and the Orleannois, for Gregory of Tours relates that after the death of
Chilperic, the fiirst King of France, the latter made an Irruption into the
Country of the former. Dunois had afterward its own Viscounts, since Rotrou I.
Count of Mortague, etc. till it was sold to Lewis Duke of Orleans, whose Son
Charles gave or exchanged it in 1430. for some other Lands with his Bastard
Brother, that famous Warrior John of Orleans, to whom the present French Kings
owe the best part of their Kingdom, reconquer'd from the English. The Issue of
this great General, bears now the name of Longueville, and enjoys still the
County of Dunois, that was erected into a Duchy and Peerdom in 1525, by Louis
of Savoy, Mother to K. Francis I. then Regent of the Kingdom.

Soulogne or Sologne, Secalaunia or Segalonia, is another small Country on the
South of Blaisois, between the Loire and the Cher. Some derive its Latin name
Secalaunia, from the abundance of Ry Secale, that grows in the Country; but de
Valois takes it for a proper name, just such another as the Segalauni of
Dauphine, the Inhabitants of Valence. However it be, Sologne depends for the
Spiritual on the Bishop of Chartres, and is the fourth in number among his six
Archdeaconships, and as for the Temporal, it resorts to the Bayliwick of Blois,
as well as Dunois. It abounds with Fruits and Corn, and especially with Millet.

The City of Blois, Blesum, Blesae, or Castrum Blesense, is situated upon the
Loire, with the Title of County, Bailiwick, and Chamber of Accounts. It is
almost equally distant from Orleans and Tours, being near thirteen Leagues from
the former to the East, and twelve from the latter to the West. This Town has
some Antiquity; for though Caesar does not mention it, and that there be no great
reason to take it for the Corbilo of Strabo; yet it appears by Gregory of
Tours, that the Inhabitants were already in some consideration in the V. and
VI. Centuries; since in conjunction with the Orleanois, they invaded the Dun
is, and Anno 584, kept Prisoner Eberulf in the Church of St. Martin at Tours.
The sight of Blois is very pleasant on the steep of a Hill on the North-side of
the Loire, the River running through the Town and Suburb Vienne, that are
joined by a Stone Bridge, whereon is a Pyramid, erected in 1598. With an
Inscription to show that Henry IV. rebuil'd it. There is a sumptuous Castle,
begun by the Kings Lewis XII. and Francis I. beautified by Queen Katharine of
Medicis, by the French King Henry IV. and by several Dukes of Orleans. As also
a curious Garden adorned with Water-spouts and antic Statues. Henry III.
called here twice the States of his Kingdom in 1577 and 1588, and during the
last of these Assemblies, caused Henry Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal Francis
his Brother, to be murdered.

The excellency of the Air, and fertility of the Ground have given to Blois the
Surname of, The City of Kings, or perhaps, it was because in this Country,
they brought up the Children of the Fr. Kings, and that some of the Kings
themselves have resided there. To which may be added, That the first Counts of
Blois were the Forefathers of Hugh Capet, from whom the present Kings are
lineally descended, These Counts were as Sovereign as are now the Electors and
other Princes of Germany; for they coined Money with an Hebraick Letter, a
Flower de luce, and their own Name on one side; and on the backside a cross,
with a B. and these two words Castro Blesis.

Besides what has been alleged for the antiquity of Blois, there are remains
of an Aqueduc, wherein three Men can ride on Horseback abreast, and it is the
common Tradition of the Inhabitants that at a Village called Orchese, almost 5
Miles West of the Town, Julius Caesar kept his Magazines; which they endeavor
to confirm by the Ruins of some great Buildings, Arches strong, and thick
Walls, and the like Antiquities; but have no other ground that I know of.

As to new Works, besides the Castle and Gardens, there is a Tennis Court
esteemed the biggest in France, being 57 Foot in length, and 20 in breadth.

Between Blois and Orchese, not far from that Village was discovered, about a
hundred Years since, a Mine of Terra Sigillata, or sealed Earth, which is
pretended to be as good as that of Lemnos.

The Pasture Ground in the Valley of Loire, and the Exhalations that come out
of the Vaults of St. Gervais are so wholesome, that the Milk of the Cattle that
feeds thereabouts is excellent, especially the Cream that is esteemed one of
the Dainties of the Country: The Boon-Christian-Pears, and Perdigron Plums are
also rare Fruits, and amongst Handy-works, the Watches of Blois have got a
Name through the whole Kingdom; but that which is most taking with Strangers,
is the Purity of the French Tongue that is spoken here with a good Accent, as
well by Country Men as by Gentlemen; and with all the charming Humor, and
singular Honesty of the Inhabitants. I had almost forgotten that Peter
l'Hermite, the first Preacher of the Crusado's, was a Native of Blois.

Though the Royal House and Park of Chambort or Chambourg, be not ancient
Monuments, yet they deserve a particular description. The House lies almost
seven Miles West of Blois, on the South side of the Loire, in the midst of the
Park, and of a pleasant Forest. It was begun by King Francis I. at his coming
out of the Prison, at the same time that he built Madrid-Castle near Paris; but
though he employed eighteen hundred Workmen at the building of Chambort, during
twelve years, yet it was not perfectly finished in his life time. A small Brook
abounding with Fish, surrounds the Palace, which is adorned with many little
Towers and Chimneys, that give a very fine prospect from far off, and the
Forest is so pierced through, that it hinders not the view of the adjacent
Meadows, nor even of the Town of Blois, from the top of the Towers. The most
remarkable thing is a Winding Staircase of 274 Steps, so large that several
persons can go abreast, and so contrived that those who go up on one side and
come down on the other, cannot see each other, though they can talk together. Add
to this, that one may throw a Ball perpendicularly through the Newel, from the
top of the Stairs to the bottom. At the end of the Queens Garden, which takes
up five hundred acres of Land, toward the Forest of Blois, is a Lane of six
thousand great Elms, a Mile in length, and six Fathoms in breadth. I pass over
the other Curiosities to observe, that the Park is encompassed with a
square-Wall, lying as a Parallelogramm inclined along the Loire, and cut
through the River Cousson, being three Italian Miles East and West, two Miles
North and South-West, and one and two thirds North and South-East.

There are 6 other Towns of some consideration in the little extent of
Blaisois, Mer or Menars the Town and the Castle, Suevre-cour-sur Loire and Die;
these two lie over against Chambort, the former on the North, the latter on the
South Side of the Loire; Onzain, midway between Amboise and Blois, Lands on
the borders of Vendomois, and Contres on the Frontiers of Soulogne.

Chateau-Dun, Castellodunum, is the Capital City of the little Country of
Dunois, 11 Leagues North of Blois. It has its Name from the Hill, on which it is
seated on the East Side of the Loir, Dun in old Gaulish, signifying a Hill; but
I know not where Duchesne has found that it was anciently called Rubeclara, for
Vrbs Clara; because it may be seen from far off. There is a Castle strong by
its Situation and Works; but the Suburbs are larger, and better built than the
Town, which has been ruined by the Wars. It seems to have been considerable in
the sixth Century, since Sigebert, first King of Austrasia erected it into a
Bishopprick; but Papole Bishop of Chartres, formed such a Powerful Opposition
to it in the fourth Council of Paris in 573, that Promotus the new Prelate was
forced to stand off his Right, and to lead a private Life. Another Ma^k of the
former Greatness of this Town, are its Arms, three Half Moons, with these
Words, Extincta revivisco, besides many Ruins. There is an ancient Abbey of
Cisternians, founded by Charlemaign, and several Collegiate and Parochial
Churches.

Chateaudun has an Election and Royal Seat of Justice, on which depend the
Chastellenies of Montigny le Guanleon Courtalin, Monlitard, Lesclers and
Rubetan, according to du Chesne, but I find none of them in the most accurate
Maps.

The other Towns of Dunois are Alluye, Bonneval, Cloye, Moree, Freteval, all
upon the Loire; Oucques, Marchenoir, Pathay, Bagnolet on the East, Dangeau,
Brou-St. Romain, Anthen, la Bazoche-Gouet on the West side of that River.

Romorantin, or Remorentin, Rivus Morentini, a Town and a Castle seated on the
River Saudre Salera, eight Leagues South-West of Blois, is the Capital of
Sologne, has the Title of a County, and is the Seat of the Election for that
little Country. In 1597. the Monks, who suspected Henry IV. all his life, for
having been once a Protestant, taught a young Maid called Martha Brossier, to
counterfeit one that is possessed of the Devil, and under that pretense, spread
many things to the King's disadvantage. The Cheat succeeded in many places of
the Diocese of Orleans, whither they carried her, but making bold to bring her
to Paris, the Parliament took notice of it, and the pretended Devil was
confined to her own Country. In 1560. Francis the XI. published here an Edict
against the Protestants, under the Name of Heretics. Du Chesne derives the
Name of Romorentin from Roma Minor; and pretends it to be a Work of the Romans,
because of some old Ruins. The learned Mr. Pajon, Minister of Orleans, who so
ingeniously defended the Reformation in his Answer to the Prejugez legitimes of
that famous Jansenist Mr. Nicole, was a Native of Rom^rantin. Millansay, a
Borough, and a Castle, called by Duchesne, Militia Caesaris, lies 2 Leagues
Northwards. The other places of Sologne are la Ferte-Aurain, on the Beuvron,
Chatillon, and la Ferte-Imbaut on the Saudre, St. Aignan and Menetou on the
Cher, and Nansay on the Raire.

Of Proper Orleannois.
ORleannois, properly so called, is situated between Berri, Gatinois, the
Country of Chartres and Blaisois. Orleans is the ancient City of Genabum, or
Cenabum, mentioned by Caesar, Strabo, Ptolomy, and other ancient Geographers.
It Is true, that the Description he makes of it, may in some manner be applied
to Gien, Beaugency and Gergeau, because of the Proximity of those places to
Orleans, and their Situation on the Loire. But he who shall consider that the
Chartrains Carnutes had two considerable Cities in their Country, viz. Autricum
and Genabum, whereof the first is incontestably Chartres, shall not doubt but
Genabum is Orleans. This may be proved; First, From a continued Tradition of
the ancient Historians of the French, who all agree in taking Genabum for
Orleans; And secondly, From that there never was any other Town so considerable
as Orleans under the Jurisdiction of the Chartrains.

In this Town then it was that Caesar took his Winter Quarters, and made it one
of his chief Magazines for his Army. In 450. that barbarous Prince Attila, King
of the Huns, so deservedly called the Scourge of God, as well as Lewis XIV,
laid Siege to it: and the Inhabitants afraid of his Threatenings and Cruelties,
would have surrendered themselves, had they not been ^ncouraged by St. Aignau
their Bishop with ^he hope of an unexpected Succors. And so (...) really fell
out; for Thierry or Theodoric King ^f the Goths fearing lest, Orleans being
taken, ^ttila should pass the River Loire and enter unto his Dominions, came to
the Relief of the Besieged, and charged the Huns in the Rear so ^ffectually;
that he forced them to raise the ^iege and to withdraw into the Plains of
Sologne, Secalaunicis Campis (and not Cata^aunicis, for Chalons in Burgundy
lies sixty ^eagues from thence) where Aetius the Roman ^eneral assisted with
the Goths and Burgundi^us under Thierry, and the Francs under Me^veus lever'd
them Battle, defeated Attila, and killed 180000 of his men. Childeric ^ourth
King of the French and Successor to Meroveus, having defeated Gillon or
Aegidius, ^he last General the Romans had in Gaul, took Angers, Orleans, and
whatsoever remained in their Possession on this side the Loire: But Clovis his
Son pushed his Conquests so far into Aquitain by the defeat of Alaric King of
the Goths, that after his death Orleans became the Head and Title of a new
Kingdom, the Portion ^f his second Son Clodomir. This Prince ^eigned but
thirteen years, having been killed ^n his Pursuit of the Burgundians in 524. In
^im began and ended the Kingdom of Orleans, ^or Clotarius his Brother, who had
spoused his Widow, made away his Issue. And though after ^otarius's death, France
was again divided ^^to four parts, yet Orleans was no more the ^ead of a
Kingdom, for Gontran to whom it fell to share, chose Chalons for the Seat of
hi^ Empire, and most of his Estates having formerly belonged to the
Burgundians, he took hi^ Title from thence. And thence undoubtely i^ comes that
Fredegarius reckons Orleans i^ Burgundy.

During the weakness of Charlemaign's Successors, this Town with several other
Estate became the Property of Hugh the Great Duk^ of France and Burgundy, Count
of Paris, etc Father to Hugh Capet the Head of the thir^ Race of the French
Kings. This was apparently the cause that Robert Son, and Henr^ Grandson to
Capet made often their residence i^ Orleans, and that their Successors did never
separate it from the Crown, till Philip of Valoi^ gave it in Portion to Philip
his fifth Son, dea^ without Issue in 1375. Lewis second Son t^ Charles the V.
got it afterward, and wa^ Grandfather to Lewis the XII. who ascende^ the
Throne after Charles VIII. since that it ha^ been several times the Portion of
the younges^ Sons of those Kings, as it is now enjoyed b^ Philip of France,
Lewis the XIV's Brother.

As to the Ecclesiastical State, St. Altin i^ reckoned the first Bishop of
Orleans, and in the sixth Century five National Councils were kep^ here in less
than forty years, viz. in 511, 533 538, 541, and 549. for settling the
Ecclesiastical Discipline, the Election, Rights and Limit^ of the
Metropolitans. The Prelates of thi^ Church on the day of their inthronizatio^
have the Privilege of delivering a Prisone^ and of being carried to the
Cathedral on the Shoulders of the five ancientest Barons o^ their Diocese, viz.
those of Yevre-le Chastel, Sulli, Cheray, Acheres and Rougemont.

Gregory of Tours relates that when King Gontran made his solemn Entrance into
this City, Latins, Syrians and Jews proclaimed his Praises each in his Tongue;
whether these different Nations were learned Men, or foreign Merchants, who
inhabited or frequented this Town for the sake of Trade, I shall not
peremptorily determine; though the latter seems to me the most probable. However
it be, King Phillip the Fair sounded here an University for the Civil Law in
1312. to which Pope Clement the V. added the Cannon Law, in thirteen hundred
sixty seven. The Scholars are divided into four Nations, French, Germans,
Normands and Piccards, each of which has its particular Officers. There are two
common and well furnished Libraries.

This City has also undergone the various fate of War. We have already seen how
it was rid from the hands of the barbarous Attila. In 1417. it stood out a long
Siege against the English, on behalf of the French King Charles VII. The
besieged were so weak'ned and famished that they had resolved to surrender
themselves to the Duke of Burgundy, but the English would not allow of it, though
this Prince was their Ally, and then in their Army. This refusal may be
reck'ned one of the chief causes of the Expulsion of the English out of France,
as it was the fatal period of the progress of their Arms. For as on the one
hand it gave a mighty disgust to this Duke, one of the most potent Princes in
Europe; so on the other, the French were not loath to make an advantage of it.
They set up a young Maid, a Shepherdess of about eighteen years, who pretending
a Revelation to raise the Siege of Orleans, and bring the King triumphing into
Rheims, in order to his Coronation, so encouraged their disspirited Army, and
fright'nd the Enemies, that she performed her promises; assisted by the Valor
and Conduct of the famous Count of Dunois, but perhaps more by the jealousies
raised between the English and the Burgundians, and then by the Civil Wars of
the English. The Day of the Raising of this Siege, which was the Eighth of May
1418. is still kept as a Solemn Festival in Orleans, and a Monument of this
Victory has been erected on the Bridge of the City. It represents the Bl.
Virgin with our Savior in her Arms as ready to be buried; on one side lies
King Charles VII. upon his Knees, and on the other the Virgin of Orleans, (as
they call her now) Booted and Spurred as a Trooper. This Maid was called Jeanne
d' Arc, she was a Native of Vaucouleurs in Lorrain, but her Family being
Nobilitated by the French Kings, had their Name changed into that of Lys,
Flower de Luce, in memorial of her Services to that Crown.

During the Reign of Francis II. in 1560. the Duke of Guise, under the pretense
of the conspiracy of Amboise, disarmed the Inhabitants of Orleans, filled the
suspected Houses with Soldiers, and then brought the young King, as triumphing,
into the City. And well he might triumph, for he had gained his point so far,
as to cause the Prince of Conde to be sentenced to lose his Head. But the Death
of Francis II. forced him to alter his Politics. In 1562. the Protestants
under the Command of the same Prince of Conde, seized upon this place, and the
Duke of Guise himself was killed besieging it. However the Roman Catholics
retook it, but La Noue, one of the stoutest Commanders the Protestants ever
had, mastered it again, five years after. In 1588. it declared for the Leaguers
by the Intreagues of one Rossieux, Secretary to the Duke of Mayenn, but it
submited to the French King Henry IV. in one thousand five hundred ninety four.

The Name of Orleans comes undoubtedly from the Latin Aureliani, by which the
Roman Historians after the second Century do call this City. There is still
however some remains of the ancient appellation of Genabum, in a nickname given
to such Inhabitants as have not Traveled abroad, viz. Guepin, which I am apt
to take for an abbreviation of Guenapin, Genabinus.

This City is seated on the steep of an Hill on the Northern side of the Loire,
that washes its Walls, and represents almost the figure of a stretched Bow. In
sight of the Town, and the middle of the River is a pleasant Island covered
with great Trees and Buildings. This Island is joined with a Bridge on one side
to the Town, and on the other, to the Suburb of Pontereau. This Bridge has 16
Arches, and it is upon it that the Monument of Jeane d' Arc is erected.

Orleans is large and well built, the Streets are broad, strait and neat, being
paved with a small square-stone. Some of the Markets are fine, spacious, and
overshadow'd with Trees. The most Magnificent Churches are the Cathedral of
Saint Croix, and the Collegiate of S. Aignan. The body of the former is an
hundred foot in length, sixty in breadth, and one hundred and two in depth. It
has fifty nine Canons and nine Dignitaries; the latter has but thirty one
Prebendaries, whereof eight are dignify d. Both have been much defaced during
the Civil Wars of Religion, but the Cathedral was repaired by Henry IV. There
are twenty two Parochial Churches. The Townhouse has a very high Tower, whence
the whole City and Suburbs may be discovered. The Chastelet or Palace of the
Justice, is also a remarkable Building, seated on the River. The Town has eight
Gates, and is fortified with a Terrass, and surrounded with a Wall defended by
40 round Towers filled with Earth.

Orleans has a Bailywick, to which the Royal Seats of Bois-common,
Chateau-renard, Yanville, Yevre-le-Chastel, La Neufvill-auxe Loges, Gien,
Montargis. Clery, Meun, Baugency, Gergeau, and Pluviers are resorting, that is
all Proper Orleanois, and a great part of Gastinois. But the Generality of
Orleans, reaches yet farther, comprehending all Beauce, in its greatest extent,
that is the Country Chartrain, Dunois, Vendomois, Blaisois, Proper Orleanois,
Gastinois, Puisaie and Sologne, and having under it the Elections of Chartres,
Chateau-dun, Vendome, Blois, Baujenci, Orleans, Pithiviers, Dourdan, Montargis,
Gien and Romorantin. The Diocese has six Arch-Deaconships, whose Titles are
Orleans, Pithiviers, Beausse, Sologne, Baugenci and Sulli. Orleans lies twenty
six Leagues North of Paris, ^wenty nine West of Auxerre, and twenty four East
of Tours, almost in the middle of the Course of the Loire, with a Haven very
convenient for Trade; which is the cause that the delicate Wines its Soil
produces, and the excellent Brandies that are made here, are easily carried to
Nants, and thence Transported into Foreign Countries.

Gergeau or Jargeau, Gargogilum or Jargoilum, was an ancient and noble Castle,
and is still a pretty good Town, on the South side of the Loire, with a Bridge
to pass that River, belonging to the Bishop of Orleans, four Leagues East of
that City. In 1420. the Count of Salisbury took it for the English; but the
year following it was retaken by John II. Duke of Alenson, and the Virgin of
Orleans, who made the Count of Suffolk and several other Prisoners, to the
number of four hundred, most of whom they had the Barbarity to kill. Next to
Jargeau, is the Castle and Garden of Jenaille, with an artificial Rock made up
of Shells and little glistering Stones of different colors, whence spring
Water-spouts, that represent various figures.

Sully, Solliacum, four Leagues South-East of Jargeau, on the same side of the
River Loire, is an ancient Castle and Town with the Title of a Barony, that has
produced two famous Bishops of Paris in the Twelfth Century, Maurice and Odon
of Sully, It was erected into a Duchy and Peerdom by Henry IV. in 1606, to
gratify the Marquis of Rosny, who had done him so many services. This Lord was
a Protestant, and continued so all his life, notwithstanding the Apostasy of
his Master. He has left Memoirs of what happened most considerable during his
life, that are much esteemed. The Lords of Sully have there a fine Castle, Park
and Garden.

Clery upon the Doure, seven Miles South-East of Orleans, is a Village noted
for a Church under the name of our Lady. The English plundered it, after the
taking of Meun, in 1428. but the French King Lewis XI. repaired it, and richly
endowed a College of Canons, which he founded there, choosing it for his Grave.

The other places in the Election of Orleans, are Chateau-Neuf, Ascheres,
Bazoches, Artenay, La Ferte-Seneterre, a Barony with a fine Castle, St. Aubin,
Ouzouer on the Loire, and St. Benoit.

Baugency or Bois-jenci, Balgentiacum, a Town on the River Loire, almost six
Leagues South-West of Orleans, with an Election and an Arch-Deaconship. It Is
seated in a most pleasant Soil, fertile in Corn, Wine and Fruits, and abounding
with Game. It Is here that Lewis VII. assembled the Prelates and Barons of his
Kingdom to be divorced from Q. Eleanor his Wife, says Du Chesne; to which
Mezeray adds, That the King pursued the Separation vigorously. I cannot but
admire the blind zeal of the French Historians, who to save the honor of this
Prince, turn him into the greatest Blockhead that ever sat upon a Throne; when
they make him divorce upon pretense of Consanguinity the rich Heiress of
Guyenn, and to restore her Dowry, which did so mightily weaken him though he
could not ignore she would deliver it into the hands of a p^tent Neigbour. The
truth is, this was a trick of the C urt of Rome to put a stop to the growth of
the French Monarchy; lest those Kings should keep the Popes within the due
limits of a Spiritual Jurisdiction, as the first Emperors of France and Germany
had done. To compass their End, those crafty Priests made use of the love of
Queen Eleanor for young Henry Plantagenet, Duke of Normandy, Count of Anjou,
Maine, etc. and future King of England. For it was the Queen, who proposed and
pursued the Divorce at Rome, as Tho. Wikes, an English Historian tells us.
Agitata, says he, diutius lite inter Alienoram Reginam Francorum and. virum
suum Regem, ipsa Regina acriter petente Divortium, ratione consanguinitatis
quam proposuit inter se and virum suum; Auctoritate Apostolica celebratum est
Divortium inter eos. Instantius autem laborabat ad Divortium, eo quod ad
Nuptias Henrici Ducis Normaniae, and futuri Regis Angliae ferventius aspirabat.
Erat and ipsa filia Vnica and Haeres Ducis Aquitaniae, quam nos Vasconiam
nuncupamus. Soluto quoque Matrimonio inter ipsam and Regem, ad Nuptias Ducis
quas concupierat illico convolavit. Haec secundum Historiae veritatem huic
opusculo dignum inserenda judicavi. Histor. Angl. script. Tom. II. p. 29.

Here then it was that the sentence of that Divorce, so fatal to France was
pronounced, on Tuesday before Palm Sunday 1152. Forty eight years before
another National Synod had been held at Baugenci, on occasion of King Philip I.
Marrying Bertrade of Montfort against the advice of the Barons of his Realm. In
1428. Baugenci was taken by the Count of Salisbury, but retaken by the French
after they had mastered Meun. This Town has had its own Lords since the middle
of the Thirteenth Century, till 1544. that it was reunited to the Fr. Crown.

Meun or Mehun was an ancient Castle, built on a Hillock near the confluence of
the Mau^e and Loire, on the North-side, to oppose the irruptions of the
Vandals. Meun, Magdunum, Maidunum or Maudunum, is now an indifferent good Town,
four Leagues South-West of Orleans, and two North-East of Baugenci. One St.
Lifard, accompanied with Vrbicius, laid here the Foundation of a Monastery,
since turned into a Collegiate Church. After the taking of Yanville, Meun
surrendered to the Count of Salisbury, who put a strong Garrison in it;
notwithstanding which, it was soon after retaken by the French. This Town was
one of the Country-Houses most frequented by Charles V. and the Inhabitants
have a Proverb to signify that he died there in 1381, though Historians relate,
that it was in another Country House, called Beauty, upon the Marne. Whatever
be of that, Meun gave its name to a famous Poet, a Dominican Friar, called John
Clopinel, or John of Meun, who flourished about the end of the XIII. Century,
and the beginning of the XIV. and finished the renowned Roman of La Rose, begun
by William of Lorris.

There are two other notable Buroughs in the Election of Baugenci, viz.
Chaumont and Ouzouer le March.

Pluviers, or rather, Pithiviers, is the Head o^ another Election and
Archdeaconship. The Latin Authors call it diversely Petiveris, Piverum, etc.
It Is a Town and a Castle seated with a Bridge on the small River Pituere, nine
Leagues North-East of Orleans, near to a Village called Pithiviers le Vieil. It
has an ancient Priory depending on the Abbey of Cluny, and founded in the
Seventh Century; besides a Kings Court of Regal Justice, resorting to the
Presidial of Orleans.

Yanville six Leagues West of Pithiviers, is another Regal Court of the
Bailiwick of Orleans. The Fr. King Henry IV. took it after Estampes, on a
Sunday, November 11. 1589. and Garrisoned the Castle.

Yeure le Chastel, a League East of Pithiviers, and Neufville, four Leagues
South-West, are two other Regal Seats of Justice. The other Towns or Buroughs
in this Election, are Thoury, Autruy, Sermaizes, Soizi-Males-herbes, Briares
and Puizeaux. This last is called so from the abundance of Wells, that are
otherwise very rare in this Election, and the Country of Gastinois.

Of Gastinois.
GASTINOIS, Wastinensis, or Vastinensis Pagus, has the Isle of France on the
North and North-East, Bourgogne on the East, Nivernois and Berry on the South,
and Proper Orleanois on the West, reaching thirty Leagues North and South from
Mont le hery in the Isle of France, to Pouilly in Nivernois, and about sixteen
Leagues East and West, where it is broadest, as from Chastenay in the Country of
Chartres to Moret, in the Isle of France.

But it is to be observed, that that which now bears the name of Gastinois, is
made up of two Countries, viz. Pagus, or Comitatus Milidunensis, the County of
Melun, that has been united to the Government of the Isle of France, and Pagus
Wastinensis, or Gastinois properly so called, that still depends on the
Government of Orleanois.

Gastinois is a Franco-German name, derived from the Teutonish WASTE, that is
yet in use in English; for we call Commons, Heaths, wild and desert Places
Wastes, and the French having no W, do ordinarily change it into G, as Guerre
for War. Thence it comes that they call so other Wildernesses, as le Pais de la
Gasti^e in Berry. St. Laurent en Gastine, a Village in Vendomois, etc.

The Election of Dourdan is accounted by some in Hurepoix, and by others in
Gastinois. It lies on the borders of the Isle of France, in which some place
it, but it resorts to the Generality of Orleans, confining the Election of that
City on the South, that of Pithiviers on the South-East, the Isle of France, on
the North and North-East, and the Country of Chartres on the West.

Dourdan, Dordingum, was the Patrimony of Hugh Capet, belonging to his
Grandfather Hugh the great, Duke of France, Count of Paris, etc. who died here
in 956. And therefore it was not separated from the Crown, till the time of the
French King Henry II. who pawned it to the Duke of Guise. In 1596. it was sold
to a Switzer Gentleman, Imbert of Dutsbach, a Native of Berne. Then it was
acquired by the House of Rosny, and redeemed by Lewis XIII, in 1610. Dourdan
lies upon the River Orge, fifteen Leagues North North-East of Orleans. It was
formerly a pretty good Town, but has been almost ruined during the Civil Wa^s,
under pretense of Religion, in 1562, and 1567.

Estampes, Stampae, seated on the River Juine, Junna, near its mixing with the
Lo (which takes afterwa^ds the name of Essonne, from a Village it goes by, and
discharges it self into the Seine) was formerly a considerable Town, for it had
a Royal Palace under the Reign of Robert King of France. The Protestants took
this Town by Scalado, in 1567, and the Castle by composition. This Castle
founded by the said King Robert was since ruined in 1652, during the civil War
of the Princes; though their Army had the worst in a Battle fought near it.
Estampes has an Election resorting to the Generality of Paris, yet is reck'ned
in Beauce, and part of the Government Orleanois. It lies three Leagues
South-East of Dourdan, and thirteen North East of Orleans. It was anciently a
Viscounty, and of the Demesne of the French Crown. Charles IV. erected it into
a County and Peerdom in 1327, for Charles of Evreux his Cousin, Then having
been reunited to the Crown, Charles VII. gave it to Richard Duke of Britany,
and Lewis XII. to John of Foix, in 1478. Francis I. raised it to a Duchy in
1536, on behalf of Ann of Pisseleu, one of his Mistresses, whom he Married to
John of la Brosse; and Henry IV. to his Natural Son Caesar Duke of Vendome.

There are other places of some note in the Election of D^urdan, as Rochefort
on the borders of the Isle of France, toward the North, which has given name
to Gui, and William of Rochefort Chancellors of France, under Lewis XI. and
Charles VIII. St. Arnoul, Monnerville, etc.

Montargis, Mons Argisus seems to have been built by Angegisus, Archbishop of
Sens, and Vicar of the Roman See throughout Germany and France, in 876. for
Argisus may be derived from Angegisus, by a Syncop, and the change of N into R,
very familiar to the French, as they have made Pampre from Pampinus, Diacre
from Diaconus, etc. In 1418. the Count of Warwick blocked up this Town, seated
upon the Loing, fifteen Leagues North-East of Orleans, but the Count of Dunois
coming to its Relief, forced the Trenches of the Besiegers, and killed fifteen
hundred of them. In 1528. Montargis was burnt, and since rebuilt, and given by
Francis I. to the Lady Renee, Lewis XII's Daughter, in part of her Portion,
together with the Duchy of Chartres. Montargis has an Election resorting to
the Generality of Orleans. For the Spiritual it depends on the Archbishop of
Sens, and for the Temporal on the Presidial of Orleans; if we believe Du
Chesne; for Morery places a Bailywick and Provostship in it.

The Canal of Briare, that joins the Seine, and the Loire, by means of the
Loing, was begun here by Henry IV. and is of twelve Leagues extent. There has
been since dug another, from Montargis to Orleans, of eighteen Leagues in
length, making together with the Loire an irregular Polygone.

Chastillon sur-Loing, Castellio ad Lupam; is a place of some consideration and
antiquity. It lies upon the River Loing, and the Canal of Briare, nine Miles
South of Montargis, and five South-West of Chateau-renard upon the Ouane. In
1569, both these places were taken from the Admiral of Coligny, to whom they
belonged.

Lorris, Lauriacum and Lorriacum, is the head of a small Country, near the
Forest of Orleans, called Pagus Lauriacensis, le pais de Lorris. It Is known how
the Goths, Franks, Vandals, and other No^thern Nations brought into the West
and Southern Parts of Europe, the custom of deciding their Quarrels by Duels,
or single Fights, and that the Magistrates not being able to ove^rule entirely
this inclination, were fo^c'd to turn it into a Law, ordering that none should
fight but before the Provost, or an appointed Judge; and in these public and
lawful Duels, the vanquished lost his Suit as well as the Day, and was forced
to make reparation to the Victorious, either in Money, or otherwise. But there
was a custom in the Country of Lorris, which obtained throughout all Gastinois;
That if two Men came rashly to challenge one another, and then to agree with
the consent of the Provost, they were fined 2 s. 6 d. but if they fought, the
Bayls of the Vanquished were fined 112 Shillings. And therefore it is still said
in common Proverb, of a man too severely dealt with by the Judges: Qu'il est
des gens de Lorris, ou le battu pay l'amende. That He is a Lorris man, beaten
and fined. Lorris is ten Leagues distant from Orleans to the West, and six from
Montargis to the South-East. In the XIII. Century, under the Reign of Lewis IX,
it gave name to a famous Poet and Lawyer, William of Lorris, who began the
Romance of la Roze, highly esteemed in those days.

The other Towns or conside^able Buroughs depending on the Election of
Montargis, are Ferrieres, Beaune, Boiscommun, Choisi-Bellegarde, and Noyan.

Gien, Giemum or Gemiacum, thirteen Leagues South-East of Orleans, and fourteen
West of Auxerre, on whose Bishop it depends for the Spiritual. It Is a pretty
good Town seated on the River Loire, with an Election, and the Title of a
County; for it has had, time out of mind, it is own Lords, till Mathilda or
Maud, Countess of Nevers and Tonnerre, yielded it to the French King Philip
August. Since it is fallen again into the hands of particular Lords, and has
been enjoyed by the House of Seguier, which has given several eminent
Magistrates to France; amongst others, Peter Seguier, made Lord Keeper by Lewis
XIII. in 1633 and then Lord Chancellor in 1635. There is a Stone Bridge to pass
the Loire, but it was broken in 1650. to hinder the passage of the Army of the
Princes.

B^iare, Brivodurum, Briobodorum or Briodorum, is so called from a Gaulish word
Briva, a Bridge, over which the Loire is past. Here ends the Canal of
Montargis, that keeps the communication between the Seine and the Loire. Near
this place it was that the Royal Army, and that of the Princes fought, in
sixteen hundred and fifty. It lies two Leagues South-East of Gien.

Cosne, Cona, Conada, or rather Condate, this last being a Gaulish word, that
signifies Confluence; because the Lore receives here the small River of Nozaim,
after it has watered Antrain and Donzi. Some Geographers place Cosne in
Nivernois, but it belongs more properly to Beauce, since it resorts to the
Election of Gien, and the Presidial of Orleans, from which, it is twenty Leagues
distant to the South-East. Cosne is renowned for good Knives.

St. Fargeau is a Duchy and Peerdom, Erected by Charles the Ninth, in 1569.
This Town is the Capital of the little Country of Puisaye, and lies upon the
Loing, near a Forest, seven leagues North of Cosne, and twenty East of Orleans.

Between Cosne and Briare, seven Miles from each lies upon the Loire, the
Borough of Neuvi, which seems to have been formerly a considerable Town, since
Caesar, who gives it the Name of Noviodunum, designed to have besieged it, had
he not been prevented by the Surrender of the Inhabitants. Aimoin calls it
Novus Vicus, upon which the French name of Neuvi has undoubtedly been framed.

The other places of Note resorting to this Election, are Blesneau, Ozouer on
the Trezee, Chatillon on the Loire, Bonny, St. Amand in Puisaye; all depending
on the Bishop of Auxerre, for the Spiritual, and the Generality and Bayliwick
of Orleans for the Temporal.

Of Nivernois
NIVERNOIS, Nivernensis Pagus, has Gastinois, Puisaye, and Auxerrois on the
North, the Duchy of Burgundy on The East, Bourbonnois on the South, and Berry
on the West. It Is Figure resembles a round, somewhat flatted, and irregularly
bent, being of the same length and breadth, viz. above twenty leagues North and
South from Tizy, upon the Loire to Clamecy on the Yonne, and as many East and
West from Chateau-Chinon to La Guierche. It Is subdivided into eight smaller
Countries, namely, the Valley of Nevers upon the Loire, the Amognes on the
Nieure, the Valleys of Montenoison, the Valleys of Yonne, the Moruan, the
Bazois, the County between the Loire and Allier, and the Donizois: The whole
abounding with Wood, Pasture-Ground and Cattle, being watered with many Rivers
besides the Loire, the Allier, the Yonne and the Cure, and comprehending thirty
good Towns. Here are found some Silver-Mines, many more of Iron, and the best
Freestone in France.

Before the Romans, these Countries belonged to the Autunois Aedui, whose
Territories extended from the Saone to the Allier, and comprehended also the
greatest part of Bourbonnois. So that Samson mistakes, when he pretends that
the Vadicasses dwelt in Nivernois, for they were the Inhabitants of Chalons, as
we shall show in its due place. Thence it came that during the decay of the
French Monarchy, Nivernois passed into the hands of the Dukes of Burgundy; the
third of whom, called Richard le Justicier, gave it to one Ratier in 890, whose
Posterity has kept it till Cardinal Mazarin bought it together with the Duchy
of Rethel for Philip Mancini Mazarin, his Nephew, from Charles of Gonzague III.
Duke of Mantoue, etc. This County having been, in the mean while, successively
enjoyed by many illustrious Houses, as Burgundy, Courtenay, France, Flanders,
Cleves, Gonzague, into which the Heiresses of Nivernois Married.

Nevers Noviodunum Aeduorum, lies between the confluence of the Nieure and
Allier, into the Loire, 30 Leagues South-East of Orleans, and to of Cosne.
Caesar had made it his Storehouse, keeping there his Corn and Money, and the
Horses he had bought in Spain* and Italy, but Eporedorix and Virodomarus, two
Commanders Autunois, having surpised and killed the Garrison, took away the
Money and Horses, and put the Town into Flames. This dependence upon Autun is
the cause that the Bishopric is not ancient, nor mentioned in any Notices of
the Gauls, before the VI. or VII. Century. The name of Nevers Nivernum is also
new, and most probably derived from the Rivulet Nieure Niveris. Gregory of
Tours calls Nevers Nivernum, but gives it only the Title of Oppidum a Town, so
that it seems not to have been a City or Bishop's Seat, in his time, that is in
the VI. Age. Nevers is a pretty strong place, having no manner of Suburbs and
both the City and Town being included within the Walls, that are defended with
many thick and high Towers, and surrounded with deep Motes, filled up with
Water. The most considerable Buildings are, 1. The Palace of the Dukes, where
amongst other Goods is a great Marble-Table, upon which is another of less
size, that appears transparent at the light of the Sun or a Candle, and shows
most delicate Pictures. 2. The Bridge upon the Loire, consisting of twenty
Arches, and as many Pillars all of Freestone, with a Drawing-Bridge on each
side, and Towers to defend them. 3. The Cathedral, dedicated first under the
name of St. Gervais, and St. Protais, and then under the name of St. Cyr, has
a Steeple enriched on the outward side, with many embossed figures of Stone.
Nevers has besides Eleven Parishes, an Abbey of Augustinian Monks, another of
Nuns, and several Religious Houses. It has a Bayliwick resorting to the
Presidial of St. Pierre le Moustier, a Chamber of Accounts, and an Election
depending on the Generality of Moulins.

Nevers was Erected into a Peerdom in 1459. by Charles VII. which Erection was
confirmed by Lewis XI. in 1464. by Lewis XII. in 1505, by Francis I. in 1521.
That King raised it to the Dignity of Duchy and Peerdom in 1538. which
Cardinal Mazarin got ratified by Lewis XIV. in 1660. Abundance of Earthen
wares, but especially Glass-works are made in this City, because most of the
Inhabitants meddle with those Trades, the last being no disparagement to a
Gentleman in France.

Decize, Decetia, lies in a rocky and rugged Island of the River Loire, where
it receives the Airon, seven Leagues South-East of Nevers, and is the Capital
of the Country of Bazois. That learned Lawyer and Antiquary Gui Coquille, who
flourished from the middle of the last Age to the beginning of this, was a
Native of this Town. He pretends, in the History of Nivernois, that this Island
was cut off from the Continent, and called Decize from Decisus: But Aethicus in
his Itinerary calls it Dececia, that seems to be its ancient name, and Decize a
corruption of it. Whatever be of that, Decize is a Town of some Antiquity, as
appears by the Roman Medals that have been found here. It has a Bridge on the
Loire, being an important passage of that River, and therefore fortified with a
Castle, lying on a Hill, with part of the Town surrounded with old Walls.

La Charity, Caritas, six Leagues North-West of Nevers, is also situated on the
Loire, on the same side of this City and Decize, that is looking toward the
North-East, with two Bridges on that River, one of Stone, and the other of
Wood. It has a Hall, or covered Marketplace of an extraordinary length;
several Churches, and one of the chief Priories of the Abbey of Cluny, called St
Marie de la Charity. This Monastery gave name and rise to the Town, which
depends for the Spiritual on the Bishop of Auxerre, and resorts for the
Temporal to the Bailiwick of Nevers, and the Election of Gien. It suffered much
during the Wars with the English, and the Civil Wars for Religion, but
especially in 1569, when it was taken and plundered by the German Auxiliary
Forces of William Duke of Deux-ponts.

Pougues is but a Village near the Loire, three Miles North of Nevers, and nine
South of La Charity, on the same side of that River; but is extremely famous
for its Mineral Waters, said to be a specific remedy against Hydropisie. They
consist in two Fo^ntains, that are but at a Foot distance from one another; and
yet there is observed some difference in the taste. The Inhabitants use them
for common drink, and testify that they are more strengthening than ordinary
Spring Water.

St. Pierre le Moutier, Monasterium St. Petri, lies in the Country between the
Allier and Loire, five Leagues North of Nevers. It has been divided from the
Jurisdiction of Nevers, and made a Bailiwick, Presidial and Provostship, to
which the Towns of Donzi, Szincoins, Cusset and Bourg-St. Ettienne, are
resorting.

Donzi, Donziacum, four Leagues North, North-East of la Charity, lies upon the
little River Nozaim, which discharges it self into the Loire at Cosne. It has
the Title of a Duchy, and is the head of a small Country called le Donziois,
Pagus Donziacensis, which has besides Antraim, Dreve, etc.

Clamecy, Climiciacum, or Clamiceium, lies almost six Leagues East of Donzi,
upon the River Yonne, that receives here three other Rivulets which begin to
render it navigable.

Clamecy is the Seat of an Election under the Generality of Orleans, to which
resort Dornecy, or Dommecy Domitiacum, Cunfy Metz le Comte, Tannay, Anant,
Champlemy and Varzy. After the Expulsion of the Christians out of the H. Land,
Rainold Bishop of Bethlehem, followed into France, Gui Count of Nevers, in
1223. who gave him the Government of an Hospital here; and that he might still
keep a shadow of his former Dignity, this Hospital was erected into a
Bishopric, and called Bethlehem, but no Territory annexed to it. However these
Titular Prelates have had Successors hitherto. All the Northern part of
Nivernois, from La Charity to this Town, is of the Diocese of Auxerre.

Vezelay, Viceliacum, upon the River Cure, Chora, five Leagues East of Clamecy,
has an Election, and an ancient Abbey of Benedictins, founded by Gerard Count of
Nevers, under the French King, and Emperor Charles the Bald. It Is now a
Collegiate Church of Prebendaries, under the Title of St. Mary Magdalene,
resorting to the Bishopric of Autun, as does all the Valley of Yonne, and the
Country of Moruan. In 1145. Pope Eugenius III. celebrated a Council here in
presence of the Fr. K. Lewis VII.

Morvant, or rather Moruan, Moruinus Pagus, reaches from thence to the Source
of the Yonne, or very near it. It Is a wild, Woody and Mountanous Country, into
which Heptadius a holy Priest fled, to avoid his being made Bishop of Auxerre.
It has its name from a Village that is no more extant, viz. Moruin, mentioned
by the ancient Historians of the French. However there are yet other places of
some Note, as Champagne, Campaniacum, Cussi, Cussiacum, Cervon Cervedo, L'
Orme, Corbigny -- S. Leonard Corbiniacum, Auroux, Chasteau-Chinon, Castrum
Caninum. This last is a Lordship surrounded with pleasant Forests, and seems to
have gotten that name from the Greyhounds, or Hunting-Dogs, which the Counts
of Nevers kept here. The chief Trade of the Country consists in Wood, that is
carried on the Yonne, and the Seine down to Paris.

Arquien and Langeron, are two Marquisates on the two extremities of Nivernois,
Arquien on the North-East, near the River Cure, and Langeron on the South-West
near the Allier. La Ferte Chauderon, two Leagues South-East of Langeron, has
the Title of a Barony, whose Lord entitles himself Marshal and Seneschal of
Nivernois, and pretends to the right of Coin^ng Money. At La Roche-Milet another
Barony, 15 Leagues Eastwards, are considerable Fairs. Mentenoison, which gives
name to a Valley, has ^ strong Castle built on a Mountain, almost in ^he middle
of this Duchy. The other places ^re Luzy, Cercy-la Tour, Molins-Engilbert,
Anlezy, ^hatillon-en-Bazois, S. Sauge, Premery, Champ-Allemand, etc.

CHAP. XI. Of Orleanois on the South of the Loire.
Of Berry.
BERRY has Sologne on the North, from which it is separated by the Fuzou, on
the East the Loire and the Allier divide it from Puisaie, Nivernois and
Bourbonnois. It consines La-Marche on the South, and Poictou and Touraine on
the West. It Is modern name has still some affinity with the Latin Bituriges, by
which the Roman Historians call the Berruyers, the Inhabitants of this Country,
who were once Masters of all Celtick Gaul. It was so at least, in the time of
Tarquin the ancient King of Rome. For Ambigat King of the Celtes, either to
extend his Dominions, or to discharge his Realm of the multitude of People it
was crowded with, resolved to make two Plantations under the Conduct of two
Sons of his, Segovese and Bellovese. The former lead his Colony through the
Hercynian, now the Black Forest, into Germany, where they settled themselves,
partly in Bohemia, partly on the Danube, and partly in Friesland and Westphaly:
These last were the Ancestors of the Franks or French, who, a thousand years
after, passed the Rhine under Pharamond and Clodion, and began to conquer the
Gauls, their ancient habitation. As to Bellovese, he took his Way through
Dauphine, Savoy, and the Alps, followed by vast numbers of Berruyers,
Auvergnats, Senonois, Autunois, Chartrains, Manseaux, etc. who conquered the
Northern Part of Italy, and gave it the name of Cisalpine Gaul. It Is the same
that was since called Lombardy, and comprehends Piedmont, the Duchy of Milan,
the States of Genoa, Mantua, and part of the Dominions of Venice, and of
Tuscany.

I know not whether these Colonies weak'ning the Berruyers, caused the ruin of
their Empire; but in Caesar's time they were no longer their own Masters, being
under the protection, or rather dependence of the Autunois. However, they were
still so powerful, as to have above twenty good Towns in their Country, which
they all burnt except the Capital, to famish the Roman Army, though this hindered
not their being subdued by this great General. In the Division of Augustus
Berry, was made a part of Aquitain, and continued so under the French. During
the weakness of Charlemaigne's Successors, the Governors of this Province made
themselves Sovereigns, and had the Title of Counts of Bourges, till Harpin,
undertaking a Journey into the Holy Land, sold his Estate to the French King
Philip I. for sixty thousand golden Pence. This Lord turning a Monk at his
return, this County was united to the Crown, till the year 1360, that the
French King John erected it into a Duchy and Peerdom for his youngest Son
John, who dying without Male Issue, Berry returned to the Crown. King Charles
VI. gave it in portion to his fifth Son Charles, since the VII. of that name,
King of France, and because, during the Wars with the English, this Province
stood firm to his Interest, his Enemies called him contemptuously, King of
Bourges. Since that time, Berry has often been the portion of youngest Sons,
Daughters, and Queen Dowagers of France.

This Province is about 28 Leagues North and South, and as many East and West,
being divided into two Parts, almost equal by the Cher, and watered by a vast
number of other Rivers, which make this Country very pleasant and fertile in
all the necessary Conveniences of Life. It especially abounds in Corn, and the
Pasture-Ground is so excellent, that the Wool and Cloth of Berry outdo all
the others in France. The Name of Berry is derived from a Latin word used in
the decay of that Tongue, Biturium. More ancient Authors call the Berruyers
Bituriges Cubi, to distinguish them from the Inhabitants of Bourdeaux Bituriges
Vivisci, who seem to be a Colony of the former.

Bourges, Avaricum Biturigum, and in latter Ages Biturigae, Bituricae, and
Betoricae, lies 19 Leagues South South-East of Orleans, upon the River Eure, or
Yeure, Avara, or Avera, whence the Latin Name of this City Avaricum seems to
come. It Is seated in a Soil fertile in Fruits and Wine, that is not so
delicate, but more healthful than that of Orleans. The River Eure divides it
self into three Branches, one of which serves to cleanse the Town, and withal
to Dyers, Tanners, and the like; the other refreshes the Ditches that surround
the Walls, and the third runs along the Suburb of St. Peter. These three
Branches being joined, and the Eure increased with the Waters of the Oron
Vtrio; the Aurette Avara Minor, and the Moulon Molo, near the Monastery of St.
Sulpice, this River begins to be Navigable.

The Situation of Bourges is not only convenient, but also very strong; for
besides these Rivers and Ditches, it is defended by broad and deep Marshes,
surrounded with good Walls, fortified with eighty Towers; so that three Camps
would needs be required to besiege it on all sides; as one at Bourbon's Gate,
the other at Oron's Gate, and the other at the Gate of St. Privatus. Cesaer
observes that he could not shut it up with Trenches, and laid siege to it only
on that side that was between the River and the Marsh. Nevertheless, he took it
partly by Storm, and partly by Stratagem, having raised two high Towers, whence
his Soldiers leaped on the Wall, which so frighted the Garrison and Inhabitants,
that they retired to the great Market, and thence endeavored to make their
escape thorough the Gates; but the Romans having mastered them, spared neither
Sex nor Age; they were so incensed at the Murder of their Fellow Soldiers in
Gien. This was the Cause, that of 40000 People that were in this City, 800
hardly could save their Lives, by retiring into the Army of Vercingentorix,
General of the Gauls.

In the V. Century, Bourges was taken from the Romans by the Visigots, and from
them by Clovis, and made part of the Kingdom of Orleans under Clodomir, and of
that of Burgundy under Gontran his Nephews. Desiderius, or Didier, General of
Chilperic the first King of Paris or France, took it from the last in 583, and
burnt it almost entirely; Charlemaign repaired it, and Phillip August fortified
and adorned it with a Castle, called the Great Tower, which was almost quite
ruined in 1651. It was cut Diamond wise on the outside, and raised so high,
that from the top, the Country might be viewed four Leagues round about. There
has been seen a long time a Wood or Iron-Cage, where the jealous King Charles
the VIII. kept Lewis of Orleans Prisoner, who, nevertheless succeeded him. In
1412, the Duke of Burgundy brought the French King, Charles the VI. before
Bourges, whither the Duke of Orleans, and his Confederates had retired, and
laid siege to it with an Army of 100000 Men, but in vain; for at last both
Parties were glad to accept of the Mediation of the Duke of Guyenn, then
Dauphin of France. In 1562, The Count of Montgommery. Commander of the
Protestants under the Prince of Conde, seized on this Town May 27; but left
Governor therein one Yvoy, a Man of no great Courage and Trust, who
surrendered it the same Year to the Duke of Guise; and therefore it remained in
the Power of the Leaguers, till 1594, that it was reduced by the French King,
Henry the IV.

Notwithstanding these various Changes, Bourges is still a considerable City,
being of an Oval Figure, with seven Gates, and as many Suburbs. Its Walls seem
to be a Roman Work, being still almost entire, and so strongly built, that it
requires a great deal of Labor, to pluck some few Stones out of them. It has
seventeen Parochial, and seven Collegiate Churches, three Abbeys, a College of
Jesuits, and a vast number of Monasteries, besides the Cathedral of St.
Stephen, said to be bui^t in 254, and the St. Chapel, founded by John Duke of
Berry, Brother to the French King, Charles the V. and therefore depending
immediately on the Sea of Rome, That Duke was buried there in 1417, and there
is still his Crown, with several Vessels of Gold and Silver curiously wrought.
There are likewise shown the pretended Bones of a certain Giant called Briat,
said to have been 15 Cubits high. The Romans had here a Palace, which K. Pepin
repaired, and called there an Assembly of his Barons in 767; but I know not
whether it be the same which the Dukes of Berry made afterward use of, and is
now the Seat of the Presidial. Besides the Bailiwick Bourges has a Generality,
to which the Elections of Chateau-Roux, and la Chastre in Berry, and St. Amand
in Bourbonnois are resorting; as also a Chamber of Acompts for all the lands
depending on this Duchy, erected by the said Duke in 1379. Its University is
famous for the Civil and Canon Law; the best Lawyers in France having taught
here in the last Age, and the beginning of this; such as Alciat, Baron
Duarenus, Baldwin, Conti, Hortomun, Cujus, etc. It was founded by the French
King, Lewis the IX, re-establisht by Charles Duke of Berry, Brother to Lewis
the XI. and endowed with many Privileges by Pope Paul II. in 1464.

But now I am speaking of Privileges, I must not forget four very rare and
considerable Prerogatives, granted by the French King to the Inhabitants of
Bourges, perhaps in reward of their Fidelity to Charles the VII. Du Chesne.
1. Their Goods cannot be confiscated. 2. They are free from Garrisons and
Winter Quarters. 3. Those that posses Lordships or noble Manors, are not
subject to the Duty of Ban and Areerban. 4. Those that buy or inherit them pay
nothing to the King. The City is governed by a Mayor and Sheriffs, who take
care of it in time of Peace and War, and judge in first instance of the
differences between the Citizens, which may be brought by Appeal only before
the Parliament of Paris; but the Suits of the Country People resort to the
Presidial, as well as the Appeals from the Royal Seats of Issoudun, Dunle-Roy,
Meun sur Yeure, Concressaut, Sancerre, etc.

Amongst the Buildings of Bourges the Townhouse, and the House of Jaques Coeur
are worthy to be seen. This Man was Treasurer to Charles the VII. and one of
the first that ventured to send Merchant Ships into the East. By that unknown
Trade, he gathered in a short time such vast Sums of Money, that he bought the
Lordships of St. Fergeau, Menetou, Boisi, S. Geran de Vaux, la aliPsse, etc.
and built a most sumptuous Palace, that is yet partly subsisting, i^ which are
said to be as many Windows, as there are Days in the Yoar, besides other
public Buildings, and whole Streets, wherewith he adorned this City. But his
great Riches proved his Ruin; for the envious Courtiers took thence occasion to
accuse him of keeping unlawful Correspondences with the Turks, of sending them
Arms, Weapons* and Amunitions; and even Smiths and Gunners, to smeed, melt and
point them after the Christian manner; Of discovering the Secrets of the State,
making away the King's Money, and drawing unlawful Taxes from Languedoc: for
which true or pretended Crimes, he was put close Prisoner, condemned to
excessive Fines, and then banished for ever from France.

As to the Ecclesiastical State, Christianity, together with Episcopacy was as
it is said, planted here by one Vrsinus, Disciple to the Apostles, who was the
first Prelate of it, in the second Century. And as by the Division of the
Emperors, August and Constantine, Aquitain became the fourth Part of the
Gauls, and was subdivided into three other Provinces; the First, the Second,
and the Third Aquitain; Bourges being the Capital of all, its Bishop took the
Title of Patriarch or Primate of Aquitain, and had the Precedence of the
Metropolitans of Bourdeaux, Narbonne, and A^ch. This Honor having been
conferred, or confirmed to him by Charlemaign, who rested Aquitain into a
particular Kingdom, he enjoyed it undisturbed till the Duchy of Guyenn, and
the Estates of the Counts of Toulouse were torn off from the Kingdom of France;
for then the Archbishops of Bourdeaux, Narbonne and Auch, endeavored to free
themselves from their subordination to the Primate of Bourges, as their Masters
had done from their Subjection to the French Kings. Diverse National Councils
were kept upon this account; but the Archbishops of Bourdeaux maintained by
the Kings of England, would never yield. The most famous Assembly of Prelates,
that was ever called to Bourges was in 1438, where the French Clergy
acknowledged the Council ot Basil; and approved of the Pragmatique Sanction, as
did also the Parliament of Paris in 1459. This Constitution first drawn up by
Lewis the IX, corrected and enlarged by the Council of Basil, consisted of 23
Statutes, of which 21 had been ratified by Pope Eugenius IV, Their Principal
aim was; 1. To cause the Elected Bishops to be acknowledged for such before, or
without their going to Rome. 2. To make the Elections of Bishops, Abbots, etc.
free and independent from either King or Pope. 3. To prefer the Authority of a
General Council before that of the Pope. 4. To abolish expectative Graces, so
that the Pope might not give the Survivance of a Living to any of his
Favorites, Eugenius repented soon after to have yielded so s nuch, broke with
the Council of Basil, and sent Ambassadors to the French King, Charles the
VII. to hinder the Reception of the Pragmatique, but all in vain; for it
subsisted till 1516. that it was suppressed by an Agreement between Francis I.
and Leo X. called the Concordat; the French King allowing the Pope to inslave
his Clergy again, that he might abolish the free Elections and Name to the
great Livings.

The Diocese of Bourges contains 900 Parishes under 12 Archdeacons, and 20
Arch-Priests, besides 34 Collegiate Churches, and 35 Abbeys. Before the Year
1676. it had Eleven Suffragans; but Albi that was then Erected into a
Metropolitan took away five with it self, so that Bourges had but five left,
viz. Clermons, Let, St. Flour, Tulles and Limoges. Just now I hear that the H.
Chapel, and many Houses was burnt down, July 1693.

Sancerre lies 8 Leagues North-East of Bourges, upon a Mountain washed by the
River Loire. The Latin Name of this Town is a proof of its Antiquity; for
Authors call it either Sacrum Cereris, because in the Time of Heathenism; Ceres
the Goddess of Corn was adored there; Or Sacrum Caesaris, because Caesar
sacrificed in this Place, after his Victory over the Berruyers. Others pretend
that this great General built here a Fort, to keep in the Statues or Images of
his Lares or Hous-Gods; but this has little probability, since the Romans did
not use to carry their domestic Gods with them in their Armies; besides that,
considering the swiftness of Cesar's Conquest, it is most likely he did not lose
Time in building Fortresses. Another mark of the Antiquity of Sancerre is its
Title of County, which it got by being given in Portion to a youngest Son of
the House of Champaign. Stephen, Brother to Thibauld, or Theobald the Groat,
under the Reign of Lewis the IX. Stephen's Posterity enjoyed it to the Year
1451. that it passed to the House of Du Bucil. During that time, the Counts of
Sancerre were famous, and their Family produced many brave Men; as amongst
others Lewis of Sancerre, High-Constable of France in 1397. The Neighborhood
of Orleans made this Town take part with the Dukes of that Name, during their
Quarrels against the Burgundians, who for this reason besieged it. In the last
Century, Sancerre held for the Protestants, and was twice attempted in vain by
the Roman Catholic Commanders, viz. in 1568 and 1572, at which time he served
as a place of Refuge to those Inhabitants of Orleans and Bourges, that could
escape the barbarous Murder of St. Bartholomew; but the following Year, it was
taken by Famine, after a Siege of 8 Months. This County has 31 Chastelnies, and
500 Parishes depending on it.

Issoudun, Vsellodunum, or Exoldunum, lies on the small River Thiol, seven
Leagues West of Bourges. Its Gaulish termination intimates that it is an
ancient Town; and Du Chesne confidently relates it was one of the 20, which the
Gauls themselves put to Ashes to starve Cesar's Army. What authority he has for
this, I know not; but it is more certain that Issoudun was already a strong
Place, under the French King, Philip August; and of such consideration, that
Hugh of Die, the Pope's Legate, called a Synod thither in 1081. It Is now a
pretty large Town, the Second in this Province, surrounded with Walls, Ditches
and Suburbs; defended with a Castle, and a great Tower, having several
Parochial and Collegiate Churches and Monasteries; a Seat of Regal Justice, or
an inferior Bailiwick, resorting to the Presidial of Bourges; together with
many Chastelnies and Baronies its dependances. Besides that, the Wines of its
Territory are said to be of good keeping, and its Trade of Wool is
considerable.

Dun le Roy, Regio-Dunum, or Dunum Regis, is accounted the third Town of Berry,
because of its Seat of Regal Justice. It lies 6 Leagues South South-East of
Bourges, on the River Orron, or Auron, Vtrio. It has had particular Lords of
the Family of Astier, but was reunited to the French Crown in 1430. under
Charles the VII. and 1465. under Lewis the XI.

Chasteau Neuf, upon the Cher, 6 Leagues South of Bourges, is a good Borrough
and Castle* Chasteau Melan, Castrum Meliand, is six Leagues more to the South,
near the River Indre. It was formerly a walled Town, but is now only a simple
Borough; though the Castle is yet Walled, and has had a Tower, said to be built
by the Romans. La Chastre, Castra is two Leagues Westwards on the River Indre,
a little Town, but well fortified with Walls and Ditches, and defended with a
good Castle. Its Church of St. Germain is together Parochial and Collegiate,
being served with Canons, founded by the Lords of Chavigny.

Chateau-Roux lies on the same River, ten Leagues West South-west of Bourges.
The beginning of this Town was a Castle, built in 952, by one Radulphus Largus,
Raoul the large, or the Liberal, second Lord of Deolz, who presented with it
the Monks of the Abbey of St. Gildas. The Latin Authors call it Castrum Radulfi,
and therefore it had ought to be named in French Chasteau-Raoul, or
Chasteau-Roul, and not Chasteau Roux, which signifies Castrum Rufum. This Town
is pretty large, having 4 Parishes, a Collegiate Church, a fine Castle, and a
Park belonging to the Prince of Conde, who is Lord of it; for it was erected
into a Duchy and Peerdom in 1616, by Lewis XIII. Here was born Odo, or Eudes
of Chasteau-Roux, who became Cardinal, and made a great figure under the Reign
of Lewis the IX.

Bourg-de-Deolz, or Bourg-Dieux, Dolensis Vicus is also seated on the Indre,
over against Chasteau-Roux. Its Territory is extraordinary fruitful in Wine and
Wool, because of the goodness of its Pasture-Ground; besides, that it reaches
twenty Leagues in Circuit, and has above 1200 Fees, or Rear-fees depending on
it; for which Reason Charles the IX. erected it into a County for the Baron of
Aumont, Knight of his Order. Moreover Deolz is remarkable for an Abbey of
Benedictins, founded by Ebo, or Abo, a mighty Prince or Lord in Berry, Father
to the forementioned Raoul; and for a Victory, which the Goths got from
Riothimus, King of the Armorican Britains.

Vierzon, seven Leagues North-West of Bourges, on the confluence of the River
Eure and Cher. It Is called in Latin Virsio, and seated in a very fruitful Soil,
amongst Rivers, Vines, green Fields and Meadows, as it is expressed in this
Monkish distich.

Virsio Villa virens, aliunde pauca requirens,
Vitibus ornata, pratis, campis decorata.
It was taken, and burnt by the English in 1197. Wirtzburg a City of Franceny,
is called in Latin Herbipolis, or the Green Town, from its Situation. Some
derive the Name of Vierzon from the same Original, and take it for a
Franco-German Colony.

Selles, or rather Celles, Cellasti Eusicii, lies 14 Leagues West North-West of
Bourges, and 15 South-West of Orleans, It Is grown to an indifferent good Town,
from an Anchoret's Seat: For Eusicius was an Hermit, who lived at the beginning
of the 6th Century under the French King Childebert the I. and had sometimes
the boldness to wait upon, and advise this Prince.

St. Aignan upon the same River, 3 Leagues West of Celles, has the Title of a
Duchy, and bears the Name of St. Aignan, Bishop of Orleans, who is worshipped
there, and for whom it has lost its ancient Name of Chasteau Hagar.

Meun Sur Yeure, Mediolanum, or Magdunum, midway betwixt Bourges and Vierzon,
has an inferior Bailiwick, and a Collegiate Church under the Title of our Lady.
It belonged formerly to Count Robert of Artois, and the Ruins of an old Castle
testify, that it was taken and demolished by the English.

Aubigny Albiniacum, lies upon the River Nerre, nine Leagues North of Bourges.
It belonged once to the Canons of St. Gratian's of Tours, from whom John Duke
of Berry redeemed it. Lewis XI. placed here a Royal Seat of Justice; but
Charles the VIII. transferred it to Concressaut, Concurcallum, or Concorcellum
(and not Concordiae Saltus, as Du Chesne feigns) having given Aubigny to
Berault Steward, Capt. of his Guards, whose Issue took their Surname from
thence. As to Concressant, it lies on the River Saudre, four Leagues East of
Aubigny, and is only a Borough, but fortified and adorned with a very fine
Castle.

Henrichemont, and Bois-Belle, Boscabellum, are two adjacent Places, situated
betwixt two Forests, near the Source of the Saudre, six Leagues North-East of
Bourges. The last has a very fine Castle, and the Title of a Principality
belonging to the House of Bethune-Sulli. Its Name composed of Henri-Richmont,
seems to intimate an English Foundation.

Neuvi on the River Baranion, is but an inconsiderable Village: However it
seems to be the Noviodunum, mentioned by Caesar, Lib. 7. rather than Neuvy upon
the Loire, since the former is in the right way from Avaricum Bourges, to
Genabum Orleans.

Argenton, Argentomagus, is a Town and Chastelny upon the River Creuse, 16
Leagues South-East of Bourges. It has a Castle fortified with ten Towers, upon
one of which called the Tower of Heraclius, are Engraven these two words, Veni
vici, with such uncounterfeit Vestiges of Antiquity, and Ruins of old
Buildings, that it cannot be doubted but that it is a Roman Work. Besides, that
one Heraclius was Governor there under the Empire of Decius, and is said to
have put to Death the 2 Martyrs St. Marcel, and St. Anastase, in the enclosed
Yard, that bears yet the Name of the latter Saint.

The other Places of Note in this Province are Monasteriolum ad Carem Menetou
Sur Cher; Crazzacum Gracay, renowned for its Manufactory of Clothes; Levroux
Leprosium, so called from the Leprousness to which this place was once
obnoxious: Wherefore it was commended to the Patronage of St. Silvain Blanc-en
Berri Oblincum, an indifferent good Town, on the Borders of Touraine and
Poictou, Buzancais, Bosentiacae, or Busentiacum. Ruffiniacum Castellum, Ruffec
le Chateau. Castelio ad Angerim, Chastillon Sur Indre-Igorandis, Aigurande.
Montfaucon, Monsfalconis, toward Nivernois, has one of the finest Ponds in the
Country. Nancey, Pelluau, Charrox Corrocium, have the Title of Counties.
Ligneres, Lineriae, and St. Severe are Buronies. Valansay, Vatan, Vastinum, and
Culant, Cullencum, are considerable L^rdships. La Cheze-al-Benoit, is an Abbey,
the chief of St. Benet's Order.

Of Poictou.
THis Province is the biggest of those that are comprehended in the Government
Orleanois; for it reaches 48 Leagues East and West from Port de Piles in
Tourain to the Isle of Nermoutier, and 20 North and South from Loudun to Aunay,
or 26 from Champigni on the Vienne, to Marsillai on the Charante, and the
Borders of Angoumois. It Is included betwixt Britany, Anjou and Tourain on the
North. Berri and La March on the East, Angoumois, Saintonge, and Aunis on the
South, and the Sea on the West. It Is divided into upper and lower, the latter
extending along the Ocean from Fontenay le Comte to Mortaigne, and the former
taking up the rest of the Province. The whole Country is fruitful in Corn, Wine
and Pasture-Grounds, and feeds great numbers of Sheep, and Herds of Cattle;
besides, that there is good Fishing on the Seacoast, and a vast quantity of
Game in the Forests and Warrens.

The Inhabitants of POICTOV are mentioned by Caesar, Strabo, Ptol my, and other
ancient Geographers under the Name of Poictones. But there is little appearance
they should have gotten that Name from a Scythian Nation, called properly
Agathyrses, and sirnam'd Picti, because they used to Paint their Hair and
Faces, to make themselves the more terrible to their Enemies. That these Pictes
having possessed themselves of the Northern Parts of great Britain, should have
Shipped over a Colony, that made a Descent on the Coasts of POICTOV; Conquered
the Country, and gave their Surname to it. All this is grounded upon a bare
Resemblance of Words without any Foundation on History; for theses Pictes began
to appear in the Year 87. of our Lord, under the Empire a Domitian; and we have
quoted Caesar, who called the Inhabitants of POICTOV, Pictones, an hundred Years
before: So that this must needs be a Gaulish Name, whose original is unknown,
that Tongue being almost altogether lost.

The swiftness of Cesars Conquests in the Gauls will not surprise those who
shall consider the Constitution of that Country, separated into a vast number
of petty States, independing from one another. That Great Captain used the
methods that have ever proved so successful to Conquerors, to sow dissension
among their Enemies, make Alliances with some, profer Neutrality to others, and
use the Forces of the vanquished to subdue the unconquered. Thus Caesar having
submitted the Inhabitants of the Country of POICTOV and Saintonge, embarked his
Troops in their Vessels to Land Men into the Country of Vennes, and by those
means subdued the most potent Nation that lived on the Seacoast of Gaul.
Neither could the League which Vercingentorix, a young Gentleman of Auvergne,
endeavored to make among several Nations of the Celtick Gaul, restore their
broken Power. The Quota of the Pictones came then to 8000 Men, which shows how
considerable they were in those days. Notwithstanding Alesia, whose relief was
intended by this League, was taken and destroyed by the Romans; the Pictones
with all their Confederates, being likewise subdued. Ever since the Pictones
remained under the Romans, and not long after the Emperor Claudius, going over
into England, was accompanied with the Flower of their Nobility, whom at his
Return, he allowed to rebuild their Capital City, in Recompense of their good
Services. But in 410, the Vandals plundered and destroyed it in part, and two
Years after, it fell with all POICTOV, Guienn and Languedoc, in the Power of
the Wisigoths, who maintained themselves in the Possesion of all those
Provinces 84 Years, under six Kings, that is, till 509; that Clovis, King of
the French, won the Battle of Civaux, near Poictiers, killed Alaric, King of
the Wisigoths, and drove them out of POICTOV, and a great part of Guienn and
Languedoc.

Under the French King, and Emperor Charles the Bald, this Province began to
have Counts of its own, who in process of Time beeame Dukes of Guienn. William
the X. the last of them, Married Alienor, his only Daughter and Heirs to the
French King, Lewis the VII, but the crafty Policy of the Popes procuring a
Divorce betwixt them, this rich Princess spous'd Henri Plantagenet, afterward
King of England, which was the Source of continual Wars betwixt the two
Kingdoms, during two or three Centuries.

Pictones is the true Latin Name of the Inhabitants; that has been since
corrupted into Pictavi, Pictavenses and Pictavini, whence comes the French
Poitevins, and likewise the Name of Petaux, given to some part of the French
Foot, by Froissard and Thibaud de Maroiles, as most probably the Name of
Bidaux, in the same Historians, signifies the Foot-Soldiers levied in the
Province of Berry, Bituriges.

As there are great Numbers of Gentry in this Province, and the Inhabitants of
Towns are well bred, and live at Ease; the Reformation made great progresses in
POICTOV, and was often therefore the Seat of War in the last Age. But nothing can
be compared to the Cruelties, which the Intendant of Marillac and his Officers
exercised upon the Protestants of this Province, in the Years 1680. and 1681,
by Lewis the XIV's Order. The waste of their Goods, and the plunder of their
Houses were tolerable Vexations, in comparison of the Racks and Tortures, which
they put those poor Men upon, without any other Cause, than that they were
pretended Heretics. The Reader may consult two Books. Erat des Reformez en
France, Par. 1. Chap. 8, to 14. but especially Page 141, 142. and Les derniers
efforts de l'innocence affligee. Page 82.-123

Besides the general Division of POICTOV into Upper and Lower, it is subdivided
into ten smaller Countries; as le Chastelleraudois, le Loudunois, le
Mi^a^elois, le To^^rcois, la Gastine, Arbauge, le Lussonois (...) ^^o^^ois, les
Mauges, and le Pais de Tifa^^^ (...) I shall describe under the Towns, whom
they h^ve their name.

Poictiers, Capital of the whole Province, lies forty Leagues from Orleans, and
sixty five from Paris, to the South East. Its ancient Name is Augustoritum,
according to Ptolomy, who also mentions another City under the name of (...),
Limonum, which Sanson takes for Poictiers; but that ancient Geographer
distinguishes them so plainly, that I had rather to confess I know not what
place Limonum is, than to contradict him. In process of Time Augustoritum was
called Pictavi, by the Name of the People of which it was the Head; as Parisii,
Remi, and many other Cities in the Gauls, and afterward Pictava, Pictavorum
Vrbs, and Pictavium. It seems to have formerly stood lower to the North, at a
place called le Vieux Poictiers, not far from Chastelleraud, because of the
name of old Poictiers, and of some Ruins of old Walls, that are yet to be seen
there: Unless it were the Limonum, whereof I just now spoke. For Poictiers it
self has several other Monuments of Antiquity; as an old demolished Castle,
thought to be the Palace of the Emperor Gullienas; some remains of an
Amphitheatre, called les Arenes, behind the Church of the Jesuits, and without
the Town, the Ruins of diverse Aquaeducts, which the common People names les
Arceaux de Parigne, the Arches of Parigne.

I have mentioned the several Changes, through which Poictiers passed, speaking
of POICTOV, and likewise the Battle of Civaux, but I must not so get that
famous Victory obtained by our Black Prince, that Martial Son of a Warlike
Father, Edward the III. over the French King John, September 19. 1336. within
two Leagues of Poictiers. The King having an Army of above 30000 Men, and the
Prince hardly 12000; the latter proffered to go back, and to repay all the
Damage he had done, from Bourdeaux thitherto: But the French meaning that a
handful of Enemies ought to Surrender at discretion, and could not avoid being
cut into pieces, would not hearken to any Proposals; which so exasperated the
English, that they fought like Lions, gave a total Overthrow to the French, and
took their King Prisoner.

The Church of Poictiers is said to have been founded by St. Martial, a Kinsman
to the first Christian Martyr St. Stephen, and he from whom our Savior took
the five Loaves, and the two Fishes, which his Blessing so miraculously
multiplied in the Wilderness. St. Peter, add the Roman Legendaries, sent him
into Aquitain, where he converted a great many Heathens, especially in POICTOV,
and even laid the Foundation of the Cathedral of St. Peter, on that very Day
that H. Apostle was Martyred. What ever be of this (for the Monks have so mixed
with Fables the ancient Accounts, that it is a hard matter to distinguish Truth
from Falsehood) This is more certain, that about the Year 279, Nectarius, or
Victorius, a learned Man, mentioned by St. Jerome, was Bishop of Poictiers. He
was succeeded by several other great Men, amongst whom Hilarious, that famous
Defensor of the Orthodox Faith against the Arians, was the tenth in Order,
under whose Name a Collegiate Church has been since built. At the end of the
5th Century, that See was filled with one of the best Poets of that Age.
Venantius Fortunatus, who had belonged to the Household of Radegund, Queen of
France.

This Diocese has been bigger than it is now, and extended through the whole
Province of POICTOV: For Lusson and Maillezais have been separated from it, and
erected from Monasteries into Bishoppricks. However it contains yet 22
Parishes, 21 of which are included in the City, besides 30 Abbeys, 25 Chapters
of Canons, and a vast number of Religious Houses, the Parishes being under the
Inspection of four Arch-Priests.

The Cathedral of St. Peter was begun by our King Henry the II. and finished
200 Years after. It Is a sumptuous Building, all of a hard Square-Stone. In the
Church of our Lady, sirnam'd the Great; the Mayor's Lady uses to offer, every
Year, the day after Easter, a Cloak of considerable value. On the outside of
the Wall, that looks on the great Market, is the Statue of the Emperor
Constantine on Horseback, with a Sword in his Hand. The Collegiate Church of
St. Hilary, immediately subject to the Pope, lies on the upper end of the Town.
The French King is Abbot of it, as Count of Poictiers. There is shown a Stone
which consumes Dead Bodies within 24 Hours; together with the Tomb of Godfrey
the Great-Tooth, pretended Son to the Famous Melusine of Luzignan, and the
hollow Stump of a Tree, where Madmen are put in, in hopes that they shall
recover their Senses; whence comes a jearing Proverb amongst 'em, to Send one
to St. Hilary- Cradle.

Poictiers is the biggest City in France next Paris, as to the compass of its
Walls, though the not ^^ear so thick Inhabited as Rouen, Tou^^se or Lions,
there being a great many Gardens, and even Meadows, Vines, and Cornfieldsd
with^n its enclosure; for which reason Charles V. ^he Emperor, called, it a
great Village. It Is built partly in a Plain on the West Side, and partly ^n a
Hill, shut up betwixt the River Clain, and another that stagnates there into
small Rivulets, Marshes and Ponds; so that it could hardly be taken, were it
not that the lower Town is commanded by high Rocks, named by the Inhabitants
Dubes instea of Dunes or Downs. The greatest inconveniency of Poictiers, is its
lack of Water; for there are no Fountains, and very few Cisterns; and therefore
the Citizens are forced to b^y Water, that is carried into the Town, from a
Fountain springing near the Clain, at a place called Platteforme.

All the inferior Seats of Justice in the Province of Poictou, resort to the
Presidial and Se^eschaship of Poictiers, and in 1415, whilst the English were
Masters of Paris, and Charles the VII. Dauphin of France, was disputing the
Crown against 'em, Poictiers had the Honor to be the Seat of a Parliament;
which, when the English were expelled that Kingdom, was restored to Paris. The
Palace, where the Judges ^^eep their sitting was formerly a Castle, that (...)
still a very fine Hall, whose Wainscotted ^^iking is not underpropt by Pillars.

Next to this Palace is the ancient Tower of ^^^bergeron, built by an Earl of
POICTOV, therein the seven Viscounties of this Province ^^e represented.

Next to the Gate of St. Lazarus was another Castle, built in a Triangular
Form, but ther^ are no Remains of it; besides, the place when it stood, and
some strong Towers against the Walls.

La Pierre Levee, The Stone raised up, is one of the Curiosities of Poictiers,
which Stranger^ do not fail to see, it being but a Mile from the City. It Is a
large Square-stone, 25 Foot in length, 17 in Breadth, and 60 in Circuit, having
these two Verses engraven upon it.

Hic Lapis ingentem superat gravitate Colossum
Ponderis, and grandi sidera mole petit.
The University of Poictiers was founded by Charles the VII. in 1431, and has
been formerly more famous than it is now, especially for the Civil Law. The
Auditory or the Ha^ wherein the Law is read, is very large and sumptuous, and
was built, in the French K. Henry the IV's Time, by the Duke of Sully, whil's^
he was Governor of POICTOV.

Poictiers has likewise a Mint, where Money i^ Coined at the Letter G. as also
an Excheque^ and a Generality, to which nine Elections ar^ resorting, that is,
all those of POICTOV except Loudun and Mirebeau, that depend o^ the Generality
of Tours.

As to the Government of the Town, it is i^ the Hands of a Mayor, twelve
Sheriffs or E^chevins, twelve sworn Counselors, besides seventy five
Burgesses. The Mayor is not (...) Lord, but even the first Baron of POICTOV and
takes the Title of Captain and Governo^ Poictiers during his Charge, which is
but ^eatly; for a new one is elected every Year, (...) St. Cyprian's Day, but
afterward, both he ^^d his Posterity are Nobilitated for ever.

^l^ the Briars and Thorns round about this City, (...) found great numbers of
Vipers, that are carried ^^ough all Parts of France, and even transport^^ into
foreign Countries; the Trochisque of ^^per, made in Poictiers it self, is of
great re^^wn.

Dissay, three Leagues North-East of Poictiers, (...) a small Lordship betwixt
the Clain and the ^^^ne, where the Bishop of Poictiers makes his ^esidence.

Bonnivet with the Title of Marquizate, lies (...) the other side of the Clain,
two Leagues ^^rth-West of Dissay, and almost four North (...) Poictiers. It has
a very fine Castle, begun (...) William Gouffier, Admiral of France, under
^rancis the I. to whom it gave Name.

Chastelleraud, Castellum Heraldi, or Airaldi, (...) fifteen Miles North-East
of Poictiers. It (...) formerly a Viscounty, but erected into a ^^chy and
Peerdom, by Francis the I. on be^^^ of Francis of Bourbon, Count of Montpen^^,
in 1514. Some Years after, the French ^^^g took it from Charles of Bourbon,
Brother ^ Successor to the latter, and Lord High-Con^^ble of France, as being
forfeited by Rebel^^. But Henry the III. restored it by way of ^^^gement to
Francis of Bourbon, Duke of ^^pensier, in 1584. Chastelleraud is
pleasant-^^^ated, having a prospect Westwards upon ^^al Warren, and being
washed with the (...) Vienne, which increased with the Clain, begins here to be
navigable. The Town is b^ meanly built, however renowned for the goo^ Knives
that are made there, though much more for its sumptuous Bridge, that has 230
Paces i^ Length, 66 in Breadth, and stands upon ^ Arches. It was begun by
Catherine of Medici^ but finished by the Duke of Sully, Governor of POICTOV
under Henry the IV.

League from this Bridge, a Hind is said to have shown a Ford to K. Clovis's
Army, when he wa^ in pursuit of Alaric, King of the Wisigoths. I the Ruins of
an old Castle, near this Town a^^ found little Stones, which the vulgar called
D^^amonds of Chastelleraud; for being cut and p^^lish'd, they looked almost as
well, and glist^ as much as true Diamonds. The Country d^pending on the
Election, Duchy and Roy^^ Justice of Chastelleraud, is named Pagus Castr^
Heraldensis le Chastelleraud^is, and comprehends many Lordships and Villages.
The Pr^testants were Masters of this Town during the Civil Wars, and repulsed
the Duke of An^ attempting to take it by Storm, so that he w^^ forced to ra^se
the Siege: Even till of late the^^ had free exercise of their Religion and a
co^siderable Church at Chastelleraud.

Port de Piles, Portus Pilae, is an importa^^ Passage upon the Creuse, near its
mixing (...) the Vienne, seven Miles North North-East Chastelleraud. It seems
to be a Place of some An^^quity, because it is mentioned in the Records ^ the
Consuls or Ancient Counts of Anjou. (...) name is derived from a Pile or Tower
of Eric^ that stands there.

Thirteen Miles West of Port de Piles, bey^^^ the Vienne, six Leagues
North-West of Chastelera^d, and Ten North of Poictiers lies near (...) Source
of the small River Amable, the fine Town of Richelieu, in the midst of pleasant
^^^ins, abounding in Fruit, Wine, Corn, and ^ame of all sorts. It bears the
name of its ^^^lder Armand du Plessis Cardinal of Richelieu, ^^e famous
Minister of State, who under Lewis ^III. brought France to that point of
Grandeur, (...) which it stands as yet. He built it on the ^attern of Manheim,
the prettiest Town in ^ermany, before the Barbarity of Lewis XIV. ^^ried it in
its ruins. Its Figure is Square, ^^ring four Markets at the four Corners, and
(...) great one in the Middle, in which stands (...) Church, that is a very
sumptuous Building, ^orn'd with many Marble Pillars, enriched ^ith a great
quantity of Plate, and served by (...) Fathers of the Oratory. The Streets are
^^^cious, as straight as a Line, and meet all (...) the five Markets; and the
Houses are so well upon the Level, that there is nothing on one ^^de, but has
its Parallel on the other: Which ^^gether with its Halls, Fountains, Walks and
^urdens, its fine Walls and Towers, its great (...) deep Ditches covered with
Swans: The (...) of the Duke, that is as regular a Build^^^ is any in Europe,
its Rooms, Halls, Gal^^^ and other Apartments being beautified ^^th all the
Ornaments that Tapistry, Painting (...) Statuary can afford, and surrounded
with (...) Alleys, charming Parks, Orchards, Gar^^^ ^loce, Springs and
Grotto's: All this, I (...), contribute to render Richelieu an indiffe^^^^
^^st^^ng Place, and one of the finest in France. (...) XIII. erected it into a
Duchy and Peerdom for Males and Females, in 1631. established a Seneschalship
in it, and gave great Privileges to its Inhabitants.

Champigny upon the same River Amable, ^ League only from its fall into the
Vienne, an^ five Miles North of Richelieu, had formerly ^ Castle belonging to
the Duke of Montpensu^^ together with a H. Chapel, where in they us'^ to be
Burie'd; but this Noble Family havin^ exchanged this Lordship with Cardinal de
R^chelieu, that Castle and Chapel were demolished to Build and Beautify the
foremention'^ new Town. However Champigny is still a goo^ Borough and has a
very fine Park.

Loudun, Lausdunum Castrum, as the anciet^ Records call it, or Lodunum, as it is
named b^ William the Britain, lies four Leagues West (...) Richelieu, and
eleven North-West of Poictier^ Macrinus and Scevole de Ste Marthe make it ver^
ancient, and call it Juliodunum, pretending ^ was Built by Julius Caesar or some
of his Successors, but there are no footsteps of so great Antiquity. It Is an
indifferent good Tow^ with an Election and inferior Bayliwick resor^ing to the
Generality and Presidial of Tour^ though for the Spiritual it depends on the
Bisho^ of Poictiers. It has a great Parochial Church under the name of S.
Peter, a Collegla^ Church surnamed the H. Cross, with sever^ Monasterios;
amongst others a Convent ^ Carmelites, whether Superstitious People com^ in
Pilgrimage to a Statue, called our Lady (...) Recovery Nostre-Dame de
Recouvrance. It w^ to underprop the decaying repute of this Ido^ as well as of
the whole trade, that the Men^ (...) up some Nuns to counterfeit those that are
Possessed with the Devil. The cheat was discovered and opposed by a Secular
Priest, who suffered very much for it, but at last it was stopped by the
Parliament of Paris. The history of this Imposture has been lately Written
(...) French by a very good Pen, and deserves to be read, by such as desire to
know the Spirit of the Church of Rome.

Loudun is the head of a small Country called le Loudunois, on which many other
Boroughs and Villages are depending. William III Duke of Aquitain gave it to
Godfrey Grise-Gonelle Count of Anjou, to keep it in Fealty of him, ^^der the
Reign of Hugh-Capet. The French King Philip August increased his Dominions with
it, Charles V. separated it from his Domes^^^, but Lewis XI. reunited it to the
French ^own Henry III. erected the Loudunois into (...) ^^^chy, for the sake of
a Lady of the House (...), but after her Death the Patent Let^^^ were
suppressed. In 1569. the Protestants ^^re Masters of Loudun, under the conduct
(...) Prince of Conde. Du Chesne.
The Duke of (...) came to besiege it, and did expect no re^^st^ned, the Town
being not strongly forti^^^^ But he was very much surmiz'd when (...) the
Enemies draw out in Battalla to re^^^^ him and the ways so Freez'd that there
was incoming at 'em; so that after several Skirmishes, therein he had still the
worst, he was forced (...). The last National Synod of the Re^^^^'d Churches,
kept with the leave of the (...). French King, was assembled at Loudun, in
1659. if my memory does not fail me.

Moncontour for M^nt-Contourne, Mons Contori^^ for Mons Contornatus, because
it is seated upon a round Mountain, that appears as though it were turned upon the
Wheel, is washed by the Rive^ Dive, which, though very small, is not very
fordable, It lies 9 Leagues North-west of Poictier^ and 3 South-west of Loudun.
It was built by Fulk III. surnamed Norra, Consul or Count o^ Anjou, and
therefore called Mons Consularis o^ Mons Gomitis. The same Count built also
Mirebeau Mirebellum, 5 Leagues South-East, and Faye-la-vineuse, 6 Leagues
North-East of Mo^contour. But this last place is the most considerable, and
especially famous for two Battel^ gotten by Godfrey Martel, Son and Successor,
to the said Fulk, one over the Poictevins, in which he took William Count of
Poictou Prisoner wor^^ the other over the Manseaux, wherein He^^^^ Bacon Count
of Maine fell likewise into (...) hands. In 1569, on Monday October 3. the
Protestants under the Admiral of Coligny lost also the day, near Moncontour,
against the Roman Catholics, headed by the Duke of Anjou, find Henry III.
King of France. Notwithstand (...) which, Charles IX. was fain to grant an
honorable Peace to the Reformed in 1571. The ^^miral was so great a Captain,
that he will (...) great many shifts after his Defeats.

Luzignan or Lesignar, Liciniacuni Cast^^^ or Licineium, is an ancient Castle
founded (...) one Licinus, upon the small Ri^er Vonbeust^^ Leagues South-west
of Poictiers. It is called corruptively Liziniacum, and Lesin^o^ by L^ti^
Authors of the middle Age, because the French use to change c in s. and to
pronounce s between two Vowels as a z. Thus they have made from racemus,
raisin, Sarracenus, Sarrasin, platere, plaisir, etc. One John of Artois, who
writ the History of Luzignan in 1383. ascribes the foundation of this Castle
and of the Noble Family, to which it gives Name, to a Fairy, called Melusine,
half Woman and half Snake. What has given occasion to this fabulous account is
uncertain. Aimery of Luzignan, King of Cyprus and titular King of Jerusalem,
had a wise and beautiful Daughter, called Melisinde, ma ry'd to Boemond IV.
Prince of Antioch: but I cannot tell whether it is she whom that romantic
Author has taken for the Subject of his fables. Whatever be of that, the House
of Luzignan is very illustrious and known in France since the Tenth Century,
having possessed there the Counties of la March and Angouleme, till the Year
1203, and reigned in the Island Cy^^^ from 1192 till 1473. The Castle of
Luzignan, was esteemed impregnable; however the brave Teligni seized on it for
the Protestants (...) 1569. The Duke of Montpensier lay four Months before it
in 1574, and having taken it at last demolished it; so that it is now but an
inconsiderable place.

(...) or Melle, Metullum Castrum or Melle, is (...) Borough of some
consideration, that had (...) the right of coining Money. It lies (...) the
so^^^e of a small River that falls into (...) Charen^e^^, 12 Leagues from
Poictiers and (...) from Lusignan to the South-west. Some pre^^d, that the
famous Melusine got that Name because she was Lady of Melle and Luzignan.

S. Maixant, Cellula S. Maxentii or S. Maxentii oppidum, owes its Rise as well
as its Name to Maxentius a holy Solitary, who retired thither in the sixth
Century. It Is said, that he miraculously preserved his Monastery from being
plundered by King Clovis's Soldiers. The famous S. Ledger Bishop of Autun, who
was Minister of State under Clotaire III. and Childeric II. had been Abbot of
S. Maixant. This Town had then two fine Collegiate Churches. The Abbey has been
repaired and beautified by the Emperor Lewis the Meek, and by Eubulus Bishop
of Limoges. S. Maixant is renowned for the Manufactory and Trade of Serges. It
lies on the Sevre Niortoise, 7 Leagues West of Luzignan, and 12 South-west of
Poictiers.

Partenay, Partiniacum or Pertinaculum, ha^ the Title of a Barony, and is the
Capital of the small Country of Gastine, so called from the Heaths and Wastes
wherewith it is filled. It lies 10 Leagues West-north-west of Poictiers. About
the end of the ninth Century, there was an Assembly called, to procure the
Peace of the Churches of Aquitain, where William Count of Poictou, the Bishop
of Chartres and S. Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux were present.

Thouars, Toarcis Castrum, 6 Leagues West of Loudun and 15 North-west of
Poictiers, has the Title of a Duchy and Peerdom erected by Henry IV, in 1595.
It Is an indifferent good T^^^ and of a long standing; since in the eight
Century, it was already one of the strongest Places in Aquaitain. Historians
mention the calling of the Castle of Thouars by King Pepin as a very remarkable
conquest, for this Fortress had then its particular Count or Governor, whom
Pepin carried prisoner into France. The Country and dependencies of Touars,
Ager Toar^^sit, le Touarsois had afterward Viscounts under the Counts of
Poictou since the Reign of ^a^^l in the X Century. Their Estate passed by
Marriage first to the House of Ainboise and then to the House of La Trimeuille.

Niort, Niortum seated in a fruitful soil, on the banks of the River Sevre,
Separis, to which it gives the surname of Niortoise, is a considerable Town and
accounted the second in upper Poictou. It has a Seat of Royal Justice resorting
to the Presidial of Poictiers, from which it lies 16 Leagues to the South-West,
and four from St. Maixant. The Country round about called Niortois breeds the
best race of Mules in the whole Kingdom, and the Town is rich and trading,
because of its Fairs.

Maillezais lies five Leagues West of Niort and 20 South-West of Poictiers.
It Is seated on the River Autise, Altisa, that surrounds it on all sides, for
which reason the Latin Chronicles of the French ordinarily call it Insula
Malliacum. In 1003. under the Reign of King Robert. William V. Count of
Poictiers, Son to William IV. sirnam'd Fierabras and Grandson to William III.
sirnam'd Tete-d Etoupe, founded here an Abbey, whether he retired. In process of
time, this ^onastery made this place a Town of some ^ote, so that either for
this consideration, or rather to lessen the Jurisdiction of the Prelate of
Poictiers, Pope John XXII. erected Maillezais into a Bishopric in 1317. and
Godfrey of Pouvrelle the Abbot was the first Bishop of it; but the Seat has
been transferred to Rochel in 1648.

Lusson, Lucio was another Ancient Monastery of St. Bennet's order, whose Abbot
Peter de la Voirie, Pope John XXII. raised likewise to the Dignity of a Bishop,
in 1317. Lusson is situated in a Maishy Place, 8 Leagues West of Maillezais,
and two North of the Sea, whence it draws many conveniences; so that it
belongs to Lower Poictou.

Fontenay-le-Comte, Fontenaium, or rather Rontanetum Comitis, is seated upon
the Venace, that begins there to be Navigable, and discharges it self into the
Sevre Niortoise at Port-Marans. Fontenay-le-Comte is an indifferent good Town
and Well Built. It has a Seat of Royal Justice and is accounted the Capital of
Lower Poictou. Pluviaut, a Protestant Captain took it in 1568. but having
quitted it the next year, the Famous Francis de la Noue lay Siege to it in
1570, and had there his left Arm broken. They fitted to him an Arm of Iron at
Rochel. But as this accident did not abate his Courage, and he still made a
shift to keep the Bridle of his Horse, with his artificial Arm, he got from
thence the surname of Bras de Fer, or Iron Arm. In the mean while the Siege of
Fontenay went on, and Soubize, who succeeded the Wounded la Noue, had the
honor of taking the Place. This Town is 6 or 7 Leagues distant from the Sea, 6
Leagues East North-East of Lusson and four North-West of Maillezais.

La Roche-sur-Yon, Rupes ad Yonnem is a Burough with the Tittle of
Principality, seated near the source of the small River Yon, twelve Leagues
from Fontenay and 8 from Lusson. Elizabeth of Beauveau Lady of Champigny and la
Roche-sur-Yon brought these two Lordships into the House of Bourbon by her
Marriage with John II. Count of Vendome, in 1454. Since that time, this
Principality has often been the Portion of Youngest Sons of that Family, as it
was in 1684. the title of the second Son to the Prince of Conde, whose eldest
Brother dying in 1685. he took the name of Prince de Conti.

Tiffauges, Taifalia lies on the South side of the Sevre Nantoise, near the
borders of Britain. 13 Leagues North North-West of Fontenay-le-Coute, This
place is a Colony of the Teitali, a Scythian People, who apparently came into
the Gauls with Adolph King of the Goths, under the Empi e of Honorius, or with
Goar King of the Alains, under the Emperor Valentinian Honorius's successor;
and settled themselves in Poictou and Anjou, along the River Lo^re; But as they
were Heathens and addicted to a vice against Nature, they incurred the hatred
of the Natives, as well as the Romans and the French, who joined together, it
seems, to exterminate 'em. So that there is no remainder of them; besides the
name of this place and the Country about it. Gregory of Tours, in the life of
the Abbot Senochus, says that he was a Teifalian by Race, whence it may be
inferred, that in process of time, the remaining Teifalians embraced
Christianity and were confounded with the Natives.

Talmond or Talemond, Turris Talemundi, lies on the Seacoast of Poictou, 12
Leagues West of Fontenay-le-Comte. The Franco-german name of Talemond, like to
that of Pharamond, Theudemond, Sigismond, etc. shows that it had some of the
Ancient French Lords for its founder. Under Lewis VII. it was still of the
French King's Domeshes. Then it was seized upon by the Lords of Mauleon, and at
last fell to the share of the House of La Trimouille, which enjoys it as yet
under the Title of Principality.

Olonne, Olona lies upon the same Coast, two Miles West of Talmond. It has the
title of a County with an indifferent good Haven; but there are dangerous Sands
too hard by, called les Sables d'Olonne. Its territory bears abundance of Wine
and has likewise some Salt Pits.

The other places of some note in Poictou are la Garnache Gasnapia, Aspremont
Aspermons, Bellus Visus Beauvoir sur Mer, Tremosia Trimouille, Castanetum
Chastaigneraye, Luciacum Castrum, Lussac-le-Chasteau, Fontenay-le-Battu,
Marsillae a Principality, Roche-Chouart, Rupes Cauardi, which gives name to an
Illustrious Family, etc.

Of Aunis.
I Would have gone on in the same method, as I have described the other
Governments, especially the Isle of France, Picardy, Normandy, Britanny, and
the several Provinces of Orleanois hitherto, and have divided this Description
into two Volumes: But the Bookseller, who only designed to have a Book of a
lesser bulk, has so strongly opposed it, that I have been forced to comply with
him; what ever reasons I could allege, or resistance I could make, during
several Months: So that I am compelled to cut short with the remaining
Provinces and Governments, and leaving out the remotest and most curious
Antiquities and Histories, to content my self with a Geographical Description
of the Principal Cities and Towns, and some hints here or there of History. By
this unwelcome accident, all the observations I had made or collected in the
space of many, years are altogether useless, either to me or to the Public,
than which nothing can be more intolerable to an Author. However I shall
enlarge somewhat more upon Languedoc and Dauphine, then upon other Provinces.

Aunis is a small Country of 9 or 10 Leagues extent North and South, and 4, 5,
6, 7, or 9 East and West, having the Figure of a Triangle, whereof the Sevre
Niortoise and the Sea make the right Angle, and the Charante with a line drawn
from Tonnay-Charante in Saintonge to Fontenay-le-battu in Poictou make the
basis or subtending. Vulgar Latin Authors call it Alnetum and Alnetensis Pagus,
as tho one should say a Grove of Alders, or the Land of Alder-trees. But it is
more probable and agreeing with Antiquity to derive this appellations from
Aunay, a place in Poictou, that is now inconsiderable, but was formerly the
Capital of the County of Aunis, and is mentioned in the Tables of the Emperor
Theodosius, published by the Brothers Peutingers, under the name of Avedonacum
and by Aethicus, under that of Aunedonacum Thence comes Pagus Avedonacensis or
Aunedonacensis, le Pays d'Aunis, which in time past made part of Saintonge,
then of Poictou, and is now one of the Provinces of the Government Orleanois.

Rochel or la Rochelle, Rupella for Repecula, so called from the Rocks, that
are near its Haven, is now the head of the Country of Aunis. It formerly
depended on the Counts of Poictiers for the Temporal, and the Prelate of
Saints for the Spiritual, but has now a Bishop of its own, Suffragan to the
Archbishop of Bourdeaux. It has been a very considerable and well traded City,
especially since its Inhabitants did put themselves in a condition to resist
the Normans. It was subjected to the English, by the treaty of Bretigny against
the will of the Inhabitants; Afterward it returned to the Dominion of France.
In the XVI Age, the Inhabitants of Rochelle embraced the Reformation, and Anno
1567 they put the City in the hands of those of their own party. Henry of
France Duke of Anjou, Brother of Charles the IX laid Seige to it during the
Civil Wars, and had perhaps carried it by force, had not the Ambassadors of
Poland brought him a Crown, which made him change his design, having resolved,
by the advice of Cardinal de Rhichelieu to weaken the Protestants.

Lewis the XIII having resolved to Weaken the Protestants, and to re-Establish
the Roman Religion in Bearn, demanded from them their Towns of security,
whereat the Reformed were affray'd and assembled for that and at Rochelle, Anno
1620. They being beat Anno 1622, did implore the mercy of the French King: But
having risen again this Prince besieged Rochelle and obliged it to surrender
the 29 October Anno 1628. He demolished the Fortifications, and deprived the
Inhabitants of their Privileges; He suffered nothing to remain, but two Towers
which Charles the V had built for the defense of the Harbor, and for its
better security an Iron Chain is tied cross the entry of the Port, every night.
Lewis XIV. did fortify it very strongly Anno 1689. by a good Citadel, and a
great many other works to prevent a Descent of the English and Dutch, and to
keep the pretended new Converts under his Tyranny. This City was erected into a
Bishopric Anno 1648. The Episcopal Seat of Maillezais being transferred
thither. Besides these, there is a Presidial Seat, a Court Sovereign, a Chamber
of Mint, and a Haven very much frequented. Rochel lies about 92 Leagues West of
Paris, 25 West of Angouleme and 32 North North-West of Bourdeaux.

Rochefort is a Port in the Country of Aunis, near the mouth of the Charante, 6
Leagues South of Rochel. Formerly it was only a little Village, but now it is a
considerable Town, being adorned with fine Building, and pleasant Gardens, Sea
Magazins and Store Houses, and a Hospital for Old Wounded Soldiers, who have
served at Sea.

Marans is a Village on the Sevre Niortoise, situated in a Marish ground, 7
Miles North North-East of Rochel, having a Castle about two Leagues from the
Sea. This place suffered much during the Civil Wars of Religion, being often
taken and retaken.

Chatelaillon is a little Village situated nigh the Sea, about two Leagues from
Rochelle. The other places are Surgere, Benon, Moze, Courson, Port-Lupin, le
Plomb, Angoulin, Tves, etc.

Of Angoumois.
ANGOVMOIS Pagus Ecolismensis has Saintonge on the West, and South-West
Perigord on the South, Limosin and la March on the East, and Poictou on the
North. It is about 22 Leagues in length East and West, and 16 in breadth North
and South. Its great Fertility does sufficienlty recompense its small extent:
For this little Province abounds in Corn, Vine, Pasture-ground, Safron, etc.
It Is watered with several Rivers, namely the Charante, the Tardouere, the
Bandiat, the Boueme, the Son, the Argent, the Anguien^e. It Is the Country of
Andrew Thevet, Balsac, and other Ingenious and Learned Men.

Angouleme, Iculisna or Ecolisma, the Capital City, is situated upon the
Charante, 60 Leagues South-West of Orleans, and 28 North-East of Bourdeaux,
with the Title of a Duchy, a Presidial-Seat, a Seneschals Court, an Election,
and a Bishopric suffragan of Bourdeaux. It Is a very Ancient Town situated upon
the top of a Mountain between the two Rivers of Charante and Anguienne, who
join at the end of the Town. It has very fine Castle, which is accessible but
at one side, being strongly fortified.

Cognac Conniacum, is upon the Charante toward the Frontiers of Saintonge
between Jarnac and Saints, 10 Leagues West of Angouleme, in a Country
extraordinary fertile, especially in delicate Wine.

La Rochefoucaut is a Town upon the River Tardouere, four Leagues from
Angoulesme to the North-East. It bears the name of its founder one Foucaut,
being called in Latin Rupes Fulcaldi or Fulcaudi, and has given its own to I
one of the most Ancient and Illustrious Houses of that Kingdom, which has
produced diverse Great Men.

Jarnac is a Borough with the Title of County situated upon the Charante,
between Chateauneuf and Cognac; It Is famous for the Battle which the Duke of
Anjou, afterward King Henry III did gain over the Protestants in the Month of
May Anno 1569. they being commanded by the Prince of Conde, who was
treacherously killed there by Montesquiou; whence come the Proverb, Un coup de
Jarnac, To say a Perfidy. The name of Jarnac is also famous for the merit of
its Lords of the House of Chabot.

Bouteville is a Town situated near the Frontiers of Saintonge, about seven
Leagues from Angouleme, toward the South.

Rufec or Rufiacum aut Rofiacum, is a little Town, 10 Leagues North of
Angouleme with the Title of Marquisate; It Is situated in a very pleasant part
of the Country. The other places of note are Cbateau-neuf, Blansac, la Valette,
Montberon, la Vauguion, etc.

Of the Islands depending of the Government Orleanois.
THose Islands lie on the Coasts of Poictou and Aunis, and are named Oleron,
Re, Oye, Isle-Dieu, and Nermoutier.

Oleron Vliarus or Olario, is an Island upon the Coasts of Aunis, nigh the
Mouth of the Charante, about two short Leagues from Land. It has five Leagues
in Diameter and about 12 in Circuit: It Is fertile in Corn, and abounds with
Rabbits. It was fortified in 1689. to hinder the Descent of the English.

The Isle of Re, Radis insula, Vulgarly called Reacus, is nigh unto Rochel and
belongs to the Government of the Country of Aunis and Brouage. Here is great
Store of Salt, and such abundance of Wine that the Inhabitants would be forced
to give the old to Poor People for Tunning of the New; if the English, Dutch
and Normand Fleets came not every year to receive their Loading of it. This
Island has several Villages, the Chief of which are St. Martin and Oye called
the Isle, because of a Canal which must be passed as they enter into it. The
most considerable Fort is that of la Pree pointed toward Pertuis Breton. In it
are two pieces of Artillery, which carry even to the Continent from the Island.
It is Flanked with four Bastions, with Half Moons and other outworks. Anno
1689. they added some new Fortifications to it, on the side that looks on the
main Sea. Here is a high Tower, where in the night time, they set up a Beacon,
because of the Rocks called Baleines which are adjacent, and for this cause the
Tower is called la Tour des Baleines, or the Tower of Wales.

L'Isle-Dieu, or rather, l'Isle-d'Ieu, Oia or Ogia, is near St. Gilles in
Poictou, about three Leagues from the Continent.

Nermontier lies not far from Britanny, near Beauvoir in Poictou, distant from
the Continent about a League. In it is a rich Abbey of Benedictins, resorting to
the Bishopric of Lusson, whence is derived the name of Nermoutier, Nigrum
Monasterium.

CHAP. XII. Of the Government of Guienne.
IN the time of Julius Caesar, Aquitain reached not farther than from the
Garonne to the Pyrenees, that is, it only comprehended what was since called
Novempopulana, and now Gascony. But August extended it, Limits to the Loire, so
that it contained besides the present Government of Guienne, the Provinces of
Poictou, Touraine, Berry, la March, Bourbonnois and Auvergne, and made the
fourth part of the Gauls. Charlemaign and Lewis the Meek followed this division
when they erected it into a Kingdom for their youngest Sons. Most of those
Provinces were since possessed by the Dukes of Guienne, fell to the English by
the Marriage of the Duchess Eleonor with Henry II. and were Conquered from
them by Charles VII.

The Dukes of Guienne had the third rank among the twelve Ancient Peers of
France. The name of Guienne is a maimed Word from the Latin Aquitaniae, that is
it self derived from Aquae, because there are many Springs of Warm Water,
whence many Cities in this Government are still called to this day, as we shall
see hereafter.

This Government borders to the North upon Poictou, Angoumois and la March; to
the East upon Auvergne and Languedoc; on the South to the Pyrenean Hills, by
which it is divided from Spain; and the West to the Ocean. It lies between 42
D. 30 Min. and 46 D. 20 Min. of Latitude, and between 18 D. and 24 D. of
Longitude, which amount from the South to the North to 100 Leagues, from
Aragnoet, in the Pyrenees to Niort in Poictou, and to about 112 from St. John
de Luz beyond Bayone to Saint Geniez in Rouergue near Gevaudan.

The Soil is pretty Fruitful in Corn, Wines, Fruits, Pastures, etc. except the
Lands (or Sandy-grounds) near the Pyrenees, where is nothing but Heaths and
Pastures that feed abundance of Cattle: The Air is there sweet and wholesome.

This Government is Watered by many Rivers, of which the Chiefest are the
Garomne, and the Charante that have been already described the Dordonne, the
Lot and the Ad^ur, of which are after. The Garomne above all facilitates the
Trade of Wine, Corn, Oils, Brandy, Plums, Wool. One may say for this Country
that it has given to France brave Soldiers, and great Scholars; for it is
certain, that Guienne and Languedoc get as much honor in the Armies, and the
Republic of Letters, at the rest of the Kingdom besides. The Inhabitants of
this Province are generally Ingeniou^, Valiant, Cunning, but much derided for
their Pride, which has even passed into a Proverb.

As to the Rivers of Guienne, the chief are the Garonne, which has been
described p. 8. the Charente p. 263. the Seudre, that waters part of Saintonge,
and falls into the Bay of pertuis de Maumusson, South-East of the Isle of
Oleron and South of Brouage. The Dordonne, that rises in Auvergne near a place
called Murat, receives the Chavanoy near its source; then the Rue, the Sumene,
the Auze, the Louesse, the Somene, the Estarreau, the Sere increased with the
Jordane and Autre, the Bave, the Nea, the Ser: then goes through Bergerac,
Saint Foy, Libourne, where it is increa'd shith the Lisle. This springs up in
Limosin, at a place called Meisse, receives, near its source, the Loulour and
the high Vezere, goes by Perigueux, Montpont, Lussac, where it receives the
Larrey increased with the Palais, and a little higher the Droune increased with
the Coals, Boulon, Janade, Em^ere, Voutrou, Les Fontaines, Tude and Rissonne,
and then the Save, three Miles North of Li^^urne. The Dordonne thus swollen and
able to bear great Boats, pursues its way to the West, receives the Moron, not
far from St. Andreas, and mixing with the Garonne at a place called Bourg; they
run together into the Ocean, ma^ing up a Bay of 2 or 3 Leagues in breadth, and
20 in length, under the name of Gironde.

The Drot rises in Perigord near a place called (...), washes Villereal,
Castillonnes, Monsegur, ^^lls into the Garonne at Caudrot, and carries no
^^ats. The Lot springs from the Mountains ^f Gevaudan, waters Mende,
Entraygues, where (...) receives the Truyere, increased with the Bes, Lander
and Epic, goes by La Vinzelle, Cade^^^, and Cayrac, is increased with the Seze,
the Cole and Iboly that water Figeac; then runs through Cahors, where it begins
to be navigable, receives the Mass and the Led, with several other Rivulets,
and discharges it self into the Garonne, betwixt Clerac and Esguillon.

The Aveyrou issues in Rouergue near the Fronteers of Gevaudan, washes Rhodez,
receives the Biaur, and together with this River makes the separation betwixt
Albigeois and Rouergue; then is increased with the Cerdu and Ceret, the
Bonnette, the Vere, and the Conde, mixes with the Tarn, 5 Miles East of
Moissac, where having received the Lute and Lemboulas; they run both into the
Garonne. The Seune and some other Rivulets of less note fall also into the
Garonne, betwixt the Lot and the Averrou.

Then come the Tarn, the Agout, and the Lers, which I now go by, because they
belong to Languedoc, to speak only of the Rivers of this Government, which fall
into the Garonne on the South Side of it; as the Touch near Muret, the Save
increased with the Guess at Grenade; the Nadesse betwixt this Village and
Verdun; the Gimone increased with the Farampionor over against Castel-sarasin.
The Corre, the Ayroux, the Camesan, inconsiderable Brooks; the Ratz, the Giers
that goes through Aux, Lectoure, and discharges it self into the Garonne over
against Again. The Baise that comes from Armagnac, washes Condom and Nerac,
receives the Loss, the Lausou, the Lante, the Gelise, and falls into the
Garonne over against Esguillon. Lower down to the West this great River is
increased with many other Rivulets as the ^^lizos, the Lavassane, the Loubens,
etc.

The Leyre or Err rises in that barren Coun^ry called Lands, and falls into
the Bay named Cape de Buchs in the Country of Medoc.

The Adour issues from the Pyrenees, goes through Tarbe, receives the Leschez,
and the ^arrez increased with the Bouez, waters Air Grenade and Dax, receives
the Gabas, the Leus, the Luy, the Gave of Pau, which waters Pau ^^d Lescar, and
is increased with the Vedan, ^he Gaves of Cauteres and Azun, the Lazon, the
^^es, the Baisse, the Gaves of Ossau, Aspe, Ole^^^, and Salies, the Rivulets of
Lou-vert and ^essas. Then the Adour receives the Bidouse, ^he Ayguette and the
Nive at Bayonne, 3 Miles from its Mouth. On the North-side it is in^reased with
the Midou, that goes through Ville^^^ve, Mont de Marsan and Tartas, and carries
^long with it the Waters of the Ladon, Douze, ^stampen, Ganeire, Lestrigon, and
Gelouse.

Guienne is now divided into 19 Provinces, ^hereof the first 8 belong to
Guienne, and the ^ others to Gascony: Proper Guienne, Basadois, ^genois,
Querci, Rouergue, Limosin, Perigord, ^^intonge, Armagnac, Chalosse, Condomois,
Lan^^, Terre de Labor, Lower Navarre, Viscounty Soul, Bearn, Bigorre,
Coming, Conserans. ^^eir Capital Cities are, Bourdeaux Archbishop^^* Bazas
Bishopric, Again Bish. Cahors Bish. ^^des Bish. Limoges Bish. Perigueux Bish.
^^^tes Bish. Auch Archbish. S. Sever, Condom ^^h. Dax Bish. Bayonne Bish. S.
Palais, Mau^^, Pau, Tarbe Bish. S. Bertrand Bish. S. Lizer.

Of Proper Guienne.
GVienne Proper, Burdigalensis Ager, lies between the Ocean on the West,
Gascogne and Bazadois on the South, Agenois and Perigord on the East, and
Xaintonge on the North. This Country is less plentiful in Corn then Wine,
amongst which that of Grave is remarkable, and is transported every where by
Sea; the Soil is not toward the Coasts like, in the little Counties of Medoc
and Buch.

There are chiefly to be taken notice of Bourdeaux, Libourne, Blaye, Lespares,
Rions, Cadillac, etc.

The City of Bourdeaux, Burdigala, or Burdigala Biturigum Viviscorum, who seem
to be a Colony of the Bituriges Cubi or Berruyers, lies upon the Garonne. It
has an University, a Parliament and an Archbishop, who entitles himself Primate
of Guienne. Clement V. decided the priority in his behalf against that of
Bourges, because he had been Archbishop of the former, though the right of
Primacy belongs to the latter. It is one of the finest, greatest, and most
trading Cities of the Kingdom, seated in a fruitful ground; Ausonius speaks
thus of it.

Burdigala est natale solum, clementia Coeli
Mitis, ubi and rigua larga indulgentia Terrae,
Ver longum, Brumaeque breves, juga frondea subsunt, etc.
Its Haven is very famous, it is called the Haven of the Moon, because it has
the Figure of a Crescent: Bourdeaux is likened to a Bow, of which the Garonne
is the String; they reckon 15 Leagues from this City to the Sea, and the Fare
called La Tour de Cordouan, which is very remarkable, and is the Work of Lewis
of Foix an able Engineer: The University has been very flourishing; King
Charles VII. restored it to its luster; the Pope Eugene IV. gave it great
Privileges, and Lewis XI. increased them: S. Jerome and Ausonius speak of the
great Men it has brought forth, both for Learning and Piety.

Libourne, is upon the Dordonne at its conjunction with the River Lisle, 7
Leagues from Bourdeaux to the North-East. Near this Town rises a Mountain of
Water, which the Inhabitants call the Mascaret of Bourdeaux; at the very time
that the Waters are most calm, it is formed in a trice, and runs a great way
along the River, overthrowing all the Boats it meets with. It Is said that the
River Pegu in the Kingdom of Martaban now depending on the Emperor of Siam has
still more violent f^^s.

Blaie, Blavia or Blavutum, lies upon the Gironde 7 Leagues down from Bourdeaux
Northward, and 4 Leagues from the Bec d'Arnbes, where is the confluence of the
Garonne and Dordonne: The Country about Blaye is called le Blaiguez, Blaviensis
pagus.

Of Bazadois.
Bazadois, Ager Vasatensis, lies between Prope^ Guienne on the North and West,
the Lands on the South, and Agenois on the East, it is a Country pretty
fruitful in Corn, VVines, and Fruits.

There are chiefly Bazas Bish. the Capital La Reole, whether the Parliament of
Bourdeaux was once transferred 12 or 14 years ago; Castelgeloux, Nerac,
Genissac, Caudrot, Buzet, Castelnau de Mames, etc.

BAZAS Cossio Vasatum or Vasatae, is a City near the Source of the Lavassane or
Vassanne, with a Seneschal's Court, and a Bishopric Suffragan of Auch. It is
seated upon a Rock, whose bottom is watered by that little River, in a Country
full of Woods and sandy Grounds, almost 4 Leagues North of the Garonne, and 11
North-East of Bourdeaux under 44 Degrees. 24 Min. of Lat. and 19 Degrees. 54 Min. of
Long. St. John the Baptist has the Cathedral Church dedicated to his Name, and
Sextilius is accounted its first Bishop.

Of Agenois.
AGenois Borders upon Armagnac to the South, to Querci to the East, on Perigord
to the North, and Bazadois to the West: This is the most plentiful Country of
Guienne, and supplies many Provinces with Corn, Wine, and Oil of Nuts: Its
called in Latin Pagus Aginnensis.

The Places of more note are Again Bish. Villeneuve, Aiguillon, Tonneins,
Clerac, S. Foy, etc.

The City of Again, Aginnum Nitiobrigum, lies upon the Garonne with a Presidial
and Seneschalship, and a Bishopric Suffragan of Bourdeaux; It was the chief
City of those ancient Nitiobriges that were so considerable among the Gouls,
and the true Founders of this City, without ascribing to it any fabulous
original. This City is great and populous.

Of Quercy.
QVERCY Pagus Cadurcinus, lies betwixt Languedoc on the South, Rouergue and
Auvergne on the East, Limosin on the North, and Perigord and Agenois on the
West; its extent from South to North is above 30 Leagues, from Montauban in
Languedoc to Turenne in Limosin; 20 East and West, from Mont-murat near Cadenac
to Pestillac near Villefranche in Perigord, which are its greatest length and
breadth. This Country is pretty fruitful in Corn, Wines, Fruits, and Pastures:
There is a great Trade of Plums, Saffron, and good Wool. Its Inhabitants
brought in formerly about 12000 Men in the League of the Gauls against the
Romans. Querci is divided into upper and lower, the upper called Causse
contains the Valleys that are along the River Lot, the lower or Villes basses
is extended along the Aveirou. This Province belongs to the Government of
Guienne, though it depends on the Parliament of Toulouse, and the generality of
Montauban, which has under it 3 Elections, viz. Cahors, Montauban, and Figeac.
Querci was annexed to the Crown in the beginning of the Reign of Philip the
Bold, as being the Inheritance of the Counts of Toulouse. In 1306. Philip the
Fair did covenant with Raimond Paucholi Bishop of Cahors for the right of
Peerage, allowing him to take the title of Count.

The most remarkable Places of Quercy are Cahors, Bishop. The Capital; Gourdon,
Moissac, Figeae, Lauserte, Montratier, Montpesat, Souillae, Martel, Cadenac,
etc.

CAHORS, Cadurcum or Divona Cadurcorum has an University, a Seneschal's Court,
and a Bishopric Suffragan of Bourges: It lies upon the Lot in a Demi-Island,
which is formed by that River, which has three Bridges of Stone, and is very
useful to the Inhabitants for several Manufactures: It is raised upon a steep
Rock, where was formerly a Citadel. James Ossa Bishop of Frejus, afterward a
Cardinal, and Pope under the name of John XXII. was born in this Town, where he
Founded in 1331. an University, to show his Love toward his own Country; which
has had famous Professors. Its Cathedral Church is dedicated to S. Stephens,
and if we believe fabulous Authors it was consecrated by S. Martial himself;
there are many other Churches and Monasteries, with a College of Jesuits since
1605. Cahors lies 42 Leagues East of Bourdeaux.

Gourdon is 8 Leagues from Cahors Northward. Moissac lies on the River Tarn
(which soon after looses it self into the Garonne) with a Seneschal's
Jurisdiction, 17 Leagues from Cahors to the South, and 6 Leagues from Montauban
to the West: It is a very ancient Town, that has often been ruined; for the
Goths took it from the Romans; and King Clovis took it again from the Goths;
afterward it was seized by Gaiges Duke of Aquitain, and retaken by King Pepin,
in 1212. Raimond Count of Toulouse made it side with the Albigenses; Simon
Count of Montfort stormed and plundered it; the English did utterly destroy it;
and it suffered much during the Wars against the Protestants; so that this Town
is very different from what it has formerly been; though it has yet a very
famous Abbey of St. Bennets Order, where, as it is said, have been near 1000.
Monks at once: The Abbot is Joynt-Lord of it with the King, which was regulated
by a Sentence in 1229. etc.

Of Rouergue.
ROVERGVE, Rutenicus Ager, Borders to the East upon the Cevennes, to the North
upon Auvergne, to the West upon Quercy, and to the South upon Languedoc: It
lies between 43 Degrees. 30 Min. and 44 Degrees. 46 Min. of Lat. and betwixt 22 Degrees. 22
Min. and 24 Degrees. 15 Min. of Long. So that it takes up 37 Leagues East and West
from S. Jean de Breuil to S. Antonin in its greatest length; and 28 North and
South from Mur de Barrez to Brusquez. This Province is divided into three
Parts, viz. the County, the Upper and Lower March; the chiefest City of the
first is Rodez, of the second Milhau, of the third Villefranche. The Country is
very plentiful in some places, but barren in others. There are Mines of Iron,
Antimony, Copper, Brimstone, Alum, Silver, and as Strabon says of Gold too. The
greatest revenue of Rouergue consists in Cattle, Wools, Fruits, Cheeses, Hemps,
and Lines; the only Trade of Mules that are bought there, for Spain brings in
every Year above 200000 Crowns. Its Principal Rivers are the Tarn, the Lot, and
the Aveirou; It depends on the Parliament of Toulouse, and boasts of 25 Towns,
and 50 great Buroughs; 2 Bishoprics, and a Elections, under the Generality of
Montauban. There are ordinarily commended Rodez for his People, Conques for its
Gate; Milhau for plenty of Almonds, Nerac for Vitriol, St. Antonin for Plunis,
Roquefort for Cheeses, Monsalvi for its delicate blew and green Peases, Vouse
and Espaliou for excellent good Bread, the Abbey of Aubrac for its Hospital and
Alms, Severac for its Castle, Marcillac a Principalty for the Cave or den
called Bouche-Roland, that is near it and reaches four Leagues under ground.
The Inhabitants are both Courageous and Honest; The Nobility there is very
Generous and much respected by the Common People.

The City of Rhodez Segodunum or Ruteni, is seated on the Aveirou, 24 Leagues
South East of Cahors, and has the title of a County, a Seneschalship and
Bishopric Suffragan of Albi. It is very Ancient; but it has lost its former
Ancient greatness, having been often ruined by the Goths, Saracens, French,
etc. The Cathedral is under the name of our Lady; there are many others
Churches and Monasteries, and a fine College of Jesuits. Its first Bistop was,
as it is believed, St. Amand. The Counts of this City were of the House of
Carlat, and possessed that part, which is called the Borrough, and the Bishops
were Master of the other that bears the name of the City. The County belonged
to the Counts of Toulouse. Alfonsius the I. having resolved to take the Cross,
and to make a Journey into the Holy Land, sold it in 1147. to Richard Son of
Raimond. Viscount of Carlat, Richard left it to his Son Hughes I. Count of
Rodez, etc. It was afterward annexed to the County of Armagnac, by a Marriage
and a Judgment in the year 1312. John I. Count of Armagnac, had a Grant of the
French King Charles V. in 1375. that the four Juridictions of Rouergue should
be Annexed to the County of Rodez, which are St. Geniez, la Roque-Valsergue,
Castagnes, Begonimez and la Guiole. After that, all the Estates of the House of
Armagnac came into that of Albret, and the French King Henry the IV. carried to
the Crown the County of Rodez, as being the Patrimony of the House of Armagnac.
There is near that City, the Mountain of Cansac, which burns in the rain. There
are Mines of Copper, Arsenick, Azur and Silver. Two Leagues from that Place, is
an Abyss called Tindoul, 60 Paces broad and 200 deep; On the side of that Abyss
is to be seen a hole without Bottom.

The City of VABRES Castrum Vabrense, is a Bishopric and County Suffragan of
Alby. It was formerly a Famous Abbey of St. Benets, Order, which Pope John XXII.
in 1317. Erected to a Cathedral Church. The Abbot Peter Orlageo was its first
Bishop. It is 12 Leagues South of Rodez.

MILHAV, Amilianum or Aemilianum, is the Chief Town of the Upper March, being
upon the Tarn toward the Frontiers of Gevaudan, 14. Leagues South-East of
Rodez. There are a great many Almond-Trees. This Town has been famous during
the Wars of Religion; it being a strong hol'd, but is Fortifications were
razed, in 1629. The Country depending on it is called Aemilianus-Pagus.

VILLEFRANCHE, is the Chief Town of the Lower March, with a Seneschalship and
Presidial, 12 Leagues West of Rodez. The People is there very Civil, and
serviceable, and provisions plentiful and cheap.

Saint Antonin lies upon the Confluence of the Aveirou and Bonnete, 18 Leagues
West, South-West of Rodez, with high Walls round it. In the year 1226. Guy of
Montfort yielded to the French King the Right he had on that Town, Raimond
Count of Toulouse protested against that Gift; but in 1229. he approved, by an
Act, of the Arbitrators Sentence pronounced by the Popes Legate, and the Count
of Champagne upon the Matter; So that St. Antonin was adjuged to the Crown in
1245, Besnard Hugonis, Son to Frocard Viscount of St. Antonin having sold to
the French King Lewis IX. what ever Right he had upon it. The Protestants had
Fortified themselves there, but Lewis XIII. turned them out of it, in 1622.
This Town is famous for its Plums. There are besides others considerables
Places, as St. Just, Estain, Entraigues, St. Come, St. Geniez, the Town and
County of Espaliou, Severac le Castle, la Guiole, the Abbey of Anbrac, etc.

Of Limosin.
LIMOSIN, Lemovicinus Pagus, Borders upon Auvergne to the East, upon la March
to the North, part of Poictou Angoumois and Perigord to the West, and Quercy to
the South. It lies between 44 Degrees. 52 Min. and 45 Degrees. 45 Min. of Latitude, and
between 21 Degrees. 40 Min. and 23 Degrees. 20 Min. of Longitude, which make from
South-East to North-West about 38 Leagues from Port-Dieu on the Frontiers of
Auvergne to la Roche-chouart in Angoumois, in its greatest length and 24 North
and South from S. Priech on the Confluence of the Vienne and Taurion, and the
Borders of la March, to Beaulieu on the Dordonne near the Province of Quercy.
This Country is generally cold and barren; there is scarce any good Wine, Save
in the Lower Limosin, and little Wheat, but plenty of Rye, Barley, and
Chestnuts, of which the poorer sort make bread; and because when they first go
out of that Country, and meet with good bread, they eat it most greedily,
thence bread-gluttons have gotten in French the Surname of Limosins. In
Caesar's time the Limosins brought in 10000 Men for the Confederacy of the
Gauls against the Romans: This People is now adays ingenious, prudent,
laborious and saving; they have given 5 or 6 Popes to the Church. Limosin is
divided into Upper and Lower; the chief City of the first is Limoges, of the
second Tulle. The Principal Rivers are the Dordonne, the Vienne, the Vezere,
and the Upper Vezere, etc.

The City of Limoges, Ratiastum, and Le Movicae, is seated partly on the top of
a little Hill, and partly in a Valley upon the River Vienne, surrounded with
good strong Walls, and deep ditches; a Gaulish Prince, as it is pretended, built
it and gave it his name; it has much suffered in diverse times by the Goths,
French, and English: Under King Charles V. the Lord High Constable du Guesclin
took it from the English in 1371, and the Prince of Wales retook it a little
while after by storm, where 4000 People fell a Sacrifice to his wrath, but the
French King got it again soon after. The Cathedral is under the name of St.
Stephen, whose first Bishop St. Martial is accounted to be, tho with little
proofs. There are three considerable Abbeys of St. Austin, S. Martial, and S.
Martin, and several other Monasteries with a Presidial and a Generality. This
Town has had its Hereditary Viscounts, who were Sovereigns of the whole
Province: Many Councils have been held there: Limoges lies near the borders of
la March 34 Leagues North of Cahors and 19 North-East of Perigueux.

TVLLE Tutela Castrum, is watered by two Rivers Courreze and Soulane, 15
Leagues South-East Limeges; the Abbey of St. Martin was erected here to a
Bishopric by Pope John XXII. in 1318. of which Arnold of St. Astier was the
last Abbot, and the first Bishop: Its Prelates are Viscounts and Lords of the
Town. There is a Presidial and an Election; this is the Country of the ancient
Family of Gardia. There are also to be noted the Viscounty of Turenne, Brive la
Gaillarde, Vserche, a strong Town; the Dukedom of Ventadour, Roche-Abeille,
famous for a Fight in the year 1569. St. Hivier, S. Junian, Chalus,
considerable for its Markets of Horses. Aix renowned in that Country for the
excellent Bread that is baked there Preige-buffiere the first Barony of Limosin.

Of Perigord.
PERIGORD Pagus Petrocoricus, Borders to the East on part of Quercy and
Limosin, to the North, Angoumois to the West on part of Xaintonge and Guienne,
properly so called to the South, on Agenois and part of Quercy; it lies betwixt
44 Degrees. 38 Min. and 45 Degrees. 30 Min. of Latitude; and betwixt 20 Degrees. 30 Min.
and 22 Degrees. of Longitude, which makes 24 Leagues North and South from the
Source of the Droune to the Barony of Biron, near the Source of the Dr^t, and
26 East and West from Sarlat to Roche-Chalais. It Is a rough, stony, and
mountainous Country; but for all that pretty fruitful: There are many Medicinal
Springs, and some Mines of Iron and Steel; it is divided into Upper and Lower
Perigord; the first called Blanc or White, because of its Mountains it is
North-West betwixt the two Venzeres, and the other that was South-East along
the Rivers l'Iles, and Dordonne, is called Noii, or Black, because of its
Woods. There are abundance of Wall-nuts, Chest-nuts, several sorts of Simples,
and Wine in some places, this Province since the declining of the Monarchy had
particular Counts till Lewis XII. who gave them other Lands in exchange, and
which the French King Henry IV. annexed to the Crown.

The City of Perigueux, called at first Vesunnae Petrocoriorum, and afterward
Petrocorii or Petrocori, by the name of its ancient Inhabitants, is the chief
of the Upper Perigord, and of the whole Province, lies upon the River l'Isle
with a Bishopric, Suffragan of Bourdeaux, of which it is distant 28. Leagues to
the North-East. It is a very ancient City, yet not so ancient as to have been
founded by one of Noah's Sons, as some would have it; it has often been ruined
by the incursions of Barbarians. In 768. Pepin le Bref (or the Short) got near
that Town a famous Victory over Gaifer Duke of Aquitain: St. Front was its
first Bishop; its Cathedral, under the Name of St. Stephen, was much defaced
during the Civil Wars.

The most considerable places are, besides Perigueux and Sarlat; Beaumont,
Bergerac, Roche-chalais, Brantosme, Ville-Franche de Perigord, Montignac, on
the Vezere, in whose Castle the ancient Counts of Perigord used to reside.
Montpont the Head of a small Country called the Conquest, betwixt the Rivers
L'Isle and Double, and the Village of Mucidan. Castillon on the Dordonne, 9
Miles East of Libourne, and 25 North-East of Bourdeaux, where our English
General Talbot, who had maintained the Wars many years, with a handful of Men,
against all the Power of Charles VII. was at length routed in 1451. At Miremont
is to be seen a subterraneous Cavern or Den, that reaches very far under the
Ground. At la Douze a Borough, and Marquizate, betwixt Montignae and Miremont,
is made the best Paper in the Country. Hautefort, Bourdeilles, and Exidueil
have also the Titles of Marquizates, Riberac that of a County, Mareuil, Bainac,
and Biron are ancient Baronies, and La Force, which gives the name of Dukes to
an illustrious Protestant family, is the finest House in Perigord.

Of Saintonge.
SAINTONGE and corruptively Xaintonge, Pagus, Santonicus, etc.

Sarlat, Sarlatum, and Sarlatium, Capital of Lower Perigord, and more
especially of a small Country thereabouts called Pagus Sarlaticus Le Sariadois,
lies on the source of the Nea, 2 Leagues North of the Dordonne, and but one
from the Borders of Quercy. There was an ancient Abbey of Benedictins, changed
by Pope John XXII. in 1317, into a Cathedral Church, of which Raimond of
Roquecor was the first Bishop. This Town has a Seneschal's Court, and is strong
by its situation, for it maintained two Sieges during the Civil Wars of the
Princes in 1652.

Santonicus Borders upon Angoumois and Perigord to the East, on Poictou and the
Country of Aunis to the North, on the Ocean to the West, and on proper Guienne
to the South; it lies between 19 Degrees. 5 Min. and 20 Degrees. 53 Min. of Longitude,
and between 45 Degrees. 5 Min. and 46 Degrees. 20 Min. of Latitude, which makes about
34 Leagues East and West from Roche Beaucourt and les Fontaines to the Bay
called Pertuis of Maumusson, and 32 North and South from the Sevre Niortoise to
very near the Save in proper Guienne. This Country is very plentiful in Corn,
Wine, Pastures, Saffron, good Fish, and above all in Wormwood, and Rosemary
that have particular Virtues. A great quantity of good Salt is made upon the
Coast; and it is a common saying, that were France an Egg, Xaintonge would be
the Yolk of it; its principal Rivers are the Garonne, the Charante, the Seudre,
etc. which are very convenient for the Carriage and Transportation of
Commodities.

The City of SAINTS or Xaintes Mediolanum Santonum, and in latter Ages
Santoni, lies upon the Charante, with a Bishopric Suffragan of Bourdeaux, from
which it is distant 22 Leagues to the North, and almost 10 from the Sea to the
East: It has had particular Counts as well as the whole Province, and is very
ancient; there are still to be seen the remains of an Amphitheatre and
Aqueducts, of a triumphant Arch upon the Charante, and many Inscriptions of the
Romans S. Eutropius is accounted its first Bishop, and its Cathedral Church is
dedicated to St. Peter, but it was almost ruined during the Wars of Religion.

Brouage, Santonum portus, lies on a narrow Bay over against the Isle of
Oleron, 8 Leagues West of Saints. It is called in vulgar Latin Broagium, from
the mildness of its Soil, and is the head of the Country thereabouts called le
Brouageois, that constitutes a particular Government, in which are two of the
finest Buroughs in France, Marennes, and la Tremblade, where the French King
has a Storehouse for his Vessels. And tho the Country be but small, yet
because of the customs, it yields 14 Millions of Livers, which amount near to
1100000 pound Sterling, to the French King. This together with the convenience
of the Havens and Salt Pits makes Brouage an important Town, for which reason
it is strongly fortified.

The other places of note are S. Jean d' Angeli, Engeriacum or Ingeriacum, on
the River Boutonne, 8 Leagues North of Saints: It was formerly very strong,
and given to the Protestants as one of their Towns of security; but Lewis XIII.
who took it from them by storm in 1621, pulled its Walls down: Taillebourg has
a Bridge on the Charante, and is famous for a Battle fought there in 1242. by
Lewis the IXth's. Forces, with the Count of La March that had revolted against
him.

Soubize, and Royan are two Seaports, the first who gave the name of Duke to a
famous Protestant Commander, lies on the Mouth of the Charante, and the other
on the Bay of the Gironde, Mortaigne, and Chalais have titles of Principalities
Posnac and Matha of Counties, Aubeterre of a Viscounty. Montausier was erected
into a Duchy and Peerdom in 1665. Pons is a Siraute or ancient Lordship, on
which 250 fees are depending. Barbezieux gives now Title of a Marquess to one
of Louvoys Sons, Secretary of State to Lewis XIV. Jonsac and Mirembeau are also
considerable Lordships.

Of Armagnac.
ARMAGNAC, Armaniacum, is a County in Gascogne, between Languedoc on the East,
the Garonne and Condomois on the North, Chalosse and Bigorre on the West, and
Cominges on the South: There is a great plenty of Corn, excellent Wines,
Cattle, and Fowls. This Country in Caesar's time was inhabited by the Elusates,
whose Capital Euse or Eause, Elusa or Aceluso was then a Metropolitan, and Aux
a Bishopric only; but the two Dioceses having been melted in one, and the
Archiepiscopal Seat transferred to Aux; Eause became an inconsiderable place,
and retains nothing of its former grandeur, but an Archiepiscopal Palace: Eause
is seated on the River Gelise, and the Borders of Condomus almost 14 Leagues
South of Bazas, so that from Serignac on the Garonne, and Aragmer in the
Pyrenees, Armagnac is extended 43 Leagues North and South in its greatest
length, and 30 East and West from Verdun on the Garonne, to Air or Barcelone
on the Adour. Thus this County, together with the Countries of Riviere and
Verdun are included betwixt 42 Degrees. 40 Min. and 44 Degrees. 10 Min. of Latitude, 19
Degrees. 50 Min. and 21 Degrees. 40 Min. of Longitude. It has had famous Counts, and
has above 1800 Fees subject to the Ban and Rearban.

The most remarkable places are Ausch Archbishopric Lectoure, a Bishopric and
strong City with a Citadel; Vic d'Armagnac, where the Counts of Fosensac used
to reside, who received homage of 300 Gentlemen; Vic de Lomagne Capital of the
Country of that Name: There is also Miradou which stopped the designs of the
Prince of Conde in 1652. Mirande Capital of the Country of Estrac. Verdun
Capital of the Country of that Name. La Bastide, Jegun, Naugaro, Try, etc.

The City of Aux or Ausch, Augusta Auscorum and Ausci, lies upon the Giers,
with a Presidial and Archbishopric: It Is said to have been a Roman Colony,
which is confirmed by its Antiquities; it has some remains of the magnificence
of the Counts of Armagnac: Clovis the Great is thought the Founder of the
Cathedral, which is one of the most magnificent and richest Churches in the
Kingdom; its first Bishop is thought to be Aufronius, its Chapter consists of
15 Dignitaries, and 20 Prebendaries, of which 5 are Laymen, who sit in the
Quire, and have a share in the Distributions: These are, the Count of Armagnac,
and the four Barons of Montaut, Pardillan, Montesquiou, and l'Ile: The 15
Dignitaries are the Provost, 3 Abbots of Faget, Idrac, and Cere; 7 Archdeacons
of Angles, Sabanes, Sos, Vic d'Armagnac, Magnoac, Astarac, and Pardillan; two
Priors of Montesquiou, and S. Mary of Snow; a Sexton who is withal a Parson,
and a Theolocal (or Professor of Divinity.) There are also 36 Incumbents, eight
Chaplains of the Holy Ghost, and St. Denis, 37 Chaplains in ordinary, and
diverse Clerks for the Divine Service. The Archbishop has the Moiety of the
Lordship of the City; there are many other Churches and Monasteries, etc.

Of Chalosse.
CHALOSSE or Gascony properly so called, lies between Armagnac on the East,
Condomois on the North, the Lan^^ on the West, and Bearn on the South. This
Country bordering too much on the ^andes, or wastes of Gascony, produces nothing
^^t Rye, Millet, and some Pastures. It reaches ^3 Leagues North and South, from
the Source (...) the Gelouse to the Borough of Mant upon ^^e Luy, and 13 East
and West from Air to ^eyond Gaviac, etc. The chiefest Places are, ^ires Bish.
Cap. S. Sever, Meugron, Arsac, ^^^^muy.

The City of Aires, Vicus Juli, Aturensium ^nitatis, or Aturae, is a Bishopric
Suffragan of ^^sch, seated on the Adour in a plentiful Country, ^^most 27
Leagues South of Bourdeaux. It de^ends on the Seneschal of Bazas, and the
Par^iament of Guienne without further appeal: The Kings of the Visigoths made
their Residence ^here; there is still to be seen on the River ^^de, the Ruins
of Alaric's Palace, he that made public in 506, the Theodosian Code, which had
been revised by Anian his Chancel^or: Since that time this Town has often been
^^in'd by the Saracens, Normans, etc. it suffer^d much during the late Civil
Wars. There is an Abbey of S. Quiterne, which is celebrate^ for the Martyrdom
of that Saint; it is con^^thedral with that of Aires, which has the Blesse^
Virgin for Patron. The ancientest Bishop (...) St. Marcel, who sent in 506. one
of his Pries^ to the Council of Agde; the Chapter has tw^ Archdeacons, and the
whole Dioceses is divide^ under 6 Arch-priests, etc.

Of Condomois.
CONDOMOIS Pagus Condomiensis, is small Country betwixt Armagnac an^ Agenois on
the East, Basadois on the North, the Lands and Chalosse on the VVes^ and part
of Chalosse and Armagnac on the Sout^ It reaches 30 Leagues East and West from
^staffort on the Giers to beyond the Gelouse; b^ its greatest extent North and
South is hard^ 12 Leagues, and in some places only 2, 4, 6 ^ 7. However it is
subdivided in other small^ Countries, as Mursan, Gavardan, Fesensague^ etc.
They say that Condomois yields all the n^cessaries for life, and borrows
nothing of i^ Neighbors. The most considerable Places a^ Condom Bish. Gondrin,
Corrensan Mezin, S^ Rimbes, Montreal, Gabaret Cap. of Gavarda^ Mauvesin Capital
of Fesen saguet, Mont de Ma^san with Roquefort and St. Justin, etc.

The City of Condom, Condomium Vasconum, is ^^^ted upon the Baise, Balisa, with
a Bishop^^er Suffragan of Bourdeaux, three Leagues ^^om Nerac; it has a
Presidial and Election, ^^^e it was separated from the Bishopric and
^^^schalship of Again. The Pope John XXII. ere^ed it into a Bishopric in 1327.
and gave it ^^e revenues of an Abbey of St. Benedict, con^^crated to St. Peter,
which is now the Cathe^^al. Raimond Gontard last Abbot of that Ab^^ey, was the
first Bishop of Condom, and the ^anons were secularized in 1549. There are ^any
other Churches, and several Monasteries. This City was taken in 1569. by
Gabriel of ^^tmorency Commander of the Protestants.

Of the Lands.
THE LANDS are along the Sea, between the Country of Labourd on the South,
Chalosse on the West, and Bourdelois o^ the North. This is a barren Country,
that ha^ in some places nothing but Heaths and Pastures where abundance of
Cattle is feeding; in some other places it yields a little Corn, and a great
deal of Rye by the means of burnt Earth, which mixed with the sandy Soil,
fattens it and make^ it fruitful. It Is extended 33 Leagues North East and
South-West from Belin to Bayonne. Bu^ only 12, in its largest breadth from
Tartas o^ the Adour to the Sea. It was the Habitation o^ the ancient Tarbelli,
whom Caesar and Strab^ describe as living on the Seacoast of Aquita^ from
Bourdeaux to the Pyrenees. The Places t^ be noted are, Dax Bish. Tartas, Belin,
le M^ret, Magese, Albret, etc.

The City of Dax or Aqs, Aquae August^ or Aquae Tarbellicae, lies upon the
Adou^ with a Bishopric Suffragan of Ausch, and a S^neschal's Court, 13 Leagues
North-East of Ba^onne. It is a trading City, rich and well buil^ with a Castle
flanked by many big roun^ Towers, with a Garrison in it; it is famou^ for its
warm and healthful Bathes, which were in great consideration in the times of
the R^mans; whence comes its name of Aquae, and that of Aquitain.

Of Labourd.
THE Land or Country of LABOVRD, or rather Lapord, Lapurdensis pagus, lies on
the Frontiers of Spain, between Bearn on the East, the Lands on the North, and
the Ocean on the West. This Country has in most ^^tees little Corn and Wine,
but is plentiful in Fruits, especially Pears and Apples, of which they make
excellent Syder. It yields a great deal of Millet, and Physical Herbs of great
Virtue; Whales have been taken upon its Coasts; and there are Mineral Waters
good for several Distempers. This Country reaches 17 Leagues East and West from
Bidache to Fontarabie, but his extent North and South, is not above six or
seven Leagues. The chief Places are, Bayonne Bish. St. J hn de Luz, Luisium,
that is muddy places; Bidache, Siboule, etc.

The City of Bayonne, Lapurdum, Boatium Ci^itos, and vulgarly Baiona, lies on
the Confluence of the Adour and Nive, which three Miles after disburthen
themselves into the Sea. It has a Bishopric Suffragan of Ausch, and is one of
the Keys of the French Kingdom toward Spain; it is very rich because of its
Trading and very strong. The word Bayonne comes from Baie a Port, and from Juna
which signifies goo^ in the Bask or Country Language, so that it as much as to
say Good Port. It Is in the Cast^ of this City, called Lapurdum, that the Trib^^
of the Novem Populan Cohort made his Residence; it is under the Seneschal's
Jurisdictio^ of Dax. Near this City is a Hill on the top (...) which one may
see part of three Kingdoms, vi^ of France, Castile, and Navarre. The Cathedral
is dedicated to the blessed Virgin, an^ St. Leon: There are many other Churches
an^ several Monasteries: This Bishopric was on^^ extended into three Kingdoms,
viz. France, N^varre, and Castile; but in 1565. Philip II. (...) of Spain,
obtained from the Court of Ro^^ the dismemb ing of it, on behalf of Pampelu^^
This Country had formerly its own Viscounts Ships of any rate come up the River
which (...) very deep, as far as the middle of the City.

Of Lower Navarre.
THE LOWER NAVARRE Borders on the Country of Labourd to the North-West, and
West, on the Pyrenees to the South, and the Viscounty of Soul to the East. It
is a Moun^^inous Country; which produces little Corn or Wine, and yields only
Millet, Oats, Pears and Apples, of which they make Syder, that is the usual
drink of the Inhabitants. Pasture ground is very good here, the flesh of Cattle
very delicate, and the Wool very fine; Game both small and great is likewise
very common.

The most remarkable places are, St. Palais the Capital, St. John pie de Port,
S. Johannes ^^^pyrenaei, Garris Garrucium, la Bastide de Clarences.

S. Palais, Fanum Sancti Pelagii is seated on the Rivers Bidouse, almost 12
Leagues South-East of Bayonne. It was the Seat of Chancery and Sovereign
Justice before the Institution of the Parliament of Pau in 1620. it has still a
Court of Mint, etc.

Of Soul.
THE Viscounty of SOVLE, Subola, is (...) little Country that makes part of
Navarre^ and lies betwixt it and Bearn. There is no remarkable place but
Mauleon of Soul, which i^ its chief Town; called by the Latins Malle^ Oppidum,
or Castrum, and is seated in the hear^ of it: It Is the birth place of Henry
Sponde Bishop of Pamiez, who has continued the Annal^ of Baronius.

Of Bearn.
BEARN, or Benearnensis pagus, with the Title of Principality, lies near the
Pyrenees, bordering on the County of Bigorre to the East, Lower Armagnac to the
North, the Precincts of the Provost of Acqs, Lower Navarre, and the Viscounty
of Soul to the West, and the Mountains of Arragon and Roncal to the South. The
chief Town of this Province is Pau; the other most remarkable are Benearnum,
now Lescar Lascurris, Oleron Iluro, Nay, Ourtes, or Ortez, Navarreins, Morrane,
Sauveterre, Pontac, Sanbege, Salies, and 434 Buroughs or Villages, 2
Bishoprics and 3 Abbeys. It lies betwixt 42 Degrees. 50 Min. and 43 Degrees. 40 Min.
Latitude, and between 18 Degrees. 50 Min. and 20 Degrees. of Longitude; its greatest
strength East and West being about 22 Leagues, and 20 North and South. There
are two Principal Rivers called Gave, one has its source in the Mountains of
Bareges in Bigorre, and is called the Gave of Bearn, and the other is that of
Oleron, which is a compound of the Gave of Alpe and Ossau, it has its source in
the highest part of the Pyrenees, where Bearn is divided from Spain; these
Rivers are not navigable, but the plenty of Fish they afford, makes amends for
it; from the highest Mountain of Ossau, one may see both the Seas and the
Mountains of Castile. The Soil is rendered fruitful, only by the labor and
industry of the Inhabitants. By the care and piety of Ja^^ Queen of Navarre,
this Province and her other Countries embraced the Reformation; So tha^ after
the reconciliation of Henry the Great her Son to the Church of Rome, the
Sovereign Court of Pau petitioned the King, who would re-establish the exercise
of the Roman Religion in their Country, that the Jesuits might be excluded from
it, which was granted to them, and observed from the year 1599 to 1620, tha^
Lewis XIII. repealed this Edict against his Fathers Murderers. In 1684. Lewis
XIV. forced the Bearnois with Dragoons to abjure tha^ Holy Religion they had
professed almost an Age.

The City of PAV upon the Gave of Pau, or Bearn, with a Parliament, is pretty
large and well built, and the native Place of Henry the Great; there is also a
Court of Accounts, and a College of Jesuits: Pau lies 27 Leagues South East of
Bayonne.

Of the County of Bigorre.
THE County of BIGORRE, Bigerrones, or Bigerri, borders upon Armagnac to the
North and East, on Bearn to the West, and part of Arragon to the South. Its
length North and South from the Pyrenees to Marbouquet is above 22 Leagues, its
largest breadth East-West 14, and in some places but 3 or 4 Leagues. It is
divided into three parts, viz. the Mountains, the Plain, and the Rustan: The
first contains two Principal Valleys, that of Lavedan, the other of Barege; the
Plain is 5 Leagues long, and 1 broad: The Rustan has some little Hills along
the River Arroz. The Mountains are like a rail betwixt France and Spain; there
are four narrow and difficult passages, viz. Azun, Cauteres, Barege, and
Campan, which the Inhabitants are obliged to keep. This Country yields a great
deal of Jasp and Slate; the Mountains have Silver, Iron, Copper, and Lead
Mines, but they are not dug out. There are 3 Lakes, and 4 Principal Rivers,
viz. Adour, Eschez, Arroz, and Lavedan, which is composed of the Gaves of
Barege, Cauteres, and Azun. Eneco Arista was in possession of this County in
828. before he founded the Kingdom of Navarre, and after many changes and
revolutions Henry IV. annexed it to the Crown by an Edict in the Month October
1607.

The most remarkable places are, Tarbe Bish, Vic de Bigorre, Lourde, Campan,
Rabasteins, Bagneres, Luz, Cauteres, etc.

The City of TARBE, or Turba, or Tarvia, lies upon the Adour, 10 Leagues East
of Pau, it is a plentiful Country with a Bishop Suffragan of Ausch, and a
Seneschal, the Cathedral is under the name of our Lady. Lourde, has a good
strong Castle; Benac is a Duchy; Barege is famous for its Waters.

Of Coming.
COMING, Pagus Convenicus, lies between Languedoc and Conserans on the East,
Armagnac on the North, the County of Bigorre on the West, and the Pyrenees on
the South. It is divided into upper, properly Coming; and into Lower, or the
Diocese of Lombez. This Country has had its own particular Counts before, it
was annexed to the French Crown: It is pretty plentiful in Wheat, Oats, Wines,
Pastures, Fruits, and especially Walnuts, which yield great quantity of Oil; it
also abounds in all sorts of Fowl.

The most remarkable places are, S. Bertrand of Coming Bish. Lombez Bish.
Montpezat, Rieume, Muret, S. Beat, Bagneres, S. Gaudens, L'Ile Dodon, etc.

The City of S. BERTRAND of Coming, or Convene, or Lugdunum Convenarum, lies
upon the Garonne, 14 Leagues South-East of Tarbe, with a Bishopric Suffragan
of Ausch, and a Royal Court of Justice, under the Seneschal and Parliament of
Toul^use, the Bishop Seat is in the States of Languedoc.

Lombez, is one of the Bishoprics erected by Pope John XXII. in 1317. It Is
Suffragan to Toulouse, from which it is distant above 12 Leagues to the
South-West, and 12 North of S. Bertrand de Coming. It Is seated upon the Save,
in a very fruitful Soil, bounded on one side with Hills, covered with
Vineyards, and on the other with Plains, abundant in Corn and Hay.

Of Conserans.
COSERANS or Conserans, Pagus Consarannensis, lies on the South of Coming,
properly so called, between Languedoc and the Pyrenees; it is a Viscounty, which
is thought to have been possessed by Arnold of Spain, under the Title of a
County, whence the House of Montespan, derives its Original. After that it went
over to the Counts of Carcassonne, and from thence to the Kings of Navarre. The
chief place is, S. LIZER of Conserans upon the River Salat, 13 Miles East of S.
Bertrand de Coming, with a Bishopric Suffragan of Ausch, and a Royal Court
of Justice, under the Parliament of Toulouses. It is divided in two, viz. City
and Town; the first is properly Coserans, with the Concathedral Notre-Dame; and
the other is S. Lizier, where is also the other Concathedral of the same name;
the Chapter consists of 12 Canons, of which the first is Archdeacon; of two
Sextons, two Precentors, and one Almoner, of 24 Priests Prebendaries, with a
Parson in each of these two Churches, where the Service is performed at the
same time. Conserans is said to be properly the Episcopal See, and that
Valerius was its first Bishop, and S. Lizier Glycerius the Fifth. The other
places of some note are S. Julian, Cazeres, Bonpaux, S. Girons, La Cour,
Castillon.

CHAP. XIII. Of Languedoc.
THis Government is separated from Provence and Dauphine by the River Rhone on
the East; it borders upon Auvergne, Rovergue and Quercy on the North; on the
West and South-West the Garonne, and some Mountains divide it from Gascony and
Catalogne, and on the South it has the Mediterranean Sea. It is the first
Province which the Romans conquered after Provence, and the Allobroges. In
Caesar's time, Narbonne, one of the Capital Cities of this Government gave its
name to Languedoc, Provence, Dauphine and Savoy; but Augustus divided it into
two Provinces, the Viennoise and Narbonnoise, and this last was again
subdivided into two, whereof the first is our Languedoc. Before Caesar, the
Inhabitants were called Volcae, and subdivided into two powerful Nations, viz.
The Volcae Tectosages, who possessed the Western or Upper Languedoc, from the
Garonne, and the Pyrenees to the Cevennes and the Mediterranean Sea; and the
Volcae Arecomici, who enjoyed Eastern or Lower Languedoc, from these Mountains
and Sea to the Rhone. About the end of the 6th. Century, it began to be called
Septimania from its 7 Capital Cities, viz. Tolosa, Toulouse, Biterrae, Beziers,
Nemausus, Nimes, Agatha, Agde, Magalona, Maguelonne, Leuteva, Lodeve, Vcecia,
Vzes. By the Treason of Stilicon, the Romans were forced to yield to the Goths,
all the first Narbonnoise, Catalogne, and a good part of Navarre and Aragon,
where they settled themselves, and established the Kingdom of the Visigoths. It
seems it is they who gave to the first Narbonnoise, the name of Septimania; and
so jealous they were of that Title, that having lost by the Battle of Vouille
(where their King Alaric was killed by Clovis in 507. the Towns of Toulouse and
Vzes, they supplied that number by the addition of Narbonne and Careassonne.

The Visigoths enjoyed Septimania above 250 years, which is the cause that it
is sometimes called by the Latin Authors of the middle Age Gothia: Thence some
derive the modern name of Languedoc, as tho it were said for Langue de Goth, or
Langue-Goth, but this Etymology does neither agree with the spelling of
Languedoc, nor with the appellation of Occitania and Lingua Occitana, which the
said Authors give it: And therefore I more approve of those, who observe that
the French have been distinguished, time out of mind into Langue D'Ouy and
Langue D' Oc, that is in such as say Ouy, and such as say Oc for Yes, the first
living on this side, and the second on that side of the Loire. In process of
time the Surname of Langue D'Oc was appropriated to Septimania, wherein it is
more general to say Oc for Yes, than any where else.

The French having expelled the Goths beyond the Pyrenees, Charlemaign
established Governors in Languedoc with the Title of Counts of Toulouse; of
whom the first was one Corson in 778. The second was St. William du Court-Nez,
or Aux Cornets, whence the Princes of Orange derive their pedigree, as may be
infered from the hunting horn they bear in their Arms. This William, who lived
about the year 790, founded the Abbey of St. William the Desert, in the
Dioceses of Lodeve; wherein he took the Habit of Monk: After his death or
retirement the State of Languedoc was very much troubled by the quarrels of the
several pretenders, who making use of the weakness of the French Kings,
endeavored to erect their Governments into Sovereign Principalities.
Raimond-Pons Count of Toulouse in 907. made himself Proprietary of the Duchy
of Septimania, or Marquisate of Gothia; but not being able to subdue some
particular Governors, as the Counts of Carcassonne, Melgueil and Foix; the
Viscounts of Narbonne, Besiers, Agde, Nismes, Lodeve, Vzes, etc. who formerly
depended on the Dukes of Septimania; and would now become Sovereigns as well as
themselves; the Counts of Toulouse allowed them to enjoy their Usurpations. In
the mean while they acquired by Marriage, Inheritance, or War, the Counties of
Querei, Perigord, Albi, the Agenois, the Milhaud, the Gevaudan, the County
Venaissin, Melgueil, Asterac; nay they were sometime Marquesses of Provence,
Godefrid. Annal.
as in 1235, and in that quality made homage to the Emperor. These Lords being
so powerful, the French Kings were glad to make them the first Counts and Peers
of their Kingdom, that by this Title of honor, they should be drawn to stick
the closer to the French Interest. However this House remained not long in its
luster, for Raimond the 6th. surnamed the Old, maintaining the persecuted
Albigeois, as his Subjects, the fourth Council of Lateran excommunicated him,
and gave his Estate to Simon Count of Montfort, in 1215. Amauri Son to Simon,
dead in 1218, not being able to keep the unlawful Conquests of his Father,
yielded them to the French K. Lewis the VIIIth. in 1224. Raimond the 6th. was
dead two years before in 1222, and his Son Raimond the 7th. or the Young,
perceiving that he could not withstand the whole power of Popery, thought best
to reconcile himself to the Church of Rome, as he did in 1228. At the same time
he made a Treaty with K. Lewis the VIIIth, by which he betrothed Jane his only
Daughter to Alfonse of Poictiers the King's Brother, upon condition that if
they happened to dye without Issue; the States of the Counts of Toulouse should
fall to the Crown of France; they both died without Children in the Month of
August 1271, upon which, King Philip the Bold took possession of their
Dominions; and in 1361. King John reunited this Country to the Crown of France
by his Patent Letters, which were confirmed in in an Assembly of the General
States of that Province.

These States, the only ones that have yet any shadow of power, are made up of
the 3 Orders of a Kingdom, namely the Clergy, the Nobility and the People; the
Clergy is represented by the 22 Prelates of that Province, whereof 3 are
Archbishops, and 19 Bishops; the Nobility Votes there by the Mouth of 22 Barons
of the following Families, 1. Rieux, 2. Mirepoix, 3. Florensac, 4. Vauvert, 5.
Castelnau d' Estrete Fons, 6. Capendu, 7. Haute-rive, 8. Confoulens, 9. St.
Felix, 10. Ville, Neuve 11. la' Gardiole, 12. Lanta, 13. Alais, 14. Polignac,
15. Clermont, 16. Arques, 17. Cauvisson, 18. Ganges, 19. Castries, 20.
Castelnau de Bonnefons, 21. Ambres, 22. Ferrals. The People speaks in the
Persons of 22 Consuls or Sheriffs, deputed out of the 22 Bishoprics. The
Archbishop of Narbonne is President born of that Assembly, which is seldom
called for any thing else, but to give the King money, by laying besides the
ordinary Taxes an extraordinary and heavy imposition, under the name of
Don-gratuit, or free Gift.

Languedoc, lies between 21 Degrees. 16 Min. and 26 Degrees. 10 Min. of Longitude, 41
Degrees. 45 Min. and 45 Degrees. of Latitude: It reaches 23 Leagues East and West from
Beaucaire upon the Rhone to Rieux upon the Garonne, or 79 from Crussol upon the
Rhone over against Valence in Dauphine to Castel-Sarasin on the Garonne, in the
Diocese of Montauban. It Is extent North and South is still more unequal from
Moissac in Quercy to Lavet Coronat in the County of Foix, it is of 40 Leagues,
of 53 from La Guard Biaur on the Borders of Rouergue to beyond Prat de Mollo in
Roussillon, and 50 from Serrieres in Vivarais to beyond Fort de Peccais near
Aigues-mortes in the Diocese of Nismes. It is one of the most fruitful and
healthful Provinces of France, divided into Upper and Lower Languedoc, and the
Cevennes. The first comprehends the Toulousan, the Albigeois, the Lauragais and
the County of Foix: The second is distinguished into 3 Precincts or Quartiers,
that of Narbonne, of Beziers and of Nimes; the Cevennes are subdivided into 3
Countries, Gevaudan, Vivarais, and Velay.

Both parts of Languedoc produce great quantity of Corn, that they use to carry
into Spain and Italy; their Wines are delicious, and their Fruits most
esteemed, especially pickled Olives and Raisins. Their Salt Pits and Dyers-wood
make up a considerable Trade, besides Azure, Saffron, Verdigrease, Vermilion or
artificial Cinoper, Soap, Glasses, Box-trees, and several Simples and Plants
that are transported thence. The Air is so wholesome, that it is thought a
specific remedy against consumptions, chiefly about Montpellier, which
temperature of the Heavens contributes not a little to make Women comely, and
Men ingenious, as appears by the great number of Poets, either in French,
Latin, or the Country-Language, and by some good Historians Languedoc has
produced. Women, tho as honest here as in any other part of France, use a
freedom of accosting Strangers (especially in Montpellier and Nismes) which
would be thought immodesty elsewhere, but goes here under the name of
gentleness, and good manners. This Province feeds abundance of Sheeps, Goats,
and Herds of Cattle, of Fowls and Beasts of Game; for though there be few
Forests in the Plains, yet besides, that all the North, North-East, and
South-West is covered with Mountains, there is a Chain of them that crosses the
Country from the Pyrenees to the Cevennes.

What conduces most to the fertility of Languedoc are the many Rivers that
water it; for besides the Rhone on the East, and the Garonne on the West, it
has the Douine, that rises near Bourg-Argental in the Velay, washes Annonay,
and falls into the Rhone between Andance and S. Vallier. The Douz rises in the
Cevennes, and mixes with the Rhone at Tournon. The Eyrieu comes from the same
Mountains, receives the Dorie at le Cheylars, the Gleure and the Orene, at les
Oullieres, goes by S. Fortunat, and discharges it self into the Rhone, between
Beauchastel and la Voulte. The Scoutay runs into the same River at Viviers. The
Ardesche is more considerable than the former; it rises likewise in the
Cevennes near Montpezat, receives the Volane and Bruens near Vals, washes
Aubenas and Vauguel, then increased with the Leude, Beaune and Chassezat goes
by Salavas, Ayguese, and runs into the Rhone between Bourg S. Andiol and Pont
S. Esprit. The Ceze takes its source from Mount Lozere, washes Ambroise,
Monceus, Cornillon, Bagnols, and falls into the Rhone at Condoules, 5 Miles
West of Orange. A mile lower is the Mouth of the Tave, that goes by
Couvillargues and Ladun. The Gardon or Guard, Vardo is made up of two Brooks
both rising in the same Mountains; the most easterly is called le Gardon d'
Aluis, and the most westerly le Gardon d' Anduse from two Towns of that name
which they go by; then uniting at Cassagnole and increased with some small
Brooks, as the Droude, the Braume, the Aysene that comes from Vzes and receives
the Alzon, they pass under the famous Pont du Guard, and fall into the Rhone,
near the Island Valabregue, and the Town of Beaucaire. The Vistre or the River
Nimes Nemausus as Ausone calls it, rises at the foot of a Hill near the Walls
of that City, and increased with a Rivulet coming from some Mountains near
Ledenon 3 Leagues Northwards, washes Bernis, Vauvert, Aymargues, La Caila, and
discharges its Waters into the Pond called Laterna or Taurus Palus l'Etang du
Tau, between Aigues-mortes and the Island Maguelonne. The same Pond, which
reaches 18 Leagues East and West along the Mediterranean Coast, and has
communication with that Sea by Grau du Roy and Grau de Palavas, receives 8 or 9
other Rivers, among which the most considerable is the Vidourle, that rises in
the Cevennes, goes by S. Hippolite, Sauve, Quissas, Ville-vieille, Sommieres,
Marsiliargues, and has its mouth but a League West of that of the Vistre. The
Berenge, the Cadoule, the Salonon, the Lez, or the River of Montpellier, the
Caulazon increased with the Lamousson, the Laverne, and the Palas deserve
hardly to be named. The Eraut, Arauris or Cyrta, rises in the Mountains of
Gevaudan, where it is increased with the Arre, washes Ganges, S. Bauzely,
receives the Vis near Brisac, and the Buege near Pont S. Esteve, goes by S.
Guillem le Desert, S. Jean de Foz and Canet, where it mixes with the Lergue,
increased by the Solondre, receives the Pain at Pezenas, the Touque at S.
Tubery, lets out a branch to Florensac, and another above Agde, below which its
greatest Mouth mixes with the Mediterranean Sea. A League Westwards is that of
the River Lerron, and 2 Leagues farther that of Orb, which rises in the
Diocese of Castres near a Village called Cellies de Languedoc, receives the
Vicousan and the Mare at Bec de Rioux, washes Colombiers, la Voute, where it is
increased with the Jaur, and the Vezenobre at Cessenox, goes by Beziers,
Ville-neuve-la-Cremade, and falls into the same Sea near Serignan. The Aude,
Atax, comes from the Pyrenees, washes Alet, Limoux, and Carcassonne, where it
is increased with several Rivulets joined together as the Fresquel, the
Vernassone, the Alzon, and having received the Vrviel and the Orbieu, separates
into two Branches, three Miles above Narbonne, whereof the least being
increased with the River Cesse runs into the Grau of Vendres, and the biggest
pursuing its course toward Narbonne falls into the Pond of La Robine, Rubresus
or Rubrensis Lacus. The Ariege or Auriege, Areia and Aregia rises in the
Pyrenees, washes Aqs, Tarascon, S. Paul, Foix, Barilles, Pamiers, Sabaudin,
where it receives the Lers, that comes from the same Mountains, goes through
the Town and Dioceses of Mirepoix, and is increased in his way with the
Lambroue at Chalabre, the Doudbuire at Rieucroix, and the Bosegue at Belpuech,
then joined with the Gabelle, they go by Cintegabelle, Haurerive, Lezat, where
they receive the Leze, and unite with the Garonne at Portet, 5 Miles South
(...) Toulouse. The Little or Petit Lers issues ^^om a Mountain near
Castelnaudary, goes by ^ardoux, Montesquiou, Baziegue, Mongiscar, re^eives the
Marquessone, the Sone, the Seillonre, ^he Girou; and falls into the Garonne
near S. Jo^^ 7 Miles North of Toulouse. The Agout, Ago^^ rises in the Diocese
of S. Pons de Tomieres, and being increased with the Gigeou, and some ^ther
Rivulets, washes Castres, receives the Du^^quc and the Thoret near it, goes by
S. Pol, ^^vaur, and somewhat lower the Agros, increased ^^^h the Denat, Oubus
and Dadou, discharges its ^aters into it; then they mix together with ^^e Tarn,
Tarnis at S. Sulpice. The Tarn de^^ends from Mount Losere, in Gevaudan, passes
^y Montwert, Espagnac, Quessas, S. Eremie, S. ^bely du Tarn, Peyrebeau, where
it receives the ^^a^te, and the Trevezel, with the Dourbie at ^^lbaud, the
Cernon between S. George and Com^^eignac, the Sergue, that goes through S.
Fric^^e and Vabres at Brougnies, the Dordon hard by, ^he Alrance at Trebas,
then washes Alby, Gaillac Rabastens, Villemur, Montauban, mixes with the
^veyrou near l'Isle-made, with the Lute and Lem^ulas near Moissac, and runs
into the Garonne, ^etween this Town and S. Nicolas.

Here is, methinks, the proper place to speak ^f that Masterpiece of Work, the
Canal of Languedoc. The design was to convey Mer^handizes from one Sea into
another, a very ^seful undertaking, if it might be completely performed. It was
begun in 1666 by Mr. Ri^et, and the first Essay was made by his Sons ^n 1681.
One would think, that it was not a very hard task, since the source of the
little Lers, is not above two Leagues from the Fresquel, that mixes with the
Aude 3 or 4 Miles farther, and that there are Torrents and Rivers round about,
whose course might easily be turned, to increase, the Aude with them, and
render it navigable; besides the Snow-water of the neighboring Mountains, that
might be spared in Reservers, Ponds, and Sluices. None of these things has been
forgotten, for a canal has been dug of 127600 Toises, which make above 63
common Leagues of France, in length, upon 30 foot or 5 Toises in breadth every
where. There are several surprising works, as the Reserver of S. Ferreol, which
has above 2000 Toises in Circuit, and is 90 Foot deep in some places. It Is used
to receive, and to keep the Waters of the black Mountain, which are detained
there, by a Causey and 3 strong Walls. These Waters fall into the Basin of
Naurouse, which is 200 Toises long, and 150 broad, and lined all over with
Freestone. This Basin is dug in the highest place of the Canal, so that the
included Waters may be let loose on both sides, and go each a contrary way. The
Bridge of the Torrent Repudre is also considerable by the novelty of its use,
for while Boats somewhat large row over this Bridge, which is 70 Toises long,
built with Freestone, and covered every where with 7 Foot of Water, the
Rivulet runs under the Bridge^: The Vault of Malpas is yet more surprising, for
it is a Rock pierced through, to give way to the Waters, that has eighty Toises
in length, four in breadth and four and a half in height, and on both sides is
a raised way to draw on the Boats.

Of Toulousan.
THis Country included between the Rivers Aveyrou, Garonne, and Arriege, the
County ^ Foix and Albigeois is 26 Leagues North and ^outh, but hardly 10 or 12
East and West: It ^ontains the Diocese of Toulouse, Montauban, La ^^ur and S.
Papoul, or the Country of L' Aura^^^, of which I shall speak in the same order.

Of the Diocese of Toulouse.
THE ancient Inhabitants of Toulouse, the Volcae Tectosages filled up a far
greater Country than this Diocese, and even the Toulousan; for their Dominions
reached as far as the Northern end of the Cevennes; they confined to the very
Santones or Saintonge, if we believe Caesar, and had the Mediterranean Sea, and
the Pyrenees on the South. Their Territory abounded with Gold, which having
raised a sedition amongst 'em, such as proved the weakest went in search of a
new Land under the Conduct of Brennus, and having landed in Phrygia, conquered
the best part of it, which afterward was called from them Galatia and
Gallograecia. But a difference arising about the division of their Conquests;
20000 parted from Brennus, and went back to Thracia now Romania, headed by two
of their Kings Lomnorius and Lutatius. These were as successful as their
Confederates, for they overcame such as withstood them, made the others their
Tributaries, and took Byzanice now Constantinople, the chief Town of that
Country. Some time after, hearing of the riches of Asia, they past the
Hellespont or Streights of Gallipoli; and taking hold of a Civil War, betwixt
Tit. Live. l. 38.
Nicomedes and Zybaen, who disputed the Kingdom of Bithynia, they assisted the
first, who remained victorious by their help, then pursuing their Conquests
farther into Asia, tho from 20000 they were reduced to 10000, yet they brought
such a terror upon the neighboring Nations, even beyond Mount Taurus, that
they all submitted to their Empire. As they were issued from three Gaulish
Nations, The two first are unknown: it seems they were neighbors or a branch
of the Tectosagi, who perhaps after their departure seized upon their Country,
and thus came the name of both to be lost. It may be that they lived in the
Diocese of Alby, for the Albigeois, Albienses, are not mentioned by any ancient
Geographer.
Trocmi, Tosistobogii and Tectosagi; so they divided Less Asia into 3 parts,
the Trocmi had the Borders of the Hellespont, the Tolistobogii Aeolis and
Ionia, and the Tectosagi the inland Country, taking A^cyra for the Seat of
their Kingdom. These became so powerful, that they put even the Kings of Syria
under contribution, and remained in that State, till they were overcome by a
Roman Consul Cneus Manlius Vulso in 565. of Rome.

Ptolomy ascribes eight Capital Cities to the Gaulish Tectosages, viz.
Toulouse, Collioure or Illiberis, Roussillon or Ruscino, Narbonne, Carcassonne,
Beziers, Cessero, esteemed by some Castres, and by other S. Tubery, and Agde or
Agatha. Speaking of Languedoc, I have observed the several changes of Masters
and Governments, which Toulouse as the head of this Province has undergone, so
that I have but to mention, that even long after the French had conquered all
Septimania, as under the Reign of Lewis the Meek, the Toulousan, Pagus
Tolosanus, made up a distinct Country, as having been in the French hands long
before the rest of Septimania.

Toulouse, and its Latin name Tolosa are very ancient, for Caesar makes mention
of the Tolosates; but the time of its foundation is altogether uncertain: for
those who ascribe it to one Tolus, Grandchild to Japhet are fabulous Authors.
As it came early under the domination of the Romans; so they pleased themselves
in beautifying it with several stately Buildings, as a Palace, an Amphitheater,
and a Capitole, which last honor they made common with Rome to two other Towns
only, viz. Narbonne, and new Carthage or Carthagena; but there are no remains
of any of 'em. All what we know of that of Toulouse, is, that it was dedicated
to Jupiter, built in a very high place, and still in being in the middle of the
XIII Century, but made use of as a Townhouse; for the Senators or Magistrates
assembled there in Council, as Peter Maurice Abbot of Cluny relates in a Letter
against the Petrobrusians. Thence probably it is, that the Sheriffs of this
City are yet called Capitouls. Anciently they were 24 in number, who were
reduced to 12 under Alfonse of Poictiers, last Count of Toulouse 6 for the
City, and as many for the Borough, and again to 4, and then to 6 in 1390. by
an Edict of the French King Charles VI. to which two others were added 1392, 5
for the City, and 3 for the Borough. In 1401, they were increased to 12, 8 for
the City, and 4 for the Borough, but in the very same year they were again
reduced to 8, and 2 only left to the Borough, which di^ision has ever since
subsisted.

Aulu-Gellius relates, that Q. Servilius Cepio a Roman Consul, having taken and
plundered Toulouse in 648 of Rome, found a great quantity of Gold in its
Temples, but that all those who were partakers of this Booty, came to a
Tragical end. For Orosius says, that he sent this Treasure to Marseille, but
caused all the Leaders to be put to death in the way, that he alone might enjoy
it; which perfidious cruelty so meens'd the Romans against him; already enraged
at his having been defeated by the Cimbres, that they confiscated his Goods,
and bought Lands of it for the People. As for him he died most miserably in
Exile, whence came the Proverb habet aurum Tolosanum; he has of Toulouse's
Gold, said of such whose riches did not prosper. Valerius Maximus assures, that
this Booty was found in Marshes, and consisted in Wedges of Gold and Silver
15000 Talents worth; Orosius fixes it to the value of 100000 Found in Gold, and
110000 in Silver; but Justin increases it to 110000 Pound of Gold, and 5000000
of Silver; and adds, that it was the plunder which the Tectosages brought home
from the expedition of Delphos; which last account is altogether fabulous,
since such of the Tectosages, who went into Greece and Asia, never returned
back to their own Country, having either been killed or settled themselves
there, as Polybius, Pausanias, Livy, and all the ancient Authors testify. So
that the matter of fact is true, viz. that there was a vast quantity o^ Gold
and Silver, in, or about Toulouse, which was taken away by Cepio, but it
remains doubtful whence it came; whether it had been extracted out of Mines
they had in their Country, or gathered up through the course of many years by
this industrious and warlike People, averse to Luxury and Expenses, as Valerius
Maximus qualifies them.

Toulouse has twice had the honor to be the head of a Kingdom, under the
Wisigoths before Clovis, and under Charibert, to whom Dagobert his Brother King
of France, yielded the Tolosa^, Quercy, Agenois, Perigord, Saintonge and
Gascony. As to the State of the Church, though the Cathedral be dedicated under
the name of S. Stephen; yet S. Saturnin is thought to have been the first
Bishop of it in the second Age, and to have been precipitated by the Heathens
headlong the Capitole. Pope John XXII. erected this City into an Archbishopric
in 1317. and submitted to it the Bishopric of Pamiez, with six Monasteries
that he changed into Episcopal Sees, viz. Montauban, Rieux, Mirepoix, la Vaur,
Lombez, and S. Papoul, of which the 5 last were formerly included within this
Diocese.

The Parliament of Toulouse was instituted by the French King Philip the Fair,
in 1302, and made sedentary by Charles VII. in 1442, or 1443, who subjected to
it, all Upper and Lower Languedoc, and the 3 Countries of the Cevennes, besides
some part of Guyenne and Gascony, as Quercy, Rouergue, Cominges, Gaure,
Armagnac, Estrac, Lomaigne, Magnoac and Bigorre. This, if we believe Du Chesne,
was occasioned by a difference between the King and Matthew of F^ix, Count of
Chastelbon, Husband to Jane Daughter to the Earl of Cominges and Boulogne. The
French Monarch pretended to be Heir to that Lady, and on that account he
summoned them both to appear before his Parliament of Toulouse in 1442, and at
the same time fixed there the Seat of that Sovereign Court.

Besides the Parliament, there is an Office of Chancery, a Seneschalship and
Presidial, whose Chief justice is called Juge-Mage, a Viguery, that is the same
Court, which on this side the Loire is called Prevote or Provostship; General
Treasurers, and a Receiver General of the King's D^nesne. Add to this the Court
of the Capitouls; who judge of all such things as belong to Police or the City
Government; as appears by that they have lately condemned See the Journal des
Savans Dec. 22. 1692. This happened on the 21 of July 1691.
a pretended Hermaphrodite, but a real Woman, born in 1669, and called Margaret
Mallaure, to be from henceforth clothed as a Man, and to bear the name of
Antony Mallaure; because when she became 14 years of Age, it was given out,
that she had more of the Man than of the Woman. This young Maid thus disguised
against her will, came to Paris last Winter 1693, where the Physicians of that
great City, more learned than those of Toulouse, discovered that it was but a
sort of broken Belly, and having cured her of that Disease: She presented a
Petition to the French King, in order to reverse the Sentence of the Capitouls
against her, and to restore her to he natural Clothes and Fame; which was
granted

The University for Civil and Canon Law wa^ instituted by Raimond VII. Count of
Toulouse and endowed with many fine Privileges by Pop^ John XXII. and by
Innocent VI. who founded the College of S. Martial; the others as tha^ of Foix,
Narbonne, Maguelonne, Pampelune, Perigord, Ste. Catherine, and Mirepoix have
been founded by several Prelates and Noblemen.

Toulouse will not yield to any City in France for bigness, magnificence or the
number of Inhabitants, and it is not of late that it is grown so considerable,
for in the fourth Century, Ausonius bestows on it the following Elogy.

Non unquam altricem nostri reticebo Tolosam,
Coctilibus Muris, quam circuit ambitus ingens,
Perque latus pulchro perlabitur amne Garumna
Innumeris cultam populis, confinia propter
Ninguida Pyrenes and pinea Coebennarum,
Inter Aquitanas Gentes and nomen Iberum:
Quae modo quadruplices ex se cum effuderit urbes,
Non ulla exhauste sentit dispendia plebis
Quos genuit cunctos gremio complexa colonos.
I shall never forget Toulouse, wherein I have been educated, whose large
circuit is surrounded with Brick-walls, and washed with the fine River Garonne;
which is inhabited by a numberless People, whose Borders reach near the Snow of
the Pyrenees, and the Pine-trees of the Cevennes, being seated between Aquitain
and Spain; which, when four Cities shall flock out of it, it shall not feel the
loss, nor be exhausted of People, if it but keep such Inhabitants as are born
within its bosom.

If this be the true sense, as it seems the most natural to me, Toulouse was
doubtless one of the greatest Cities in the Gauls. Adrian de Valois pretends
that these quadruplices Vrbes are four Countries, which had newly modo been
added to the Toulousan, but he neither names them, nor gives any proof for it.
Besides that, the Poet does not speak, as he supposes, in an absolute sense, or
say that Toulouse has but lately set out four Cities; on the contrary, his
expressions are hypothetical, cum essuderit, that though it should happen so,
however it would hardly feel the loss, provided it should keep ^^do complexa
fuerit, its native Inhabitants.

The Romans used to solemnize Floral Games, at the beginning of May, in honor
of the Goddess Flora, but accompanied with very dishonest shows: Those that the
Toulousaans still celebrate, under that name, and at the same time, are only
attended with such circumstances as are most proper to stir up virtue and
ingenuity. A President and 4 Counselors of the High Court of Parliament, with
the eight Capitouls, and the other Magistrates of the City, come in their Nobes
on the 1. of May, into the Council-hall, to hear the Poets recite their Verses;
and on the 3d. day after a sumptuous Treat, and a Sonnet to be made immediately
by the pretenders to the Prizes, who are included to that effect in a great
Hall, these Prizes are distributed by the plurality of Votes. They are three in
number, and consist in so many golden Flowers each of the value of about 14
Pound; the first is a Columbine, called by the French Ancolie, and by the
Languedocians, Eglantine; the second i^ a Mary-gold, and the third a Violet.
The institution of those Games is variously reported ^ some ascribe it to a
great Lady called Clemence Isaure, who bequeathed the greatest part of her
Estate to the Townhouse upon that account, and whose Statue of white Marble is
yet to be seen in the great Hall; but the Registers of Toulouse attribute it to
seven Noblemen in 1324. Howsoever it be, this Solemnity is not only laudable,
but even worthy to be imitated by Princes, Commonwealths, and great Cities; for
besides that it would give an honest diversion and emulation to the ingenious;
it would be as a Touchstone to know the several degrees and abilities of
understanding Men; for extraordinary Poets are for the most part uncommon
Genius's, and might successfully be employed in weightier undertakings.

Toulouse is divided into two parts by the River Garonne, and into 8 Wards in
reference to its 8 Capitouls. The first is the Daurade, so called from a very
ancient Church under the name of our Lady, that was formerly a Temple of the
Sun. This Precinct comprehends several Churches, Monasteries and Colleges, the
Pesthouse, and the Suburb of S. Cyprian with the great Hospital of S. James.

The second Ward bears the name of S. Stephen the Metropolitan Church, built in
a great Market, adorned with a fountain, upon which is raised a fine Obelisque.
In 1609. this Church was all burned except that part, which is called the
Cloister, and has 'till some Gothic Statues of half embossed work. It has
since been rebuilt statelier than before, with a great and high Tower, wherein
hangs the Bell Ardaillac, which is so very big that they dare not ring it, lest
the Belfrey should fall; besides 14 vaulted Chapels round about the Quire:
There are also the Archbishop's Palace, the Townhouse or Capitole, adorned
with the Pictures of the Entries of the French Kings within Toulouse, and of
the Capitouls in their Robes, the Arsenal, the Chapels of the white and blew
Penitents, with several Churches, Convents, and Colleges.

The Old-Bridge gives its name to the third Ward, and is but a course piece of
Building, worthier of the Goths than of the Romans. The New-bridge which is far
finer, does hardly yield to that of Paris; and no wonder since it was begun in
1544, and but ended about the middle of this Age. In this Precinct are the
Exchange, the Court of the Provost, and Consuls of Merchants, and the Cage
wherein Blasphemers are included to be drowned into the Garonne.

The fourth Ward, called La Pierre, or the Stone, has nothing considerable. The
fifth takes its name from the Church Dalbade, enjoyed by the Fathers of the
Oratory, since the year 1620. There are besides the Inquisition; a place well
known by the cruelties against the Albigeois, near which is a round Castle,
esteemed by Du Chesne to be a remainder of the ancient Capitole; the Island S.
Antony formed by the Garonne, and inhabited by Handicraft-men.

The sixth Ward called S. Pierre des Cuisines, has among other Churches and
Monasteries, that of the Franciscans, surnamed Observantins, which exceeds all
the rest in bigness and sumptuosity, but is especially renowned for a Cave,
which consumes Dead-bodies, without anointing the Skin, and displacing the
Joints. Here is the University, with the College of Foix, founded by Peter
Cardinal of Foix, and endowed with two Libraries, one of Mss. and the other of
Printed Books, that of Narbonne, founded by Gambert Archbishop of Arles and
Narbonne in 1342, that of L'Equille, begun in 1561, and ended 1608 at the
expenses of the Town, for teaching the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Tongues. Here
are also the Mills of the Basacle, whose Workmanship is esteemed one of the
greatest curiosities of Toulouse. This place, in Latin Vadaculum, that is small
foord, gives likewise its name to a Bridge and a gate, hard by the Castle.

The seventh Ward called S. Bartholomew, has the Castle Narbonnoise, which was
the ordinary Residence of the Counts of Toulouse, and a very strong place
before K. Charles VII. Now it is the Palace of the Parliament, with the Hall of
the Pleas, the Marble-Table, the Prisons called Hauts-murats, the Court of the
Exchemier and the Mint, where Money is coined and marked at the Letter M.

The eighth Ward, under the name of S. Sernin or Saturnin, an ancient
Collegiate Church, defended by Guns at the top of it, so placed, that none of
the many Pillars, which underprop the Building, can cover a Man from their
Shot. This they do because of the great Treasure, that is included in this
Church, for there are above 50 Silver-skreens washed over with Gold, besides
the Jewels and Church-ornaments. Here are the Tombs of the ancient Counts of
Toulouse, of its Prelates and Nobility.

Five Miles North-West of this City lies the Village or Lordship of Pibrac,
which I mention here, for having given its name to a Toulousan Gentleman, Gui
du Faur Lord of Pibrac, President of the Parliament of Paris, and Ambassador of
France to the Council of Trent, and then to Poland, under Charles IX. and Hen.
III. He has left, several loose Discourses and pieces of Poetry, but the most
renowned are his Moral Quatrains, which for their brevity, majesty, and if I
may so speak, sententiousness, may still challenge the first place, among all
which has been written in this kind by uninspired Men. It appears by several
passages of this golden Book, that the Author was not at all addicted to the
Superstitions of Rome, though he never publicly embraced the Reformation, no
more than diverse other Great and Learned Men of his time, who seemed to approve
of the Doctrine, but did not like the manner of propogating it.

Seven Miles South-west of Toulouse lies the Village of Plaisance, so called
from the goodness of its Air, Soil, and Situation. Adrian de Valois supposes it
to be the Vernus Sol of Aethicus, but I rather take it for a place called
Vernouse, which lies just 15 Italian Miles South-west of Toulouse, as the
Vernus Sol of that Geographer.

I find nothing considerable of the other places of this Diocese, as Montoriol,
Vieille Toulouse, S. Jori, Columiers, Castel-moron, Ville-Longue, Ville-neuve,
Montagut, Montgaillard, Verseuil, Lenta, Carmain, with the title of a County.

Of the Diocese of Montauban.
MOntauban, Mons Albanus, is one of the 6 Bishoprics of Pope John XXII's
erection. It was formerly a Monastery founded by Theodard Archbishop of
Narbonne, and when it was made a Cathedral, the Abbot Bertrand du Puy was the
first Bishop of it. As to the Town, it was but at the beginning a very strong
Castle, which in process of time increased into a considerable City by the
fertility of its Soil, and the convenience of its Situation upon a Hill, and
the Rivers Tescounot and Tarn, on the high way from Toulouse to Limoges, and
thence to Paris. It was built or repaired in 1144, and united to the French
King's Domesne in 1171* to whom Amaury Count of Montfort yielded since his
pretensions. Montauban is divided into three parts, the old Town along the
Tarn, Ville-Bourbon on the other side of that River in Languedoc, which is
joined to the old Town by a brick Bridge. The new Town is toward Cahors: Thus
both the Old and New Town are in the Querci, but the rest of the Diocese in
Languedoc; whence it comes, that its Bishops has right to sit in the Estates of
both Provinces. The Protestants were Masters of Montauban, from 1562 to 1621,
that it was taken from them by Lew. XIII. They had here an Academy or College
for Languages and Divinity, and it was one of the surety's Towns, which Henry
IV. yielded to them. But Cardinal de Richelieu designing to run down all the
orders of the Realm, began by asking from the Protestants, to deliver their
Towns of surety, which they justly denying; Montauban was twice besieged in
vain; but at last discord creeping amongst 'em, and being betrayed by some
great ones; as the Duke of Lesdiguieres, it was taken at the third Siege, and
its strong Fortifications razed in 1629. Montauban has an Election and a
generality of Treasurers, on which the Elections of Cahors and Figeac are
depending. Between the City and the Suburb of S. Antony is a fine Fountain
called Griphon, that has 10 Pipes, and furnishes all the Inhabitants with
water. This Town proved the death of two of the most renowned Captains of the
French K. Char. VII. during his Wars with the English.

The other places of some note in this Diocese, are Castel-Sarrazin, built in
the time of Charles Martel to oppose the incursions of the Sarracens, Montech,
Frignan, Villemur, where the French King Henry the Great's Forces got a signal
Victory over the Leaguers, headed by the Duke of Jo^euse, who was drowned in
the Tarn, in 1592.

Of the Diocese of La Vaur.
LA Vaur, which some spelt Lavaur, and others l'Avaur, Vaurum Castrum, is one
of the new Suffragans of Toulouse, and lies six Leagues of Languedoc, or 8 of
France Eastward of it, upon the River Agout. It was already a considerable
Castle in the time of the Albigeois, and depended upon the Bishops of Toulouse,
one of whom, named Is^rne gave it to Florard, Abbot of S. Pons de Tomieres, on
condition that he should found there a Priory of regular Canons of S. Austin,
under the name of S. Alain, as also he did. This Monastery was afterward
erected into a Bishopric in 1318, and Roger of Armagnac was its first Prelate.
It contains 69 Parishes. In 1213, the Papists held there a Synod against Peter
of Arragon, who maintained the Albigeois.

Puy-Laurens, Podium Laurentii, that is the Mountain of Laurence is situated
upon a Hill 9 Miles South-East of La Vaur, and 11 Leagues of Toulouse. It had
formerly the Title of a Duchy, and some years before the last Persecution of
the Protestants, their Academy of Montauban had been transferred thither, both
to make 'em uneasy, and to depress the luster of Montauban. However they had
here of late a famous Professor of Divinity -- Martel, who answered the method
of Cardinal de Richelieu. William of Puy-Laurens, Chaplain to Raymond the young
Count of Toulouse, who has written a Chronicle, wherein he makes the History of
the Albigeois, was a Native of this Town. But this Chronicle is now
extraordinary rare, the Papists having used all endeavors to suppress it,
because he is too sincere in relating the Opinions and behavior of these
pretended Heretics.

Soreze, Soricinium, or Saricinium, seems to have its name from the multitude
of Mice Sorices, that infested the Country, according to Adrian de Valois, or
rather from the small River S^r, upon which it lies 7 Leagues South of La Vaur.
It has a very ancient Abbey of S. Bennet's Order, mentioned in a Decree of
Lewis the Meek, as one of them that were bound to say Prayers for the
Emperor's welfare.

The other most remarkable places in this Diocese are, Viterbe Viterbium, S.
Pol separated from Lamiate another Town in Albigeois, by the Agout,
Rocque-Vidal, Semalens, Vuviers, Souarz, la Bruguere, Massagnet, Arsons, S.
Alby, Mazamet, Aupoutz Altus-pullus.

Of Lauragais.
THE Country of Lauragais, Lauriacensis, or Lauracensis Pagus, takes its name
from the Village Laurac Lauriacum, near the source of the Little Lers, or
according to others, who spell it l'Auraguais from the Town and Barony of
Auriac, which is said to have been its Capital, and lies 8 Leagues South-East
of Toulouse. In 1258, this Country belonged to James King of Arragon, who
yielded it to the French King Lewis IX. but in 1478, Lewis XI. erected it into
a County, and gave it to Bertrand of La Tour Count of Auvergne. Afterward it
fell by Inheritance to Catherine of Medicis Wife to the French King Henry II.
and then to Queen Margaret their Daughter, who made a gift of it to Lewis XIII.
Dauphin of France, on condition that it should for ever remain united to the
Crown.

Lauraguais abounds in Pastel or Dyers-Wood, which is the chief Trade of the
Country; as likewise in quails better than those of Italy, in July, August, and
September. Castelnaudary, Castrum novum Arii, upon the Fresquel, 12 Leagues
South-East of Toulouse is accounted the Capital. It Is situated in a fruitful
Soil, and the Manufacture of Woolen-Cloaths contributes much to its Riches. It
has a Presidial erected by Henry II. in 1553, in behalf of his Queen Countess
of Lauraguais. Some twenty years ago, Lewis XIV. to vex the Protestants
transferred thither from Castres, their Chamber of the Edict. It was in the
Plains of Castelnaudary that the Marshall of Schomberg defeated the Troops of
the Duke of Orleance, on the 1. of September 1632, and took Prisoner the Duke
of Montmorency, who was since Beheaded at Toulouse.

S. Papoul, S. Pappulus, or S. Pappolus, on the source of the small River
Lampt, 3 Miles North-East of Castelnaudary, and 13 Leagues South-East of
Toulouse. It was formerly a famous Monastery, mentioned in the Constitution of
the Emperor Lewis the Meek in 817, and since erected into a Bishopric
Suffragan to Toulouse, by Pope John XXII. The Town is not very large, and the
whole Diocese has but 45 Parishes.

The other places of this Diocese are, Ville-Franche de l'Auraguais, which
Sanson puts in the Diocese of Toulouse, but De Valois under this Bishopric, le
Mas Saints Puelles, Mansum S. ^uellarum, Vignonet, Avenio Castrum,
Villepeinte. Fagnaux is reck'ned in Lauraguais, but depends on the Bishop of
Mirepoix. It Is called in Latin Fanum Jovis, Fan-jaux from a renowned Temple of
Jupiter that was built there.

Of Albigeois.
THis Country comprehending the Diocese of Alby and Castres, has those of S.
Pons, Carcassonne, and La vaur on the South and South-West, those of Montauban,
Cahors and Rodez on the North and North-West, and those of Vabres, Lodeve and
Beziers on the East, and reaches 17 or 18 Leagues East and West, and 21 North
and South. Du Chesne takes its ancient Inhabitants for the Helvii of Caesar,
who are rather those of Vivarais, and Sanson for the Fleutheres or Heleutheres,
subject to the Auvergnats, as well as those of Quercy, Gevaudan and Velay;
adding withal that the Cambolectri, whom Pliny places in Aquitania, inhabited
the Diocese of Alby, and the Cambolectri Atlantici the Diocese of Castres. But
as he grounds his conjectures upon no certain foundation, so they are rejected
by De Valois. We have already seen that the Tectosages filled up all the
Western part of Languedoc to the very Cevennes and the Mediterranean Sea, and
consequently that the Albigeois might well be the ancient Tolistobogii or
Trocmi, Neighbors, Allies, or Subjects to the Tectosages.

I have observed in the first part of this Book, how the Disciples of
Vigilantius, spread in Guyenne and Languedoc, were for a long time as a Bank,
that stopped the overflowing superstition. But when this Torrent grew so
strong, that this Barrier proved too weak, God raised, new Defensors to his
Church. At the beginning of the XII. Century, Peter of Bruys, a Native of
Dauphine, Preached and writ successfully against the prevailing Errors, and was
happily seconded by Henry, a Monk of Toulouse. The Papists had recourse to
their usual Arms, Fire and Sword, by which means they both got the Crown of
Martyrdom. But their Blood proved, as well as that of the first Christians, the
Seed of the true Church; so that after the Dispersion of Valdo's Disciples
about 1160, some of^^em retiring in those parts, they were kindly received. The
vulgar had so good an Opinion of them, that they commonly called them les Bons
Hommes; the Good Men, and even Raym^^d the old Count of Toulouse, Peter King of
Arragon, the Counts of Foix, Comminges and the Viscounts of Bearn spoused their
Cause. And as Error and Vice are always timorous, so the Popes began to fear
that their fatal day was come, and published a Croisade against those pretended
Heretics, as though they had been Heathens or Mahometans. The Albigeois, under
the Wings of their Lords and Protectors defended themselves almost an Age, but
at last they were over-pow'red by the number, the French King's catching hold
of that opportunity, to deprive those petty Sovereigns of their Principalities.
Then it was that such as had escaped the Sword in the Field of Battle, fell in
the bloody hands of the Inquisitors, who at long run made an end of them;
however not so, as wholly to root the seeds of the truth out of their heart,
which sprouted out again, when our first Reformers appeared in the last Age;
for then the Provinces of Languedoc and Guienne, the ancient Seat of the
Albigeois, produced more Converts than all the others of France taken together.

We have hardly any Account of the Albigeois, then by such as were their sworn
Enemies, Accusers, or rather Executioners; so that upon the plain confession of
Popish Authors, that the Albigeois held almost all the same Doctrines with the
Protestants, and that they rejected the same Superstitions, for which the last
are still divided from the Church of Rome, we might look as Calumnies some
Manichean Tenets ascribed to them, as to deny the Divinity of the Old
Testament, to admit a good and a bad Principle, etc. But to clear these
Christian Hero's for ever, we have but to observe that the Manicheans having
been banished the East by the Greek Emperors, they first spread themselves
into Germany; thence they passed into Italy and France, where meeting with a
People averse from Persecution, they* readily crept and skulk'd amongst them;
and the malicious Inquisitors catching some of these Heretics, took hold of
this occasion to defame the true Albigeois. The R. D. Allix has given such
incontestable proofs of these Matters of Fact, that I cannot imagine that a
Roman Catholic of any sincerity will ever renew such notorious Calumnies.

ALBY, Albia or Albiga Capital of this Country lies upon the River Ta^n, 17
Leagues North-East of Toulouse, and 14 South-East of Montauban. Its Foundation
and Antiquity are unknown, for no ancient Geographer remembers it, and the
first mention of it that De Valois could find is in an old Notice of the
Gauls, which puts Civitus Albiensum in the fourth place among the 8 Cities of
the first Aquitain, though some of latter date name it but the seventh in
Order. Gregory of Tours testifies that one Salvius was Bishop of Alby, under
the Children of Clovis, and another called Sabinus subscribed to the Council of
Agde in 506. but whether S. Clair a Martyr planted there Christianity* and was
the first Bishop of that Town is uncertain. Charlemaign having erected Aqui^^^^
into a Kingdom, on behalf of Lewis the Meek his Son, established Counts in the
Principal Cities, who together with the Bishops were to be the young Prince's
Counselors, and Aimoin was named the first Count of Alby. All these Counts
having made themselves Sovereigns, during the decay of the French Monarchy; the
Estate of the Counts of Alby passed by marriage into the House of Toulouse, and
then both returned to the French Kings, by the (...) I have hinted speaking of
Languedoc. Alby has been a long time a Suffragan to Bour^^^ and one of the
richest Bishoprics in France* being about 50000 Crowns worth; but (...) it was
made a Metropolitan by Pope ^^cent XI. in behalf of Hyacinthe Serroni, a Roman
Gentleman, and the Dioceses of Rodez, Castrer, Cahors, Vabres and Mende,
detached from Bourges, to whose Prelate has been given a recompense of some
additional Revenues. The Archbishop of Alby is still Lord temporal of that
City, and the King has but there a Viguier for his Chief Justice. The Cathedral
under the name of S. Cecile has one of the finest Quires in that Kingdom.

The other Towns or considerable Buroughs of this Diocese, are Pens upon the
Aveyrou, Cords, Monestier, and Caramous upon the Ceron, Pampelone upon the
Biaur, Gaulene, and Valence near the source of the Ceron; Tais, Maillat,
Ville-neuve, Cajousac, Castelnau de Montmirail, and Peucelsy upon the Vere;
Rabasteins, l'Isle, Gaillac, la Bastide de Lenis, Lescure and Trebas upon the
Tarn on the North side; Grioussens, Cadelens, Denat, Albain on the South of
that River, Lombers on the Assou, Realmont on the Dadou, etc. Gaillac is famous
for its white Wines, whose Drunkenness is not felt but an hour after the
Debauch. At Rabasteins was fought a memorable Battle between the Duke of Berri,
and the Count of Foix, in 1381.

Castres, the second Bishopric contained in Albigeois, is seated on the Agout
nine Leagues South of Alby, and 16 East of Toulouse. Both the Town and the
Bishopric are new, for we find no mention of the Town in ancient Geographers;
only the Historians of the Albigenses, as Peter the Monk mention it as an
illustrious Castle, under the name of Castra, and as the head of the Country of
Albigeois. As to the Bishopric it was erected by Pope John XXII. in 1317,
instead of the Abbey of S. Vincent, whose body was secretly conveyed from
Valence in Spain hitherto, by Audald a Monk of Gascony in 858, if we believe
Aimoin-Castres has still the name of a County, and has been possessed under that
Title by the Counts of Mountfort, and then by those of Armagnac; the last of
whom James of Armagnac was behead^d under Lewis XI. in 1417. This King gave ^t
to one Bouffil of Juges his Lieutenant in R^us^^^n, but under Francis I. it was
reunited to the French Crown. In the time of its Counts, Castres had a
Seneschal Comtal, and a Judge of Appeals, but now all its Officers of Justice
are resorting to the Seneschalship of Carcassonne. The French King Henry IV.
had established there ^ Chamber of the Edict or a Sovereign Court, consisting
of Counselors, one half Protestants and the other half Roman Catholics; but
^ewis XIV. transferred it to Castelnaudary, and then abolished it with all the
others in 1679. under pretense of uniting it to the Parliament of Toulouse.
This Town divided into two parts by ^he River Agout, was taken by the Reformed
^ 1567, and is very much known by the Ma^^factory of Crapes. It has several
Churches and Monasteries, especially a Chartreuse, or Convent of Carthusians
hard by the City. The Bishop's Palace is a very sumptuous Building. There is a
great huge Rock called the Rock of Lu^el, two Leagues from Castres, that is
worth ta^ing notice of, if it be true what I am assured ^y Mr. Boyer a
Gentleman of parts, and a N^^^re of that Country, viz. that it may b^ (...) ^y
any ones Hand or Finger, though it st^^^^ ^^movable, when Carts and Coaches go
(...) it, (...) it lies under a Bridge.

I shall here subjoyn another observation communicated to me, by that ingenious
promoter of Learning Sir Theodore de Vaux, Physician to the Late King Charles
II. Fellow of the Royal Society, concerning the Mountain of the Priapes as they
call it, that lies betwixt Castre^ and Carcassone, much out of the road: It is
^ little Hill amongst other Hills, where the Stones are shaped like Men's Yards,
with two Stones perfectly made; some great like those o^ big Men, some like
Boys, and some like Children We gathered, said he, amongst us above 40 o^ them,
some of which I gave during my Travels in sundry places, to the curious to pu^
them into their Closet of Rarities. Amongs^ others I presented Caualier del
Puzzo a Virtuos^ of Rome, with one very much resembling the natural parts of a
Man of middle Age. These Stones being broken, there is a vein of Crist^ in the
midst. I gave one to King Charles I^ not so big as that at Rome, but of as
exact shape. I had many of them at Padoa, bu^ our Maid that found them on a
Shelf flu^^ some of them away, and others she broke thinking we had put them
there to laugh a^ her; one broken I gave to the Royal Society with one that is
made like a Woman's thin^ the earth round about this place is a Sand lik^ blood
almost. The reason of this I leave to Ph^losophers; observing only that the
Inhabitan^ use to ascribe it to a Celestial Influence, for want of a more
proper cause. So far my wo^thy Friend, whose relation I have inserte^ here the
rather, that I never saw nor hear^ before of any thing like it.

Three Leagues North-West of Castres lies the small Town of Lautrec, with a
ruined Castle, and the Title of a Viscounty, that has been born by the Counts
of Foix, and since by several illustrious Families in Languedoc. This Town is
seated upon a Mountain that produces excellent Wines, and the Chapter of S.
Peter of Burlas has been transferred thither.

The other places are, Briateste, Graulhet, and Mondragon upon the Dadou,
Venais, S. Germier, and Roque-courbe near Castres, Brassac, and Castelnau de
Brassac; Pierre-Seguade, Viannes and La Caune upon the Gigeou, La Salvetat,
Boissesson de Murviez, and S. Gervais.

Of the County of Foix.
THis County comprehending the Dioceses of Rieux, Pamiez, and Mirepoix, has
that of Toulouse on the North, those of S. Papoul, Carcassonne, and Alet on the
East, part of Catalogne on the South, and the Counties of Conserans and
Comminges on the West. It reaches 20 Leagues South and North from Lavet
Coronat, near the source of the Arriegue, to its mixing with the Lers, between
Sabaudun and Calmont, and 14 or 16 East and West. This Country has had its
particular Counts issued from the Earls of Carcassonne during six Ages. Bernard
I. if we believe the Learned De Marca, was the first Count of Foix in 1012.
Raimond Roger the Sixth, in order took the part of the Albigeois, about the
beginning of the XIII. Century. It Is reported that as in a conference, betwixt
the Roman and these true Catholics, the Sister of the Count would speak in
behalf of the last, a rough Monk Stephen of Minia told her most uncivilly, that
She ought to go and spin from her distaff, and not to meddle with Religious
Matters, whereupon the ingenious Princess replied that the very Stones will
speak where Men keep an unworthy silence, and that she must needs discharge a
Duty, which he was either unable or unwilling to perform. The zealous Count
lost a great part of his Estate in this quarrel; but his Son Roger Bernard II.
to preserve the rest, reconciled himself to the Church of Rome, and made Peace
with the French King Lewis IX. in 1246. The Counts of Foix became afterward
more powerful, and acquired either by Marriage or Inheritance the Viscounties
of Bearn and Chastelbon, the Lordships of Grailly and Albret, and even the
Kingdom of Navarr, till all these Dominions and Estates past into the House of
France, by the coming of Henry IV. to that Crown. This County has several
Quarries of fine Marble and some Silver Mines.

FOIX upon the Arriegue, Fuxum has the Title of a County and Peerdom, erected
by Charles VII. in behalf of Gaston of Foix, in 1458. It has an election, and
is the Seat of a Seneschal, and of the Estates of the Province. It lies near
the Pyrenean Mountains, 17 Leagues South of Toulouse, and resorts for the
spiritual to the Bishop of Pamiers.

Pamiers, Apamia, upon the same River, 4 Leagues North of Foix, and 13 South of
Toulouse, was anciently a Town called Fredelac, where the Counts of
Carcassonne, found^d in the 8 Age an Abbey of Regular Canons of S. Austin, under
the name of S. Antonia. De Valois esteems him to be the same who has written an
Itinerary, or a Journal of his Travels from France to the Holy Land through
Italy; but at the same time he quotes an ancient Martyrology, wherein this S.
Antonin is said to have suffered Martyrdom at Pamiers by the Heathens, V. Nonas
Sept. or the 2. of September, but the Year is not mentioned; so that the whole
remains uncertain. Sure it is, that this Towr had already a considerable
Castle, in the time of the Albigeois, whose Historians call it Apamia and
Apamiae, that in 1149, Roger Bernard Count of Foix, presented the Abbots of S.
Antonin, with the Town and Castle of Pamiers, and that in 1296 Pope Boniface
VIII. erected this Abbey into a Bishopric, in behalf of Bernard Saisseti the
Abbot. The French King Philip the Fair did not like this election, and gave the
Bishopric to one Lewis of Provence, who died in 1298: After his death he
consented to the reinstallation of Saisseti; but was so incensed at a Speech
this Prelate made to him, that he caused him to be arrested in 1301, and put
under the guard of its Metropolitan the Archbishop of Narbonne, who was then at
Court. Pope Boniface took fire at it, sent John of Normandy Archdeacon of
Narbonne to get Saisseti at Liberty; but he was denied it, and the Holy
Father's Thunderbolts despised; so that after Boniface's death the imprisoned
Prelate was fain to beg the King's pardon, upon which he was released. Some
years ago, a late Bishop of Pamiers has been a great Confessor of Jansenism,
and of free Elections, maintaining the Rights of his Church under the
Protection of Pope Innocent XI. against Lewis XIV. and the Jesuits. This Town
was submitted to the new Archbishop of Toulouse, by Pope John XXII. and in the
last Age fell under the Power of the Protestants. It is divided into 6 Wards,
each of which has his Consul or Sheriff.

You have besides in this Diocese the Towns of Mazeres, upon the Lers,
Maceriae, so called from the slight Buildings they were made of at first, as
well as Maizieres in Rhetelois, Maziers or Mazerocles in Ponthieu and Mezieres
en Brenne. It has a ruined Castle which has been sometime the Residence of the
Counts of Foix. Montaut lies 3 Miles South of Mazeres, and 5 North of Pamiers.
Sabaudun or Saverdun, is made up of 4 little Towns, most of them ruined; its
situation is pleasant, and the Earls of Foix have often dwelt in it. Barilles
Vatillae, S. Paul, Tarascon, Castrum Tarasco, different from Tarascon upon the
Rhone, and Acqs from Dax or Acqs upon the Adour, are seated upon the Arriegue.
On the South Side of that River you meet with Chateau-verdun, vic de Soz,
whence the best Iron in France is extracted. Saurac, Castelnau, le Mas d' Azil,
Azilium, or Mansum Azili, with an ancient Abbey of Benedictins, which Du Val
puts in the Diocese of Rieux: Then you find Serberat, les Bordes, Carlac and S.
Ibar.

Mirepoix, Castrum Mirapicis, or de Mirapice, one of the new Bishoprics, lies
upon the Lers 11 Miles South-East of Pamiers, 12 North-East of Foix, and almost
15 South-West of Castel-naudary. In 1210, Simon Count of Montfort took this
Town from the Albigeois, and bestowed it upon Guy Lord of Levi, with the Title
of Marshal of the Faith, whose posterity has ever since enjoyed Mirepoix, and
its Territory, erected first into a Barony, and then into a Marquisate. In
1390. Roger Bernard of Levis yielded to the King of France, one half of the
Jurisdiction he had upon the Castle of this Town and some of its dependencies,
for which he got some other Lands. These Gentlemen pretend to be a kin to the
Blessed Virgin, as issued from the Tribe of Levi; but I do not know how they
prove it.

On this Diocese are farther depending Belpuech, that is Fair Hill, for Puy,
Puech and Pit, signify as much as Mountain or Hill, Laurac, Le Carlat, Fagnaux
Fanum Jovis, Rieucros, Libertat, Leyran, Chalabre, le Peyrat, Mirabel.
Bellestat near the source of the Lers has a Fountain, which ebbs and flows.

Rieux, Rivi, has taken its name from its Situation, on the fall of the Rize
into the Garonne. It is one of the Bishoprics of Pope John XXII's Foundation,
of which Pilefort of Rabastens Cardinal was the first Prelate in 1318. This
Diocese has besides the Town of Fueillans upon the River Touch, with an Abbey
Chief of the Order of Cisteaux, Calers another Abbey of Cisternian Monks, Lezat
of Benedictins, Salangues of Cisternian Nuns. Carbonne, Montesquiou de
Volvestre, S. Sulpice, etc.

CHAP. XIV. Of LOWER LANGUEDOC.
Of the Precinct of Narbonne.
NARBONNOIS, as comprehending the Dioceses of Alet, Narbonne, Carcassonne, and
S. Pons de Tomieres, has Albigeois on the North, the Precinct of Beziers on the
East, the Mediterranean Sea on the South; the County of Foix, and Lauragais on
the West.

Alet, Electa, or Alecta upon the Aude, is both a new Town, and a new
Bishopric, as are most of the others erected to that Dignity by Pope John
XXII. This Pope establish d the Sea of the Prelate to Limoux, in 1317. but it
was transferred hither two years after. Petrarcha seemed not to like these
foundations, when speaking of this Pontise, he says that France still complains
of his dividing many Dioceses, and lodging the new Prelates in unfit places,
whereas before none but great and wealthy Cities enjoyed the Privilege of being
Bishoprics. (Rerum memorand. Lib. II.) Alet lies above 9 Leagues South-East of
Mirepoix, and 15 South-West of Narbonne.

Limoux, two Leagues North-West of Alet upon the same River, is renowned for
its White Wines: It is called Limosum Castrum, because seated in a muddy Soil,
and is often mentioned in the Wars of the Albigeois. As this Diocese Borders on
the Pyrenees, and the County of Foix, so it is most mountainous. De Valois
reckons in it Tonnens, Mazerolles, Ville-Longue, and Montferrand, famous for
its Bathes; but I find none of 'em in Sanson's Maps, and I doubt whether those
this Learned Man perused, were of the best sort. Sanson only mentions
Coustaussa, Quilla, and Bugarach, with two Villages Cauvissan and Arques. As to
Sault Pagus Saltus, which the said De Valois places in this Diocese, it is a
separate Country lying on the South-West, according to Sanson.

NARBONNE, Narbo Martius Decumanorum or Atacinorum, so called, because the
Romans sent thither a Colony out of the tenth Legion, that bore the Surname of
Martial, and that this City is built near the Mouth of the River Aude, Atax.
The first Plantation was made by Licinius C^assus that famous Orator, under the
Consulate of Q. Martius, and M. Porcius Cato in 636 of Rome; wherefore some
Antiquaries derive from the first Consul the Surname of Martius given to
Narbonne; though Ausonius calls it Martie in the Vocative Case, and not Marci,
as he ought to have done, if it came from a Man's name. Julius Caesar sent
thither another Colony, under the conduct of Tiberius Claudius Nero, Father to
the Emperor Tibere, whence this City got the names of Colonia Julia Paterna
Narbo Martius, expressed by these five Letters C. I. P. N. M. in an ancient
Monument. The Roman Proconsuls, Senate, and Emperors took a particular delight
in beautifying Narbonne, and endowing it with fine Privileges. They built there
an Amphitheatre, and a Capitole all of Marble, which subsisted yet in Ausonius
and Sidonius Apollinaris's time, that is in the IV and V Centuries; nay we find
yet mention of it in the XIIIth. Age, though not so precise that we can just
tell in what State it then was: Now it is but a heap of ruins near the King's
Gate, called by the Inhabitants Capdueil.

One may judge of the former magnificence of this City, by the following Verses
of Sidonius Apollinaris.

Salve Narbo potens salubritate,
Qui urbe and rure simul bonus videris,
Muris, Civibus, ambitu, tabernis,
Portis, porticibus, foro, Theatro,
Delubris, Capitoliis, Monetis,
Thermis, Arcubus, Horreis, Macellis,
Pratis, fontibus, insulis, salinis,
Stagnis, flumine, merce, ponte, ponto,
Vnus qui jure venerere Divos.
Lenaeum, Cererem, Palem, Minervam,
Spicis, palmite, pascuis, tapetis.
Well met, mighty healthful Narbonne, thou that art renowned both for thy Town
and Territory, for thy Walls, Citizens, Circuit, Taverns, Gates, Galleries,
Palace, Amphitheatre, Temples, Capitole, Mint, Bathes, Arches, Granaries,
Shambles, Meadows, Fountains, Islands, Salt Pits, Ponds, River, Merchandises,
Bridges and Sea. Thou art the only City that may by right present those Gods
with offrands, Bacchus, Ceres, Pales, Minerve, with Vine-branches, Ears of
Corn, Hay, Tapestries, etc.

Du Chesne adds, that the Romans had built there Aqueducts besides, and erected
public Schools much like to our Universities. We are apt to imagine that the
only design of these Conquerors of the World was to show their Magnificence,
and withal the Greatness and Power of their Empire: But, if I am not mistaken,
these shrewd Politicians had a farther insight. Cicero says, that they had
planted that Colony, as a Watch-Town, and a Rampire, or a Fence of the Roman
People against the Natives: Specula Populi Romani ac propugnaculum istis ipsis
Nationibus oppositum and objectum. And lest the new Inhabitants should contract
too great a familiarity with the ancient, care was taken to raise those of
Roman Original so far above the Gauls, that they should endeavor to keep up
their grandeur by a constant Union with the head of the Empire. Since they had
began to follow this method; we read but of few Rebellions in their new and
yearly conquests, and of a fewer in their Foreign Plantations. Contrariwise
they erected on their side public Monuments of their gratitude to their
Benefactors; such was the Altar our Narbonenses built to Caesar August, after
his Death, and Apotheosis, and the sacrifices they instituted in his honor,
whose Laws were engraven in Capital Letters, on a Marble-table, that is yet
subsisting. The chief of them were that on the 23. of September, the day that
August was proclaimed Emperor, as also on the first of January, and the 7 of
June, three Roman Plebeian Knights, and three Freemen, Libertini Sons to Slaves
made free.
should each of them offer Sacrifices, and furnish the Plantation, and other
Inhabitants with Wine and Frankincense of their own.

Some fabulous Authors pretend that Narbonne was built by a Gaulish King,
called Narbon; but it appears that this name is not much older than the Romans
time; since this Country was anciently inhabited by the Bebryces, a Nation
confining on the Iberians or Spaniards, as Stephanus has it, whose testimony is
confirmed by that of Marcianus, In Periplo Galliae.
who speaks of the Maritime Bebryces, Neighbors to the Ligurians, and the
Grecian Cities of Gaul, that is, to the Coasts of Marseille and Genoa. Rufus
Festus Avienus, describing the Southern Coast of Languedoc, says, that it was
all possessed by the Bebryces, and that Narbonne was then the head of a powerful
Kingdom, which reached according to Ausonius Descr. Ill. Civit.
from Franche-Comte to the Pyrenees, North and South, and from the Cevennes to
Aquitain East, and West. Tzetses in his Commentaries on Lycophron relates out
of Dion, that those who are now called Narbonnesians, had formerly the name of
Bebryces, and that the Pyrenean Mountains, which separate Spain from Gaul
belonged to them; whereupon the Poet Silius Italicus has grounded this Fable,
that Pyrene Daughter to King Bebryx, whom Hercules got with Child, going to
Spain through Gaul, gave her name to these Mountains. It seems that the
Bebryces, who inhabited part of Bithynia were issued from this Gaulish People,
whom this Plantation weakened so much, that the Tectosages mastered their
Country, or made it Tributary, whence it came that in process of time they lost
their ancient Name as well as their Empire; for in Pliny's Age, they were only
known as a part of the Tectosages.

Narbonne remained faithful to the Romans till the utmost decay of the Western
Empire, in 435, that it was besieged by the Goths, under their King Theodoric.
It then made a considerable resistance; but in 462. Count Agrippin its
Governor, envying the prosperous successes of Aegidius, or Gillon Chief
Commander of the Roman Militia in the Gauls, delivered this City into the
Enemies hands. The Goths were content with the demolishing of its Walls, and
preserved its other Monuments of Antiquity; but the barbarous Huns, who took it
some time after, destroyed them all. Notwithstanding, it recovered still part
of its former luster, and when the Saracens took and plundered it, in 732, it
was become again the finest, the most famous, and the Capital of that Country,
if we may believe Aimoin; but Charles Martel, who retook it not long after,
made a greater havoc in all Lower Languedoc than the Enemies themselves.

However of all the mischiefs Narbonne has been exposed to, the most sensible
seems to be the unworthy treatment it received from Simon of Montfort, who by
the help of numerous Croisades, having at last got the better of Raimond Count
of Toulouse, and his Vassals and Confederates, ordered the Inhabitants of
Narb^nne to throw down their own Walls, which they were forced to do for fear
of the worst.

As to the Civil Government, we have hinted how this City was at first the head
of a Kingdom under the Bebryces, then subject to the Tectosages, and afterward
to the Romans, who made it the Capital of, and gave its name to the fourth part
of Gaul, called from hence Gallia Narbonnensis, and since subdivided into 5.
Provinces, the 1 and 2 Narbonnoise, the Viennoise, the Greek Alps, and the
Maritini Alps, that is, all Savoy, Dauphine, Provence, Lower Languedoc,
Roussillon, the Toulousan, and the County of Foix. During the decay of the
French Monarchy, under the second race of their Kings, the Dukes of Septimania,
took upon them the Title of Dukes of Narbonne, as did likewise the Counts of
Toulouse their Successors; but the following Lords of this Town and adjacent
Territories, contented themselves with the Name of Viscounts, which they bore
from 1134 to 1507. that Gaston of Foix last Viscount of Narbonne exchanged it
for other Lands with the French King Lewis XII. his Uncle.

If we believe the Tradition of the most credulous of Roman Catholic Authors,
the Proconsul Sergius Paulus converted by the Apostle of that name, was the
first Preacher of Christianity at Narbonne, and consequently its first Bishop.
But though this Tradition be uncertain, this Church is however of a great
antiquity; and there are plausible proofs, that it has been a Metropolitan from
the time of Constantine the Great in 309. and though the erection of Toulouse
into an Archbishopric, has restrained its Jurisdiction into narrower Limits;
yet it has still ten Suffragans, viz. Beziers, Agde, Lodeve, Maguelonne, now at
Montpellier, Nismes, Vsez, Carcassonne, Elne, now at Perpignan, S. Pons de
Tomieres, and Alet.

This City has been much bigger and larger than it is now, as appears by the
ruins of the Palace of the Gaulish Kings, that are without the Town. However it
is still considerable, especially for its Fortifications, which render it one
of the Keys of France, on this side the Pyrenees. In Pliny's time, it was
seated upon the River Aude, twelve Italian Miles South of the Sea, but is now
nine or ten Miles only distant from it, which shows, that either the Sea has
not gained upon the Land, or that this City has been rebuilt near the Shore. It
is properly the Aude, that goes through Narhonne, and divides it into two
Parts, the City and the Burough, but a Channel drawn from it, called La Robine.
The Cathedral Church under the Name of St. Just, and St. Savior is renowned
for it is Organs, and the Picture of Lazarus rising from the dead. There are 5
Parishes besides, of which the most famous is the Collegiate of St. Paul. The
whole Diocese contains 4 Archdeaconships, that of Narbonne, Corbieres, Le Razes
and Fenouillet, an Abbey of Augustinians, called Our Lady of forty Notre-Dame de
quarante, another of Osternians, under the name of Notre-Dame de la Fon-frede,
Our Lady of the cold Fountain, and several Monasteries. The Palace of the
Archbishop is not that of the Kings of the Wisigoths or Westgoths, which was
demolished in 1451. Hard by, at a place called Pontsorme, are the remains of an
ancient Bridge built by the Romans. The Air hereabouts is not extraordinary
wholesome.

Leucate, Leucata, keeps still its ancient name that was given it, as it seems,
by the Inhabitants of Marseille a Colony of the Phoceans, because of the
whiteness of the steep and naked Rocks wherewith it is environed, for (...)
signifies white and glistering. Round about the Hill, which is the Seat of
Leucate, lies a Pond in the form of a Peninsule; so that this Town is very
strong by Nature. Francis I. built there a Fort to which other Fortifications
having been since added; Serbellon General of the Spaniards besieged it in
vain, and was defeated by the Governor of L^nguedoc, Charles of Schomberg Duke
of Halluyn, September 29 1637.

The other Towns or considerable Buroughs of this Diocese are, Capestan,
Caput-stagni so called, because it is seated at the head of a Pond, wherein the
Aude discharges it self, Colombier, Puy-serguier Podium Sericarium, North-East
of Narbonne; Rieux, Azillac and Lesignan on the North-West; Bages, Peyriac,
Ville-Salce and Sigean on the South, the second and last of these have
Salt Pits; four Leagues and a half North of Narbonne, and five West of Bezuil,
lies a Village named Quarante, at the foot of a Mountain, whence both Towns may
be discovered; which has given occasion to this pleasant equivocation, the one
may see quarante and deux Villes, forty and two Towns. Quarante the name of
that Village signifying forty.

Carcassonne, Carcasso or Carcassum Volcarum Tectosagum, above 13 Leagues West
of Narbonne, and almost 20 South-East of Toulouse. It Is seated upon the River
Aude, which divides into two parts, the Town and the City, both walled in, and
joined by a Stone Bridge, but having each their particular Magistrates and
Government. The City is higher than the Town, and encompassed with a double
Wall, Towers, and deep Moats. It has a Castle with a Garrison kept by the King
in ordinary pay, a Presidial-seat, and the first Seneschalship of the Province.
Both parts of Carcassonne make together a pretty big City, which seems somewhat
ancient, by reason of the old Mss. Acts that are found there, written on the
bark of Trees, on fine Linen and the like stuff; besides the great many old
weapons, Harnesses, and other Warlike Engines that are in its Arsenal. That
part which is called the Town is built along the River, and though most of the
Houses he made of Wood, yet they give a fine prospect, because the Streets are
strait-right, and end at a Square, whence the 4 Gates of the Town may be
discovered. It is surrounded with Bastions and Rampires, that make it capable
of some defense. The Chief Trade of the Inhabitants consists in Box-combs,
Serges, and Clothes, whereof there are several Manufactures. The Bishopric is
not so ancient as the City, for the old Notices of the Gauls do not mention it;
and the first Prelate of Carcassonne that we find upon record, is one Sergius,
who subscribed in that quality to a Council held at Narbonne, in 590, the 4th
year of Recarede King of the Westgoths: Whereas Pliny, Ptolomy, and the Tables
of the Emperor Theodosius speak of the City, whose Cathedral is dedicated to
S. Nazaire. The Gottish Monarchs had extraordinary fortified this Town, in
which they kept their treasure, and as it is pretended the spoils of Rome. The
French besieged it in vain, after they had routed Alaric in 507, but Gontran
King of Orleance, having taken it by intelligence, was forced to retire and
leave it, having received a notable overthrow from King Recarede in 587 or 588.
However the French having at last expelled the Wisigoths beyond the Pyrenees,
became absolute Masters of Carcassonne. The Emperor Charles the Bald gave it to
Bernard II. Count of Toulouse in 871, but it is not certain who were his
Successors till the year 974. that Arnauld Count of Carcassonne was succeeded
by several other during above two Centuries. The extinction of that family, or
the loss of their Sovereignty came from the protection Raymond Roger, the last
Count gave to the Albigeois; for the Croisado's Army incensed at it, besieged
and took Carcassonne in 1209, the Council of Latran approved of, and confirmed
this Usurpation in 1215, and invested Simon of Montfort with the Estates of the
deprived Count. However Amaury his Son not being able to keep his Father's
Conquests, yielded them to the French King Lewis VIII. in 1222, and in 1247
Raimond Trincavel the true Heir and Lord of Carcassonne, as only Son to Raymond
Roger, yielded likewise his lawful pretensions to Lewis IX.

Round about Carcassonne are some other Towns and Buroughs, that make up his
Diocese called le Carcassez, as Montreal, Alzone, Montolieu, Seyssac, Mas de
Cabardes, Penaultier, Trebes, Marseillettes, Montlaur Coffosens, etc.

S. Pons de Tomieres, was but an inconsiderable Village, where Raimond III.
Count of Toulouse founded an Abbey of Benedictins in 937, under the name of S.
Pons, Martyr and Bishop of Cimele or Nice. Thence it was that Raimond took the
Surname of Pons, and that Latin Authors call this Town Pontiopolis as well as
Tomeriae. Pope John XXII. turned this Monastery into a Bishopric, Suffragan to
Narbonne in 1318, and the Monks were made Secular Canons in 1625. Its Prelate
is Lord of the Town, which is neither big nor thick inhabited; but has this
considerable, that it lies near the Spring of a River called La jaur, which at
its very source is so great as to move several Mills, and having washed diverse
Villages discharges it self into the Orb. S. Pons de Tomieres stands almost 11
Leagues North-West of Narbonne, and 12 of Carcassonne. Its Diocese comprehends
the Towns or Buroughs of La Bastide, S. Amant de Valtoret, Angles, Olargues,
La Voute, Cessenon, S. Chignan de la Corn, Creuzy, Aygues-vives, La Caumelle,
Menerbe, Ferralz, etc.

Of the Precinct of Beziers.
THE Bezares considered as comprehending the Dioceses of Beziers, Agde and
Lodeve, has those of Montpellier and Nismes on the East, those of Castres, St.
Pons and Narbonne on the West, the Mediteranean Sea on the South, and the
Mountains of Cevennes and Rouergue on the North. It reaches about 15 Leagues
East and West, and 17 North and South.

BEZIERS, Beterae, Biterae or Bliterae Septumanorum, five Miles North of the
Sea, and six Leagues North-East of Narbonne, is one of the biggest and best
peopled Cities in Languedoc, seated upon a Hill of difficult access, whose foot
is washed by the River Orb. This City is very ancient, and mentioned by
Strabo, Pliny, Ptolomy and others, but the time of his foundation is uncertain:
Only we know that it was a Roman Colony in Julius Caesar's time, since repaired
and increased by Tiberius, who built there two Temples, one to Augustus, and
the other to Livia. It kept its luster under the Romans, and even under the
Goths, tho they ruined its most sumptuous Buildings; but in 736, the Saracens
having taken it, Charles Martel, who retook it the foll^wing year, razed it to
the Ground, lest it should serve for a Nest to these Mahumetans. The
Inhabitants repaired it soon after, and it began to flourish again under Pepin,
Charlemaign, and their Successors, and had Viscounts of its own during the
decay of the French Monarchy, whose Estate being united by Marriage to that of
the Counts of Carcassonne fell under the power of the Croisado in 1209, who
took the Town, and killed 10000 of its Citizens: Some years after, in 1222 and
1247, it fell to the share of the French Kings, by the means I have observed,
speaking of Carcassonne. The learned Holstenius, in his Notes on Ortelius, and
on Stephanus pretends, that Beterrae is the true name of Beziers, because of an
ancient Medal or piece of Money found in 1629. at Murvieil, three Leagues North
West of Beziers, with this Inscription BHTHPPATON. Beziers is the first
Suffragan of Narbonne, since the erection of Toulouse into an Archbishopric,
and Aphrodisius is accounted its first Prelate, under whose Name was an Abbey,
that has been turned into Secular Prebends. There is still another of
Augustinians, bearing the Name of St. James, and the Cathedral Church that of
S. Nazaire. The Arians held here a Council in 356, whose Acts are now lost, and
the only notice we have of them is by the Works of S. Hilaire, who making bold
to accuse the Heads of that Party, they prevailed with the Emperor Constantius
to have him banished. There are likewise some remains of an Amphitheatre, and a
Citadel, that was demolished in 1636. The Streets of Beziers are fine and
broad; the Bishop's Palace has a very fine Prospect upon the neighboring
Campaign, and the Townhouse a high Tower. The Jesuit's College is esteemed
for a sumptuous Gate; but much more for a Picture, so naturally representing a
bursting Wall, that several of ^he most curious observers have mistaken it for
^eal Cracks. The Trade of Beziers is somewhat considerable, but the roughness
of the Sea, and the Banks that lie all along the Coast do not al^ow great
Merchantmen to approach the Shore, and they are only small Boats, which can
enter unto the Graus.

The Diocese of Beziers contains besides the Capital, the following Towns or
Buroughs; Ville-neuve la Cremade, Murvieil, Magalaz, St. Laurent, Fougeres,
Colombiers, Bec-de-Rioux, St. Gervais, Lunaz, etc.

AGDE, Agatha Massiliensium, built by the ^hoceans of Marseille, as Strabo, and
its Name ^f Greek Original testify, lies on the mouth of the Eraut Arauris, a
League South of the Sea, another West of the Bull's Pond, Etang de Thau, and
six South-East of Beziers. Stephanus calls ^ a Town or a Colony of the
Ligurians, that is the Genoese, or of the Celtes, that is the Tran^^lpine
Gauls. It Is first name was (...), that is Good-fortune, if we believe
Timost^enes a Greek Author, perhaps because of some advantage the Phoceans got
over the Inhabitants, when they were planting this Colony. It was subject to
its founders, till Julius Caesar deprived the Massilians of all their
Dominions, leav^ng them nothing but their own Liberty. Agde, as well as Beziers
are reckoned by the ancient ^eographers in the Country of the Tectosages.
Ptolomy speaks of two Islands near Agde, the ^^st of which, he calls Agathe, as
well as the ^^wn, and the second Blasco. As to the last, (...) undoubtedly
Brescou, a small Isle in the Sea near Cape d' Agde, two Leagues South of that
City, and the first may be another formed by the two Arms of the Eraut, falling
into Grau^ d' Agde, West over against it. In 506, Alari^ King of the West-Goths
allowed the Catholic Bishops of his Dominions to assemble in Council at Agde,
as they did in the Church o^ S. Andrews, where they made 71 Canons concerning
Ecclesiastical Discipline, to which Sophronius subscribed as Bishop of Agde.
The Foundation of this Bishopric seems not to be much elder; for in a Notice
of the Gauls under the Empire of Honorius, there is no mention o^ Agde. Its
Cathedral under the name of S. Stephen has 12 Canons, whereof 4 are dignified
with the Titles of Archdeacon, Sexton, Precentor, and Chamberlain. The Town is
no^ very big, but Rich and Trading; especially since the Haven of Brescou has
been repaired, s^ that Merchantmen can now come pretty nea^ Agde, and Boats
somewhat large enter into the Mouth of the River, where they exchange several
Commodities for the Wines of the Country. Agde has had its own Viscounts, whos^
Estate fell to the share of those of Nismes and Carcassonne. In 1187,
Bernard-Atton, Son to ^ Viscount of Nismes, presented the Bishop o^ Agde with
the Viscounty of it.

Five Miles North of Agde, near the fall o^ the River Touque into the Eraut,
lies the Tow^ of S. Tiberi, or S. Tubery, called Araura or C^sero, in the
Itinerary of Antonin, with an ancient Abbey of Benedictins. It has its nam^ from
one Tiberius, who together with Modestu^ and Florentia, got here the Crown of
Martyrdom, under Diocletian and Maximian.

Two Leagues more Northwards upon the Eraut, lies the Town of Pesenas,
Piscenae, so called from the many Fish Ponds, that were round about it in the
Romans time. This. Town is renowned for its Fairs, and for its Women that are
said to yield to none of that Country in well breeding and comeliness, but to
those of Montpellier. The late Governors of Languedoc, as the Duke of
Montmorency, and the Prince of Conti, have kept here their ordinary Residence,
and the States of the Province have been consequently held here, which has much
contributed to the enriching and beautifying of this Town.

The other places of this Diocese are, Marseillan, Florensac, Castelnau,
Montagnac, Le Pouget, Gignac, Ville-Magne, Loupian, and Me^e the Mesua of
Pomponius Mela; tho the Island he speaks of, seems rather to be Lates.

Lodeve, seated between Mountains near the meeting of the Rivers Solondre and
Lergue, not far from the Cevennes, and the Borders of Ro^^rgue and Gevaudan,
lies almost 9 Leagues North of Pesenas, and 13 of Agde. Its ancient name in
Latin is Forum-Neronis, and then Leu^eva both known to Pliny, and its Bishop
kept already the 4th or 5th rank among the Suffragans of Narbonne, at the
beginning of the 5th Century. Lodeve is not now very big, for it has suffered
several devastations during the Wars of the Goths, then of the Albigeois, and
lastly during the Civil Wars between the Pr^testants ^^d Roman Catholics, and
the Duke of Montmorency took it in 1585. This Town had formerly the Title of a
Viscounty; which one of its Prelates Raimond Guilhen Brother to the Lord of
Montpellier bought off from Viscount Geldin, whence it comes that the Bishops
of Lodeve are Lords of it; appoint the Magistrates and take the Title of Counts
of Montbrun, a Castle near it. And it is asserted that 800 Noblemen depended on,
and made homage of their Lands to this Prelate, who on this account was
Sirnam'd the Noble. Bernard Gui and John Plantavit de la Pause Bishops of
Lodeve, have published Chronicles of their Church, Denis Briconnet and Francis
Bosquet are likewise in the number of Authors.

The Diocese of Lodeve comprehends besides, the Towns or Buroughs of Las
Ribs, S. Michel, Ganges, Brisac, S. Jean de Buege, S. Guillem ley Desert,
with a famous Abbey of Benedictins founded by one of the Ancestors of the
Princes of Orange, Mont-Peyroux, S. Jean de Foz, S. Andre, Clermont de Lodeve
and Canet.

Of the Precinct of Nismes.
THis Precinct is not near so great as the ancient Territories of the Volcae
Arecomici, who extended themselves through the Dioceses of Montpellier, Nismes,
Vzes and Lodeve, enjoyed the Town of Pezenas, and even some Lands beyond the
Rhone. Now it is restrained within the Episcopal Jurisdiction of Montpellier
and Nismes, and has the district of Beziers on the West, Gevaudan and Vivarais
on the North and North-East, the Rhone on the East, and the Sea on the South.
Its greatest length from Frontignan on the Pond of Maguelonne to the source of
the Eraut, is 17 Leagues North and South, and its greatest breadth from
Beaucaire on the Rhone to Anagne on the Eraut 22 Leagues East and West; but in
some places it is so very tarrow, that it has hardly 4 or 5 Leagues.

Montpellier, 3 Leagues South of the Sea, 13 East of Pesenas, and 14 North-East
of Agde, is called in Latin Mons-pessulus, Mons-pessulanus, Mons-peslerius, and
Mons-puellaris; but every one may see that these are not old Latin names; and
likewise this Town is hardly known in History, since 600 years, though it be
now the biggest and richest in Languedoc after Toulouse. It is seated upon a
Hill, whose foot is washed by the small River Lez, which receives there another
Rivulet called Merdanson, after it has served to the uses of the Town. The
original of Montpellier is related thus. There was formerly a strong and
considerable City called Maguelonne, Magalo, in a Gulf, named by Pliny,
Laterna, and by the French, l'Etang du Tau, de Lates, or de Perraut. The
foundation of Maguelonne is uncertain, for tho the Coast of Lower Languedoc has
been sometime in the power of the Marseillois, and Stephanus mentions Alonis as
an Island belonging to them, whose Inhabitants were called Alonites, yet having
no other testimony, a small and far fetched resemblance of names can scarce
prove them to be one and the same. However it be, sure it is, that Maguelonne
was an Episcopal City in the 5th and 6th Centuries, and a famous Seaport too,
which was the cause of its ruin: For after the Saracens had conquered Spain,
they spread themselves in Lower Languedoc, in 730, and threatened the whole
Kingdom of France, with a Barbarian Invasion, when they were utterly routed by
Charles Martel near Tours. As this great Captain had observed that they
commonly landed at Maguelonne; when it had retaken this Town in 736, he razed
it to the very ground, and transferred the Episcopal See to Soustancion,
Sextatio, almost a Mile East of Montpellier. Soustancion is mentioned in the
Geographical Tables of the Emperor Theodose, and in the Travels of Aethicus;
but the Inhabitants finding the Situation of the place, where now Montpellier
lies more convenient, and the Air sweeter, began to build there. Thus the new
Village increased by degrees, during 300 Years, that the B. of Maguelonne kept
their Seat at Soustancion. But in 1060, Arnauld Julian, one of these Prelates,
raised up the Walls of Maguel^nne, fortified them with Towers, and the Haven,
where the Saracens used to land being stopped, built another in a more
convenient place. Before this the Governor of Maguelonne had retired to a
place called now Mauguio, where he built a Castle under the name of Melgueil,
and having usurped the Sovereignty of his Government during the troubles of the
French Monarchy, he took upon him the Title of Count of Melgueil and
Soustancion, and coined a kind of small Money called the Melgoris pence. The
Estates of these Counts passed in 1172 into the House of Toulouse, by the
Marriage of Ermessende their Heiress with Raymond VI. Surnamed the Old, and was
confiscated upon his Son by Pope Innocent III. and the Council of Latran, in
1215.

In the mean while, Montpellier increased apace; for it appears by a passage of
S. Bernard Abbot of Clairvaux, that there was already a School or Seminary of
Physicians, in 1155; and in 1156, we find mention of its Baths, which were
farmed by the Lords of that Town, as being of a considerable Revenue. However
the first Institution of its University is commonly ascribed to the Disciples
of Averroes and Avicenne in 1196, and its perfect establishment is said to have
been made but in 1220. About this time the Lords of Montpellier were in great
esteem. This Lordship was first detached from the Patrimony of the Counts of
Melgueil to be the Portion of Eustorgia, a Daughter of that House: She had a
Son called Fulcran, who became Bishop of Lodeve, and two Daughters, who
bequeathed their Estates to the Church of Maguelonne in 975. These Prelates
sold Montpellier to a Gentleman named Gui, on condition that he should keep it
as a Fee of the Church, and defend it against the Saracens. The French Kings,
and the succeeding Bishops of Maguelonne confirmed this gift or sale, so that
Montpellier remained to his Posterity; who because of the increase of their
Town, and the consideration it came to be in, allied themselves with very
illustrious Houses, as the Kings of Jerusalem and of Aragon, the Dukes of
Burgundy, and the Counts of Foix, and became at last Kings of Majorca. But this
small Kingdom was the ruin of their Patrimonial Estate; for James III. King of
Majorca, and Lord of Montpellier, having been deprived of his Realm by Peter of
Arragon his Brother in Law, was compelled by want and misery, to sell his
Lordship to the French King Philip of Valois in 1349.

Physic has the precedence in the University of Montpellier, yet both parts of
the Law are taught in one of its Colleges, by four Royal Professors, with power
of making Licentiates and Doctors. There are besides a generality of the King's
Treasurers, a Court of Aides, a Chamber of Accounts, a Mint, and a
Presidial-seat. Montpellier was one of the Towns of security, which Henry IV.
had granted to the Prot^stants; but Lewis XIII. designing the ruin of this part
of his Subjects, forced them by Arms to surrender this pledge of his
protection, and took this City after a long Siege and a vigorous defense, in
the Month of October 1622. Then it was that the Roman Catholics got again into
their hands the Cathedral of S. Peter, for the Bishopric of Maguelonne had
been transferred thither in 1536, with the consent of Pope Paul III.
Soustancion being now but a ruined Village. However they were still fewer in
number, and have been so till this last Persecution. Montpellier is governed by
six Consuls or Sheriffs, who are also Viguiers or Baylies of the Town, and have
a great attendance. The Merchants have likewise their Consuls, under the came
of Consuls of the Sea, to distinguish 'em from the Sheriffs, called Consuls
Majours. There is a particular Court for Debts, whose Judge, surnamed of the
little Seal, has jurisdiction over them, who submit to him by contract. Besides
the University, the Churches, and the Palace of the Justice; there are other
Buildings worthy to be taken notice of; as the Royal College for Humane
Learning, the Citadel, raised since the taking of Montpellier from the
Protestants, and flanked with four Bastions, two within and two without the
Town: Near to its Wall is the Royal Garden of Simp^es, extraordinary well kept
and furnished. The Ceremonies used in taking the degree of Doctor in Physic is
worth seeing, were it only for their putting seven times on and off the Back of
the new Doctor, the old Gown of Rabelais. The Confection of Alkermes is
likewise made in a solemn manner, before the Magistrate, and one of the
Professors of Physic. Their Triacle is in as great esteem as that of Venice,
and their Powders of Cypre, Queen of Hungary's Waters, Essences, and
Scent-waters are vended through al^ Europe. The Inhabitants of Montpellier are
also famous for making Verdegreese, whitening Wax, working upon Silk with Mills
and severa^ other Manufactures. Add to this, that their Soil is one of the
best, and the Air one of the wholsomest in France.

Lates, mentioned by Pomponius Mela, under the name of Castellum Latara, and by
more modern Authors under those of Castrum de Latis, and Castrum de Palude, is
seated in an Island made by the Mouth of the Lez, Ledum, which discharges it
self into a great Pond called by Pliny Laterna, and by Mela Stagnum Volcarum.
This Island lies but a Mile South of Montpellier, and is reck'ned its Haven. A
League more Westwards on the Mouth of the Caulazon, lies the Town of
Ville-neuve, over against Magueloune, and 4 Leagues South-West, upon the same
Lake or Pond of Lates, the Town of Frontignan so famous for its Muscadine
Wines. De Valois takes it for the Forum Domitii of the Ancients, so called from
Cn. Domitius Aenobarly, who having vanquished the Allobroges and Auvergnats,
was carried in triumph upon an Elephant, through the whole Province. Three
Miles North-West you meet with the small Town of Balaruc renowned for its
Bathes. Lunel, Lunate 5 Leagues East of Montpellier gives its Name to a Bridge
upon the Vidourle, over against the Town. It has a Monastery under the Name of
S. Peter, but is more renowned for being the Birthplace of a Learned Jew Rabbi
Solomon, who took from thence the Surname of Jarchi. The other places of this
Diocese are, Montferrand, Murvieil, Pignan, Fabregues Sanson mentions a great
many other, but he marks them all for Villages.

NISMES, Nemausus Volcarum Arecomicorum, lies seven Leagues North-East of
Arles, and ten and a half North-West of Montpellier, in a fertile Plain,
overshadowed with Fruit Trees, and at the foot of Hills covered with Vineyards.
It Is a very ancient City, though the time of its foundation be uncertain.
Stephanus and Suidas after him ascribe it to one Nemausus of Hercules's
posterity; whence Du Chesne infers, that it is a Greek Colony of the
Marseillois; but as there have been many Hero's of that name, and that the
Descendants of the Greek Hercules have been long in repute; this does not
precisely determine the time of its first Building. De Valois derives it from a
Fountain springing hereabouts, which Ausonius calls Nemausus; but it will still
be doubtful, whether the City has given its name to the Fountain, or the
Fountain to the City, and whence both have got this appellation. It will be
more useful and diverting to consider the rise and various fortunes of Nismes,
and withal the precious remains of its Antiquities. It owes its first increase
to a Colony of Roman Soldiers, who returned with August from the Conquest of
Egypt, as appears by an ancient Inscription, which this City has taken for its
Arms, COL. NEM. Colonia Nemausensis, the Colony of Nismes. Before that, Julius
Caesar had put a Garrison in this Town, to defend it against the incursions of
those of Reuergue and Querci. The Volcae Arecomici were already one of the most
powerful Nations of the Gauls, in the time of Hannibal, according to Livy; and
under the Empire of August and Tibere, Strabo L. 21. L. 4.
testifies that Nismes was the Metropolis of the Volcae Arecomici, and that tho
it was not to be compared to Narbonne, as to the number of Strangers and
Merchants; yet it exceeded this Capital of the Province, as to the State of its
Government, for it had 24 Villages or Commonalties (...), under it, inhabited
by considerable Persons; (...), who enjoyed the privileges of the Latins, so
that one might find at Nismes, Romans Citizens, who had discharged the Offices of
Edile, or City Surveyor (...) and of Quaestor or Treasurer. (...), And
therefore this Plantation did not answer before the Tribunal of the Governors
that were sent thither from Rome. But though they were so favored by the
Senate and Emperors, a particular hatred they had against Tiberius, Suetonius.
made 'em throw down his Statues, while he was at Rhodes, and before he
ascended the Imperial Throne. Adrian Ael. Spartian.
raised here a famous Basilique, in honor of Pl^tina, Wife to the Emperor
Traian, who had much contributed to his Adoption, Jul. Capitolin.
Antoninus Pius was originary from thence by his Father's side. In the decay of
the Western Empire, the Goths conquered Nismes, with the rest of Septimania;
and it then lost a great part of its luster, but suffered much more by the
devastations of Attila, of the Saracens, and afterward of Charles Martel, who
though he put it in Flames, was not able wholly to destroy all the Monuments of
the Roman magnificence. Notwithstanding these misfortunes, Adrian. Vales.
Nismes was so soon repaired, that under Lewis the Meek, it was again a rich
and wealthy City, thick inhabited, walled in, and fortified with Towers; so
that during the weakness of the French Monarchy, in 1129, the Governors of
Nismes usurped the Sovereignty of it, under the Title of Viscounts, whose
Estate was at the end of that Century, devolved to the Counts of Toulouse, and
from them returned to the Crown of France. In 1569, the Protestants seized upon
this City, by the courage of a shrewd and venturesom Soldier, who, during the
Night, filled at several times the Bars of the Grate, by which the Fountain of
Nismes enters into the Town. Since it was yielded to them by Henry IV. as one
of their Towns of security, which they enjoyed till Lewis XIII. dep^ived them
of it. However they still kept some of their privileges, as to have one half of
the Consuls, and of the Regents or Schoolmasters of the Royal College, Founded
by Henry II. of their Religion; but Lewis XIV. has by degrees taken from them,
not only the small remains of their Liberties, but even their Temples, and the
free exercise of their Religion.

The most remarkable remains of Antiquity in Nismes are its Amphitheatre, the
Square-house, or Maison quarree, the great Tower or Tourre-magne, the Fountain
Nemausus, and the Temple near this Fountain.

The Amphitheatre called by the Inhabitants Les Arenes is now but an Oval-Wall
of 470 Steps, with 63 Arches, built up of very la^ge Stones without Mortar or
Plaster, which, however has not only withstood the ransackings of the Goths
and Saracens; but even the Flames of Attila and Charles Martel, as appears by
the black color they are tainted with. Notwithstanding one may still discern
the Figures of Remus and Romulus suckling a She-wolf, the Vultures that
appeared to these Founders of Rome, two Bull-heads upon the ancient Gate of
this Building, and two Towers upon the new Gate. The Seats whence the
Spectators saw the Shows have been removed from thence, and the Caves where the
wild Beasts were kept are now filled up with Earth. Nay the whole capacity of
the Amphitheatre is taken up with Houses, at least since the year 1179; as may
be proved by Patentees granted by the Viscount Bernard Atten, where the
Inhabitants of Nismes and those of the Arenes are distinguished; which shows,
that this City has not been rebuilt where it formerly stood; for anciently the
Amphitheatre was without the Town, and Warriors have often made use of it, as of
a Fort or Citadel.

The Square-house, La Maison quarree, is a kind of Parellelogramme, or long
Square, being 74 Foot in length, and 41 Foot 6 Inches in breadth. Its front is
adorned with 6 Columns, and each side with ten. The top is flat and covered
with square Free-stones extraordinary large, so that one may walk upon it
without any danger. As we do not know who raised the Amphitheatre, we are not
better acquainted with the Founder of this House, nor to what use it was
fitted. For its form which has no likeness at all with the ancient Basilicks,
does not allow us to take it for that magnificent Building raised up by Adrian;
neither is the vulgar name of Cap-dueil sufficient to make a Capitole of it,
since no ancient Author speaks of a Capitole of Nismes. But as its front has a
great resemblance with those of the ancient Temples; one may believe with the
Learned Spon in his curious inquiries of Antiquity, that it was a Temple
dedicated to Jupiter Capitoline.

Without the Walls of the City upon the top of a high Hill, rises an ancient
Building, called by the Inhabitants Tourre-Magne, the great Tower, because of
its prodigious height, or that it exceeded by far all the Towers round about.
For by the remains it seems to have been a Watch or Tower, built in the form of
a Pyramide at one of the Corners of its ancient Walls. One may still
distinguish the Stairs, whereupon they ascended to the top, and the Niches or
Case-frames, wherein they placed the Statues of their Gods. The whole Fabric
is of small square Stones, so well cemented together, that the most industrious
Mason should not throw down two Foot of it in a day.

At the Foot of that Hill springs a most clear and pleasant Fountain, in the
form of a Pond, with a Whirl-pool in the middle, wherein, if any Creature
chance to fall, it is never to be seen again. This spring is the Source of the
Vistre, so called from the brittle and transparent color of its Water, an
Epithete given it by Ausonius, Vitrea non luce Nemausus. A branch of this
Fountain runs through a Channel purposely drawn into the City. As to the course
of the Vistre, you may see it in the Rivers of Languedoc.

Near this Fountain is an old Square-Temple, under-propt by two rows of Columns
with their Bars, Chapters, Architraves, Frizes, Cornishes and Mouldings, all in
a just proportion, together with Niches or Case-frames, and round Windows in
the Walls, for the Statues of their Gods, and Eagles of embossed Work, whose
Heads have been broken off by the barbarous Goths, Huns, or Saracens in
contempt of the Romans. This Temple has been turned into a Monastery of Nuns;
and because of the Eagles and other marks of its former magnificence, I should
be apt to take it for the Basilick of Adrien, rather than the Square-house, or
any other ancient Building.

To avoid length, I shall not mention the many Statues and Inscriptions that
are found in this City, nor insist upon the Monuments of newer date, as the
Wine-Tower, La Tour Vinatiere, so called Because built out of an excise upon
Wine. Mont-pouzieu, in the enclosure of the Monastery of S. Bauzille is a Hill
of Clay, that formerly was the burying-place of the Jews, for which, they used
to pay a certain quantity of Pepper to the Monks. The King's Castle, the Column
erected at the entry of Francis I. with a Salamandre upon it, the Clock-Tower,
the Crown-gate with its Bulwark, and the Palace of the Presidial are
considerable Buildings.

Sulpice Severe, mentions a Council held at Nismes in 389, but does not name
the Bishop of it. The first of whose subscription we read is Gilbert of Nismes,
who assisted at a Synod, called in his Diocese by his Metropolitan in 886, and
the old Notices of the Gauls name Nismes; but in the 4th. or 5th. place among
the 8 Suffragans of Narbonne; so that the erection of this Bishopric seems not
to have preceded the 4th. or 5th. Age.

Four Leagues North-East of Nismes, lies the Village of St. Private, renowned
for a most pleasant House belonging to a Gentleman, who bears the name of it,
and adorned with delicious Gardens, Fountains, Grotto's, Water-spouts, Alleys,
Green-closets, and the like. Over against it are the remains of the famous Pont
du Guard, one of the Masterpieces of the Romans. It was intended to conduct the
Waters of the Mountains of Remoulins to those of Ledenon, and thence into
Nismes, for the uses of that City, but especially to represent Sea Fights in
its Amphitheatre. It may be too, that the course of the River Guard or Gardon,
which now runs under these Bridges was turned off thorough a Channel, that is
yet partly in being, has six Foot in height, three in breadth, and is covered
with large Stones. But more of it in the Diocese of Vzes.

Four Leagues South of Pont du Guard, and as many East of Nismes, lies the Town
of Beaucaire, Belliquadrum or Bellum quadrum, that is fine Square, undoubtedly
so called from its Square form and pleasant Situation; for its seated upon the
Rhone, next to the small Island Valabregue, and over against Tarascon in
Provence, from which it is only separated by the River. It is the Seat of a
Seneschal, but is much more renowned for its Fair on the 22. of July, or S.
Magdalen's day, whether come Merchants from most parts of the World, even from
Asia and Africa. This Town belonged formerly to the Counts of Provence; but
Raimond Berenger I. yielded it to Alphonse Jourdain Count of Toulouse,
September 16. 1125. The Papists took it during the Wars of the Albigeois, but
the Inhabitants revolted from them to Raimond the Young their lawful Master. In
1251, Charles of France Count of Provence, holding a conference at Beaucaire
with his Brother Alphonse, Count of Toulouse, the Citizens of Avignon forced
them to take the Oath of Allegiance to their Government. After Alphonse's death
Beaucaire returned to the French Crown with the other Estates of those Counts.
In 1561 the Protestants took this Town, and put Garrison in it under one
Hardwin of Porcelles, and the Roman Catholics having retaken it, they were
expelled the same day with the loss of 1200 Men. Beaucaire had then a Castle
upon the Rock, on the Rivers side, which has been since demolished in 1632, on
occasion of new Civil Wars.

Three Miles South-West of Beaucaire, lies betwixt Mountains the Town of
Belle-garde, and 3 Miles South-East of Belle-garde the Village of Fourques
Furcae, so called because the Rhone divides here it self into three branches,
much like to a Fork: 4 Leagues South-West of Beaucaire, and above two West of
Fourques, lies upon a Rivulet the small Town of S. Gilles Sti. Aegidii Fanum.
It has its name from an Anachoret, who retired thither in the 6th. Century, and
a famous Abbey that was built there under his name, which has been since given
to secular Priests. It Is said that the Gottish Kings had there a Palace, and
that this Town is to be understood by the name of Palatium Gothorum, which is
found in the Authors of those times. At least it is sure that the Counts of
Toulouse took the Title of Counts of S. Gilles, and that sometimes the whole
Province was understood by that name. This Town belongs now to the Knights of
Malta, under the Title of great Priory, and it was near it that the Protestants
got a signal Victory over the Roman Catholics, headed by the Count of
Somme-rive in 1562. In a Neighboring Forest called Estagel, is a Chair of
Stone, which is thought to have served the Druides, who used to render justice
or to pronounce their Oracles in the Woods.

Four Leagues East of S. Gilles, lies upon the Vistre the Town of A^margues
Armasanicae, to which Vauvert Vallis viridis, Le Cayla and Aigues-mortes are
resorting. This last situated betwixt the Pond of Maguelonne, and the Western
Mouth of the Rhone has been a famous Seaport, where the French Kings used to
imbark, when they went to the Holy Land; but the Haven has been stopped by the
Sands, and the Town lies now two or three Miles from the Sea. The Pond Laterna
and the Rhone have communication together by a Channel, upon which this Town is
seated, and which because of the little motion of its Water has given it the
name of Aigues-mortes, Aquae-mortuae. Before one enters into it, it meets with
a Tower called la Tour Carbonniere, that was taken by the Protestants in 1562.
The Town is of a square figure, surrounded with good Walls, and 16 strong
Towers, among which that of Constance is the most considerable, as having a
Phare or Beacon to direct the course of the Ships.

Three Miles Westwards upon the Western Mouth of the Rhone, lies the Fort of
Pecais, built to defend the Salt Pits, which are here so abundant, that they
suffice to furnish with it, not only Languedoc and the Neighboring Provinces,
but even Foreign Countries, if we believe Du Verdier, so that all the other
Salt Pits, excepting those of Peyriac and Sigean; in the Diocese of Narbonne
have been spoiled and drowned, not to make Salt too common. Marsiliargues is a
little fine Town, 5 Miles South of Aigues-mortes, and 2 North-West of Lunel,
that has the Title of a Viguery. Higher up you meet with Gaillargues, Aubais,
Aigues-vives, Cauvisson, Sommieres upon the Vidourle Sumerium a Viguery,
Ville-vieille, Clarensac, Cour-Couronne Quessas, Sauve Salvia, a Viguery,
Pompignan, Ledignan, Cassagnolle. Anduse Andusia another Viguery, upon the
Southern branch of the Gardon, 21 Miles North of Montpellier, and 17 North-West
of Nismes, was formerly a strong Town, and one of them who declared for the
Protestants under the D. of Rohan, but Lewis XIII. having taken it, caused its
Walls to be demolished. St. Hippolite lies betwixt Mountains near the source of
the Vidourle, 5 Miles East of Anduse, and though it be none of the biggest, yet
its Inhabitants had of late years the courage to Preach upon the ruins of their
Temple, thinking that their example would be followed by their Neighbors; but
they found themselves mistaken, and exposed almost alone to the French King's
rage, who caused the most part to be murdered or sent to the Galleys.

Alais Alestum, upon the Northern Branch of the Gardon, three Leagues
North-East of Anduse followed the same fate, submitting to Lewis XIII. after
the taking of Privas in 1629. It has the Title of a County, and formerly
belonged to the Counts of Melgueil now Mauguio, issued from the Viscounts of
Narbonne.

The Diocese of Nismes extends it self still more North-West to Mount Lesperou
in the Cevennes, and contains besides the Towns or Buroughs of Vezenobre,
Toirax, Monsargues, La Sale, Sumere, S. Romans, Mondarchier, Le Vigan Vicanum a
Viguery, Vissec, Arrey, Alzou Aumezas, etc.

Of the CEVENNES.
THis Country the most North-Eastern and Mountainous part of Languedoc, has the
Dioceses of Nismes and Lodeve on the South, Rouergue on the West, Auvergne and
Forez on the North, and the Rhone of the East. These Mountains reach a great
way through Auvergne and Languedoc, but their extent is commonly reckoned from
Lodeve to Montpezat, near the source of the Loire about 30 Leagues, and the
name of CEVENNES more properly given to the Country about Anduse, Alais, St.
Ambroise, and St. Hippolite. The Greek Authors call these Mountains (...), and
the Latin Cemmeni Montes or Cebenna. Caesar says, that the Auvergnats were
separated from the Helvians or Inhabitants of Vivarais by the CEVENNES; but
other Latin Authors, as Pliny, Mela and Ausonius give that name to all that
long ridg of Mountains, from the Rhone to the Pyrenees, and the Garonne, which
formerly divided the Celtes from the Narbonnoise Gaul. Nay some Geographers, as
Olivarius, pretend that the Ancients comprehended, even the Mountains of
Auvergne, under the general name of CEVENNES. Whatever be of that, here are
several Lead and Tin Mines, and of Gold and Silver too, as De Valois believes,
which are not dug out and improved for want of Slaves. The Protestants were
very strong in this Country, and the convenience of the Mountains enabled them
to resist Lewis XIII. but no Foreign Power taking their part, and even their
Brethren of other Provinces leaving them in the lurch they were soon forced to
yield. In 1683, the Protestants beyond the Loire, or of the Southern parts of
France, drew up a project, which had it been made sooner, or even then
constantly and vigorously followed, would most probably have stopped the
Persecution. (For Lewis XIV. how cruel soever he is, would have been loath to
exterminate two Millions of Men.) Namely they agreed amongst them, as many as
could come together from several parts in those troublesome times, not to
comply willingly any longer, with the Edicts and Declarations given against
'em, in order to pull down their Churches, to forbid their Assemblies, to put
their Pastors into Prison, etc. but to obey God rather than Men, and generously
to encounter Death and Martyrdom, still keeping themselves in a passive and
defensive way. But the Inhabitants of the Wealthiest Cities; especially of such
where the number of Roman Catholics prevailed, could not assent to, nor put
this project into Execution. They being thus divided, having no Head to command
'em, nor any settled union and correspondence amongst themselves; this Brave
and Christian resolution came to nothing, being only performed in some parts of
the CEVENNES, and of the Valleys of Dauphine, where it served for a pretense to
the Ministers of the Popish barbarities, to represent 'em in Foreign Parts, as
a set of seditious Men. However they never attacked any body; but because the
King's Dragons pursued them into Forests and Deserts, whether soever they might
retire themselves, the Men went armed with the Women and Children to keep them
harmless. But the King's Officers took their time so well, that they seized on
the most courageous, and got 'em broken upon the Wheel. Those that remained
united had the better fate, for many obtained passes to go out of the Kingdom.
I have seen a young Man in Holland, who was one of the Heads of the Vivarois,
that forced the Intendant or the King's Overseer in the Province, to grant him
a Pass, and to 500 of his Camerades, and safely to conduct 'em on the
Territories of Spain; whence, after they had suffered much by the blind and
barbarous zeal of the Spaniards, and the cruelty of the Inquisitors, some at
last made their escape into Protestant Countries.

The Precincts of CEVENNES comprehends three small Countries, each of which
keeps its separate States after the Assembly of the General States of
Languedoc, viz. Vivarais on the East, Gevaudan on the West, and Velay on the
North.

Of VIVARAIS.
VIVARAIS comprehending the Dioceses of Viviers and Vzes, according to the
division of some modern Geographers ^eaches 36 or 37 Leagues North and South
^^om Mount Pilate, and the small River Limo^^, on the Borders of Lionois to the
River ^ardon, that separates it from the Diocese of ^^ismes, and 12, 14, or 17
East and West from ^^e Rhone to the Mountains Cevennes. But VI^ARAIS, properly
so called, contains only the Diocese of Viviers, which is large enough to ^^ve
been the Inhabitation of the ancient Hel^^, being still 22 Leagues North and
South. This People were comprised, as well as the In^^bitants of Uses, under
the Volcae Arecomici, ^^de part of the Roman Province, or Galliae Narbonensis;
and were so faithful to their Ma^^ers, that in the times of the conspiracy of
^^e Gauls to recover their liberty, they made, (...) their own accord,
incursions into Gevaudan ^^d Velay; but were repulsed. Cn. Pompeius ^^de the
VIVAROIS Subjects to the Mar^^^ois.

VIVARAIS is divided into Upper and Lower ^y the River Eryeu, each having a
Bayliwick, ^^e at Annonay for the Upper, and the other at Ville-neuve de Berg
for the Lower. Tho^ parts that Border on the Mountains feed va^ numbers of
Sheeps and Herds of Cattle, b^ produce only Rye and a little Wine, wherein the
Plains, especially along the Rhone, the^ grows abundance of Hemp, Corn, and
Frui^ of all sorts, and such excellent Wines the Pliny makes mention of them.
There are ^ ancient Barons, who by turns assist at the g^neral States of
Languedoc, and preside to t^ particular States of Vivarais, viz. 1. Joyeuse, S.
Remaize, 3. Montlor, 4. Crussol, 5. La Vou^ 6. Annonay, 7. Largentiere, 8,
Tournon, 9. Bologne, 10. Aps, 11. Brion, 12. Chalencon annex to Privas. The
Protestants were so numero^ in this Province, that in many places, the P^pish
Priest said Mass only for his Clerk and himself.

VIVIERS lies 500 paces West of the Rho^ upon the small River Scoutay, above 3
Leagu^ South-West of Montelimar, almost 3 Nort^ West of S. Paul-Trois-Chateaux,
on the oth^^ side of the Rhone in Dauphine, and 18 Nort^ East of Nismes. The
Latin Authors call it ^varium, since the 5th. Century. The origin^ of that
modern name is unknown, for the C^pital of the Helvians was called Alba
Helvioru^ or Alba Augusta, and even gave the name Albenses to the Inhabitants
of the whole Country. Neither is it a firmly grounded conj^cture, that the old
Barony of Aps, seated b^twixt Mountains, near the source of the Sco^ray, should
be the ancient Alba Augusta, whi^^ having been destroyed by Crocus, King of t^^
Alamanni, the Episcopal See should have be^ ^ransferr'd to Viviers; because
that Translation ^ mentioned no where. The most ancient Prelate ^f it, spoken
of in History, is one Venantius, who ^^bscribed to the Council of Epaone or
Ponay, (...) Bishop of Albe and Viviers, at the beginning (...) the 6th.
Century. This Diocese contains ^155 Parishes, and depends on the Metropolitan
(...) Vienne. The Bishop takes the Title of Count (...) Viviers, and Prince of
Donzere and Chateau^^f.

Annonay Annonaeum, a Marquisate upon the ^all River Deume, lies 3 Leagues West
of the Rome, and almost 19 North of Viviers, in a very fruitful Soil. It Is the
Capital of Upper VIVARAIS, and the Seat of a Bayliwick. Some pretend that it
was formerly a Storehouse of ^he Roman Armies. Most of the Inhabitants
^mbraced the Reformation in the last Age; so that it remained under the
Protestants, during ^he Civil Wars, notwithstanding the attempts ^he Leaguers
made against it, in 1562 and 1563.

Tournon, Turno Castrum, because it was formerly but a Castle seated on a
neighboring Hill, lies upon the Rhone, over against Thain i^ Dauphine, has the
Title of a County, and has given name to an Illustrious Family, that has
produced several Cardinals, and many Prelates. It Is one of the ancientest
Baronies in that Country, but is grown more famous and flourishing of late by a
College of Jesuits, that draws thi^her great numbers of Scholars. It was
Founded by Francis Cardinal of Tournon, Archbishop of Lions, under Charles IX.
This Town has besides a Collegiate Church and several Monasteries, and the
County extends its Jurisdiction over 72 Parishes.

Aubenas, Albenacum, is an indifferent goo^ Town, upon the steep of a Mountain
washed b^ the River Ardesche, almost 8 Leagues North West of Viviers: Most of
the Inhabitants were Reformed. Villeneuve de Berg, lies near the source of the
Rivulet Hibie, 11 Miles West o^ Viviers. But though it be the Capital of the
little Country of Les Botieres; yet it is only co^siderable for its being the
Seat of an inferio^ Judge or Baily.

The other places of some note are, Serriere^ Andance, Chasteaubourg, Cornaz,
Crussol, a Cou^ty, Soyons a principality belonging to the Bisho^ of Valence in
Dauphine, Charms, Beau-Chaste^ La Voulte, Poussin, Bays sur Bays, Meisse.
Roche Maurette, Le Teil, Le Bourg St. Andiol; all sea^ed along the Rhone, from
North to South. I the middle of the Country, or near the Mountains, you find
upon the River Beaune Joyeus^ a Duchy and Peerdom erected by Henry II^ in
1581, I.' Argentiere near the small Country o^ Borne, Vauguel, Mirabel, S.
Laurent, Boulog^^ l'Estrange, Meyras, Montpezat, Rioutort, nea^ the Borders of
Velay, 3 Leagues down the sourc^ of the Loire, where that River is yet so
narrow that a Lady having leaped it over by putting foot on a Silver Plate, she
laid in the middle o^ the Channel, made the Italians believe, she ha^ past over
the Loire on a Silver-bridge. The you meet with Pierre-ville, Chalencon, Le
Che^lars, S. Agreve, etc.

Of the Diocese of Uzes.
THis Diocese is included betwixt the Rivers Ardesche, Rhone, and Garden, and
the ^ountains Cevennes; having the County Venais^, the Principality of Orange,
and the Trica^^is to the East, Vivarais to the North, and ^^vaudan with the
Diocese of Nismes to the West and South-West. Its length and breadth ^e almost
equal, being about 12 or 14 Leagues. ^t drawing a diagonal North-West and
South-^ast from Villefort, near the Source of the Ar^^he, on the Borders of
Gevaudan to Monfrain (...) the Gardon near its fall into the Rhone, the
^reguoi^ reaches above 18 Leagues.

VZES, Vindomagus Volcarum Arecomicorum, ^d in latter Ages Vcetia or Castrum
V^eciense, (...) near the Spring of the small River Aysene, ^uch after a course
of 5 or 6 Miles di^charges ^ self into the Gardon. Magus is an old Gau^ word,
that signifies Habitation; and because is often changed into r, and V into G, as
Ca^^elus for Carantonus la Charante; so Vindo ^^y have been said for Virdo, or
Vardo the Gar^. In the ancient Notices of the Gauls, this ^^thedral Church is
put in the last place, or (...) one before the last; but since the erection
(...) the new Bishoprics, S. Pons de Tomiere's and Alet, it is the 7th. in
order. VZES had ^ first the Title of a Barony, then it was erecte^ into a
Duchy, and at last into a Duchy a^^ Peerdom in 1572, for Antony of Crussol.
Besides this the Bishop is Count of the Town, an^ the King is also Conseigneur
or Lord Partner, an^ has his Seat of Justice, and his Viguier or Bailey so that
the King, the Bishop and the Duke, have each their Castle, and their
Jurisdiction, which often causes many disputes. VZES is pretty bi^ rich and
trading, because of the Manufactory Clothes, the Serges of VZES being renown
throughout all the Kingdom. Most of the I^habitants had embraced the
Reformation, fo^lowing the example of their Bishop John of Gelais, who turned
Protestant with all his Cha^ter, and ^ent for Ministers to Geneva in the la^^
age; and there has been still a considerable R^form'd Church, even till these
latter times, The City lies 4 Leagues of Languedoc, or eleven E^glish Miles
South of Nismes, and almost 8 common Leagues of France, North-West of Av^non.

Five Miles South-East of VZES, upon t^^ River Gardon is to be seen the most
sumptuo^^ remainder of Roman Antiquities, that is exta^^ perhaps in all the
World. It Is called Pont Guard pons Vardonis, and consists of three Bri^ges
built upon one another. The underm^^ has 6 Arches, and is the common road of M^
and Beasts; the middlemost has eleven A^ches, and the uppermost 30, the whole
reac^ing to the height of 82 Foot. Under these Bri^ges is a Canal 6 Foot deep,
and 3 broad c^ver'd with large Stones, through which t^ Water of the Gardon was
made to pass, and to ^cend to the highest of those Bridges, whence ^ through an
Aqueduct it was brought into ^^smes, to serve for their Arens, Mills, and other
(...). For Nismes being not seated on the bank (...) a River, and having but a
small Fountain, as ^s been observed in its proper place, wants Water the most
part of the Summer. These ^ridges, tho not so entire as to be of use, are ^ll
however a glorious Monument of the Roman ^^^andure.

On the North-East, above 9 Leagues from ^ZES, lies P^nt S. Esprit, a pretty
strong ^own, and an important passage upon the Rhone; Wherefore it has a
Citadel and a par^^cular Governor. The Town has its name from a Bridge, that
is a curious piece of Work^anship, being under-propt by 22 Arches, 1206 ^rench
Toises, or 7236 Foot long, and 90 Foot lord.

The other places of note in this Diocese, are ^^amon, Ville-neuve-lez-Avignon,
S. Andre, Roc^^emaure, Condoules, all upon the Rhone from South to North.
Villefort and Chamhonas upon ^he Chassezat; Salavas and Ayguese upon the
^^desche, S. Ambroise, Monclus, Cornillon, Bagnols upon the Ceze: Les Vens,
Bane, Bezas, Bargeac, ^agnas, La Bastide de Virac, betwixt those two Rivers:
Genouillas and Chambourigaud near the ^^vennes; Couvillargues and Lodun upon
the ^^ve: Lussan betwixt the Ceze and Tave: Blan^u near the Gardon, St. Laurens
des Aubres near the Rhone, etc.

Of GEVAUDAN.
THis Mountainous Country is separated from Velay and Vivarais by the Allier to
the East; to the North it has Upper Auvergne, t^ the West Rouergue, and to the
South the Diocese of Nismes; reaching 22 Leagues North and South, from beyond
Sialgues to Val Francesque^ and 18 East and West from Lambrusche to S^ Laurens
de Revidol. It Is the habitation of the ancient Gabales or Gabali, who were
subjec^ to the Auvergnats.

Though this Country lies betwixt 43 Deg^ 40 M. of Latitude, yet the Mountains
are covered with Snow all the Winter, but the Plains named Lower GEVAUDAN are
indifferent fruitful. The Inhabitants of the Mountains called Upper GEVAUDAN or
GIVAUDAN, as wel^ as their Neighbors of Upper Vivarais, Upper Velay, and Upper
Limosin, use to go into Spain every year before the beginning of the Winter,
where they suffer themselves to be employed in the vilest Services to get their
livelihood. Wherefore the Spaniards use to call Gavaches from Gavali, poor,
dirty, low-spirited Fellows.

Pepin, Head of the second race of the French Kings, Conquered this Country
from Gaifer Duke of Aquitain. In the IX Century the Governors of GEVAUDAN
usurped the Sovereignty of it, ^rder the name of Counts. It fell afterward to
the share of the House of Rouergue, then to the Counts of Toulouse, and with
their other Estates was reunited to the French Crown in 1271. It was for the
most part in the power of the Protestants during the Civil Wars.

Mende, Memmas, Memmate or Mimmate, is ^^ted at the foot of a Mountain, hard by
the River Lot Olita, 26 Leagues East of Viviers, and almost 20 East of Rodez.
Mende is an indiffe^ent good Town, but is of no long standing, for ^^s Original
is related thus. Gregor. Turon. L. 1. c. 32.
In the third Cen^^ry, under the Empire of Valerian and Gallien, ^he Alamanni,
a German Nation, made an irru^tion into the Gauls, and overflowed like a
Tor^^^t most of the Southern Provinces of France, ^^der their King Crocus. They
took, plundered, and ruined the City of the Gabales or Gevau^an, which is now
but a poor Village called ^^avaux or Javoux, a word nearer to the La^ia Gabali,
than the very name of GEVAUDAN. Those that could make their escape re^^d into
the Fortress of Gredo, now Greze, ^^ted amongst Mountains, 3 Leagues South
(...) Javaux, and almost four West of Mende; (...) the Bishop S. Private fled
into the Caverns (...) Memmate or Mende, whether the Germans ^^^low'd, and
killed him with blows. The Holy ^^elate was interred in the neighboring
Vil^^ge, that bore the name of the Cavern, and (...) veneration People had for
his memory increased it by degrees to a considerable place. However it does not
appear that the Episcopal Seat was transferred thither immediately after; for
until the middle of the 10th. Century the Bishops of GEVAUDAN are called by no
other name, but Gabalitani Episcopi, or Episcopi Civitatis Gabalum or
Gabalorum; neither was Javaux ever rebuilt; so that I am apt to believe that
two neighboring Towns, Marenge or Marveiois two Leagues South, and Mende
eleven Miles South-West of Javaux, increased by it^ ruins; though the City of
the Gabales still obtained the seventh rank among the 8 Episcopa^ Sees of the
first Aquitain, but that the Prelates of GEVAUDAN fixed at last their Seat at
Mende; great numbers of People resorting thithe^ by reason of the Sepulcher of
S. Private. The Bishop of Mende has a fine Palace there, he intitules himself
Count of the Country by virtue of an Agreement made with the French King Philip
the Fair, in 1306. He also pretend^ to be Lord Partner of the Town with the
King and to have right of coining Money.

The other places of some consideration in thi^ Country, are Sialgues, S.
Lazier de Malzion Serverette, Chanac, La Canourgue, S. Chely d^ Tarn, S.
Eremie, Quessas, where during the Civi^ Wars the Protestants made a Booty of
Relick^ valued to 280 Marks; Espagnac, Bagnols, Bars des Cevennes known by
its fairs, and Montwert. Chateau neuf de Randon is only a Village but famous by
the death of that brave Warrior Bertrand du Guesclin Lord High Constable o^
France. There are besides 8 Lordships tha^ give the Title of Barons to those
Lords that assist by turns at the General States of Languedoc, and ^eside at
the particular of GEVAUDAN, viz. ^^rceaur, Canillac Apcher, Peyre, Senaret,
Tour^^, Randon and Florac.

Of VELAY.
VELAY, Vellavus Pagus, is included betwixt Vivarais on the East and South
East, Gevaudan on the West and South West, Auvergne on the North West, and
Foretz on the North, reaching 18 Leagues North and South from Aurech in Foretz
to Jonchieres on the Borders of Gevaudan, and above 16 East and West from
Cla^as to Prades, in its greatest length and breadth. The Mountains of Mezi^es,
Pertuis and Meigal, which are covered with Woods, and run across the Country
from North West to South East, divide it into Velay on this side, and Velay on
that side the Woods. The Inhabitants are called by ancient Authors Vellavi,
Vallavi and Velauni, and in Caesar's time were Tributaries to the Auvergnats;
wherefore their Capital is named indifferently Podium Avernorum, and Podium
Vellavorum, le Fay en Auvergne, and le Puy en Velay.

Le Puy, so called from the Mountain, on which it is seated, ( Puy in old
Gaulish signifying a Hill) lies 16 Leagues South West of Annonay, and almost 14
North East of Mende. It seems not to have been always the Capital of Velay; for
Ptolomy names it Rovesio, and the Maps of the Emperor Theodosius, published by
the Brothers Peutingers, Revessio, which is taken by some modern Authors for S.
Paulian, a small Town, two Leagues off Languedoc North, North West of Le Puy;
whence, say they, S. Evodius, or as the vulgar call him S. Vosy, translated the
Episcopal See to Mont-Anis, Montem Anicium; whereupon Le Puy has been since
built. And accordingly Gregory of Yours L. x. c. 25.
speaks of the City of the Velauni, and of Anicium, as of two different places.
However, the time of this Translation is uncertain, and seems not to have
preceded the sixth or seventh Century; for it is only since that time that the
Volains are called indifferently Velauni and Puates or Buates.

Le Puy is now the biggest City in Languedoc after Toulouse, to whose
Parliament its Bayliwick and Presidial-seat resort. The Bishop intitles himself
Count of Velay, pretends to the Right of Fallium, to be free from the
Jurisdiction of his Metropolitan the Archbishop of Bourges, and to be
immediately Suffragan to the Pope. He boasts to have in his Cathedral,
dedicated to our Lady the Praeputium Du Chesne.
of our Savior, or that Flesh that was cut off when he was circumcised,
together with the mitre of Aaron, the first High Priest of the Jews; and such
fine Relics cannot fail of producing strange wonders, and drawing great
numbers of People in order to present them with Oblations, which is the
principal aim. The Chapter is made up of a Dean, a Provost, a Singer, a
Treasurer, a Sexton, the Abbot of S. Peter, the Abbot of S. Evodius, and 24
Prebendaries.

The other places worth taking notice of are, Montfaucon, Tence, Duniere, S.
Didier, Monistrol en Velay, Craponne, Chalencon, Issignaux on the North East
side of the Woods, S. Paulian, La Volte, Solignac, S. Private, Chapteys, Le
Monastier, S. Chastie, on the South West.

CHAP. XVI. Of PROVENCE.
It Is known that 60 or 70 years before the entire Conquest of the Gauls by
Julius Caesar, the Romans having vanquished the Salians, and the Allobroges in
631 and 632 of Rome, reduced into a Province the South-Eastern part of the
Gauls, included betwixt the Cevennes, Mount-Jura, the Alps and the
Mediterranean Sea, and called Gallia Braccata, or the Gauls wearing Breaches.
They pleased themselves more in this Country, than in any other of their
Conquests, for which reason they used to name it Our Province, or absolutely
the Province. In process of time several Changes, Divisions and Subdivisions
having been made, that part nearest to the Sea, and Italy carried alone the
name of Provincia, or Provence in the Country Language; probably because of the
strict relation it kept with Italy, in the midst of all those Revolutions.

Gallia Narbonensis was subdivided into five Provinces, the first and second
Narbonnoise, the Viennoise, the Greek, the Apennin, and the Maritim Alps.
PROVENCE is made of the second Narbonnoise, except Gap, the Maritim Alps,
except Embrun, together with the Dioceses of Vaison, Orange, Caraillon,
Avignon, Carpentras, Arles, and Marseille taken from the Viennoise. And
therefore it borders to the North on the Tricastinois, Diois, Gapencois and
Embrunois, which make part of Dauphine, to the East the Alps, and the Rivers
Var and Tence separate it from the County of Nice and Marquisate of Saluces, to
the South and South East it has the Mediterranean Sea, and to the West the
Rhone divides it from the Dioceses of Nismes and Vzes in Languedoc; so that it
reaches above 42 Leagues North and South, from La Breoulz on the fronteers of
Embrunois to Cape de Dormes in the Isle of Porquerolles, and above 53 East and
West, from the Confluence of the Tence and Var to the Rhone, betwixt Condoules
in Languedoc, and Caderousse in the Principality of Orange.

In the decay of the Roman Empire, the Wisigoths and Burgundians conquered this
Province. Theodoric an Ostrogoth King having mastered Italy, seized upon
PROVENCE under pretense of Guardianship to Atalaric King of the Wisigoths his
great Grandson. The French King Clovis, and his four Sons expelled the Goths
out of PROVENCE; and when, that famous General of the Emperor Justinian,
Belisarius had reconquer'd Italy by the defeat of Theodat and Vitiges Kings of
the Goths, he thought fit to yield PROVENCE to the French, lest he should draw
such powerful Enemies upon him. In the division the Sons of the Emperor Lewis
the Meek made of his Dominions, PROVENCE together with Italy fell to the share
of Lotharius the eldest of 'em. And though during the weakness of the French
Monarchy, Counts usurped the Sovereign Power in PROVENCE, as did one Robaud or
R^tb^ld about the year 900, which was continued almost six Centuries through
several Families; yet these Counts were sometimes Kings in Italy, as Boson, his
Son Hugh, and the Dukes of Anjou, who were Counts of PROVENCE, and Kings of
Naples and Sicily, from Charles II. called the Lamb in 1285 to Charles IV.
Surnamed du Maine, that bequeathed by his Will the County of PROVENCE to Lewis
XI. and the French King's Successors in 1481.

The Rivers of PROVENCE, besides the Buech and the Durance, that are described
in Dauphine, are the Rivulets of Sosse, Jabron, Bleone, Targue, Laro and Ass,
falling into the Durance from Sisteron to Manosque. The Verdon rises in the
Mountains of the Diocese of Digne, washes Colmars, Castellane, Montpezat,
receives the Issolet, the Nartabre, and the Auvestre, and mixes with the
Durance at S. Paol. The Rocks and steep downfalls of the Durance hinder it from
being navigable, till about this place; however it is yet increased with the
Tese, the Durancole, the Calevon, that goes through Apt, and some other
Rivulets before it discharges it self into the Rhone, betwixt Avignon and
Barbentane. The Louveze springs in the Baronies, at a place called Montauban,
goes through le Buys, M^olans, Valzon, receives the Russe that waters
Carpentras, and the Sorgues at Pont de Sorgues, that falls into the Rhone, a
Leagues North of Avignon. The Tolobre and the Arc and Lionne fall into the
Gulf of Martegue: The Veaune into the Bay of Marseille near Chateau d'if; the
Aran discharges it self into the Sea near La Ciutat; the Gapcau near Hyeres,
the Batailler into Cape negre, the Gisole into Gulf de Grimaut. Then you meet
with the Alla, the Candune, the Caranne, the Caujou or Chalilan, the Pis, the
Tendole, which join together betwixt Roquebrune and Frejus, and mix with the
Sea near Cape S. Vincent. Farther Eastwards are the Rairan or River d' Agan,
the Bencon, the Siagne, and the Loup. At last you find the Var, that takes its
source in Embrunois, receives the Tuebie, the Coremp, the Vain, goes through
Glandeves, and La Pene, is increased with the Tence, the Vesubie, and the
Ester^n, and disembogues its Waters into the Sea, betwixt Nice and S. Laurens.

PROVENCE viewed in a Map affords but an unpleasant prospect, for it seems as
though the greatest part of it were covered with barren Mountains. However it
is not so, for except in some few places of the Bayliwick of Seyne, bordering
upon Embrunois, all the other Mountains are fruitful Hills or Hillocks, which
not only produce the best Corn, and the most delicious Wine in France, but
sometimes one and the same Mountain will yield such Fruits as require a
different Climate; being covered on the South side with Vines, Plume, and
Olive Trees, Pomegranates, Oranges, Citrons, Limons, and on the North side with
Cherries, Apples, Pears, Almonds, and Walnuts. Neither does the Country want
Pastures and Woods, especially in the Northern parts, though the latter be not
in great quantity, because of the industry of the Inhabitants. The Air is as
temperate as the Soil is fruitful, for the Sky is clear most part of the year,
and rain falls very seldom. The Southern parts along the Seacoast would be
very hot, were it not for the Bize or North Wind, that refreshes and purifies
the Air, but creates a severe cold when it blows in Winter. Those that keep
there Sheep and Herds of Cattle send them in Summer to Devolui and other
Mountains of Dauphine, having Pastures of their own, the greatest part of the
Winter. They make vast quantity of Silk, by feeding Silkworms with leaves of
Mulberry-trees, as also Salt upon the Seacoasts. Thence are transported into
Foreign Countries the Salicor a kind of Ashes fit to make Glasses and Soap of;
together with Saffron, Vermilion, Cork, and Rosin, an oily juice running out of
the Male Pine-trees. The few heaths and wastes that are there; are covered with
Thyme, Hysop, Lavander, Rosemary, Sage, Juniper, and Myrtle-trees.

The Provencaux, or Inhabitants of PROVENCE a^e ingenious and industrious,
Dante and Petrarcha, two famous Italian Poets, ascribe to their Troubados or
Trouveres the invention of Rythm'd Poetry, and they make still indifferent good
Rythms in their Country Language. The Protestants have not been very many in
PROVENCE, since the barbarous Murder committed on the Vaudois of Merindol and
Cabrieres. When I lived there, that is 15 years ago, they had but 7 or 8
Churches, which are since destroyed with all the others of France. In those
days they already complained of their exorbitant Taxes, with a very expressive
Proverb, Lou Languedoc is ruinad, La Prouvence es accoumencade. The ruin of
Languedoc is finished, and that of PROVENCE is begun; but now I believe they
have but little reproach one another.

PROVENCE is divided into Upper and Lower: The Upper lies on the North side of
the River Durance, Verdon, and Esteron, nearer to Dauphine, and the Lower on
the South side, along the Seacoast; but lest I should forget some part of it,
I shall treat of each Diocese after one another, and begin with Aix the Capital.

Of the Diocese of AIX.
THis Diocese is included betwixt those of Marseille, Arles, Apt, Riez, Frejuls
and Toulon, and is the biggest of all, reaching 26 Leagues East and West from
beyond Cotignac near the Diocese of Frejus to the Plains of la Crau, and about
10 North and South. This Country was anciently inhabited by the Salians,
Salyes, Salyi, or Saluvii, and it is in this Territory that C. Marius gave a
total overthrow to the Cimbres killing 150000 of them.

The City of AIX, Aquae Sextiae, or Aquensis Civitas, is within a Musket Shot
of the little River Arc, 5 Leagues of Provence North a Marseilles. It is very
Ancient. Caius Sextus a Proconsul carried thither a Roman Colony, in 632, of
Rome, and made the warm Bathes from which it draws its name, though the Bathes
be not longer in being. It is graced with an Archbishopric, a Parliament, a
Court of Accounts, a Court of Aids; the first Seat of the Seneschal of
Provence, a Generality, a Chamber of Mint, a Lieutenant General of the great
Seneschal of the Province, an Ordinary Judge for the Town, and another for the
King called Viguier; besides an University for the Law and Physic; it has been
plundered by the Longobardi and Saracens, in the 4th. and 7th. Centuries. The
Counts of Provence, who lived there did enlarge it; but it is much altered for
the better upon all accounts since that time, and is one of the pleasantest,
and best built Cities in France. S. Savior is the Metropolis, where is a high
Hexagon Tower to be seen; the Font is of an admirable Structure, and all of
white Marble, supported by fufile Columns round about like a Dome: The Chapel
of our Lady of Grace is very rich, and that of S. Maximin very Ancient and
Holy. The Chapter consists of a Provost, an Archdeacon, a Capiscol, a Sexton, a
Penitentiary, and 15 Canons; there are also some Incumbents or Prebendaries,
and a most delicate Music, two other Parishes, viz. S. Magdalen, and the Holy
Ghost, diverse Monasteries, and a College of Jesuits.

S. Maximin above 9 Leagues East of AIX, is the Seat of a Baily, but much more
famous for a pretended S. Ampulla, and the Body of S. Mary Magdalen said to be
kept here in a Collegiate Church, served by Dominican Friars. Many amongst us
would rather choose the Case than the Relick, for the Case is all of pure Gold,
being the figure of a Woman, held up by two Angels, and Crowned with a golden
Crown enriched with Diamonds; whereas the Relick may be, for ought I know, the
Skeleton of some old Bawd.

Nine Miles South West of S. Maximin, lies in the midst of a thick wood the
Cavern of la S. Baume, where the Legendaries say, that S. Mary Magdalen passed
33 years in a retired and penitent life; after she was arrived thither from
Palestina in a rotten Ship, without any Pilot, in company of Lazarus, S.
Martha, and Cesidonius, pretended to be that young Man Born blind, whom our
Savior cured. This Cavern is spacious being near 500 Foot high, and the Rock
wherein it is dug is all of white Marble. The place belongs to the Diocese of
Marseille.

Brignole, Brinonia, so famous for its Pluims, is likewise the head of a
Bayliwick; as also Barjols or Barjoux. The other places of note are, Esparonde
de Pallieres, Rians, Tonques, S. Paol, Sambuc, Peyroles, Lambese, Pelissane,
Alencon, Aguiles, Fuveaux, Peinies, Trets, Porrteres, Torrevez, La Val, Carces
a County, Cotignac and Foz.

Of the Diocese of Riez.
THis mountainous and small Country, borders upon the Dioceses of Aix, Apt,
Sisteron, Senez, and Frejus, and is watered by the Verdon. It was the
habitation of the ancient Albici, Reii, Segoregii, or rather Segoreii, who from
the Worship of Apollo were sirnam'd Apollinares. Their Capital Alebece Reiorum,
Apollinarium is ancienter than Aix, which as it has been observed was a Roman
Colony, whereas this City seems to have been built by the Natives, who before
that time did often wage War with the Salians and Massilienses. It is a little
Town well built, seated on the Source of the Auvestre, almost 16 Leagues North
East of Aix. The Bishop is Lord Temporal of it, and the second Suffragan of
Aix. The Cathedral is dedicated to our Lady. The famous Semipelagian Faustus
Rejensis was Bishop of it. There have been found many ancient Inscriptions.

The most considerable places are La-Palu, where is the famous Hermitage of S.
Maurin Monstiers a Bayliwick, Pymoisson, Valencole, Allemagne, Montpezat.

Of the Diocese of SENEZ.
THis Country is also very mountainous and small, and watered by the Verdon.
It Is included betwixt the Dioceses of Riez, Sisteron, Digne, Glanderez, Vence,
Grace and Frejus. This Diocese made part of the Province called Maritim Alps,
and was anciently inhabited by a People named Vesdiantii by Ptolomy, and
Vendiantii Cemenelii by Pliny; so that there was another Bishopric Cemenelium,
which is perhaps Castellane.

The City of SENEZ, Sanitium Vesdiantiorum Civitas Sanitiensium, or Sanitio, is
very small and little inhabited; its Bishop is Suffragan of Ambrun; it is
seated betwixt Mountains, on the source of the Ass. Its Prelate resides now at
Castellane, upon the Verdon. The Chapter that was of the Order of S. Austin,
was made Secular by Innocent X. in 1647. it is composed of a Provost, an
Archdeacon, a Sexton and 5 Canons, of which one is Chamberlain. The Cathedral
is consecrated under the name of the Assumption of the B. Virgin.

The places of some note are, Castellane a Bailywick, Colmars, Mevoiles,
Clumeng, Lembrusche and Barremes.

Of the Diocese of DIGNE.
THis Diocese is one of the smallest, and of the least revenue in France,
bringing hard^y 3 or 400 l. to its Prelate, and having not ^bove 27 Baptismal
Churches. It lies betwixt those of Senez, Sisteron, and Ambrun. It is very
mountainous, and watered by two small Ri^ers, the Issolet, and the Bleone. It
was formerly in^abited by the Bodiontii and Sentii, who had DIGNE, Dinia, or
Dina for their Capital, that ^00 years ago was a considerable place being
^ivided into City and Borough. The City has ^till three Gates, is surrounded
with Walls, and ^efended by square Towers; and the ruined ^alls of the Borough
show it to have been 600 ^^ces in Circuit. Its first decay came from ^^at King
Renatus, Count of Provence, transfer^ed to the City the Fairs that were in the
Bur^^ugh, An. 1437, and during the Civil Wars of ^^e last Age, the Inhabitants
retiring to the ^^y, as to the strongest place, left the Bur^^ugh almost Desert.

DIGNE is seated at the Foot of a Mountain, ^^sh'd by the River Bleone, which
receives there ^e Mardaric, a Rivulet of warm Water, that ^akes this City
famous for its Bathes. It has a ^meschal Seat, a Bailywick, and a Bishopric
Suffragan of Ambrun. Our Lady is the Cathedral Church, whose Chapter which was
once Regular, of the Order of S. Austin, is now composed of a Provost, a
Capiscol, a Sexton* and 9 Canons, of which one is an Incumbent, with 8
Prebenda^ies more, and 2 Parsons.

The most considerable places are, Mirabel Aiglun, Corbons,
Brusquet-Toart-Collobrioux, and Verdache. As to Seyne, which Rob and hi^
transcriber Dela Croix put in this Diocese, it depends upon Embrun.

Of the Diocese of ARLES.
THis Diocese extends 18 Leagues East an^ West, from Salon on the B^rders of
the Diocese of Aix to Peccais in Languedoc, and i^ North and South, from beyond
Tarascon to the Mediterranean Sea.

The City of ARLES, Arel^s, Arelatae, Arel^te, or Arelatum, lies upon the Rhone
with a Archbishopric, a Seneschal's Seat, and an Ac^demy of Humane Learning
associated to the of Paris. It was formerly the Chief of the Kingdom of
Burgundy and Arles: The Roman settled there their Sixth Colony, and there a^
still to be seen the remains of an Amphith^atre, of an Obelisque, a great many
Mausole (or stately Tombs) of the Ancients witho^ the City, and many other
considerable Monu^ents of Antiquity. The Original of ARLES ^s uncertain because
too ancient; it is sure that ^t is of Gaulish Foundation.

At first there were only Houses on the East ^^de of the Rhone; but the Emperor
Constantine the Great, built a new Town on the West side, and joined it to the
old with a fine Bridge. He ^leas'd himself extremely in this City: Here ^^ was,
that his youngest Son Constantine was Born, that he called a Council against
the Do^^tists, that he established the Seat of the Cap^ain General or Governor
of the Gauls; and besides that, he would it to bear his name, and ^o be called
Constantina for the future, though ^is orders as to that, have not been obeyed.

The Church of Arles is said to have been ^ounded by S. Trophime, Disciple of
S. Paul. The Secular Power of this City has contributed ^uch to that of the
Church. It was at first Suffragan to Vienne, but erected to a Metropo^is, under
the Empire of H^norius. Then it had (...) Suffragans, viz. Marseille, Orange,
S. Paul^uis-Chasteaux, Toulon, Avignon, Vaison, Carpen^tas, Cavaillon. But
Avignon having been made ^ Primate, has carried away the 3 last with it ^elf:
To compensate this loss, the Popes made ^e Archbishops of ARLES. Vicars of the
Ro^an See in the Gauls; with power to declare ^aster, to ordain Bishops, and to
celebrate Councils. The Chapter of the Cathedral con^ists of 20 Canons, among
which there is a Pro^^st, an Archdeacon, a Sexton, an Archpriest, (...)
Capiscol, a Treasurer, a Primicier, and a Theologal; there are also 20
Prebendaries, or Incumbents: It was made Secular in 1497, under Nicolas Cibo.
The Territory of this City ^ 50 Leagues in Circuit, consisting in two Islands
called Great and Little Carmargue, formed b^ two Branches of the Rhone, and in
the Crau the latter is a large extent of Land covere^ with Flint Stones; on
which Aeschylus says that Jupiter rained Stones to destroy the Lig^rians, that
were fighting against his Son Hercules. This stony Champaign produces little
Win^ and Corn, but there are vast quantities of Simples and Vermilion. As to
the Camargue, which has its name from Caius Marius, vanquisher ^^ the Cimbers;
the Pastures that these Island bring forth are so good, that the Cattle tha^
feeds upon them, grows extraordinary fierce an^ strong.

Tarascon, Tarasco Salyorum was the Capital ^^ the Salyies before the building
of Aix. It lie^ 3 Leagues North of ARLES, and above 5 Sou^ West of Avignon,
upon the River Rhone, ov^^ against Beaucaire, next to a little Island, which as
it increases every day, so it will at last ma^^ the Proverb prove a lie. That,
Betwixt Thain and Tournon.
Betwixt Beaucaire and Tarascon,
There feeds neither Cow nor Mutton.


This I observe to show that new Islands m^^ be formed by the Rivers and Sea,
washing a^ carrying away the ground, and letting it su^side when they meet with
a stop. Tarascon h^ an indifferent good Castle, built by Renatus of Sicily, and
Count of Provence; a Collegia^ Church, wherein they boast to have the Relics
of S. Martha, and several Monasteries. Besides ^his, it is the head of many
Villages resorting to ^s Viguier. There happened of late a pretty Story: A Man
digging in his Cellar, met with ^ Wall and an Iron-gate, which he caused to ^e
opened, and found it led into a vaulted way, ^ut there he heard such a
frightful noise, that ^e durst not proceed farther. The Magistrate was advised
of it, and with much ado got a Man condemned to dye to go through, who at the
end of that way met with another Iron-gate, which was likewise shut, and at
which he ^nock'd in vain. He related that the noise increased whilst he went
along, but that as he came nearer to the other Gate, it seemed as though he
left that noise behind him. This relation kindled the stronger the Magistrate's
curiosity, who still big with the hopes of undiscovered Treasures, got some
Masons to go and open the Gate, by promising them the 25th part of whatever
should be found: They performed it accordingly, and found that this Gate led
into Beaucaire. Since what time the Masons of Tarascon use to say in a jearing
way, that the 25th. part of Beaucaire belongs to them.

The other places of note are, Salon, a pretty good Town with a Principality,
depending upon the Archbishop of ARLES, but more known for being the Birth and
burying Place of that famous Astrologer Michael Nostradamus. Les Baux, a
Marquisate belonging to the Prince of Monaco, and formerly a Principality
belonging to the Princes of Orange. S. Martin in the Crau, Notre-Dame de
Dormet, and les Trois Mary's in the great Camargue; S. Remi, S. Gabriel, Orgon,
Senas, S. Chamas, Berre that ha^ good Salt Pits, Vitrolles, Istres, Marignane,
Ferriere, the Isle of Martegue, Jonquieres, etc. Bu^ I conclude, because the
remarkable things tha^ are in the Diocese of ARLES would require a whole Volume.

Of the Diocese of Marseille.
THis Diocese that lies on the Seacoast is very narrow, having the Gulf and
Island of Martegue on the West, the Archbishopric of Aix on the North, the
Bishopric of Toulo^ on the East, and the Sea on the South.

The City of MARSEILLE, Massilia, or Massalia, is upon the Mediterranean Sea,
with a Bishopric Suffragan of Arles, an Admirality a Seneschal's Court, a
Bayliwick, and other Jurisdictions; its Port is sheltered from Winds, and so
good, that it has never been heard a Ship has perished in it. And therefore
it is the usual abode of the Galleys, and where most Merchantmen of the Levant
do resort; which render it very Populous and Trading. The Phoceans or
Phocenses, who came from Phocea, a Colony of Athens in that part of Asia called
Ionia, were its Founders. In Caesar's time this City was flourishing, was a
kind of Republic, and had a famous University. The Romans had a great esteem
for it, and made an Alliance with it. It has undergone many revolutions, and
sustained many Wars; it has had its Viscounts, and diverse other Sovereign
Lords, and was at last united to the Crown at the same time, as the rest of
Provence, viz. in 1481. This City has been the Mother of many great Men, and is
now one of the biggest, finest, and best built of the Kingdom; since it has
been enlarged by the French King's order. The Port, the Arcenal, the Citadel,
the Galleys; many other Buildings, the South Walk or Race, the New Streets, the
Markets, the neat and stately Houses, Churches, Monasteries, Seminaries,
Hospitals, the College of the Fathers of the Oratory, the Fountains, etc. are
worth the curiosity of Strangers.

I would have spoken here of the Original of MARSEILLE, of its Foundation by
the Phoceans and Cenomani, of its Government, Laws, Academy of Humane Learning,
of its Manufactories, Trade, Wars, Conquests, Colonies, of its Alliance with
the Romans, of the Changes, and Revolutions it has undergone under the Goths,
Sarracens, the French Kings, the Counts of Provence, and its own Viscounts.

The other places of note in this Diocese are, Aubagnes, Roquevayre, Oriols,
Cassis, La Cioutat, famous for its Muscadi^e Wines, and for the Fabric of
Polacres, a kind of Vessels used on the Medite^ranean Sea, Olliols, La Cadiere,
le Castelet, etc.

Of the Diocese of TOULON.
THE Diocese of TOVLON, lies also upon the Seacoasts to the East of that o^
Marseille, to the South of that of Aix and to the West of that of Frejus.

The City of TOVLON, Telo Martius, lies upon the Mediterranean Sea, almost 15
Leagues Eas^ of Marseille, with a very fine Port and Road a great Arcenal, a
Bailywick, and a Bishopric Suffragan of Arles. It is very ancient; Hen. IV
fortified it with good strong Walls, and buil^ there two great Moles of 700
Paces each, which do almost cover all the Port. This present King has finished
this Work, begun by his Grandfather, whose description would require a great
Volume; there are fine Houses, a great many Churches and Monasteries, the
Cathedral has many Relics, its first Bishop is esteemed to be S. Honoratus,
and Hyeres is a little Town, four Leagues East of TOVLON on the Sea, over
against the Isles Hyeres. It has a Viguery, and many Buroughs and Villages
depending on it. The other places are Sifours, Cenari, Solyes, La Valette,
Turris, Cuers, Le Puget, Pierrefuec, Bormes, etc.

Of the Diocese of FREJUS.
THis Diocese lies also upon the Seacoast, betwixt those of Toulon, Aix, Riez,
Senez, and Grace, reaching 15 Leagues East and West, and 17 North and South.

This Country was anciently inhabited by the Suelteri or Selteri. The Capital
Frejus, Forum Julii, or Civitas Foro-Juliensis, is a Colony of the Romans, and
had formerly so good a Haven, that the Emperor August kept there his Fleet for
the defense and security of the Gauls.

This City lies now in a Fen, half a League from the Sea, on the River Argens
with an indifferent Port, and a Bishopric the 4th. Suffragan of Aix; there are
some remains of Antiquity to be seen: for this City is very ancient, and was
very considerable heretofore, as may be seen in many famous Authors.

The other places of note are, S. Tropes, a good Seaport Town, seated on Golfe
de Grimaut Sinis, or Plagia Samblacitana. Draguignan another good Town, upon
the River Pis 6 Leagues and a half North West of FREJVS, the Seat of the
Viguier of this Diocese, Callian, Fayence, Seillans, Bargemes, Comps, Bargamon,
Caillas, Eigueniere, Taurene, Flayose, Lorgues, Trans, Les-Arqs, Le-Muy,
Le-Luc, Cogolin, Grimaut, Roquebrune, La-Napole.

Of the Diocese of GRACE.
THE Diocese of GRACE lies on the East of that of Frejus, on the West of that
of Vence, and the South of that of Senez: It was anciently inhabited by the
Deciates, one of the Ligurian Nations, that lived on this side of the Alps.

The City of GRACE, Grassa, lies on a small River, two Country Leagues North of
the Sea, with a Bishopric Suffragan of Ambrun; a Viguery or a Court of
Justice. The Episcopal See was transferred thither from Antibes, by Pope
Innocent IV. in 1250. by reason of the bad Air, and the Incursions of Pirates;
it is a pretty Town, fortified with a good Citadel, etc.

The most considerable places are, Antibe, Antipolis a good Seaport Town, and
a Colony of the Marseillois, Canes upon Cape de la Croix, Mogins, Cesari,
Cipieres, Le Bar, Chateau-neuf.

Of the Diocese of VENCE.
THis Maritim Country, the ancient habitation of the Nerusii, has the Diocese
of Grace to the West, that of Glandeve to the North, and the County of Nice to
the East. The Dioceses of Grace and VENCE are very small, and afford but little
Revenue.

The City of VENCE, Vintium, lies five Leagues North East from Grace, and two
North of the Sea. It has a Bayliwick and a Bishopric Suffragan of Ambrun. It
is very ancient; the temporal Dominion is divided between the Bishop and the
Baron of VENCE. The Cathedral is dedicated to our Blessed Lady.

The famous Poet Godeau, who has made a Paraphrastical Translation in French
Rythms of the Psalms, and the Canticle of Solomon, written a Church History,
etc. was Bishop of Grace and VENCE; for these two Dioceses are often joined,
because of their nearness and smalness.

There are but four places of note in the Diocese of VENCE, viz. Cagne and S.
Laurens near the Sea; S. Paol on the South side of VENCE, and Le Broc near the
Var.

Of the Diocese of GLANDEVE.
BEfore the Romans and French, this Country was inhabited by a Ligurian Nation
called Velauni. It lies now about the Var and Vain, having the Bishoprics of
Grace and Vence to the South, the County of Beuil to the East, part of
Embrunois to the No^th, and the Dioceses of Digne and Senez to the West.

The City of GLANDEVE or Glannateva, on the South side of the Var with a
Bishopric Suffragan of Ambrun, is now almost ruined; for the Bishop makes his
residence at a Borough called Entrevaux, which has been built on the other
side of the River, with the Ruins of the City, etc.

The other places of note are, Guilleumes the Seat of the Viguier for this
Diocese. It lies at the foot of a Mountain on the North side of the Var,
Colmars upon the Verdon, Annot upon the Vain, these three are accounted Towns;
the others are but Buroughs or good Villages, viz. Toramenes, Le Poget, La
Pene, etc.

Of the Diocese of SISTERON.
THis Diocese seems to have had no particular Inhabitants, but to have made
part of the Country of the Cavares; however it be, it borders on the Bishopric
of Digne to the East, on Gapencois and the Baronnies to the North, on the
County Venaissin to the West, and on the Dioceses of Apt and Riez to the South.

The City of Sisteron Secustero, or perhaps Acusio Colonia, lies extended in
length upon the confluence of the Buech and Durance, with a Bishopric
Suffragan of Aix, in the Upper Province, it has a Bayliwick, a small Citadel,
and a Castle.

The most considerable places are, Forcalquier Forum Calcarium, or Fons
Calcarius. This Town was the Portion of the youngest Sons of the Counts of
Provence. It has a good Citadel, a Viguier and several Privileges. The French
King is called in the public Acts issued from the Parliament of Aix, Count of
Provence and Forcalquier. Manosque is another pretty Town, lying on the Durance
11 Leagues South of Sisteron, and belonging to the Knights of Maltha. The other
are but Buroughs or Villages, as Rosset, Castelet, Puy-michel, Orezon, La
Brelhane, Luiz, les Meez, Peyruis; Montfort was formerly a Barony belonging to
the Counts of Provence, and had then a very strong Castle; but it has been
demolished, and the place is now an inconsiderable Village. However its
Territory is still very large, and it has a Forest of 6 Leagues in circuit
depending on it, and called La Comb de S. Donat. In the Viguery of Forcalquier
are S. Michel, Manne, Simiane, etc.

Of the Diocese of APT.
IT was anciently inhabited by the Vulgientes, and is now included betwixt the
Viguery of Forcalquier, the County Venaissin, and the Archbishopric of Aix.

The City of APT, Apta Julia Vulgientium, is a little Town on the River of
Calevon, with a Bishopric Suffragan of Aix, and a Bayliwick; It is very
ancient, for it was one of the biggest and most famous Towns of the Celtes, and
the chief of the Vulgientians under the Romans: Julius Caesar, or rather some
of his Successors liked it so well, that he encreas d it, made it a Roman
Colony, and gave it the name of the Conqueror of the Gauls. The Bishop of APT
is the first Suffragan of Aix, and its first Prelate is S. Auspicius a Martyr.
The Bishops of this City call themselves Princes of APT, and had heretofore the
privilege of coining Money. There is to be seen a vast Treasure of Relics,
especially of S. Auspicius, and S. Mark the Abbot in the Cathedral of S. Anne:
And of Count Eleazar, of S. Delphine his Wife both Virgins, and of S. Margaret
their Maidservant, in the Church of the Franciscans.

Saut is an ancient County near the source of the River Sorgues belonging to
the Dukes of Lesdiguieres.

The other places are, Lambez, S. Savornin Gordes, Reilhane, Beaumont,
Mirabeau, Tour d'Aygues a strong hold with one of the finest Houses in the
Province; Lourmarin, Merindol, Menerbe, Aupede and Cabrieres, were good
Buroughs, whilst inhabited by the Vaudois, but since their barbarous Murder,
they are but inconsiderable places.

I shall give here a more faithful account of it than that partial Scribler
Morery, who says enough, however to make appear the unheard Cruelties of the
Roman Church.

It must b^ observed before all, that time out of mind the Lords of France were
not properly Subjects, but only Vassals to the King, and Sovereigns under him;
and that their Fees, Castles and Manors could not be ransacked or pulled down,
nor their Subjects abused or killed, unless it were for Crime of High Treason.
Now the places of Merindol, Cabrireres, La Cost, etc. whether the Vaudois
resorted, belonged to a Lord, who protected them, and all the Crimes they were
found guilty of was to profess the same Religion, that was persecuted in other
Parts of France, and to give retreat to such as escaped the bloody Hands of
their Murderers. The French King Francis the I. prevailed upon by the Monks,
gave out a severe Edict against all the Protestants, in 1535, and the
Parliament of Aix condemned to be burned 19 Inhabitants of Merindol, and the
neighboring places, most of whom were Ministers; but the first President
Chassanee, a learned Lawyer superseded the Execution of it. He was suceeded by
a most cruel Man, John Meynier, Baron of Oppede, or Auppede who making use of
the absence of the King's Lieutenant, the Count of Grignan, put himself at the
head of the Troops, that were in that Province, accompanied by a Capt. called
the Baron of La Guard, the second President, two Counselors, and William
Guerin, Advocate General of that Parliament. Thus they went on to Merindol, and
were reinforced in their way by the Troops of the Pope's Legate from Avignon.
The poor Vaudois retired into Woods and Mountains; so that the Persecutor's
Army found nothing in their Villages and Buroughs; but old and sick Men, Women
and Children, however they had the Barbarity of Murdering every one of them,
and burning and razing all their Habitations, nay even of hanging 30 of them,
who had surrendered themselves upon Terms. Maimburg confesses, that there were
3000 murdered, 600 sent to the Galleys, 24 Villages, and 900 Houses burnt; but
others make it amount to a far greater number. This happened in 1546, when
Francis the first had Notice of it, he was sensible of the injustice they had
done; saying, that they had made use of his Name, to destroy the most honest
Men in his Kingdom, and therefore ordered at his Death, which happened some
Months after, to his Son and Successor, Henry the Second, that he should not
leave those Barbarities unpunished. Accordingly this Prince immediately after
his coming to the Crown, named Commissaries to judge of this Affair; but the
Money, and power of the Clergy, stopped their Mouths; so that the King was
forced to remove the Suit before the Parliament of Paris by his Patents of
1551. Then the Persecutors not being able to avoid Justice any longer, threw
the hatred of all this horrid and unlawful Executions, upon some Soldiers who
were dead, or whom they had caused to make their escape, and upon the Advocate
General Guerin, who was beheaded in the place of Greve. As to the Baron of
Oppede, tho his Credit saved him from the hands of Humane Justice; yet it could
not deliver him from the hands of God, who called him before his Tribunal in
1558, by the most painful Death that ever was, as you may see in Thuanus,
Dupleix, and other Roman Catholic Historians.

Of the County Venaissin.
THE County Venaissin, that is now a dependency of the Papal See, borders on
Provence to the East; on Dauphine to the North; on the Durance to the South;
and on Languedoc to the West. It is about 13 or 14 Leagues from South to North,
and from West to East; it is the first of the Pope's Legateships, a fruitful
and pleasant Country; there are an Archbishopric, 3 Bishoprics, 4 Baronies,
and 78 Towns, Buroughs or Villages.

In the Romans time, it was inhabited by the Cavares and Memini, since it
passed under the French, and from them to the Marquesses and the Counts of
Provence. In 1228 the Estates of Raimond Count of Toulouse, having been seized
from him, because of his protecting the Albigeois, it was agreed amongst the
Usurpers, that the Lands which Raimond had possessed on the East of the Rhone
should be settled in trust, only for a time, to Gregory IX. as appears by the
Letters of this Pope to the French K. Lewis IX. and Queen Blanch his Mother,
in 1230, and 1233. Its modern name Venaissin comes from Venatione, because of
the vast quantity of Game that is in this Country.

Avignon and its Territory made up a separate Dominion; which still belonged to
the Counts of Provence; but in 1348 Jane Queen of Naples and Sicily* Countess
of Provence, sold this City with its Suburbs and Territory, for the Sum of
80000 Golden Florens, that is 48000 French Livres, to Pope Clement VI. and lest
it should be said that this sum came not near the value of so considerable a
City, it was inserted in the Agreement, that the Queen made a free gift of the
overplus to the Pope. Hereupon the French Historians observe, 1. That this
Princess being born in 1328. was not yet out of Age, no more than her second
Husband Lewis of Tarante. 2dly. That the sale was made without the consent of
the Guardians given her by K. Robert her Grandfather, when he instituted her
his Universal Heir against his express will. 3. That some years after the same
Pope to hinder Queen Jane of selling others of her Countries, gave out a Bull
declaring void all the alienations made, or to be made by the said Queen, both
in the Kingdom of Naples, and in the County of Provence, against the will of
the said K. Robert her Grandfather. 4thly. That in 1365 Queen Jane declared
void the sale of Avignon, and all the others she had made to that very time.

These are the Chief reasons on which the French Kings ground their pretensions
over Avignon and County Venaissin, and for which they never fail of seizing
upon this City and County, as soon as they are at variance with the Court of
Rome, as did Lewis XIV. in 1663. and 1688. I leave the Reader to judge of them,
as he may do very impartially, since they are both our Enemies; only with this
difference, that the one, viz. the Pope is irreconcilable to us as long as we
are Protestants, whereas within some years we may be at peace with the other.

The City of AVIGNON, Avenio, Cavarum, is upon the Rhone, 8 Leagues North of
Arles, almost as many South East of Vzes, and 10 North East of Nismes, with an
University and an Archbishopric, only since the year 1475. under Sixtus V. It
was before that time a Bishopric Suffragan of Arles. Pope Clement IV. removed
the Pontifical See to Avignon in 1305. Clement VI. bought that City 37 years
after, his Successors lived there quietly till the year 1380. as also during
the Schism, that is to the Council of Pise, in 1409. It has a Court of
Inquisition; a Mint where Money is coined with the Pope's Arms; its Walls are
fine, its Churches magnificent, its Avenues pleasant. The justice is
administered by the Consuls and their Assessor, who is the Judge of the City;
the Viguier, who is like the Provost of Merchants in Paris, or the Lord Mayor
in London, judges without farther appeal, all Causes and Suits not exceeding
four gold Ducats; but in other Causes one may appeal to the Vice-Legate, who
commits the matter to the Rote, which consists of five Auditors, and from
thence one may still appeal to Rome. All the Canons of the Cathedral Church of
our Blessed Lady, are clothed in Red, and the Chaplains in Purple; seven Popes
have seated there during 70 years, from 1307. till 1377. viz. Clement V. John
XXII. Benedict XII. Clement VI. Innocent VI. Urban V. and Gregory XI. who by
the persuasion of St. Catherine of Sienne removed to Rome again; together with
three Antipopes, Clement VII. Boniface IX. and Benedict XIII. from 1378 till
1409. This is called by the Italians, The Babylonian Captivity of the Church.
And well may they compare their Church to Babylon; for it is as like to the
Mystical Babylon of the Revelation, as two drops of Water are to each other.
Amongst other resemblances the following will not be unpleasant, viz. that the
number of Seven, the number of the Heads of the Beast, seems to be affected in
the public buildings of Avignon, which is the Masterpiece of the Popes, for
there are 7 Parishes, 7 Monasteries, 7 Hospitals, 7 Colleges, 7 Palaces, 7
Markets, and 7 Gates, which make up 7 times 7.

The City of Carpentras, Carpentoracte Meminorum, lies upon the Russe 5 or 6
Leagues from Antignon, with a Judge in Ordinary, an Office of the Pope's
Exchequer, and a Bishopric Susfragan of Avignon. It is seated on the foot of
Mount Ventoux, which is four Leagues high, and on the ruins of Venasque or
Vindausca, in a fruitful Soil, with good Walls about it. This is properly the
Chief City of the County Venaissin.

Cavaillon, Cabellio Colonia, lies upon the Durance, in an Island formed by
that River, the Calevon and the Durancole, 9 Miles South West of Avignon. It
was formerly seated on a Hill, where are still some remains of old Buildings,
but now it lies in a very fruitful Plain, though for the rest it is small and
ill built; the Cathedral is dedicated under the name of S. Veran, one of its
Bishops in the 6th. Century. It belonged to the Cavares.

Vaison, Vasio, is seated upon a Hill washed by the Louveze. It Is mentioned by
Pliny, Ptolomy, and other ancient Geographers, as one of the Cities of the
Vocontii, and seems to have been pretty considerable. But it has been so often
ransacked and plundered by the Goths, Vandales, and Sarracens, that there is
but a heap of ruins, where it formerly laid, viz. in the plain, about the
Church of our Lady.

The other places of note are, M^rnas, Chateau-neuf-du-Pape, Barbentanes, and
Boulbon upon or near the Rhone; Graveson, Chateau-renard, Noves, Caumont, and
Valorges, about the Durance, Chateau-neuf, L' Isle, Pernes, Pont de Sorgues,
near the River Sorgues; Bedarides, Sarrian, Caron, Flassan, Mazan, Venasque, S.
Didier, about Carpentras; Miolans, Queyrane, and Cameret about Vaison.

Of the Principality of Orange.
I Put here this Principality, because it cannot be described any where else,
since it is included by the County Venaissin on all sides, save on the West by
the Rhone. It is very small, though its Territory be extraordinary fertile in
Wine, Corn, Fruits, etc. for its greatest length East and West, is but 5
Leagues, and not quite 4 North and South. That it belongs by right to His
Majesty William III. as part of his Patrimonial Estate is undeniable; though to
put an affront, if it were possible, upon that great Prince, the Parliament of
Paris have adjudg'd it to Charles Paris of Orleans last Duke of Longueville,
killed in the Dutch War of 1672; and tho Lewis XIV. pretending to be his Heir,
lords now over it, as though it were his own. But to determine whether the
French Kings, as Counts and Marquesses of Provence, are Lords Paramount of this
Principality, would require too long a discussion. I shall only observe, 1st.
That in 793 William au Cornet or au Court-nez, High Constable of France, having
conquered Orange from a Sarracen King called Theobard, took the Title of Count
by the Grace of Go^ which was then proper to Sovereigns. 2dly. That since the
Right Prince of Orange is now King of England, he may in compensation, justly
lay his claim to those vast and rich Dutchies and Counties of Normandy,
Guienne, Poictou, Maine, Touraine, Anjou, that were the undisputable
inheritance of his Predecessors; besides his right to the whole Kingdom of
France.

The City of ORANGE, Aurasio Cavarum, or Secundanorum Colonia, lies a League
West of the Rhone, and 6 North of Avignon, with the Title of Principality, and
a Bishopric Suff^agan of Arles: This was formerly a Roman Colony of the second
Legion; there are still to be seen the remains of a Cinque, and a Triumphal
Arch almost whole. There was a kind ^f little Parliament, whose Members were
one half Roman Catholics, and the other Protestants, but it was cashiered by
the French King in 1687, and changed into a Viguiers Jurisdiction, under the
Parliament of Aix. It has still a Mint, and an University. Its strong Citadel,
and other Fortifications were razed in 1660. against the Agreement made some
Months before with Count Dhona Governor of the Town. The Protestant Religion
was forbidden there; though there are 12 or 15 Jewish Families offered in the
City, and above as many in the dependencies of it.

The other places of note are, Caderousse, Courtezon, Jonquieres, Vaqueyras,
and Gigondas; but formerly this Principality extended much farther within
Tricastinois, Diois, Valentinois, Gapencois, Sisteronnois, the County of Nice,
the County Venaissin, and even beyond the Rhone into the Dioceses of
Montpellier, Nismes and Lodeve in Languedoc.

Of the Islands of Provence.
THE Isles of Martegues, Maritimae Avaticorum, which are called by some, Venice
of France, are made of a Triple Town with the Title of Principality, belonging
to the Duke of Vendome. For they are divided into 3 Parts Ferriere, l'Isle and
Jonquieres, and seated on the Pond of Berre, from whence they have dug great
Ditches for a Communication with the Sea, distant about an English Mile; so
that the greatest Boats come up to the Town from the Sea, and go through the
Pond for the convenience of Trade; and they may easily go from one Town to the
other upon Bridges. There are all sorts of good Fish caught in certain high
Sea-rushes called, Bourdigaux; the Inhabitants are great Lovers of Dancing and
Mirth, whence comes the common Proverb to dance the Martingale. This Town has
had several Masters; for it belonged once to the Viscounts of Marseille, then
to the Counts of Provence. Francis of Lorrain Duchess of Mercoeur, Estampes,
Ponthievre, Princess of Martegues brought all her Estate into the House of
Vendome, by her Marriage with Caesar Duke of Vendome, a Legitimated Son to
Henry IV. These Islands lie 8 Leagues West of Marseille, 10 South East of
Arles, and 12 South West of Aix.

The Islands Stacades, called also the Golden ^^ands, or Hyeres, Olbia and
Areae, because ^ey lie over against the Town of that name, ^e 3 in number,
called by the Latins, Sturium, ^henice, Phila, and in French, Island of Le^ant,
or of Tilan, Porte-Cross, which has a Gar^ison, and Porquerolles, all three in
the Diocese ^f Toulon. In Cassian's time, these Islands were ^nhabited by
Monks; some of whom under ^ope Innocent the III. were Cisternians. They ^re so
fertile, that after the loss of Rhodes the ^nights of S. John designed to
settle there with ^he French King's leave.

The Islands of Lerins, Lero, Planasia, or Le^i^us, are but two in number, ove^
against the Town of Cannes toward Antibes, which are called Islands of S.
Margaret or Lero, and of S. H^norat, Planasiae, or Lerinus. The first draws ^ts
name from a Chapel dedicated to that Saint, ^t is three quarters of a League
long, and one quarter broad; there are five Ports, and a Citadel newly
fortified to defend it. The other draws it from S. Honorat, who founded there a
Monastery in 375. driving away as it is said, the Serpents that made it desert,
and cau^ing a Fountain of fresh water to spring there, which is still in being.
He was afterward Bi^hop of Arles. This Solitude has been for ^any Ages
together the Nursery of the Pre^ates of Provence, and of the neighboring
Churches. For thence are issued 12 Archbi^hops, as many Bishops, 10 Abbots, 4
Monks numbered among the Holy Confessors and 105 Martyrs. The Air is very
temperate, the So^ fertile. The Spaniards surpised these Islan^ in the
beginning of this Age, laid waste th^^ holy place, pulled down those fine
Forests o^ Pine-trees, which formed many covered Walks adorned by a vast number
of Oratories; but i^ 1637. they were turned out of them. Ther^ are in the
Island of S. Honorat 3 Walls, and ^ Chapels: they Fish there a great deal of
Corral.

As for Chateau-d'if, it is a little Island, tw^ Leagues South of Marseille,
with a good stron^ hold, where the biggest Ships stop, because they cannot get
in the Port of that City for want of Water. There are some Islands o^ the Mouth
of the Rhone, but covered only wit^ Grass and Mountains.

CHAP. XVII. Of Dauphine.
THis Province the nearest to Italy, confines on the North to that of Bresse,
and the Dukedom of Savoy is separ^ted from Piedmont by the Alps, on the East;
from the County of Nice, Provence, the County Venaissin, and the Principality
of Orange, by the sam^ Mountains, though interrupted in some places, toward the
South; and from Languedoe on the West by the Rhone. It reaches above fifty
common Leagues of France, or 38 of DAVPHINE, East and West, from Pignerol to
the Rhone, and above forty North and South from Fort de Baraux on the Borders
of Savoy to Cisteron in Provence. The Country is Mountainous all over, except
in the North-West of Low Dauphine; however it produces excellent Wine, and
abundance of Corn of all sorts; as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Spelt, Lentil,
Beans, Pease, and other kind of Pulse. There are also many Woods, and some of
them are pretty large, and full of Bucks, Deers, Shamoys, and other Beasts of
Game; but the greatest part of their Woods are Warrens, that abound with Hares,
Conies, Pheasants, red and gray Pratridges, etc. Neither does it want
Pasture-Ground, especially about the middle, and the foot of some Mountains,
whether the Provencals, and the Inhabitants of Low Dauphine send their Cattle
to feed in Summer time. In a word, this Country which, by the bare looking on
the Map, seems fitter for a Nest of Birds and wild Deers, than for the
Habitation of Men, supplies its Inhabitants with all the Conveniences of Life:
For as the Mountains and Valleys of High Dauphine, furnish them with Corn, Hay,
Apples, Pears, Nuts, Chestnuts, Cherries, and all sorts of Northern Fruits; so
the lower Part, gives them abundance of the best Wines, and even some Manna,
Olives, Oranges and Cittrons. They have likewise Salt-Springs and Iron-Mines;
but what is most valuable of all, its Mountains are the Seminaries of Gardens,
bringing forth abundance of wild Thyme, Daffodils, Tulips, Ambrets, Lilies,
Roses, Pinks, etc. besides that, they produce such Simples as are hardly to be
met with any where else; as the Scorzonera or Vipers-Grass; the Angelick, the
Satyrion, etc. There are also the seven Wonders of DAVPHINE, of which I shall
speak in their proper places.

Its chief Rivers are the Pin that rises in the South of Viennois, and waters a
good part of that Country, passing thorough the Marquisate of Virieu; the
Barony of La Tour da Pin, the Town of Bourgoin, and a Lake of that Name, and
falling into the Rhone, between Anton and St. Marie, seven Leagues East of
Lions. The Ozon, the Gere, the Vareze, the Dolon increased with the Ambre, and
the Sane, the Galaure, are other Rivers of the Viennois that discharge
themselves into the Rhone. The Isere that comes from Mount Iseron, in the Valley
of A^uste, washes a good part of Savoy, where it receives the Plen, and the
Arly at Constans; the Arc at Mi^^nis, goes by Montmelian, and through Gre^^ble,
where it mixes with the Drac, that rises in the Ambrunois, and is increased
with the Ra^anche and Gross, near Port de Champ, two Leagues South of
Grenoble; then it receives the Vence at Sassenage, the Bourne, and Eschevits ^t
La Baume washes Romans, and falls into the Rhone, five Miles North of Valence.
The small River of Veour runs likewise into the Rhone, increased with two other
Rivulets, over against ^^yons, a League South of Valence.

The Drome rises in the Valley of Valdrome in ^he Gapencois, goes thorough the
Lake of Beau^^nt, receives the Bese at St Feriol, and the Me^^ce at Die: Then
increased with the Sure, the Rouanne, and the Gervane, washes Crest, and ^ixes
with the Rhone, between Livron and L'Au^iol, eleven Miles South of Valence. The
Achas^^ rises at Montmorin, three or four Miles South of the Source of the
Drome, runs thorough the Valley of Bourdeaux, and by M^ntelimar, near which it
receives the Jabron, and the Vebre, takes the Name of Rouvion, and discharges
it self into ^he Rhone. The Durance proceeds from two Fountains; that spring
from Col de La-Roue, and ^oin at Brian^on, receives the River of Guille^re, at
a Burough of that Name, goes by Am^run, receives the Been at Vaulserre, and the
Buech, which is a pretty large River, bearing Float-Boats of Timber during ten
or twelve Leagues, at Cisteron, and pursuing its cours^ thorough Provence, goes
by Manosque, Cavaillon, and falls into the Rhone, near Avignon.

This Province is made up of some part o^ four Roman Provinces; for Vienne,
Valance, Die and Grenoble, were of the first Viennoise, Ambrun was the Capital
of the Maritim Alps, Ga^ belonged to the second Narbonnoise; and S. Pau^
Trois-Chasteaux, to the Province of Arles. The Burgundians conquered these
Provinces from the Romans, and enjoyed them about 90 or 130 from 404, or 408,
till 532, or 534, that they were subdued by the French, who were Master^ of
their Dominions, till 879, that one Boson caused himself to be crowned King of
Arles This Boson possessed only that part of the Burgundian Kingdom, which is
included between the Saone, the Alps and the Sea; but one Rodolph^ having
invaded the other Part in 888, and hi^ Son, Rodolphe the Second, having gotten
by cession that part which had been usurped by Boson, it passed to his
Successors, and from them to the Emperors of Germany, till tha^ under the
Reign of Henry the IV. Gui, or Gui^gue the VI. sirnam'd the Old, or the Fat,
takin^ hold of the Quarrel between this Emperor an^ the Popes, made himself
Sovereign of the County of Grenoble. His Successor Gui the VII. acquired the
Lordship or Country of Vienne, from Berthold of Zeringhen, and was the fiIst
tha^ called himself DAVPHIN of Viennois. Adr^an de Valois pretends, that this
Title was the Surname of that Prince, and quotes Beda; an^ William of
Malmsbury, who remembers one ^auphin Bishop of Lions, that was killed above
^000 Years ago; but Monsieur Chorier, in his earned History of DAVPHINE, tells
us out of ^n Author, that has written the Life of this Prince's Wife; that her
Husband having taken ^n a Tournaments the Dolphin for his Arms and Device; and
having been admired there, for his ^rowess and Valor; he thence got the Name
of ^^unt of the Dolphin, or Count Dolphin. The ^^st Prince of that Family,
Humbert the Second, ^aving had his eldest Son killed in the Battle of ^iecy,
against the English, and having unhappi^y let fall the Second out of a Window
as he ^laid with him, and being often provoked and disturbed by Amedeus of
Savoy his mortal Enemy, ^o pass the rest of his Life more quietly, he yielded
his Estates to the French King Philip of ^alois, upon these Conditions; That
the eldest son of France, should bear the Name of Dauphin, and the Arms of that
Province quar^^red with those of France, Du Chesne.
that the Clergy, Nobility and Commons, should still enjoy their Privileges;
and that the whole Province should ^ever be annexed to to the Kingdom of
France, ^^less the Empire were united to it.

The ancient Dauphins entitled themselves Princes of Briancon, Dukes of
Champsor, Marq^esses of Cesane, Counts Palatines of Vi^^ne, Albon, Grenoble,
Ambrun and Gap; Barons of La Tour du-Pin, Meuillon and Mountaubon; ^o which
Titles were added those of Counts of Valantinois and Diois, after the Year
1419, that Lewis of Poictiers left his Estates to Charles the ^. Dauphin, and
7th of that Name, King of ^rance.

Though this Province and Savoy be the ancie^ Allobroges, and this name in our
vulgar Tongu^ proverbially, signify a dull and heavy sort of Man: yet the
Dauphinois are not altogether so for Countrymen are skilful and industrious,
an^ know as well as any Tenants in the World, ho^ to cheat their Lords; those
of the Mountain are extraordinary strong, and go in Winter time to Provence,
and the lower Parts of Dauphine, where they get their Livelihood by Dressing
Hemp, and doing other hard works and to put to use the little Money they earn
they buy at their return some Pedling-ware for their Countrymen. The Gentry are
courageous and well bred, but poor for the most part, because too numerous;
those that have traveled are of a sweet conversation, but the others are too
tedious in their civilities. The Country-Language is a mixture of corrupted
Latin, Italian and French, broader toward Provence, and more languishing
toward Savoy, but the Gentry speaks good French every where, especially at
Grenoble; however you may distinguish them from the Parisians, not so much by
their Accent as by some particular Idiotisms. For instance, they say, beaucoup
du vin, bien de pain, la chose que j'ai fait, par chemin, instead of beaucoup
de vin, bien du pain, la chose que j'ay faite, par le chemin. During the civil
Wars the Protestants have been Masters of the best part of this Province, but
ever since the Popish Religion has been prevalent.

The whole Province is divided into several small Countries which, because
Authors much vary thereupon, I shall follow the new Division of Rob and
Samson, as I have hitherto done, and begin with Upper DAVPHINE.

Of High-Dauphine.
Of Gresivaudan.
BY the Name of GRESIVAVDAN, is understood the Bayliwick resorting to Gre^able,
which comprehends the Mountains of GRESIVAVDAN, properly so called; the Val^y
of Trieves Royanez, and a small Tract of land beyond the Isere, bordering on
Savoy and Viennois, making in all an extent of 24 Leagues North and South, and
18 or 20, East and West. Some take it for the Habitation of the ancient
Iricollores; and that afterward it was called GRESIVAVDAN, as if one should
say Vallis-Gracorum, The Valley of the Greeks; which Etimology seems more
reasonable, than to derive ^ from Gratianopolitana Vallis.

GRENOBLE, Capital of this Country, and of the whole Province, is seated on the
River Isere, which separates it into 2 Parts, the Town, and the long Suburbs of
St. Laurence; 12 or 13 League South-West of Montmelian. The Town is situated in
a fertile Plain, and the Suburb at the foot of a Mountain, that produces
excellen^ Wine; both taken together are of the bignes^ of London, from
Temple Bar to the Bridge. It Parliament is the third of France, for 'twas
erected by Lewis the XI. in 1453. There ar^ also a Chamber of Accounts,
Generality, Election, Presidial, Bayliwick, and a Spiritual Cour^ for the
Bishop, who takes the Title of Prince o^ Grenoble, and is suffragan to the
Archbishop o^ Vienne, though he precedes his Metropolitan at the Assembly of the
States. In what time thi^ Town was converted to Christianity is uncertain; for
the most ancient Bishop we know of is one Domnin, who assisted at the Council
o^ Aquileia in 381. These Prelates have the Privilege of presiding to the
States of that Province, which was granted to them, to reward the Fidelity of
one, who stuck firm with the Nobility to the French King's Interest, while the
rest of the Clergy and the People, resolved to submit to the Pope. There was of
late a Chamber of the Edict, made up of a President, and six Counselors Roman
Catholics, and as many Protestants; but it was abolished in 1679. To this
Chamber resorted the Reformed of Dauphine and Provence, and those of Burgundy
had the choice of this or that of Paris; besides that of the four Consuls or
Sheriffs, the Second was to be a Protestant. The most considerable Buildings
are the Cathedral-Church of our Lady, and that of S. Andrew, both of which have
Canons, and the last is considerable by a Pyramidical Tower. The other
Buildings are the Palace of the Parliament, that of the Governor, with its
costly Gardens; the House formerly belonging to the Lord Constable of
Lesdiguieres, etc. In 1562. the Protestants mastered that Town, with the
Castles of La Bussiere and Mirebel. Grenoble was already considerable in
Cicero's Time, and bore the Name of Cularo. The Emperor's Diocletian and
Maximinian repaired it, and gave a name to two of its Gates, as appears by an
ancient Inscription; but it is not so certain whether it was rebuilt by the
Emperor Gratian, tho it be now called Greatianopolis. Baudrand says, that it
is also called Granopolis, whence comes the French word Grenoble; but De Valois
observes, that Granopolis is but an abbreviation in writing of Grationopolis;
which maimed word some ignorant Transcriber has taken for the true name of that
Town. The Inhabitants of Grenoble a^e more polite than the rest of their
Countrymen, and the Residence of the Governor, and of the Parliament makes it
a pretty rich Town. It has produced several learned Men, especially Lawyers; as
Du Perier, Chorier, Allard; the two last of whom are yet alive, for ought I
know, the one being famous for his History of that Province, and the other for
that of its Nobility. Formerly some Branches of the River Drac, discharged into
the Isere to e'n near Grenoble; so that Rains and melted Snow swelling up this
Torrent, often drowned the neighboring Campaign, and even a good part of the
Town; but now they have removed them farther to the West.

Almost two Leagues West of Grenoble, upon the meeting of the Rivers, Vence and
Isere, is the Barony of Sassenage, famous not only for its Lords, who are the
most ancient and considerable in that Province, but especially for two rare
things that are reckoned among the Wonders of DAPHINE, namely, some Stones
which are said to be very serviceable to cure sore Eyes; and two Hollownesses
dug in the Rock, and called by the Inhabitants Cuves or Tubs, which are
pretended to be empty the whole year round, execept on the Day of Epiphany,
though no body knows whence it comes, nor whether it retires after that Day. They
add further, that there is more or less Water in several years, according as
the Harvest is to be more or less abundant, which is signified in respect to
Corn by one of these Tubs, and in regard of Wine by the other. Diverse Authors
mention these Tubs, and I have often heard of them, but I never had occasion to
examine this pretended wonder, nor did I ever speak* with any Man of Repute, who
had been an Eyewitness of it, or who gave any credit to this relation.

Halfway between Grenoble and Sassenage, is La Tour Sans Venin, another wonder
of Dauphine, where it is said, that no Venomous Creature can live no more than
in Ireand.

Seven Miles North of Grenoble, is La Grand, Chartreuse, the chief Habitation
of the Cartusian Monks, and the ordinary Residence of the General. It Is a
magnificent Building in a fine Desert, in the middle of steep and rugged Rocks.
It was founded in the 11th Century, by one Bruno, who weary of the World,
retired thither, and had leave given him, by Hugh, Bishop of Grenoble, to build
there a Chapel, and since a Monastery, which in process of time increased to
that height, that it became the Head of the Cartusian Order, and these
Solitaries, the richest of all the Friars, as they are still, unless the
Jesuits do exceed them. All those who go to pay these Monks a Visit, are kindly
received, and entertained by the Directors of the House; for the Monks
themselves speak to no body, unless it be at cettain Hours, and that in very
few words, which is a fair pretense to conceal the gross Ignorance wherein they
are kept. They will show you all the Curiosities thereabouts, without enquiring
what Religion you are of, at least it was so, some time before the last
Persecution.

Remounting the Ifere, nine Leagues North of Grenoble, 11 Miles from the Grand
Chartreuse, and five South of Montmelian, lies Fort de Baraux, situated on a
Mountain near that River. It is not quite so strong as Montmelian was of late;
however it is the Key of France on that side. In 1528, March 13. the Duke of
Lesdiguieres took it by Storm from the Leaguers in two hours time.

On the South of the Isere, two Leagues East of Grenoble, lies the Village of
Giere, which I mention here for a natural Curiosity, the like I never met with
else where; namely, a Cascade, or VVater-Fall, that precipitates it self down
from a steep Rock, almost as high as the Steeple of Bow-Church, and as thick as
two Men; and after it has run some steps into a small Rivulet, is brought
thorough Lead Pipes into a Garden, where it spouts with an incredible Violence,
as high as any Tree; so that if this Place were not neglected, but Art were
joined to Nature, it would make the finest VVater-fall and Spout in the World.

The Gardens, and Park of Vizille, three Leagues South-west of Grenoble are
much better kept, because they belonged to the Dukes of Lesdiguieres, which
during three Generations, and almost an Age, have enjoyed the Government of
Dauphine. The Park is encompassed with Walls of almost three Leagues in
circuit. There are small Hills and Valleys, and abundance of all Beasts of
Game. There is likewise a Mesnagerie, where they keep Foreign Birds. But the
most considerable piece is what they call, tho somewhat improperly the Cascade.
for it is rather the Bed of a small Brook of a Mile or two in length, paved with
Free large Stone, and divided into Squares of 5 or 6 Fathoms; so that the Water
falls by degrees from the Duke's Palace to the end of the Park.

The Valley of Trieves is considerable for the abundance of its Gentry, and the
three Towns of La mure, Men's and Corpse. The resemblance of the Names makes
Holstenius take the second for the habitation of the ancient Mimenii, and the
third for that of the Tricorii. This Valley is yet famous for a place called the
Burning-Fountain, which was indeed so in Caesar's time, and even about 50 Years
ago; but whether that the Sulphureal Steams were then spent, or by some other
accident unknown to me, the small Rivulet, that ran over the Burning-place,
lies now some steps farther. However, it is still admirable enough to see a low
place vomit Smoke and Flames, without any appearance of Hollowness or
combustible Matter; and that the Minerals, that are the source of those Steams
should have lasted Time out of Mind, without any sensible dimunition. And
therefore this place is still accounted one of the seven Wonders of Dauphine.
At night, especially in cold Weather, or when it rains but slowly, the Flames
are very sensible; but in the heat of the Day, or after a violent Rain, there
appears but a Smoke, which, being put on Fire by kindled Straw, draws out other
Vapors; so that the Flame lasts a considerable time.

The small Country of Royanez, the most Westerly of GRESIVAVDAN, along the
Isere, has two Marquisates, La Baume and Pont de Royan, which last is a large
Burough, where the Protestants had a Church, and a Minister that made himself
known of late, several ways.

Of the County of DIOIS.
THis Country anciently inhabited by the Vocontii, seems to have been much
larger than it is now, since Vasio or Vaison, a City of Provence, near the
County Venaissin was its Capital. Now it is extended about 18 Leagues North and
South from St. Julien to S. Ferriol, and about 16 East and West from La Croix
Haute to Crest, where it is broadest. Besides Vasio, the Vocontii had 21 Towns
more, among which, Lucus Augusti, and Dea Vocontiorum, were the most
considerable; the first is now but a Village, called Luc, near a Lake of that
Name, almost six Leagues South-East of Die. All the ancient Historians agree,
that Hannibal went thorough the Land of the Vocontii, toward Pignerol, in
order to pass the Alps, and descend into Italy. But this Country is much more
considerable, for having produced one of the best Historians Rome ever saw, and
whose loss is most deplorable, viz. Trogus Pompeius.

This County is Mountainous all over, though fruitful in Wine and Corn, and
abundant with Pasture-ground. The most remarkable is Mont-Aiguille, or the
unaccessible Mountain, five Leagues North-East of Die, near a Village called
Chessiliane. One can go up to the height of a quarter of a Mile, but then it
rises so steep for almost a Mile, that no sort of Animal was ever able to go to
the top of it, which appears by the Grass and Weeds that are overgrown there.

Near this Mountain is the Valley of Vercors, which keeps yet something of the
Name of the Vocontii, or rather of a small Tract of Land belonging to them, and
called Vertacomicoros. Die, upon the Drome, lies 16 Leagues South of Grenoble,
and 11 South-west of Valence, is the Dea Vocontiorum, and a Colony of the
Romans, built or repaired in honor of Livia, Augustus's Wife; and therefore
sometimes called Dea Augusta. It has a Bayliwick, and a Bishopric, which was
united to that of Valence in 1275, but was again separated from it in 1687.

This Town was full of Protestants before the the last Persecution, because
they had there a College and University proper to them, for Philosophy and
Divinity. The Lombards became Masters of Die in 1514; and after the last
dismembring of the Kingdom of Arles or Burgundy, the Sovereignty of it was
usurped by the Bishops, or some Lords under them. They bore the Title of
Counts, and were issued from the House of Forcalquier, who possessed it during
the 11 and 12th Century; at the end of which it passed to the House of
Poictiers, who already enjoyed the County of Valentimois, but Lewis of
Poictiers sold them both to the French King Charles the VI. in 1404; and so
they were united to the rest of the Province. The Protestants took this Town
twice during the civil Wars in 1577 and 1585; and the last time razed the
Citadel. The most ancient Bishop of Die remembered in History is one Martius;
for St. Nicaise, who was the sole Prelate of the Gauls, that assisted to the
first Council of Nice was but the 5th in Order.

Three Miles North-west of Die is the Village of Quint on the meeting of the
Rivers Sure and Drome. It gives name to a Mountain whence it rises, three
Leagues North-west of the Village of Saillans, which Ortelius and Holstein,
suppose to be some remains of the ancient Segalauni; but Adrian de Valois
proves that according to the geni^s of the French Tongue, Saillans cannot be
derived from thence. The Village of Bourdeaux gives it name to a Valley on the
South of the River Achasse.

Of the BARONNIES.
THis Counary the most Southerly of Dauphine produces not only good Wine, but
also some Olives, Figs, Oranges and Pomegranates. It seems to be so named from
the several Lordships it comprehends in its little extent of 16 Leagues East
and West, and six or seven North and South. It is likewise called the Bailiwick
of le Buys, from its Capital, seated on the River Ouveze, on the Borders of
Provence, six Leagues North East of Vaison. It is but a small Town, tho it be
the Seat of a Baily, and that the Protestants and Roman Catholics thought it
worth their trouble to fight for it; the Lord of St. Auban having taken it for
the former in 1561. Here and at Nions, another pretty Town, five Leagues North
West upon the River Eygues were a great number- of Protestants. Near the last is a
large Rock with a Hole, that emits a wind almost insensible hard by, but very
violent at 20 or 30 Steps distance. I shall not insist upon the several
Lordships of this Country, as Condouret, Gouvernet, Menouillon, Montbrun, which
have given their Names to as many noble Families.

Of Gapencois.
THis Bayliwick extended about 18 Leagues North and South, and 14 East and
West, though it be for the most part Mountainous, does not want any of the
conveniences of Life. Its ancient Inhabitants were called Tricorii; as appears
by the Description that Livy makes of Hannibal's Journey thorough Dauphine. In
this Territory is the trembling Meadow, le pre qui tremble accounted one of the
seven Wonders of Dauphine. Horses and Carts dare not go over it, for fear of
sinking down.

The Capital City is called in Latin Vapincum; but tho it has been along time
so considerable, that it was the 5th in Order among the Cities of Nar^onnoise
Gaul, yet it is not mentioned by ancient Geographers. Its modern name is Gap
now somewhat famous by the late expedition of the Duke of Savoy. It formerly
belonged to the Counts of Forcalquier, till William the VI. gave it for her
Portion to his Granddaughter Beatrix of Claustrail married to Guy Andrew,
Dauphin of Vienne, in 1202, whence perhaps it is that the Bishop intitles
himself Count of Gap. This Town is not very big nor very strong neither, being
commanded by Mountains round about, and having no other River but a small Book,
called Been. During the civil Wars the Papists proved the strongest in this
Town, and having driven out the Protestants 1561, declared afterward for the
League. The Duke of Lesdeguieres, the French King's Lieutenant, to keep these
Rebels in awe, built a Fort upon a Hill, named Puymore, a Mile West of the Town
in 1588. Last year 1692. The Duke of Savoy having taken Ambrun, Gap surrendered
to him, but he abandoned both soon after. The Inhabitants of Gap, hold St.
Demetrius a Martyr for their first Bishop, but their first Prelate remembered in
History is one Constance, who assisted at the Council of Paunas in 1509.

Veins, 6 Leagues South-West of Gap, is the habitation of many Gentlemen, who
divide amongst them the jurisdiction of the place. It Is seated between fruitful
Mountains and Meadows, but is not accounted a Town, because not walled in.
However it would be as big as Gap, if the 7 or 8 Hamlets depending on it were
joined.

Serres upon the River Buech, 10 Leagues South West of Gap, is a small Town
that has its name from the Hills whereupon it is built, and wherewith it is
encompassed; that are called in the Country Language Serres. The place is
capable of good Fortification; and therefore in the late civil Wars the Duke of
Lesdiguieres built there a strong Castle, whose Ruins are still to be seen.
Orpierre, three or four Leagues South of Serres, is a considerable Burough,
with the Title of Barony belonging to the House of Orange. La Roche has the
Title of County, Tallart of Viscounty, Sauze and Esparron of Marquisates.
Montmaur and Arzilliers of Baronies, etc. St. Bonnet, five Leagues North of
Gap, is the Birthplace of Francois de Bonne, who from a simple Gentleman
raised by his Valor to the Dignities of Duke, and Peer, Marshall, and Lord
High Constable of France. It Is observed, that on the first of April 1543, that
this great Captain came into the World; and the 28 of September 1624, that he
departed from it, two memorable Incendies happened at St. Bonnet. Lesdiguieres
has a fine, but not strong Castle. It was erected into a Duchy and Peerdom, on
behalf of the forementioned Francois de Bonne, in 1611. It lies 5 Leagues West
of St. Bonnet, and nine North-west of Gap.

Of Ambrunois.
THis Country reaches not above ten or eleven Leagues on all sides, and a great
part of it is barren Mountains and Deserts. It was the dewlling place of the
Caturigae, whereof there are still some remains in the name of the Village of
Ch^rges, Catorigomagus, 4 Leagues West of Ambrun, and as many East of G^p.

AMBRVN or Embrun, the Capital was the chief Habitation of the Ambruareti,
Allies to the Romans, according to Du Chesne; but the name of their City was
Ebredunum or Ebrodunum, Caturigum, to distinguish it from Ebredunum
Helvetiorum, which is Iverdun in Switzerland. This City is now small, but seems
formerly to have been considerable, since Caesar makes mention of it; and that
in the Dauphin's time it was the Title of their eldest Son. The Archbishop has
for Suffragans 6 Cities of Provence, Digne, Grass, Vence, Glandeve Senez and
Nice, and takes the Title of Prince of Ambrun, and Count of Seyne and
Guillestre. Ambrun was formerly an Imperial Town, but the Founders of the
second Kingdom of Burgundy gave the Sovereignty of it to its Prelates, who in
process of time yielded part of their Right to the French King's, as that of
Coining Money, etc. However they have still part of the Towns Jurisdiction, and
the other is Royal, under the Title of Bailiwick and Presidial. Ambrun is
seated on the Platform of a rugged Rock, washed by the River Durance.

It Is said, that about the end of the first Century, one of St. Nazare planted
there Christianity; but if so be, it had been almost extinguished after his
decease or departure, since we do not read of any Bishop there before St.
Marcellin about the Year 340. In 1583, Lesdiguieres the French King's
Lieutenant took this Town from the League, and the Inhabitants redeemed
themselves from Plunder by a free Contribution, as they have done the same way
from the Duke of Savoy's Arms, in 1692. The Citadel, which had been built
during the civil Wars has been since demolished.

Seyne has the Title of a County depending on the Archbishop of Ambrun, as we
have already hinted, however Sanson puts it in Provence, and some will have it
to be a remainder of the ancient Sentii.

Guillestre is a good Village, not otherwise considerable than that it gives
its name to a River, and is one of the Passes of Dauphine into the Marquisate
of Saluces, and so farther into Piemont.

Of Brianconois.
THis Mountainous Country reaches 18 or 20 Leagues East and West from Pignerol
to the Mountains called Produissen, and 16 North and South from Chateau-Dauphin
to Col de La Roue. It was formerly of a narrower extent, before Pignerol, and
the adjacent Valleys were yielded to the French King. In this Territory falls a
sweet and purging Dew, called La Manne de BRIANCON, and accounted one of the
seven Wonders of this Province.

The Capital BRIANCON is now the head of that Bailiwick, and the Seat of a
Presidial, but was never a Bishopric, tho Rob calls it so. Under the
Dauphins it had the Title of a Principality, of which they bore the name, but
under the Romans it was at first one of the places where they used to incamp;
but by little and little it became a Place of some note. Both this Town and
Country made part of the Kingdom of Cottius, that famous Gaulish Prince, whom
Augustus not being able to subdue, persented with the Alliance of the Roman
Empire. His whole Realm consisted in 12 Towns, of which Suse was the Capital;
but he knew so well how to in^^ench himself, that both his Subjects, and his
Enemies concurred to give his name to the Mountains whereon he reigned, calling
them Cottian Alps, during the extent of 14 Leagues from Mount Viso to Mount
Cenis. This Town ^n Latin Brigantio or Brigantium, depended for ^ long time
upon the Segusiones, or the Princes ^f Suze.

BRIANCON is now built on the foot of ^ Rock, near Mount Genevre, on the
meeting ^f two small Brooks, one of which bears the ^^me of Dure, viz. the most
Easterly, and the ^^ther that of Ance; but after their junction, ^he common
name of Durance. BRIANCON is esteemed by reason of its Situation the ^ighest
Town in Europe, tho it be commanded ^y a Castle, built upon the Rock, at the
bottom ^f which the Town lies. Two Leagues South (...) BRIANCON, is a pierced
Rock, called ^^tuis Rostan; some believe that Caesar caused ^^is Passage to be
made thorough this Rock for ^is Troops, at his entrance into the Gauls. Others
^e of opinion, that it is the same Rock, which ^nnibal caused to be pierced
with Fire and ^inegar, that his Elephants might pass thorough; others again
think that it is a Work of King ^^tius, in honor of Augustus, whose Statue he
^^ected upon it. Whatsoever it may be, BRI^NCON has not been considerable
before (...) 13th Century. In the last Age the Leaguers ^^zed upon it; but the
Duke of Lesdiguieres ^ok it from them in 1590. This Town has produced one of
the learnedest Mathematicians of France, called Oronce Fine, who was professor
Royal at Paris, and died in 1555.

Pignerol is properly a City of Piedm^nt, and formerly was the Title and
Portion of the Dukes of Savoy's youngest Sons. It is seated upon the small
River Cluson or Chisson, which falls into the Po near Moncallier, two Leagues
South of Turin. It had formerly a good Citadel only; but since the French have
it in their possession, they have fortified it so as to make it almost an
impregnable place. The Citadel is built on a Rock, and the Town between the
last Mountains of the Alps, seven Leagues South-East of Turin, and 12 North
West of BRIANCON. There Is is a Fort called St. Bridge, which has communication
with the Citadel by a covered way, and subterraneous passages. The Duke of
Savoy at the head of the Confederate Forces, took it this year 1693. But
instead of going on vigorously with the Siege of the Town and Citadel, they
left them blocked up, and went to sight Catinat the French General, who lay
encamped with 12 or 14000 Men betwixt the Mountains of Col de Fenestrelles, and
Col de Rossa, seven or eight Leagues North West of Pignerol. But when they were
gone so far, they perceived they could not come at him: So that after much time
lost they went back, and opened the Trenches before Pignerol in September,
raised the Siege, and were deseated, October the 4th 1693.

It Is a pleasure to read the cunning fetches of that shrewd Politician,
Cardinal Rihelieu, to get this Strong-hold into his Master's Hands. There arose
a Civil War in Piedmont (perhaps by this subtle Minister's Devices) The Uncles
of the young Duke, pretending to the Regency against the Duchess Dowager, who
had been left in possession of it by her Husband. As she was a Princess of the
French Blood, she presently implored the assistance of her Cousin, especially
seeing that her Competitors were assisted by the Spaniards. It had been an easy
matter for the French Monarch, to maintain the Duchess in the quiet possession
of her Right: But the Policy of his chief Minister suffered her to come to that
extremity, that she kept nothing else beyond the Alps, besides Turin and its
Citadel. Whilst she was in those Fears, she was promised a sufficient Succor
to restore her into all her Dominions, provided she would yield to the French
King Pignerol. and all the Valleys, of Piedmont. She was very loath to part
with such a large Portion of her Territories; but at last, for fear of loosing
all, she consented to yield Pignerol, with the Valleys on the East Side of the
River Cluson; whereupon the Treaty was secretly concluded in the Town of
Queyras, the 31th of March 1631; so that ever since, the important Valleys of
Perouse and Pragelas belonged to the French King.

There are some other places, that give their Name to Valleys; as the Burough
of Bardonanche; the Town of Queyras, with a strong Castle and a Mountain washed
by the River Guillestre, the Burough of Chasteau-Dauphin, which seems to have
been built by the Princes of that Country, against the Incursions of the
Piemontois; for it lies on the utmost Borders of Dauphine, ten Leagues South
East of BRIANCON.

The Fort of Exilles is another considerable passage from France into Italy, 13
Miles North-West of Brianon and but 3 East of Suze: Caesar makes mention of it
in the first Book of his Commentaries, under the name of Ocelum. The Country
about it is called by the Inhabitants the Valley of Duren.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Low DAUPHINE.
Of VIENNOIS.
THis Country that now comprehends the Bayliwicks of Vienne, and St. Marcellin
was formerly called the Isle of the Allobroges; it being included between the
Rivers Rhosne on the North and West; the Isere on the South, and the Giare on
the East, and reaching 24 Leagues North and South, and 18 East and West; it is
the best and most inhabited part of Dauphine, being watered with several
Rivers, and less interrupted with Mountains than the others. The Capital Vienne
built upon the Rhone, where it receives the small River Gere, lies 8 Leagues
South of Lions. 18 Norli- of Valence, and as many North-West of Gren^ble: It is
accounted one of the antientest Towns in the Gauls, and even in all Europe, and
therefore its original is very uncertain, for it is not likely that it should
have been built by Vennerius an African Exile, and called Bienna, because it
was raised in two years; for the Latin Tongue was not yet so far spread, as to
derive the Etymology of such an ancient Town, from one of its compounded Words.
Neither is the Original related by Stephanus less fabulous: for he pretends
that the Inhabitants of Biennus a Town of Crete, or Candie, which no body
mentions but himself, being driven out of their Country by a great drought,
came by the direction of the Oracle to a marshy place along the Rhone, where
they built this Town and called it Bienna from the name of one of their
Virgins, who had been swallowed up by the ground, whilst she was dancing. But
as this Town is named Vienna Allobrogum by the ancient Geographers, who used to
give to Cities the name of their Founders; so it is apparent, that it has been
built by the Natives of the Country, the Allobroges. However it is sti^l very
difficult to determine the time of its Foundation; only we know that about the
year 366 of Rome, when the Senenois passed over Italy, they built two Temples
at Vienna, one dedicated to Mars, and the other to the Victory.

This Town has flourished a long time under tho Romans. Tiberius Gra^chus built
there a Bridge in 566 of Rome, and fortified the two ends of it with a strong
Castle. Caesar made it his Storehouse for Arms. Tiberius built there that high
Tower which the People call the Tower of Pilate, as though he had died in this
place. There is another ancient Building now named Notre Dame de La Vic. Our
Lady of Life, which was formerly a Heathen Temple, where the Romans used to
render Justice; for which reason the People calls it the Pretory or the Palace
of Pilate, as though he had sat there as Judge during his Banishment. They
add, that he was a Native of Vienne, but there is no proof of his being born or
ever exiled thither, and this fabulous Tradition seems to take its Original
from Humbert Pilati, Secretary to the last Dauphin, who had a Country House
near St. Vallier, which the vulgar also calls the House of Pilate.

The Emperor Galba granted many Privileges to this Town, in requital of the
affection of its Citizens, who had declared for him against Nero, whilst those
of Lions held still for that Tyrant, wherefore he also confiscated their Goods.
During the Civil Wars of Otho and Vitellius a Captain of the last took Vienne
in his possession; and while this Emperor was sitting on the Tribunal Seat, a
Cock light'd on his shoulders, and then on his head, signifying as the Augures
explained it, that he should fall into the hands of a Gaulish Man; and so it
happened, for the first who defeated him was one Antony of Tolosa Nickname
Becco, or Cock-beak. Diocletian and Maximian, who strove to perpetuate their
memory, through the most famous Cities called one of this Town-Gates Herculia.

Besides all this Vienne is remarkable for the Banishment of Archelaus, Herod
the Great's Son and Successor; for being the Native Country of Valerius
Asiaticus, who was twice Consul, which shows that the Viennois were a Roman
Citizens born, and might become Senators in that Capital of the World. There
also it was that Julianus Caesar began his Consulship by the Celebration of
solemn Games; that the Emperor Valentinian the young was killed by Count
Arbogast; Constant the Usurper by Gerontius, and Godegile Prince of Burgundy,
by his Brother Gondebaud.

The Romans had adorned Vienne, in which they much delighted, with several
Magnificent Buildings, as an Amphitheatre, an Aqueduct, a Palace, etc. whereof
there are still considerable remains, and this is not at all strange, since
Vienne was the Capital of the Narbonnoise, which they first conquered and
beautified above the rest.

The Burgundians were the first, who took this Town from the Romans, and made
it the head of their Kingdoms, but after they had been subdued by the French,
Vienne remained united to that Monarchy, till it became part of a second
Kingdom of the Burgundians in Charles the Simple's time. At the dismembring of
this new Realm, it passed under the Power of the Dauphins, who entitled
themselves Dauphins of Viennois and Counts of Albon, a Castle along the Rhone
between Vienne and Valance. It will be worth our enquiry to see how this great
Town is by degrees fallen to the low State it is now in, for it is hardly
extended a Mile in length from Lions Gate to that o^ Avignon, and its breath
comes not near it. Vienne was then at first the Capital City of the
Narbonnoise, that is of Savoy, Dauphine, Provence and Languedoc; and when it
was converted to Christianity its Metropolitan, had under him the Bishops of
all their Provinces. And indeed the first Christians of Vienne, besides the
Dignity of their Town, seemed to des^rve that honor; for they not only
confessed the name of our Savior in the middle of a cruel Persecution, under
the Emperor Decius, but also encouraged the other faithful by their Writings
and Examples, as may be seen by a Letter, which Eusebius has inserted in his
Ecclesiastical History. Soon after the Narbonnoise was subdivided into 5
Provinces, of which the Viennoise had the honor to be the first, and had 13
Episcopal Cities depending on it. In process of time Arles, one of its
Suffragans growing in Wealth and bigness, was erected into an Archbishopric,
and deprived its Metropolitan of seven of its Suffragans, of which however it
kept but 4, viz. St. Paul Trois Chasteaux, Orange, Marseille and Toulon; the
Popes making afterward their dear Avignon an Archbishopric, and subjecting to
it the Cities of Vaison, Cavaillon, and Carpentras; so that the Metropolitan of
Vienne, has now but 5 real Suffragans, viz. Valence, Die, Viviers, Grenoble,
and St. John de Maurienne, to which may be added the Titular Bishop of Geneve.

But the greatest unhappiness of Vienne came from that which was designed to
keep the luster of its Metropolitans, namely, the Gift which the Emperors made
to them of the Sovereignty of the Town; for this caused several broils betwixt
these Prelates and the Dauphins, which by succession of time much depopulated
this ancient City, so that in 1448, the Archbishops were forced at last to
yield up their Right to Lewis the XIth. then Dauphin, and afterward King of
France. The name of this easy Prelate was John of Poictiers, whose Successors
have been ever since in a little esteem, whereas his Predecessors made a great
figure in the World. Vienne has had the Privilege of coining Money, as appears
by several pieces, bearing its name under the first and second race of the
French Kings.

Thirteen Miles North East of Vienne, lies upon a Mountain, the Village of
Ponay, which Mr. Chorier esteems to be the place where the Epa^nense, or
Ponense Concilium was held, after the Conversion of Sigismund King of Burgundy,
in 517. Adrian de Valois mentions a Village called Ebao or Tortillane, which
800 years ago belonged to the Archbishops of Vienne, and consequently did not
lie far off; and thence infers that Ebao and Epaone are the same name; but I
find no such place, as Ebao or Tortillane in my Maps.

The first considerable Town after Vienne in this Diocese, is Romans upon the
Isere, fifteen Leagues South East of Vienne, and 14 West of Grenoble. It was
originally an Abbey founded by one Bernard Archbishop of Vienne, and called
Romany or Romanum Monasterium; either because the Romans were yet Masters of
the Country, or that he put in Monks and Clerks coming out of Rome. Whatever be
of that, the Jurisdiction of the Town, formerly belonged to the Collegiate
Church of St. Bernard, but in 1344. Pope Clement the VI. made a gift of another
Man's property, by transferring it to the Dauphin Humbert, who yielded him up
Avisan. It Is observed that the Situation of this Town, has some (...) with that
of Jerusalem, and especially a small Hill within its Walls to Mount Calvaire;
which was the reason that one Romanet Bossi^, who had traveled into the Holy
Land, erected there a Building representing the St. Sepulcher, with a Monastery
for Franciscan Friars, in 1520. In 1562, the Protestants becoming Masters of
the Town, plundered the said Convent and Church.

St. Marcellin 7 Leagues North East of Romans, and 8 West of Grenoble is the
head of a small Bayliwick, that takes up 6 or 7 Leagues of the North end of the
Diocese of Vienne. On the Borders of this Bayliwick, 8 Leagues North East of
St. Marcellin, and 6 North of Grenoble is the Borough of Voyron, where was a
famous Abbey, and a goodly Town called in the old Chartres Visorontia or
Veserontia, if we believe the Jesuit Labbe; for Adrian de Valois conjectures
more probably, that it is a place still called Veseronce, 4 Leagues North East
of the Town of Bourgoin, one South of the County of Bouchage, and 2 West of the
Rhone.

In the same Bayliwick, lies the small Town of Thin or Thain, 7 Miles West of
Romans; it is seated upon the Rhone, over against Tournon, from which it is
separated by nothing but this River. It must have been of some consideration in
the 4th. or 5th. Century, since the Maps of the Emperor Theodosius published by
the Brothers Peutingers, mention it under the name of Tegna; 15 Miles North of
Romans lies the Town of Moras, seated upon a Mountain 5 Miles of St. Rambert
upon the Rhone.

Going out of the Bayliwick of Grenoble, 10 Leagues North of that City, you
meet with the Town of Pont de Beauvoisin Pons Bellovicinus, so called, because
it is built upon the River Giere; and divided into two parts, united by a
Bridge. This part of Viennois is all mountainous, as well as Savoy and Bresse
upon which it borders. The Inhabitants name it Terres Froides, and made a great
Traffic of the Vipers, which abound in their Country. Six leagues West of Pont
de Beauvoisin is the famous Barony of La Tour du Pin, of which the Dauphins
bore the Title. On this Barony formerly depended the Town of Bourgoin, which
lies three Leagues farther to the West, and is renowned for its Trade of Hemp.
Five Leagues North of Bourgoin, lies the Borough of Cremieu, in Latin
Stramiacum, where the Emperor Lewis the Meek kept an Assembly in 836. The
Borough of Anton upon the Rhone, 7 Leagues East of Lions, seems to have been
built or beautified by Marc Antony the Triumvir, both by its Latin name
Antoniacum, and by these Verses of Sido^ius Apollinaris.

Pocula non heic sunt illustria nomine, pagi,
Quod posuit nostris ipse Triumvir agris.
For this Part of Viennoise was in the Territory of Lions, wherein this Poet
was born, so that he will say that the Country thereabouts afforded no better
Wine than that of Anton. Six Leagues East of Anton upon the Rhone, and the
Borders of Bresse, lies the Town of Quirieu; 3 Leagues North of Vienne, and 5
South of Lions, lies the Borough of St. Saphorin, renowned for its Post-asses.
These Animals are so well taught, that they go to the Borough of La
Guillotiere, which makes part of Lions, but shall not advance a step farther
than the place where they are used to be let loose, though you should beat them
never so much, and the same they do in their return to St. Saphorin.

I supersede to describe the many Lordships that are in this Country, as the
Marquisates of Virieu, and Omacieu, the Counties of Diximieu, Serrieres,
Bouchage, Roussillon, Anjou, Charms; the Baronies of Baubec, Anton, etc.

Of VALENTINOIS.
THis Country, included between the Rhone and Isere, the Bayliwick of Die, and
the Tricastinois, reaches 20 Leagues North and South, but hardly 6 or 8 East
and West. The Southern part is more mountainous, the Northern more plain, but
both abundant with all the conveniences of life. The Capital Valance, lies
upon the Rhone 6 Leagues South West of Romans, and 18 of Grenoble: The Latins
call it Valentia, or Julia Vallentia; because of its strength, and of the
Colony they had transported there. In their time it was Inhabited by the
Segalauni, one of the chief People of the Gauls, and their Dominions extended
even beyond the Rhone, since Tournon was in their Jurisdiction. VALENTINOIS was
erected into a Sovereign County, at the dismembring of the French Monarchy,
under the Successors of Charlemaign. The first Count thereof remembered in
History is one Gontard, who lived in 950, and who by the Surname of Poictiers,
which he left to his Successors, seems to be descended from the ancient Dukes
of Aquitain. I have observed how Lewis of Poictiers, yielded his Dominions to
the French King Lewis the XI. who united them to the rest of Dauphine. Lewis
the XII. erected this County into a Dukedom, for Caesar Borgia Son to Pope
Alexander the VI. but the Lords of Poictiers made a solemn protestation against
it, pretending their Father could not deprive them of their Inheritance. The
Suit was along time depending before the Parliament of Grenoble; but what their
good Right could not get was obtained by the Beauty of a Lady of that House,
Diane of Poictiers, Mistress to Francis the I. who easily prevailed upon that
King to present her with the contested Duchy, which after her death was united
again to the French Crown. Valence is the head of a Seneschalship, to which the
Vice-seneschalships of Crest and Montlimar are resorting. It has likewise a
Presidial-seat and Election, and an University for the Civil and Cannon Law,
wherein Doctors are made, and the Famous Cujas has taught.

Its Bishop is Suffragan to Vienne, and the first is one Emilian. Its Cathedral
is dedicated to another of its Prelates, called St. Apollinaire: But I must not
forget that famous Nicodemite John of Montluc, Bishop of Valence, who lived
under the Reign of Francis I. Henry II. and his three Sons, and was one of the
most Learned Men of his time. He favored the Protestant Doctrine openly
enough, and often Preached it at Court. But whether he could not as easily
resolve to for sake his Kitchen as Transubstantiation, as he himself used to
say; or that he thought that his stay at Court would be more serviceable to the
good side, than a public abjuration; or that he did not like a Presbyterian
Reformation; as it is reported that when the Ministers of Geneve wrote to him,
he should come over to them to make a public Profession of the Truth; he
answered they ought rather to come to, and take orders from him, they having no
lawful Mission; whatsoever it may be, he dyed in the Communion of the Roman
Church, at Toulouse in 1579. Among the Monasteries of Valence is most eminent,
the Abbey of St. Ruff chief of the Order of St. Augustine, esteemed one of the
most sumptuous Buildings of all Dauphine. The Foundation of this Town is
uncertain, but it appears by several Inscriptions and Roman Monuments, that it
is very ancient. It is divided into Town and Borough, and is defended by a
Citadel; for the other Fortifications which Francis the I. designed to make at
Grenoble and Valence were never finished. In the Town are two Fountains, whose
Conduits said to have been built by Julius Caesar, are indeed a Work of the
Roman Magnificence; for they are vaulted, and so big that a Man may walk
upright in them: the source and the end of one cannot be discovered, and along
the other, which waters the Neighboring Meadows, are the ruins of several
ancient Buildings. The Country People do not want fabulous Traditions, no more
than their Neighbors at Vienne; for they will tell you strange Stories of a
Giant called Briard, who was 15 Cubits high, and show you some monstrous
remains of his Bones; nay the Dominican Friars assure, that they have still his
true Picture, which they do not fail to show to Strangers.

Duchesne relates, that in the Neighboring Vineyards was discovered a Grave,
at the opening of which was seen a Woman, having a golden Ring at each of her
ears, with a Turky-stone and Emerald inchased in them; at her Feet was a Cup of
Cristal, and at her Head a Lamp of Glass, but as soon as this dead Body was
exposed to the piercing Air, it turned into dust. Between Valence and the fall
of the Isere into the Rhone, at a Leagues distance from both is the Village of
Confolen, where Fabius Maximus gave a total overthrow to the Gaulish Forces, in
the Year 633 of Rome.

Thirteen Miles South-East of Valence, upon the River Drome, lies the Town of
Crest, formerly a dependence of the Segalauni, and a Castle of the Counts of
VALENTINOIS. This French name is derived from the Latin Crista; because this
Castle being seated between the River and a Neighboring Mountain, appeared as
the Cap or the Comb of a Cock; and therefore it was the place of Arms of the
Counts of VALENTINOIS, and the Count of Montfort besieged it in vain, in the
13th. Age. As this Town is conveniently seated between the Diocesses of Valence
and Die, so it was the Seat of Justice for the upper part of both Counties.
It Is observed, that in 1469, one John Rabot made a new Statute-Book divided in
a hundred Articles, which were afterward confirmed by the Parliament of
Dauphine. Crest had declared it self for the League in the last Century, but
its Governor Montoison surrendered it to the French King Henry the Great, in
1589, and since that time its Tower has been demolished. Six Leagues South of
Valence near the Mouth of the Drome is the Borough of Lauriol or l'Auriol,
Laureolum or Aureolum, with a Priorate of S. John's Order. M^utelimar, almost
nine Leagues South West of Crest, and 13 South of Valence, is a considerable
Town seated upon a Mountain washed by the River Rubion; whence and from its
Founders, the Lords of Grignan called Adhemar of Monteil, it has taken the name
of Montilium Adhemari, and in Frenc^ Montilly Monteil-Aymar and Montelimar.
(...) it was, that one Milon the Pope's Legate assembled the Bishops of the
Neighboring Provinc^ against Raymond the VI. Count of Toulo^^ and the
Albigeois, in 1208. One Girard ^r made Homage of this Town to Pope Gra^^^^ the
XI. and exchanged it with Clement the ^II. for the Lordship of Grillon, but the
Dauphin Lewis the XI. not liking this barter, go^ the Town of Montelimar again,
restored Grillon to the Pope, and gave the Lordship of Marsanne to Adhemar, in
1446. In the last age the Inhabitants of this Town were among the first who
declared for the Reformation, which drew several troubles upon them, and was
the cause that it was taken and retaken several times. Montelimar has a very
fine prospect, and is but a League East of the Rhone. It produces excellent
Wines, which are almost the sole in that Country that will bear Carriage, and
therefore are transported by Land, as far as Grenoble and Chambery. That famous
Contoversist Chamier, so much known among the Protestants of France, by his
Panstratia, was Minister of Montelimar. In this Duchy are farther remarkable
the Buroughs of Chabeuil, Estoille, Livron L' Auriol and Diou le Fit renowned
for its Ear, then-ware; the County of Monteillez, etc.

Of Tricastinois.
THis Country, which makes a kind of Triangle, between the County Venaissin on
the East, South and South West; the River Rh^ne on the West, and the
Vice-seneschalship of Montelimar on the North, is hardly extended 6 Leagues
where it is broadest. The Capital St. Paul Tricastin, or, as the vulgar calls
it St. Paul Trois Chateaux bears the name of one of its Bishops, and of its
ancient Inhabitants the Tricastini. Pliny calls it Augusta Tricastinorum, but
Ptolomy Noviomagus (...), which makes Jos. Scaliger and the Learned Jesuit
Sirmond take it for 2 different Towns, whereof the last Noviomagus should
denote Nions upon the River Aygues, almost 9 Leagues East of St. Paul, but
Adrian de Valois does not think it reasonable to ascribe two Capital Cities to
such an inconsiderable People, as the Tricastins ever were, for all what we
find remembered of them, is, that Hannibal went through their Country, in his
Journey to the Alps. The first Bishop of St. Paul mentioned in History is one
Florentius, who assisted to the Council of Epaone or Ponay, in 517. In the last
Age, the Protestants were Masters of that Town during near 50 years; but in
1590. Antony Du Cross, who had been named to that Bishopric, sang Mass again in
the Cathedral, after the Popish Worship had been expelled from it 44 years.

Grignan is a small Borough, seated upon a Mountain 4 Leagues North East of
St. Paul. It has the Title of a Barony; but is much more considerable by the
luster of its Lords, who are known since the 10th. or 12th. Century, and have
been entrusted with several important Charges in France, especially the
Lieutenancy of Provence. You have yet in this Diocese Donzere, Pierre-Latte, La
Palu, Suze, Mondragon, etc.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Government Lyonnois.
THE most ancient Authors, especially the Greeks used to call Gaul, Celtick
(...) and (...). Then that appellation became proper to that part, that was
included betwixt the Rhone, the Seine, and the Marne, the Ocean, and the
Garomne; but Augustus took off that which lay betwixt the Garomne and the
Loire, to ine^ease Aquitain, and gave it the name of Lyonnoise from Lions its
Capital City. At this present the Government Lyonnois is far narrower
comprehending only 6 Provinces, viz. Lyonnois properly so called Forez and
Beaujolois, that are very little and make scarce together 25 Leagues North and
South, and 35 East and West. The other three are Bourbonnois, La March and
Auvergne, which reach all together 52 Leagues North and South from Germigny in
Bourbonnois over against Dun-le Roy in Berry, to Entraygues in Auvergne on the
River Lot; and 76 East and West from Belle-ville on the Rhone in Beaujolois, to
Availle on the Vienne in the Country of La March.

Most of the Rivers that water this Government belong more properly to others,
where you will find their course described, as the Vienne, the Creuse, and the
Indre in Orleannois, the Dordonne in Languedoc, the Loire and the Rhone in the
General Description, and the Saone in Burgundy. Remains then only the Allier,
Elaver, which rises in the Cevennes on the Borders of Gevaudan* and Velay,
waters Les-Chazes, Langeac, Peyrusse, La Voute, Brioude, Auzon, Issoire, Vic-le
Comte, Pont du Chateau, Vichis S. Germain des fossez, Varennes, M^ulins;
receives in its way the Alagnon near Auzon, the Duore or Door, and the Siolle
or Sioulle increased with the Bouble near Maringues, betwixt Pont du Chateau
and Vichy. Then falls into the Loire, 3 Miles South West of Nevers, after it
has separated Nivernois from Bourbonnois during 10 Leagues.

Of Proper LYONNOIS.
LIONNOIS properly so called is about 12 Leagues in length, and 7 in breadth;
it is situated between Dauphine, from which it is separated on the East by the
Rhone; it has Bresse and Beaujolois on the North; Forez on the West, and
Vivarais on the South. Its Soil about Lions is more proper for Wine than Corn;
in other things it is abundantly fertile, affording great quantity of excellent
Fruits, and some Mines of mixed Metals. Besides the Rhone and the Saone, which
carry abundance of things to Lions; there are some small Rivers the Azargues,
the Mornance, the Brenne, and the Giez, which have not 15 Leagues in their
whole Course.

Lions, the chief City of this division, and of the whole Government, is seated
on the Confluence of the Rhone and the Saone; Its Situation is very pleasant,
its Original ancient, and its Trade the greatest in the Kingdom; so that Lions
is generally esteemed one of the Principal Cities of Europe. Here is an
Archbishop, who is Primate of the Celtick Gaulae, the Archbishops of Rouen,
Tours and Sens depending by right upon him, as Metropolitans of the second,
third, and fourth Lyonnoise; to whom may be now added the Archbishop of Paris,
as the head of a 5th. Province. The Diocese of Lions extends through all Proper
LYONNOIS, Forez and Beaujolois. Here are also a Count of the Treasury of
France; a Presidial Seat; a Seneschals Court; an Election, a Tribunal of
Commerce, which is annexed to the Consulate, under the Title of the Conservation
of Lions.

Authors vary very much about the Foundation of Lions, and the Original of its
Name. Some say that Lugdus King of the Celtes was the Founder of it; so that
from Lugdus and Dunum (which signifies a Mountain) did arise Lugdidunum, or
Lugdunum; some will have it to come from Lug (which in the Cimbrique Tongue
signifies Fortune) and Dunum a Hill, that is the Hill, or Mountain of Fortune;
others from two Gaulish words Lugo-dunum, which they interpret the Mountain of
the Raves. And others again from Lucius Plancus, who by order of the Senate
brought thither a Roman Colony from Vienne. It is sure that before that time,
that is before the Triumvirate, Lions was already a considerable City, though
not so famous as it became afterward.

In 744 of Rome, 60 Gaulish Cities contributed toward the erection of an
Altar, dedicated to Augustus, and built on the confluence of the Saone and
Rhone, at a place called Ainay, where is still a famous Abbey of Benedictins.
Here Caius Caesar celebrated Games, and Prises were given to those that
delivered the best Discourse in Greek and Latin.

Under the Empire of Nero, a great part of this City was burnt down, to whose
rebuilding this Emperor gave out of his Exchequer 400000 Sesterces, as much as
they themselves had contributed before in troublesome times. This made the
LYONNOIS so faithful to his interest, that they withstood Galba, and stuck to
the false Nero, until they were undeceived.

In Antonine's time, there was an Amphitheatre, which according to an ancient
Chronicle, had been built by the Emperor Trajan, at a place called now
Serviere, where stands the Collegiate Church of S. Thomas. In the Collegiate
Church of S. John the Canons have the Title of Counts, and the Dean that of
Duke.

Pontius Pilate, who condemned our Lord, was a Native of Lions, and confined
thither for his Concussions, as well as Herod Antipas, and his Miss Herodias,
the Murderers of S. John the Baptist, and starved there. Pierre-Cize is an old
and strong Castle, where Prisoners of State are kept. It has its name from the
Rock in which it is built; there is no Author who speaks of this City without
giving it great Elogies. In ancient Inscriptions it is termed Colonia Claudia
Copia, or the Colony of Claudius, and the abundance of Gaul, because the
Emperor Claudius was born there; he mixed that Colony with that of the Viennois,
and ordered that Lions should be the Granary of the Gauls, as being situated
between Bresse, Bourgogne, Auvergne, Velay, Vivarais, Dauphine, Bugey, etc.
from whence it receives all sorts of commodities by the means of the two Rivers
that water it. Herodian called it great and happy City: Ptol^my gave it the
name of famous Metropolis; Sidonius Apollinaris called it Rhodanusia, or the
best City on the Rhone, Scaliger termed it un Nouveau ^^nde dans le vieux and
un vieux dans le Nouveau: ^ new World in the old, and an old in the new. The
Country about that City is extraordinary ^leasant.

The other places of some note in LYONNOIS are Chavaney Coindrieu renowned for
its Wine, Vimy, Chasselay, Anse along the Rhone, ^arare, Chazal, La Bresle, S.
Genis-l'Argentier, S. Genis-la-Val, S. Saphorin le Chastel, Mon^agny, Revirie,
S. Andiol, S. Martin en Jarez. ^^ive de Giez, S. Chaumont a Marquisate, known
(...) the Manufactory of Silk, S. Jean de Bonne^^s, etc.

Of FOREZ.
FOREZ Segusianus Ager, or Pagus Forensis, has as great an Extent as Lyonnois
and Beaujolois together; it has Burgundy and Bourbonnois on the North, Velay
and Vivarais ^n the South, the Mountains of Auvergne ^n the West, Lyonnois and
Beaujolois on the ^ast. This Country is very fertile, and fa^^ous for its great
number of Noblemens ^ouses. It Is proverbially said, that one may ^s soon number
the Stars in the Firmament, as ^o count all the Rivulets and Brooks, which from
all quarters of this Country fall into the Loire. It has many excellent
Medicinal Waters. It is divided into Upper and Lower* The Upper is near the
Cevennes, and the Lower all beyond the Loire on the West Side. All this Country
is full of Woods and Forests* especially the Upper part, whence some derive the
name of it, and write it Forets; but other deny that Original, and spell it
Forez, and the Latin favors their Opinion, besides that the Inhabitants are
called Foresiens, and not Forestiens. They are famous through all the Kingdom,
for their Trade of Iron-Wares, and for making all sorts of Iron-Works. This
Country has still the Title of a County. It has had its particular Counts (who
were also Counts of Lions) since the year 1070. Some of them have been famous
in History, as Charles II. of Bourbon, Lord High Constable of France, under
Francis I. Soon after this County was reunited to the French Crown, by the
same King. Its Principal Towns are, Montbrison, S. Etienne, Roanne, and Feurs.
Montbrison Mons Brusonis Capital os Upper Forez, is situated on the little
River Vecize 14 Leagues from Lions toward the West, it has a Bailywick an
Election, and a Provos^ship; formerly it was nothing else than a Castle called
Brison, afterward incl^sed with Walls, Anno 428. Here are a Collegiate Church
dedicated to our Lady, and diverse Religious Houses; with the best Clock-spell
of the whole Province.

St. Etienne de Furens, Fanum Sancti Stephani, is a Town 2 Leagues E. of the P.
ver Loire, and to South-west of Lions, it is situated at the foot of a Mountain
on the Riv^let of Furens, whose Waters are very proper for the tempering of
Iron, which occasioneth a vast quantity of Iron-Works to be made in that
Country, from whence ^any places of Europe are furnished. In a Mountain hard
by, is a Mine of Stone-Coals, that burns since several Years.

Roanne, Rodumna, is the Capital City of a little Country, called Roannois in
Forez, fifteen Leagues North-west of Lions, having the Title of Duchy,
^ituated on the River Loire, which thereabouts ^egins to carry considerable
Boats, wherein ^^ose that design to go to Orleans by water use ^^ imbark. In it
is a College of Jesuits; as ^lso diverse religious Houses. It had anciently its
Counts issued from the House of FOREZ.

Feurs, Forum Segusianorum, is situated on the ^iver Loire, where it receives
the little River ^ignon, so famous in the Romance of Astrea, ^etween Lion,
Roanne, and S. Etienne. It lies ^^ne or ten Leagues West of Lions.

St. Galmier upon the Loire, halfway betwixt ^eurs and S. Etienne de Furens,
is renowned for ^ Fountain, whose Water tastes like Wine; ^^d it is said, that
if one mixes a fourth part of ^ine with it, that mixture cannot be
distin^^ished from pure Wine.

St. Ferreol, a League East of the Loire, and ^ South-west of S. Etienne de
Furens, has a Bay^ick as well as Bourg-Argental, on the borders ^ ^elay, 3
Leagues West of the Rhone.

On the West Side of the Loire, you meet ^^th Leignieu, Montarchior, S.
Rambert, Bouen, ^ Germain-la-Val; Vrse, a Marquisate, the small ^^untry of
Chevalez, with the Capital S. Just, ^^^zet, Chateau-Moran, etc.

Of BEAUJOLOIS.
BEAVJOLOIS, Bell^-Jocensis Pagus, having the Title of Barony, is situated
between the Saone and the Loire; it has Lionnois on the South; the
Principality of Dombes, and part of Maconnois on the East; Charolois on the
North, and Forez on the West. This Country is very fertile in Wine, Corn* Hemp,
and depends partly on the Bishop o^ Macon, viz. the most Northern Parts, but
al^ the rest lies under the Archbishop of Lions. It^ chief places are Beaujeu,
Ville-Franche and Belle-Ville.

Beaujeu, Bellus-Jocus, is now only a Village situated on the Ardiere, having a
Castle which gave its name to BEAVJOLOIS, and the Lord of the House of Beaujeu,
which is so famous an^ ancient, and seems to be a Branch of the House of Savoy.
It Is about 11 Leagues North North West of Lions, and is famous for some
Sculptures, or fine Engraven Works after the Antiqu^ Fashion. Ville-Franche,
Francopolis, or Villa Franca. is seven Leagues from Lions toward the North,
being distant about half a League from the Saone; now it is esteemed the Capital
o^ BEAVJOLOIS. It has a Collegiate Church, a^ Election, a Bayliwick, an
Academy, and ^ Granary of Salt. There is the first Monastery of Franciscans
that was ever built in France.

Belle-Ville, is distant from Lions about 10 Leagues, and is very nigh the
Saone. The other places, as Pereux, T^izy-Reignie, are but inconsiderable
Buroughs or Villages.

Of BOURBONNOIS.
BOVRBONNOIS, Burbonensis Pagus, has Forez and Bourgogne on the East, Berry on
the West, from which it is separated by the Cher; Auvergne and Forez on the
South, and on the North it has Nivernois, with part of Berry from East to
West; it extends it self about 30 Leagues, and about 18 or 20 from South to
North. This Country abounds with Fruits, Rye and Pulse; Pastures, VVallnuts,
Oil, and Mines of Iron.

BOVRBONNOIS is divided into upper and lower, according to its proximity to the
Mountains of Auvergne. Montagar is accounted the Capital of the Upper, and
Moulins in the Lower of the whole C^untry. The ancient B^ii, a Celtick Nation,
having exhausted themselves, by sending Colonies into Italy and Germany, were
afterward extinguished in the Gauls; but some of the German Plantation
re-entring their original Country in company of the Switzers; the latter were
defeated by the Romans, and the former settled themselves in some part of the
Territories ^f the Autunois, with the leave of the Inhabitants, and of the
Romans. The place i^ thought to be Moulin's, because it depends on the Bishop
of Autun; whereas the rest o^ BOVRBONNOIS resorts either to the Bishop o^
Nevers, to the Archbishop of Bourges, or to the Bishop of Clermont.

The Loire, the Allier, with other little Rivers and many Ponds in this Country
afford great variety of Fish to the Indabitants. Its Minera^ Waters occasion a
great confluence of Strangers

The learned Gui Coquille says, that BOVRBONNOIS consisted at first only of
Bourbon Larchambaud, and some adjacent Lordships; bu^ that its Counts
encroaching upon their Neighbors made it such a large Country as it is now ^ An
Image of what the French Kings of tha^ Family should do. Robert II. Son to
Lewis IX* was the first Prince of the Royal Blood o^ France, who bare the name
of Bourbon, having spoused the Heiress of it.

Moulins, Molinae, situated on the Allier, in a Plain very large, fertile and
pleasant. It ha^ that name from the many Water-Mills that are about it; and its
rise, if we believe Samson ^ from a Bridge which Caesar rebuilt here. Thi^ Town
has a strong and fine Castle, and is especially renowned for the good Knives
and Cizer^ that are made in it. Formerly 'twas the ordinary Residing-place of
the Dukes of Bourbon.

Moulins is divided into four Parts; the City i^ self, the new Town, the Suburb
of the Carmelites, and that of the Allier. It Is a City pretty ancient, and its
Medicinal Waters render it very famous. It has a Collegiate Church, 3 or 4
Parishes, diverse religious Houses, a College of Jesuits, a Presidial-Seat, a
Generality, on which the Elections of Montluss^n, Ga^^^, and Esvaon, and
several others in Nivern^is, and Upper March are depending. Moulins lies 39
Leagues North-west of Lions.

Bourbon-l'Archambaut, Burbo Erchenbaldi, is a Town and a Castle situated in a
fruitful Valley betwixt four Mountains. It is as ancient as King Pep^n's time,
and was but at first a Barony, which the French King Charles the Fair erected
into a Duchy and Peerdom in 1327. The Castle is seated on a Rock, and
surrounded with 24 Towers. The Dukes have founded there an ^^o^y Chapel, with
12 Canons and a Treasurer. There are also a large Pond, and renowned Baths.

The other places of Bourbonnois are Vich^, Cusset, a fortified Town: S.
Germain-des-Fossez, Billi, La Palisse, a County where is a fine Castle, and a
large Park. S. Germain-le-Puy, Varennes, Jaligni, Doinpierre, etc. All betwixt
the Allier and the Lotre. St. Amand, at the foot of the fortress Montrond, that
was razed in 1652. A^^ay-le-Vieux and Montlucon, all three upon the Cher. The
last lies in a very good Territory, with Woods, Pastures and Vines. Near it is
a Box-Tree Warren, which being green all the year round, goes there for a
Wonder. Neris is famous because of its Baths, and has 13 Mills upon a Brook of
warm Water. La March is the Capital of the little Country of Combraille.
Montegut lez Combraille resorts to no inferio Justice, but depends immediately
on the Parliament of Paris. Chantelle and Fourrilles, are two Marquisates, the
former of which has a very fine House. Bellenave is a considerable Lordship.
Ville-Franche, St. Hilaire, Herisson, S^ncoin, are places of some note, all
lying betwix^ the Allier, and the Cher.

Of AUVERGNE.
AVVERGNE, Arvernia, having the Title of a County, has Forez on the East;
Bourbonnois on the North; Limosin, Quercy and La-Marche, on the West; Rou^rgue,
and the Cevennes on the South. Thi^ Province from North to South is about forty
Leagues, and about thirty from West to East* It Is divided into Higher and
Lower. The Lower called Limagne, Lemane, lies along the River Allier in a very
fertile Plain, abounding in Corn, Wine, and Mineral Waters. They trade much in
Tapestry-Hangings, Laces, Clothes, Knives, and other Commodities. The
Inhabitants in general are skilful, industrious, good Soldiers, and understand
their Interest very well.

The Auvergnats, Arverni, have been one of the Wealthiest and Mightiest Nations
in the Gauls, and are said to have extended their Dominions to the Rhine, and
the Mediterranean Sea. They were still powerful enough in the Gauls in Caesar's
Time, since the Gevaudans, the Velains, and the Quercinois were their
Tributaries, and Vercingentorix, an Auvergnat, had interest enough in the Gauls
to make them rise against the Romans. They had some time before waged War
against those Conquerors of the World, having in conjunction with the
Allobroges attacked the Autunois, Allies to the Romans; but they had been
beaten, and their King Bituitus taken Prisoner.

Upper Auvergne, or Le-haut-pays, lies in the Cevennes, which from thence are
called the Mountains of AVVERGNE. The Capital S. Flour, S. Flori Oppidum, has
its name from one Florus Bishop of the Velains. It lies on the top of a
Mountain, which is flat, and is washed by the Rivulet Lander, called
Indiciacum. It was erected from a Priory to a Bishopric in 1317, by Pope John
XXII. and the Chapter of the Cathedral was seculariz'd by Pope Sixtus IV. It
is, and has been still an inconsiderable Town, eighteen Leagues North-East of
Rodez, and 39 South-west of Lions.

Aurillac, Aureliacum, bears most probably the Name of one Aurelius its
Founder, though others derive it from an adjacent Lake, where it is pretended
that Grains of Gold were found. There is a famous Abbey of Benedictins, which
has still the name of its Founder, being called l'Abbaye de S. Giraud.

Mauriac is considerable for its Fairs, whether are brought vast numbers of
Horses; and for a College of Jesuits. Madic has a Castle, one of the finest
Houses in the whole Province, both bordering upon Limosin. The other places are
Entraygues, Ghaudes-Aigues, Carlat, Vic en Carladez, Roquebrou, Bleaux, Salers,
Murat, Lastic a Viscounty; Massiat a Lordship, Alanches, Achon,
Riom-des-Montagnes, Miramont, Bles^e etc.

The Mountains of AVVERGNE are not rugged and naked, but full of Grass and
excellen^ Simples, which are much esteemed by Physicians. The chief of this
Country have a great Name through the whole Kingdom, and Milk is so abundant
here, that it surpasses the quantity of the Wine that is made in Lower Auvergne
or at least in Limagne the best part of it. Moun^ Cantal, betwixt S. Flour and
Aurillac, is the highest of all, being always covered with Snow and has 3
Leagues in length.

Lower-Auvergne, is divided again into two Parts by the River Allier, and the
East Side i^ called Limagne, Lemane, Limmane, and Limane since the Time of
Gregory of Tours. Clermont Nemetum, Augustonemetum, afterward Arverni^ and at
last Clarus Mons, the Capital of a^ AVVERGNE is seated upon a Mountain, whenc^
it has its modern Name, betwixt two Rivulets Artier and Bedat, that discharge
themselves into the Allier on the West Side. It has the Title o^ a County, a
Court of Aids, a Presidial, and ^ Bishopric Suffragan of Bourges.

Caelius Rhodiginus relates, that in Julius Caesar's Time, there was a wooden
Tower, tha^ could never be burnt, because it was of Larix which resists Fire.

In the Time of the Emperor Nero, Zenodorus, a famous Statuary, made there
(...) Colosse (...) Mercury, 400 foot high, which was the cause that he was
called to Rome, to make a Colossean Statue of that Emperor of an 110 Foot.
There was then at Clermont a Temple covered with Lead, paved with Marble of
inlaid Work, and having a double Wall 3^ foot thick. The Cathedral Church is
still a sumptuous Building, ^overed with Pew^er, or Lead, mixed with Tin. Money
has formerly been coined here, as appears by a Tower that bears still the Name
of the Tower of the Mint. The Records of this Town make also mention of a
Capitole, where Weights and Measures were kept.

Not far of Cle^ment is a Mountain, called Gergoye, on which the ancient City
of G^rgovia was apparently seated. It Is this Town which Vercingentorix so b
arely defended against Julius Caesar, that he forced that great Captain to
raise the Siege. There is likewise a Brook, called Tiretaine, whose Waters are
thick and slimy like Pitch, and have such a petrifying Virtue, that all
running, they form a Bridge, which the Inhabitants are obliged to cut, lest he
should grow too great.

Riom, Ricomagus, lies three Leagues North-East of Clermont, upon a little
Hill, which re^ders both its Situation and Prospect agreeable. It is very well
built; the Streets are straight and wide, the Houses fine, the Churches
magnificent, the Monasteries sumptuous, the Fountains pleasant, and the Gardens
delicate; they live there both cheap, and with delicacy; so that it is called
the Flower-Garden of AVVERGNE And its Latin Name, made up of two ^aulish words
Rico-magus, signifies rich Habitation. Riom honors for its Patron one S.
Amable, of whom Gregory of Tours says, that he had the Virtue of putting
Serpents to flight. It Is the Native Country of James Sirmond, and Amable Burze,
two very learned Men. This Town is the chief of the Dukedom of Auvergne, of
which all the Fiefs and Mesne-fiefs of the Province are Vassals, and was
erected into a Dukedom, on behalf of John Duke of Berry, Son to the French
King, in 1360. It is above 900 Years since the Judge of this Town was called
the universal Judge of all the Province, because he judged by Appeal all the
Lawsuits. It has a Seneschal's Jurisdiction, and a Presidial, which is one of
the most considerable of the Realm, as well as a Generality of Finances; an
Election, and both a Marshal, and Consular Jurisdiction. The Lieutenant General
is also a Provost of the Court of Mint, and judge of all the differences, that
may arise in the Convocation of the Ban, and Rear-ban of the Province, which is
made at Riom. Justice is administered there in a Castle or Palace, which John of
Berry caused to be built.

Aygue-Perse, Aqua Sparsa, is the Capital of a little Country, called the
Dauphine of Auvergne, that is now united to the Duchy of Montpensier, which
lies but a League North of it, and both Towns three or four Leagues North of
Riom.

Brioude Brivas, lies upon the Allier, thirteen Leagues South of Clermont. It Is
famous for the Grave of S. Julian a Martyr, and for a Collegiate Church of
Canons, who are Counts of the Town, and depend immediately upon the Pope. The
Bridge of the Borough, called Old Brioude, has only an Arch, but extraordinary
long and high.

Issoire, Iciodurum, upon the Allier, almost midway betwixt Clermont and
Brioude, is renowned for its good Race of Horses, and for a bottomless Lake,
whence rises a Vapor, which resolves it self into Rain, if you throw a stone
into it.

Pont-gibaut, 3 Leagues North-west of Clermont, has a Silver Mine in its
Neighborhood. Three Leagues more Northwards lies S. Gervais, where has been,
as it is said, a Race of Conjurers, called les Marquis, the last of whom cast
himself headlong into a Pond. Maringues is much frequented for its Haven upon
the Allier, which begins here to be navigable. It lies almost seven Leagues
North-East of Clermont.

La Queulle, is a Castle near the borders of Limosin, six Leagues South-west of
Clermont, which has in its Neighborhood a Fountain that tastes of Wine, and
has, say they, as much strength mixed with the sixth part of that Liquor. Hard
by is a Mountain, called Le Mont d'or, The golden Mountain, because of some
Chaffs like Gold, that are seen glittering in its Ponds, and of a sort of
shining, yellow or golden Sand, that is used by Gentlemen to dry their
Writings. Here is the source of the River Dordonne, and of several Springs very
healthful to those that has themselves therein.

The other places of note in Lower Auvergne, on the West Side of the Allier,
are S. Pourcain near that River, and the Frontiers of Bourbonnois, from whence
to Langeac, a Marquisate, near the Cevennes, the Allier is continually bordered
with Vineyards, Gannat, Esbreule, Menat, Manatense Monastertum; Effiat a
Marquisate, Randan a Duchy, Artonne, Enezat, Montserrand over against
Clermont; Pont au mur, Hermene, Orcival, Cournon, le Crest, Pont du Chasteau,
Besse, S. Perdoux, La Tour, S. Germain-Lambrun, Mercaeur, Ardes, Blesle, etc.

On the East of the Allier (to which part of Lower Auvergne Du val appropriates
the name of Limagne, tho other Geographers extend it father to the West) are
Vic le Comte upon the Allier, 11 Miles South-East of Clermont. It Is the Capital
of a tract of Land, called the County of Auvergne, has a fine Palace, and a S.
Chapel, pretended to be built by the Dukes of Albany. Billom, Biliomagus, is
environed with pleasant Vineyards. Thiers or Tiern, Tigernum Castrum, is
renowned for the good Knives and Cizers that are made there: Lezoux, for the
goodness of its Air, and its excellent Melons. Arlenc, is the Capital of a
small Country, named Livradois, because it was rid or delivered of the
overflowing Waters, by digging a Channel a thousand foot in length through a
Mountain.

The other places are Alegre a Marquisate, S. Paullian, Paulliaguet, la Voute
Chillac, la Cheze-Dieu Casa Dei, Auzon Alsona, S. Germain-Lerm, Amb^rt,
Saucilanges Celsinaniae, S. Amand-de-Roche-Savine, Corpiere Curva Petra,
Oliergues, Puy-Guillaume, Manlieu Magnus us, with an Abbey of Benedictins.

Of La MARCH.
MARK in the Teutonic Tongue, signifies Confines or Limits, whence comes
Mark-graaf-Marquis, that is Governor of the Frontiers. This Province having
been made up of the Borders of Poictou, Limosin and Auvergne has gotten from
thence the name of Marka or Marchia, La MARCH. It has Berry to the North,
Poictou to the West; Limosin to the North, and Auvergne, (that is, the little
Territories of Combrailles and Franc-Aleu, which are of its dependencies) to
the East. Its extent from West to East is about 30 Leagues, and from South to
North fifteen, and in some places twenty. It Is divided into Upper, whose chief
Town is Gueret, and into Lower, which has le Dorat. The Lords of Lusignan or
Lezignen, were counts of La MARCH, afterward of Angoulesme, and those 2.
Counties were united to the French Crown, under King Philip the Fair. It has
often been the Appannage of younger Brothers in France, especially of the House
of Bourbon, and was at last re-annex'd to that Crown in 1331, after many
Revolutions. This Country is but indifferent fruitful, and produces only some
Pastures, Oats and Rye. There are good Horses, and they trade also in Oxen,
Sheep, Hogs, and coarse Clothes. Several considerable Rivers have their Source
here; as the Vienne, the Cher, the Creuse, and the Gartempe. This Province
resorts for the Temporal to the Parliament of Paris, and for the Spiritual to
the Bishop of Limoges.

Gueret Waractum, Capital of Upper March, has a Seneschalship, a Presidial, a
Mareshal's Jurisdiction, and an Ecclesiastical Court of the Diocese of Limoges,
from which it is 12 Leagues distant to the North-East. Its name seems to come
from the Latin Vervactum, which signifies an unmanur'd Ground, whence has been
made Waractum, Garactum and Gueret. This Town has an Election resorting to the
Generality of Moulins.

The other places of some Note in Upper March, are Bellegarde, Capital of the
little Country of Franc-aleu, with an Election under the Generality of Moulins;
Aubusson, that gives name to a noble Family, whence is issued a famous great
Master of Maltha, Bonlieu, Cheneraille, Jarnage, S. Julien, Chastelus, Dunaise,
all on the East of the Creuse. On the West of that River are, Celle, Glenic,
Sevignac, Granmond an Abbey, chief of the Order of that Name; Murat, Ahun,
Bourganeuf, Dougnon, Pont-aurion, S. Leonard, Chastain, Feletin, etc.

Le Dorat, Dauratum, for Deauratum, Capital of Lower March, lies not far from
the Gartempe and Seve, 12 Leagues North-west of Gueret, with an Election
resorting to the Generality of Limoges. Belac, two Leagues Southwards is
another pretty Town, with an Election under the same Generality. Crouzan, now
an inconsiderable Village near the borders of Berry, has been the Residence of
the ancient Counts of La March. The other places are Brosse a Viscounty,
Lussac-les-Eglises, les-Plats, Pont-S. Martin, Mombas a Viscounty; Availle,
Confoulens, Brigueuil a Viscounty, all near the Borders of Poictou. S. Junien,
Embazais, Lesegaux, Oradour, Mortemar a Duchy, not far from Limosin. Touron,
Rencon, Maignac, la Sousterraine, etc. East of le Dorat.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Government of Burgundy.
AT the beginning of the 5th Century, under the Empire of Honorius, the
Burgundians, Burgundiones, a German Nation entered into the Gauls, and having
conquered several Countries from the Romans, their King Gaudisele laid there
the Foundation of a Realm in 408, which under his Successor Gaudicare, in 413
took the name of its Conquerors, and was called the Kingdom of Burgundy,
whereof Vienne in Dauphine was the Capital. It was made up of some Provinces of
the Narbonnoise and Celtick Gaul, comprehending Switzerland, Savoy, Dauphine,
the Northern part of Provence, Burgundy Duchy and County. As they were
Warlike, and of a Stature that frighted the Galli and Romans (for Sidonius
Apollinary describes them, as being 7 Foot high) they would have extended their
Dominions farther; but tha^ the French on the North, and the Wisigoths on the
South and West, that were as barbarous, and as great Warriors as they, opposed
their Progresses. By the Conquest of Clovis, the French having brought the
Wisigoths very low, his Sons after his Death attacked the Burgundians, and
Childebert, and Clotaire, having killed or routed Godomar the IX. and last King
of that Nation, in 527, their Empire finished 119 after its beginning. The
Burgundians are esteemed part of the Vandals, and were settled on the
South Side of the Danube, in Bavaria and Austria, before their coming into the
Gauls.

After this defeat, nothing remained of the ancient Kingdom of Burgundy, but
the Name; for it was subject to the French during 340 years, until the
Divisions of Charlemaign, or Lewis the Meek's Successors gave occasion to one
Beuves, or Beuvon, to usurp the Sovereignty of it under Charles the Bald.
Boson, Son to Beuves, plotted so well with the Prelates, that he got himself
Crowned King of Burgundy, by the Metropolitans of Lions, Vienne Tarantaise,
Aix, Arles and Besancon, and 17 Bishops, in 879, his Son Lewis, sirnam'd the
Blind, succeeded him in 888, but his Grandson Charles Constantin was only
Prince of Vienne, and never Crowned King; one Hugh, Son to Theobald, Count of
Arles, having made himself Master of Arles and Italy, in 926. This yielded all
the Countries belonging to the Kingdom of Burgundy, to Rodolph, Son of another
Rodolph, who in 888 had erected another Realm within the Alps, beyond Mont
Jura, under the Name of the Transjuran Burgundy. In the mean while the Duchy
of Burgundy, fell again to the share of French Lords, from whom Robert, Son to
Hugh Capet, King of France took it, in 1001, and left it, in 1031, to his
second Son Robert, who was the head of the first Race of the Dukes of Burgundy.
Philip I. the last of this Stock dying without Issue, in 1361, this Duchy,
with its dependencies was inherited by the French King John, who in 1363 gave
it to his second Son Philip II. sirnam'd the Bold, he was succeeded by John
without fear, Philip III. or the Good, and Charles the Rash, who leaving but a
Daughter, called Margueret, in 1477, the French King Lewis XI seized upon the
Duchy of Burgundy, as a Male Feet, the Princess Margaret, who had spoused
Maximilian of Austria, keeping Franche-County, and the Netherlands, as
acquisitions of her Predecessors.

The chief Rivers of the Duchy and County of Burgundy (for I think fit to
describe them together to avoid confusion) besides the L^ire, the Rhone, and
the Yonne, already described, are the Serain, that rises near Mont S. Jean in
Auxois, washes Noyers, Poilly, Chablys, Ligny-le-Chateau, and falls into the
Yonne, betwixt Seignelay and Epoigny. The Armancon Springs likewise in Auxois
near Chateauneuf, on the Borders of Dijonnois, washes Semeur, receives the
Brenne, increased with the Ozerain and Loze, goes by Aney-le-Franc, Tonnerre,
S. Florentin, where it receives the Armance, and mixes with the Yonne, below
Brignon l'Archeveque in Champaign. The Seyne, that has its Source in this
Province near Chanceaux, on the Frontiers of Dijonnois, and runs through the
Country of La Montagne, until you come to Bar-Sur-Seyne, receives there a vast
number of Rivulets, among which the Leigne, the Ource, and the Arce, are the
most considerable.

The Saone has its Source in the Mountains of Vauge, Bonville, Attigny,
Chastillon, goes through Jussy, and Pont-Sur-Saone, receives the Coney, the
Angrogne, and the Laterne, from the Mountains of Vauge, the Mance, and the
Ayron, from Champaign, runs through Chemilly, Rey, Gray and Pontraille,
receives in its way the Fonvens, the River des Planches, the Salon, the Biez de
Citez, the Vigenne, increased with the Torelle, and the Lougnon. This is a
pretty long River that comes from the Mountains of Vauge, and is increased with
the Linotte, and several Brooks. As to the Saone, it pursues its way through
the Duchy of Burgundy, waters Aussone, S. Jean de Laune, Verdun, Chalon,
Tenare, Mascon, Thoissey, Ville-Franche in Beaujolois, Trevoun in the
Principality of Dombes, Vimy in Lyonnois, and Mines with the Rhone at Lions.

The Rivers that fall afterward on the Westside of the Saone, are the Dou.
This is a River of a strange course, and as long as that of the Saone. It
springs from Mount S. Claude, near a place called la Motte, in the Bayliwick d'
Aval, in Franche-County. Then runs North-East along Mount Jura, till it comes
to S. Vrsace, near the Borders of Elzas. Here it makes an Angle, whereof S.
Hippolite is the point. Near Mont-Beliard it begins to run South-west, waters
Besancon and Dole, receives the Louve, and the Orion, with the Glanstine. One
meets afterward with no considerable Rivers; for the Bruyne, the Selle, the
Solvan, the Panette, the Dorlande, the Solinan, the Chevron, Sane-la-vive, and
Sane-la-Morte, are but Rivulets, that unite together before their fall into the
Saone; the Resouzes goes through Bourg en Bresse and Pont de vaux; the Vesle
receives the Yrance, and the Renon, the Chalarine waters Thoissay, and the
Froment Amblerieu.

On the East Side, the Saone receives the Dehune, increased with the
Bourgeoise, the Corderin, and the Musin, the Grosne, the Marnaison, the Panset,
the Ardiere, and the Yorgon.

Here are also several Rivers and Rivulets, that fall into the Loire, as the
Reconze, the Brebince, increased with the Oudrach and Arrroux, the Paliars, the
Cressonne, and the Airon. Some do likewise fall into the Rhone, as the Versoy,
the Seran, the Fora; but especially the Dain, an indifferent long River, which
receives the Seen, the Serpentin, and the Angelon near its Source, waters
Campagnole, Tour de May and Pont-Dain, receives the Valouze, the Suzan, the
Arbarine, and discharges it self into the Rhone, betwixt Gourdan and Loyette.

This Government borders on Champaign to the North, on Gastinois, Nive^nois and
Bourbonnois to the West; on Beaujolois, Lyonnois and Dauphine to the South, and
on Franche-County to the East. It is now divided into 13 Parts, viz. Dijonnois,
Autunois, Chalonnois, la Montagne, Auxois, Auxerrois, Charolois, Briennois and
Maconnois. These 9 constitute the Duchy of Burgundy; the other four, viz.
Bresse, Bugey, Gex and Dombes, were acquired in 1601. from Charles Emanuel Duke
of Savoy, by the Fr^nch King Henry IV. in exchange for the Marqui^ate of
Salusses. They make up in all 59 L. N. and S. from Bar-Sur-Seyne to Trevoux, 50
E. and W. where this Government is broadest, as from Gex to Bourbo-l'Ansi.
Long. from 24 d. 15 m. to 27 d. 45 m. Lat. from 45 d. 32 m. to 47 d. 55 m.

Of DIJONNOIS.
DIJONNOIS, Divionensis Pagus, included betwixt Auxois, la Montagne,
Franche-County, Bresse and Autunois. It Is a Country extraordinary fruitful in
Corn and delicate Wines.

The City of Dijon, Divio Castrum, is situated upon the Ouche, Oscara, and the
Rivulet Suzon, in the Diocese of Langres, with a Parliament, a Chamber of
Accounts, and a Mint, where Money is coined at the Letter P. The Parliament was
instituted by Lewis XI. in 1476, and made Sedentary by Charles the VIII, in
1491. Before Aurelian, it was but an inconsiderable place, which this Emperor
walled in, and adorned with Towers, Gates and Temples. It became afterward
more flourishing, when the Dukes of Burgundy of the Royal Blood of France,
chose it for their Habitation, and the Dijonnois were so shrewd, that seeing
their Princess married with a German Prince, who was not like to come and live
amongst 'em, they treated privately with the French King Lewis XI. to deliver
themselves and the whole Duchy of Burgundy into his Hands, upon condition that
he should establish among them Sovereign Courts of Justice, and of the
Exchequer, which was done accordingly. This made Dijon be resorted unto the
more; so that it is now one of the prettiest Towns in France. It lies 43
Leagues North of Lions. The name of Dijon, Divio, seems to come from a Gaulish
word Div, signifying Fountain, from whence many other Towns have been called,
as Divodurum Mediomatricum, Metz. Divona Cadurcorum, Cahors, etc.

Here among other things are to be considered the Walls of the Town
strengthened with Towers and Bastions; the Castle flanked with 4 great Towers,
2 Ravelins, and every where well fortified. A very fine Chartreuse, with the
magnificent Tombs of several Dukes; the Palace for Justice; the King's House;
16 Churches, 2 Abbeys, 5 Hospitals, and the Guild Hall. The States of that
Country used to meet here every 3 Years.

Beaune, Belnum Castrum, lies 5 Leagues West of the Saone, between Dijon, Autun
and Chalon; it has a Chancellery and a Bayliwick. It is indifferent ancient,
and well built, situated in a Country extraordinary fertile, especially in
delicate Wines, and watered with a pleasant little River, called la Bourgeoise,
passing by the Town. It has an Hospital, which is one of the most sumptuous
Buildings in France, and its Territory is called le Beaunois, Pagus Belnensis.

The Town of Auxone, or Auxossne, is situated upon the Saone, with a Viscounty
and Bayliwick, almost 6 Leagues East of Dij^n, and 5 North-west of Dole,
toward the Frontiers of the County of Bourgogne. It is considerably strong.

S. Jean-de-l'Aune, or Lone, Fanum Sancti Johannis Laudonensis, is a little
Town upon the Saone; nigh to the Abbey of Cisteaux, between Auxone and
Bellegarde. It has an Abbey of its own, founded by King Theodorie, and confirmed
in its Privileges, by the French King Robert, under the inspection of the
Bishop of Chalons. As to Bellegarde, now surnamed Surde-Bellegarde; it is
seated upon the Saone, nine Leagues South-west of Dijon, and famous for holding
out against the Imperial Army, Anno 1636, commanded by the undaunted Galas
Charles, Duke of Lorraine, and the Marques^ de Grana, with several others, who
were forced to raise the Siege, being harrassed by Josias, Count of Rantzeau,
by his frequent Sallies cut off a vast Number of Men. The Abbey decisteaux,
chief of the Order of that Name, depends on the Bp. of Chalon, tho it lies 5
Leagues South of Dijon, and 2 West of St. Jean de Laune. Robert Abbot of
Molesme, in the Diocese of Langres founded it, Anno 1098. This Town is properly
is Chalonois. St. Bernard, with his Companions were there received, Anno 1113.
Ann. 1115, they founded the Abbey of Clairvaux, whereof that Saint was the first
Abbot. That Order afterward became very powerful, and has produced many noted
Men; as Popes, Cardinals and Bishops, and has now 1800 Monasteries under it
self.

The other places of note in DIJONNOIS are Fontaine-Francoise, near the borders
of Champaign and Franche-County, famous for the Victory of the French King,
Henry IV. over the Spaniards, in 1595. St. Seyne, Fleury, Belig^^ Mulsau, Bear,
Nuys, As to Rouvre and (...) that were two Country-houses of the (...)
Burgundy, they are but inconsiderabl^ (...)

Of AUTUNOIS.
THis Diocese included betwixt Auxois, Dijonnois, Bresse, Charollois and
Nivernois, is but a very small part of the Dominions of the ancient Aedui,
which reached North and South from the Country of the Sen^nois to the Cevennes,
and extended East and West from the Rhone and the Sa^ne to the Loire, and a
good way beyond it, comprehending besides the Duchy of Burgundy, Nivernois,
Bourbonnois, Bresse, Forez, Beaujolois and Lyonnois; for the Segusiani, who
inhabited the three last Countries, and part of Bresse were Tributaries of the
Autunois, and even the Senonois were under their Protection.

The Autunois being so powerful were easily tempted with the desire of making
themselves Masters of all the Gauls; in order to which, they made Alliance
with the Romans. But the Auvergnats and Allobroges, who had as much Power, and
perhaps no less Ambition than they, opposed their Design, fought, and beat
them, and would utterly have destroyed them, had not the Autunois called the
Romans to their help. This Foreign assistance proved too powerful for their
Enemies, who were easily subdued, together with all Narb^nnoise Gaul, wherein
the Quarrels of the Marseillois and Sal^ans, had already given footing to these
Conquerors of the World.

The Contestations of the Autunois and Sequani, or Frano-Countois, were the
cause of a second coming of the Romans. The Sequani being too weak for the
Aedui, had invited the Germans, and with their Succors, defeated 'em twice.
Upon this, Divitiacus, an Autunois Lord, was deputed to Rome, and Prevailed
easily with the Senate, to send an Army into the Gauls. The Great Caesar was
chosen for this expedition, who knew to make a good use of the Friendship of
the Aedui, and of the Dissensions of the Gauls; so that he overcame them all,
one after another. The Autunois perceived, but too late, they had been mistaken
in their Politics, and would feign have been rid of the imperious Master they
had given to themselves, and their Countrymen; but the Gauls were already
exhausted in a manner of Men and Money; neither had they learned the
War-Stratagems, and Military Discipline of their Conquerors; so that their
League with Vercingentorix for the relief of the Alesia, one of their Towns
availed nothing, but to bring them into the contempt of the Romans, who
deprived them insensibly of their Countries and Privileges, and made Lions
head of the Celtick Gauls.

The Autunois raised a third time under the Emperor Tiberius, but with as
little success as before. They could never since recover their Liberty, and
much less their Empire, but were always subject either to the Romans, the
Burgundians, or to the French. But the greatest losses the Autunois suffered,
were by the rebellion of the Bagaudes, or Gaulish Peasants, who plundered the
Country, and all the Towns they could Master, under the Conduct of one Aman^
and Elian, but were at last defeated by Herculius Maximian, associated to the
Empire by Diocletian, The two Emperors at the solicitations of Constantius
Chlorus, Caesar, and afterward Emperor of the Gauls, England and Spain,
began to repair Au^un, which Constantius, and Constantine his Son finished. For
this reason the Senate of Autun made a Decree, that their City should be called
Flavia, and the Inhabitants Flavienses, from the proper Name of these two
Emperors Flavius; but this lasted only as long as the Family of the Flavians
sat upon the Throne; for they retook afterward their former Name of
Augustodunum.

In the mean while, since Augustodunum is compound of a Gaulish and Latin word,
signifying the Mountain of Augustus; it remains unknown what was the name of
the Capital of the Aedui, before that Emperor, for Bibracte was a considerable
Town, not far from Autun, but not Autun it self.

In Constantius and Constantine's times, there was a Capitole dedicated to
Jupiter, Juno and Minerva, a Temple of Apollo, and a famous School for
Rhetoric and Humane Learning.

Before the Auntunois were reduced into a Roman Province, they governed
themselves as a Commonwealth, choosing every Year a Sovereign Magistrate,
called Vergo-brete, who had absolute Power of Life and Death, and over their
Goods. They had then a Senate of Druides, an Accademy for the Nobility of the
Gauls, and a School for the younger Sort.

Autun lies now on the confluence of the A^oux and Tavernay, 37 Miles
South-west of Dijon.

St. Lazare, of old, Nazaire, is the Cathedral Church, and very considerable,
both for i^s Structure and Chapter. This City is divided into two Parts, Higher
and Lower. The Diocese contains 24 Archpriests, and above 600 Parishes. The
Bishop presides at the States of Burgundy. Besides the Cathedral, Autun harh a
great number of other Churches; as al^o many Abbeys, and other religious Houses.

Bourbon l'Ansi, Burbo Anselli, is a Town, and a Bayliwick, with a Castle, in
the Diocese of Autun, about a Mile from the Loire, which separates it from
Bourbonnois. The Territory of Bourbon toward the Frontiers of Burgundy, is
encompassed with ferti^ Mountains; the Town it self is built upon the top of a
little Hill; its Castle is guarded with a Ditch, hewn out of the Rock. During
the Civil Wars it could never be taken, being defended by Sieur d' Amanze. The
Mineral Waters of Bourbon were in great esteem, even in the Time of the Romans,
and are as much now prized, since the Reign of Henry the III. who preferred
them to all other Waters.

There are few other places worth to be mentioned, save Vianges, Blanot,
Chissey, Lucenay-l'Eveque, Icy-l'-Eveque, La-Motte-S. Jean, le-Mont-Ceny,
Brandons, and Drap^y-S. Loup.

Of CHALONOIS.
THis Diocese, called also Bresse Chalonoise, was of the dependencies of Autun.
It is included betwixt the County of Burgundy, Bresse, Maconnois, Charolois and
Autunois.

The City of Chalon, Cabillo Aeduorum, or Cabillonum, is situated on the Saone,
with the Title of a County, a Bayliwick, and a Bishopric Suffragan to Lions,
between Verdun and Tenare, 15 Leagues South of Dijon. The antiquity of this
City appears from the great number of Statues and Inscriptions in the ruins
of an Amphitheatre, and of many other public Buildings. Here it was that the
Romans made Magazines of Corn for their Armies, and afterward the Emperors
appointed the Rendevouze of their Forces at this place. It was almost ruined by
Aittila; but soon after repaired. The French King 's Gontran and Thierry made
their Residence here. This City is very spacious and fine; the Saone makes here
an Isle, which they term Fauxbourg Saint Laurence, between two Bridges, one of
Stone, and the other of Wood. The most remarkable things in this City are the
Palace of the Prince, the Cathedral Church of St. Vincent (formerly of S.
Stephen) consisting 25 Canons, whereof 7 are Dignitaries, the Dean, the Singer,
the Treasurer, and four Archdeacons. S. Marcel is esteemed to be the Apostle
of Chalon, St. Donatian was Bishop of it in the 4th Century, and was at the
Council of Cologne, Anno 346. Besides the Cathedral Church there are many
Parishes; as St. George, S. Laurence, S. Mary, which is a Commandership of S.
Antony, and a fine College of Jesuits. The Citadel of Chalon is fortified with
four Royal Bastions.

The Town of Verdun is upon the Doux, nigh its fall into the Saone, about 4
Leagues North-East of Chalon. The other places of some note are Chaigny, Rully,
Givry, la Ferte-Sur-Grosne, Tenare, Cuzery, Branges, Sagy, Savigny, Bojana,
Beluvre, Paigny, and Seure de Belle-garde a Duchy.

Of the Country of La Montagne.
THE Country of la Montagne, is situated toward the North of the Duchy of
Burgundy, about the origin of the Seine, betwixt Franche, County, Champaign,
Anxerrois, Auxois and Dijonnois, and depends upon the Bishop of Langres, as
well as Dijonnois.

The Capital is Chatillon, Castellio ad Sequanam, situated on the Seine,
between Aisei-le-Duc and Bar-sur-seine, 31 Miles North-west of Dijon. It Is a
pretty good Town, and the seat of the Baily of la Montagne; the River divides
it into two Parts, one called the Bourg, and the other Chaumont. Here are to be
seen the ruins of an old Castle. It was the Native Country of William
Philander, who has made learned Commentaries on the X Books of Vitruvius.
Bar-sur-seine, Barrum ad Sequanam, is upon the River Seine, where it receives
the Ourse, the Arse, and the Leigne toward the Frontiers of Champaign, about 7
Leagues North of Chatillon. Bar in old Gaulish, signifies a Haven, or the Port
of a River. This Town is very pleasant, being well built, and seated in a
fertile Soil. Alsey-le-Duc, 3 Leagues South of Chatillon, is nigh the River
Seine.

The other places are Mussy l'Eveque Espaiily, Val des-Choux an Abbey, Aigney
le-Duc, Duesme, Baigneux les-Juiss, Villaine-en-Dermois and Verdonnet.

Of AUXOIS.
THis Country was inhabited by the Mandubii, Allies or Subjects to the
Autunois. Their Capital City Alesia, rather than Alexia, was great and
powerful, and built by Hercules, at his return from Spain, if we believe
Diodore of Sicily. Caesar laid Siege to it, and took it by Storm, although 'twas
defended by 100000 Men; and that 300000 more were in their March to relieve i^,
and then razed it to the Ground; so that Alesia, Alize, is now but an
inconsiderable Village, betwixt the Rivers Loze and Ozerain, 14 Leagues North
East of Semeur. Whatever might have been the Confines of the Mandubii, at this
present.

Auxois is situated upon the Frontiers of Nivernois, Autunois, Dijonnois, la
Montagne, Champaign and Auxerrois.

Semeur the Capital is a little Town, lying on the Armancon, 14 Leagues North
of Autun. The Latin Authors call it Sine murum, because at first it was not
walled up. At this time it is divided into three Parts, whereof the Burough is
the biggest. The second Part, called Donjon, is seated on a Rock, washed by the
Armaneon, defended with thick and high Walls, and flanked with great Towers.
The third is a round Castle fortified with Towers, at 15 Paces from each other.
This Town is governed by a Mayor, and 6 Sheriffs or Eschevins. It was taken by
Charles of Amboise, one of Lewis XI's Generals, after the Death of Charles the
Rash, last Duke of Burgundy.

Auxois depends for the Spiritual on the Bishop of Autun. The other places of
note in this Country are Avalon Aballo, on the Cousin, which had a Castle so
strong, that the French King Robert could hardly take it within three Months,
in 1006. It Is still a Seat of Regal Justice, 8 Leagues West of Semeur.
Arnay-le-Duc, on the Source of the Arroux, near the Borders of Autunois is
another Royal Seat of Justice. Flavigny, Flaviniacum, is esteemed to be founded
by some Emperor of the Flavian Family. Moutier S. Jean, has a very fine
Castle. Noyers, Montreal, l'Isle-Sous-Montreal, Saulieu, Mont-S. Jean, Viteaux,
Saumaize are of some consideration.

Of AUXERROIS.
AVxerreis is situated betwixt Auxois, Chpampaign and Nivernois, a Country of
very little extent, but that formerly reached as far as does now the Diocese of
Auxerre and comprehended the Country of Puisaye, with part of Gastinois and
Orleannois. Auxerre, Autessiodorum, is situated on the River Yonne, toward the
confines of Burgundy, 28 Leagues North West of Dijon. It has a Bayliwick,
Presidial, Election, and a Bishopric Suffragan of Sens. This City is pretty
ancient. It Is said, that Julian the Apostate did stay here for some time to
refresh his Army, ann. 356. The Age following it was taken, and almost ruined
by Attila, an 451. The French K. Robert took it from Landri, Count of Nevers,
in 1005, but in 1015 he restored it to Renald Landri's Son giving him his
Daughter Hadwide in Marriage. Their posterity enjoyed it, till 1371, that John
the IV. Count of Auxerre sold his Estate to the French King Charles the V.
Charles the VII. was forced to yield this County to Philip III. Duke of
Burgundy, but after the Death of Charles the Rash, Lewis XI. united it again to
the French Crown. The Cathedral under the the name of St. Stephen has a very
fine Quire, and a Tower extraordinary high. The Chapter is made up of 56
Canons, whereof the Dean is elected by the Chapter; all the others being named
by the Bishop, without excepting the Dignicaries, as the Singer, the great
Archdeacon of Auxerre, the Archdeacon of Puisaie, the Treasurer, the
Penitenciary, and four Archpriests. A Martyr called S. Peregrin is accounted
the first Bishop of Auxerre; but S. Germain, who lived in the 5th Century, is
the most famous of all.

The other Towns of Auxerrois, are Crevant upon the Yonne, known by the Rout of
the Lord High Constable Steward, defeated by the English and Burgundians, in
1423. Coulaenge-la-Vineuse and Coulange-Sur-Yonne, Ouayne, Courson, Nitry,
Segnelay a Marquisate.

Of CHAROLOIS.
THe County of Charolois lies toward the South of Burgundy, between
Bourbonnois, Briennois, Beaujolois, Masconois, Autunois and Nivernois. The
Latin Historians of the French name is Cadrell^nsis Pagus. It had been bought
by Charles, last Duke of Burgundy, from the Counts of Armagnac; and was
therefore enjoyed by Margaret his Daughter, Maximilian of Austria her Husband,
and the Kings of Spain their Successors, till the Peace of Nimeguen, in 1678.

CHAROLOIS, Cadrellae, or rather Quadrellae, is situated on the River Reconse;
six Leagues North East of the Loire, and eight West of Cgni, and 12 South of
Autun. It has a strong Castle, a Collegiate Church, and several Monasteries.

Digoin, Digonia, with the title of a Barony, on the confluence of the Arroux
and Loire, is the only place mentioned by Latin Authors. The others are
Paroy-le-Monial, Toulon, Mont S. Vincent; la-Guiche, Chaumont and Oye.

Of BRIENNOIS.
BRIENNOIS lies between Charolois and Macconnois, toward the Frontiers of
Beauj^lois. It is a very small Country, whose chief Towns, Semeur and
Anzi-le-Duc, are not considerable.

Of MASCONNOIS.
MASCONNOIS lies toward the South-East of the Duchy of Burgundy, betwixt
Beaujolois, Bresse, Chalonnois and Charolois. The City of Mascon, Matisco
Aeduorum, is situated on the Saone, above 15 Leagues North of Lions, with an
Election, a Bayliwick, and a Bishopric Suffragan of Lions, It Is a very ancient
Town; for in Caesar's Time 'twas there that the Arrows of the Country were
forged. It has been often ruined by Barbarians; but above all by Attila, the
Burgundians and Franks, but since repaired by several French Kings. It Is now
built upon the declining side of a Hill, washed by the River, that is passed by
a fine Stone Bridge, which joins the Town with the Suburb of S. Lawrence, where
are 2 stately Towers, and pleasant Lanes leading into the Meadows. The
Cathedral of S. Vincent was formerly dedicated to S. Gervasius and Protasius.
Besides this Church there is the Chapter or Collegiate Church of S. Peter,
whose Canons are bound to prove their Nobility, in order to their admission.
There are also the Church of S. Stephen, a College of Jesuits, and several
other Parishes and Monasteries. The Presidial of Mascon resorts to that of
Lions, and in last instance to the Parliament of Paris.

Masconnois, Matisconensis-Pagus is a fruitful Country, especially in excellent
Wines. It has had particular Counts from Alberie I. in the 10th Century, till
it was sold to the French K. Lewis IX. by Countess Alix, in 1238. It keeps its
own States separately from those of Burgundy; however at the same time. There
are five Towns walled in besides the Cathedral, viz. Tornus upon the Saone,
famous for an ancient Abbey of Benedictins, under the name of S. Valerin,
founded and endowed by the Emperor Charles the Bald. It depends on the
Bishopric of Chalon. Clugni, Cluniacum, chief of the Order of that Name. It
was founded according to the rule of S. Benoit, by William I. Duke of Aquitain,
Count of Auvergne, on behalf of Berno, Abbot of Gigniac, in 910. The Monks of
this Abbey having murdered William III. or IV. Count of Mascon, whilst he was a
hunting, made the vulgar believe that he had been carried away by the Devil.
The other 3 Towns are S. Gengoux, that has been once the Seat of the Baily;
Marsilly les-Nonains and le-Bois-S. Marie.

Of BRESSE.
LA-BRESSE, Brexia, Brissia, or Saltus Brixius, has the Dain on the East,
which separates it from Bugey; on the South it has the Rhone, which divides it
from Dauphine: On the West the River Saone parts it from Lyonnois, and the
Duchy of Burgundy and Chalonnois lies on the North. It has about six Leagues
extent from South to North, and nine Leagues from E. to W. This little Province
abounds with Corn, Hemp, Pastures and Fishes. It Is unwholesome in some parts,
because of several Ponds, which send up noisome Vapors, and thereby corrupts
the Mass of Air. As BRESSE depends for the most part on the Prelate of Lions,
whose Diocese was inhabited by the Segusiani, and that the rest of this
Province is under the Bishops of Chalon and Mascon; so it seems to have been
subject to the Autunois. It was conquered from the Romans by the Burgundians,
and from them by the French. In latter Ages it made part of the second Kingdom
of Burgundy, then came to the Lords of Beauge, who possessed the greatest part of
it, during near 400 Years. The Lords of Coligny, Villars and Monluel had there
also considerable Estates; but they melted all successively into the House of
Savoy, from 1272, till 1402. At last Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, was forced
to exchange not only this Province, but also the Countries of Bugey, Valromey,
and the Bayliwick of Gex for the Marquisate of Salusses, that is a rich and
plentiful Country, for a barren and mountainous.

The Capital Town of this Country Bourg, is situated on the little River
Reissousse, 7 Leagues East of Mascon, having the Title of a Bayliwick,
Presidial and Election. It is seated in a Marshy, but fertile Soil, looking to
the East on the Mountain S. Claude, and little Hills covered with Vineyards;
and Westward it has a great Plain, which extends it self even to the Sa^ne*
The City Government is in the hands of ^ Syndics or Sheriffs. Philibert Emanuel
Duke of Savoy, built there a Citadel in 1569; but it was demolished, ann.
1611. There are Halls spacious and well built, next to which is the Church of
St. Brou, where several Dukes of ^^voy lie interred, Pope Leo X. gave out a
Bull to establish here a Bishopric in 1515 and 1521, but Pope Paul III.
suppressed it in 1534. The Presidial was instituted by the French K. Henry IV.
in 1601. The Horses of this Country are esteemed.

Montluel is a little Village, but an ancient Lordship belonging to Monsieur le
Prince, five Leagues North East of Lions. The other places are Romenay, S.
Trivier, Pont de Vaux a Duchy, Bauger, Montrevel a County; S. Paul de Varas,
Perouges a Barony; the Native Country of the Famous Mr. de Vaugeias; Varambon,
Pont-de-Vesle, Chastillon, Goligni, Bouligneux, Villar^, etc.

Of BUGEY.
BVGEY, is situated between the Rhone, which separates it from Dauphine and
Savo^; the Dain, which distinguishes it from Bresse, and has the County of
Burgundy to the North. Its extent from Pont-Dain, or the Bridge of Dain to
Seissel, is almost 10 Leagues, and from Dortans to the Port of Loye^te, almost
20 Leagues. Although this Country be full of Hills and Mountains, yet it is
abundantly fertile; for there are many Lakes and Rivers well stored with Fish,
and Forests with Game both great and small; as Bears, Wild-Swines, Hearts,
Hinds, Hares, gray and red; Patridges, Pheasants, Wood-hens, etc.. This Country
has ordinarily followed the Condition of Bresse, and been subject to the same
Lords, as it was in the last Age to the Dukes of Savoy, and is now to the
French King.

Belley, Belica, a League from the Rhone, and almost 17 East of Lions, has a
Bayliwick, an Election, and a Bishopric Suffragan of Besancon; it is generally
esteemed very ancient, and was one of the Cities of the Sequani. It Is not known
who was the Apostle of BVGEY; for the first Bishop of Belley mentioned in
History, is one Vincent, who subscribed to the 2d. Council of Paris, under
Childebert, Clovis the Great's Son, and to the 2d. Council of Lions under
Gontran, in 567. This Town was burnt to Ashes, ann. 1385; but Amadaeus VIII.
Duke of Savoy rebuilt it, and surrounded it with Walls and Towers. S. John
Baptist is the name of the Cathedral Church; whose Chapter is composed of 19
Canons, four Dignities; the Dean, the Archpriest, the Primicier, and the
Sin^er. They were at first regular, following the Rule of S. Austin, but they
were made Secular in 1579.

The other Towns of BVGEY are S. Rambert, with an Abbey of Benedictins; Nantua,
that keeps still the name of the ancient Nan^uates, mentioned by Caesar:
Seissel, an important passage on the River Rhone; Chateau-neuf Capital of
Valromey, Chatillon of Michaille, Arban, near the borders of Franche-County,
Arlon, upon the Rhone, Montreal, Ambournay, Lagnieu, etc.

Of the Bayliwick of GEX.
I Am apt to believe that this Bayliwick, and and part of Bugey were the
Habitation of the ancient Nantuates, since the Veragri were seated in the
C^untry of Vaux, and the Seduni in the Diocese of Sion. However it be, this
Bayliwick is but a little Country, having the County of Burgundy on the North;
the Country of Vaux in the Canton of Bern, on the East; on the South it is
separated from Savoy, by part of the Lake of Geneva, and the River Rhone; and
on the West it has again part of the County of Burgundy and Bugey. The chief
Town is GEX, which is the Seat of the Baily.

Of the Principality of Dombes.
THe Principality of DOMBES, Dombensis-Pagus, lies between Bresse and the
Saone, that separates it from Maconnois, Beaujolois and Lyonnois. It Is a
Country very agreeable to live in. This Country contains 11 Chastelnies,
whereof the chief is Trevoux, that is also the Capital of the Country. It has a
Collegiate Church, a Bayliwick, and a Mint, where Money was coined with the
Stamp of late Ann Mary Louise of Orleans, Sovereign Princess of Dombes,
Daughter to John Baptist of Orleans, youngest Son of the French K. Henry IV.
Lewis XIV. has inherited this present year 1693, the Estate of that Lady, whom
he would never suffer to marry. This Principali^y has a little Parliament
residing at Lions, and made up of 3 Presidents, 3 Masters of the Requests, a
Knight of Honor, that sits with the Sword on his side, 12 Counselors or
Judges, an Attorney General, 2 Sollicitors or Advocates General, and 4
Secretaries. This Sovereign Court of Justice nobilitates its Members, and has
the same Rights and Privileges of other Parliaments of France. The Dean of
Trevoux is Counselor born in it.

The other Chastelnies are Beauregard, Monmerle, Toissey, Lans, Chalamont,
Chatelet, S. Trivier, Ville-Neuve, Amberieu and Lignieu.

CHAP. XX. Of the County of Burgundy. Or Franche-County.
THe County of Burgundy, or Upper Burgundy, called also Franche-County, has
Switzerland on the East, Bresse, Bugey and Gex on the South, Lorraine on the
North; the Duchy of Burgundy, and part of Champaign on the West. Its extent is
from 46 d. 10 m. to 41 d. of Latitude, which take up about 47 Leagues from
Dortans to Fontaine le-Chaste, and between 26 d. 20 m. and 28 d. 28 m. of
Longitude, which make up about 33 Leagues from the Frontiers of the Bishopric
of Basil to Autrey, beyond Gray. It abounds in Corn, Wine, Cattle, Horses,
Woods, and Salt-Springs: Here are to be found several Quarries of black Marble,
Jasper of diverse Colors, and fine Alabaster, with some Mines of Iron and
Silver. This Country is watered with several considerable Rivers and Brooks; as
the Saone, the Dou, the Lougnon, the Soubre, and of ex-the Louve, etc. which
abound with various so^ts cellent Fish, among which, the Carps of Saone, the
Pikes of the D^u; the Barbel-Fish of the Lougnon, and the Trouts of the Dain,
are in great esteem. The course of these Rivers has been already described in
the Government of Burgundy. All Critics and Geographers agree, that
Franche-County was anciently inhabited by the Sequani, who were so powerful as
to dispute the Empire of the Gauls with the Autunois, which was the occasional
cause of Caesar's Conquests, as may be seen in the Description of Autun. This
great Captain and Historian ranks the Sequani, as well as the Helvetii, or
Switzers, among the Celtae or Galli, properly so called. But Augustus added
these two Nations to the Belgic Gaul, as he did also those who dwelt betwixt
the Loire and the Garumne to Aquitain, and gave to the Country of the Sequani,
the name of Maxima Sequanorum, because it was one of the greatest Provinces of
the Gauls, taking up all that space that is included betwixt the Rhone, Mount
Jura, the source of the Rhin, and the Saone, from Basil, or rather August
Augusta Rauracorum, to Lions.

This Country was conquered from the Romans by the Burgundians, and from them
by the French. During the decay of that Monarchy, under the second Race of
their Kings, it made for a little while part of the second Kingdom of Burgundy.
Then its Counts made themselves Sovereigns, and their Posterity enjoyed it from
the end of the 10th Century to 1369, that Margaret, Heiress of this Country,
married Philip the bold, Duke of Burgundy of the Royal Blood of France. And
therefore this Province being originally the Portion of a Princess, remained to
Mary, Daughter to Charles the Rash, last Duke of Burgundy, and to her Hei^s the
Kings of Spain, till Lewis XIV. seized upon it in 1674, and kept it by the
Peace of Nimeguen.

Franche-County is said to have got this name from one or two of its Counts,
Renald I. and III. who refused to make Homage to the Emperors, pretending that
their Country was altogether free from that Subjection. Whatever be of that,
this County is now divided into three Bayliwicks, bearing the names of Vesoul,
Dole and Poligni; or highest, middle-most and lowest Franche-County.

Of the Bayliwick of Vesoul.
THe Bayliwick of VESOVL, or Amont, or Highest Burgundy County, is situated in
the North part of this Province, VESOVL, Vesullum, Capital of this Division, is
seated on a ^ittle River, which emptieth it self into the Saone, 21 Miles North
of Besancon, in a Soil fertile in excellent Wine. It had formerly a good
Citadel.

Gray, Gradicum Castrum, upon the Saone, 9 Leagues North of Dolo, and 10
North-East of Dijon. It was formerly a place of great strength, but Lewis XIV.
having surpised it, in 1668, ^az'd its Citadel, and all its Fortifications.

Beaune les-Nonnes, lies a Mile North of the Dou, and 7 Leagues North-East of
Besancon.

Luxeuil, Luxovium, is a little Town toward ^he Frontiers of Lorraine, and
Mount Vauge, ^ Leagues North-East of Vesoul. The Abbey of Lure, or Luders,
Lutera, is situated on a little River, which emptieth it self into the Lougeon,
toward the Frontiers of Lorraine, 15 League^ North-East of Besancon.

In this Bayliwick toward the borders of Elzas is included the small Country
of Mou^beliard called by the Germans Monpelgart, In Latin Mons-Beliardi, or
Mons Peligardi. The Capital of the same name is situated on the river Halle,
which emptieth it self into the Dou. It Is built at the foot of a rugged Rock on
which is a Castle, and a strong Citadel. This County formerly belonged to the
Dukes of Wirtemberg, who were also Lords of the Imperial Abbey of Lure and all
the Inhabitants professed the Reformed Religion.

The other places of note in this Bailywick are Fougerevil-la-ville and Le
Chastel, Faueougney, Jussey, Pont, and Port sur Saone, Chemilly, M^ntjustin,
Rup, Rey, Montboson, Grammont, Rougemont, Isle S. Loup, Pesme, Cromarcy, etc.

Of the Bayliwick of Dole.
THE Bayliwick of Dole, called also the Middlemost, is situated in the middle
o^ this Province, extending it self from the Frontiers of the Duchy of
Burgundy eve^ to those of Swisserland, about the River L^agnon Dou Du^is and
Louve Lupa.

Besancon, Vesontio, Visontio, and in latt^ ages Chrysopolis or the Golden
City, lies upon the Dou, 22 Leagues East of Dijon. It wa^ formerly the Capital
of the Sequani, and a ^^ace of so great strength and consequence that when the
Romans had it into their power they planted there a Colony, fortified and
adorned it with several buildings, whereof there remains but some few names in
and about ^he Town. In 274. this plantation raised a Triomphal Arch in honor
of Aurelian the Emperor; but some years after it was plundered and ruined by
the Alamanni under their King Crocus; so that it was in a pitiful condition in
366. It had scarce been repaired when the Fandals besieged it in vain in 406.
The Burgundians were more successful in 413. but Attilae destroyed it a second
time, in 451 or 452. it was afterward rebuilt in the form it has now, somewhat
different from what it was in the ^omans time. The River Dou separates it into
two parts, of which the biggest resembles a Peninsula, and is closed up by a
hill, whereon the Citadel was built. Besancon has still an Archbishoprik, of
which Belay and the titular Bishop of Lausanne and Basil are suffragans. The
Chapter is composed of a Dean, an Archdeacon a Singer, a Treasurer, two
Under-Singers, 43. Canons, and 24 Chaplains. The Churches of St. Stephen and
St. John pretend both to the dignity of Cathedral there are eight Parishes
besides, the Abbys of St. Vincent and St Faul, several Colegiate Churches and
Monasteries and a Coledg of Jesuits. The Palaces of Cante-Croix and Granvelle,
and the Townhouse deserve to be seen. In the last is a Brazen ^^gle bearing
the statue of the Emperor Charles V. and throwing Water by its two bills. The
Diocese of Besancon contains 780 Parishes under 15 Deanships, and 5
Arch-deaconships. Since Franche-County is in the power of the French the
Parliament and Chamber of Accounts, which had their Seat at Dole, have been
transferred hither; so that Besancon may now be accounted, the Capital of this
Province.

DOLE Dola, is situated on the Dou, in a very pleasant and fertile Country and
is still the Seat of the Baily of this Division. It Is a Town of some Antiquity.
Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy did found its University in 1426, and the
Duchess Margaret enlarged its Privileges and indowments in 1404. The French
King Lewis the XI. took that Town Anno 1479 and sacked it in a lamentable
manner, which gave occasion to call it Dola Dolens, Mournful D^le. Anno 1530.
the Emperor Charles the V. did fortity it with seven Bastions, which
afterward were augmented; but Anno 1668 Lewis the XIV took it with the rest of
the Province, threw down the Walls, ruined the Fortifications, and then
restored it to the Spaniards, but afterward Anno 1674 he retook it with the
whole Franche-County. Other Towns in this Division a^e Ornans, Quingey,
Verceil, la Loye, Rochefort, Chasteau-neuf, Raon, etc.

Of the Bayliwick of Poligny.
THE BAYLIWICK of Poligny or d'Aval in the South-West of Burgundy County, is
situated between Switzerland on the East; Bresse on the South the Duchy of
Burgundy on the West; and the Bayliwick of Dole, on the North. The chief Towns
are Poligny, Salins, and S. Claude. Poligny the Seat of the Baily lies on the
Source of the River Glanstine which emptieth it self into the Dou, eight
leagues from Dole toward the South-East. Salins, Salinae Sequanorum is
situated between two Mountains nigh the River Forica that discharges it self
into the Louve, 9 leagues from Besancon, toward the South. It derives its name
from Salt-Springs, which, did the French King allow it, would supply most part
of the Country with Salt. In the Spaniards time it was extraordinary strong and
had a Castle almost impregnable.

Saint Claude was also pretty well fortified. It Is situated toward the
Frontiers of Bugey and the Country of Gex, 7 leagues North-West of Geneve:
There is a famous Abbey, that boasts of the Body of St. Claude Archbishop of
Besancon in the 7 Century whence the Town has its name.

The other places Worthy to be mentioned are Lyon-le-Saunier, Arley, Ruffey,
Blesterans, Carla^u, Mommorot, Monet le Chasteau, Sorlin, Mir^heau,
Champagnole, Chastel-Chalon, Arbois, St. Lothain, Burgille, Nozeret,
Pontarlier; St. Anne, Monthenoit, etc.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS
PART I.
A General and Particular Description of France. Page 1.
CHAP I.
Of the ancient and modern Bounds and Divisions of France; Of its Mountains,
Ports, Rivers and Forests. p. 2.
CHAP. II.
Of the Air and Soil of France, and its various Productions. p. 10.
CHAP III.
Of the Inhabitants of France, and of their Language. p. 15.
CHAP IV.
Of the Riches, Strength, and Government of France. p. 20.
CHAP V.
Of the Chief Officers of the Crown and Kingdom. p. 29.
CHAP VI.
Of the Religion of the French. p. 37.
PART II.
A Description of France, wherein each of its great Provinces, smaller
Counties, Cities, Royal Houses, Forests, Mountains, Coasts, Rivers and Lakes,
are Geographically and Historically described.
CHAP I.
^orrain, the three Bishoprics, and the Duchy of Bar. p. 47.
CHAP II.
The Principality of Sedan, and Dukedom of Bouillon and Rethel. p. 58.
CHAP III.
Of Champaign. p. 62. 1. Rheims. p. 64. 2. Precinct of Caalons and Troyes. p.
67. 3. Senonois. 4. Langres. 5. Bassigni, Vallage, and Perthois. p. 70, 71, 72.
6. The County of Bri^, and more especially Bri^ Champenoise. p. 74.
CHAP IV.
Of the Isle of France, and its dependencies. p. 77. Paris. p. 80. Towns and
Places of Note in the Parisis, or the Territory of Paris. p. 97. Versailles.
Trianon. p. 99. 113. Other Towns, Royal Houses, and Places of Note in the
Parisis. p. 115. French Brie. Hurepoix. p. 126. 127. Mantoan. p. 137. ^rench
Vexin. Beauvaisis p. 145. 147. Soissonuois. Laonnois. p. 156, 157. Noyonnois.
p. 159.
CHAP V.
Of Picardy. p. 160 Tierache. Vermandois. p. 163. 166. Santerre. Amienois. p.
169. 171. Vimeux. Ponthieu. p. 175, 176. Boulenois. p. 179. The Recovered
Country. p. 182.
CHAP VI.
Of Normandy, especially the Higher. p. 186. Norman Vexin. p. 191. Caux. Bray.
Roumois. 197, 205, 206. The Bishopric of Evreux. p. 206.
CHAP VII.
Of Lower Normandy. The Bishopric of Lizieux. p. 211. The Bishopric of Seez.
p. 213. The Bishopric of Bayeux. p. 216. The Bishopric of Constance, or
Coutance. p. 220. The Bishopric of Avranches. p. 226.
CHAP VIII.
Of Britanny. p. 229. Of High Britanny. The Bishopric of Rennes. p. 235. Of
the Bishopric of Dol. p. 238. Of the Bishopric of St. Malo. p. 239. Of the
Bishopric of St. Brieux. p. 241. Of the Bishopric of Nants. p. 243.
CHAP. IX.
Of Lower Britanny. The Bishopric of Vennes. p. 248. Of the Bishopric of
Quimper-Corentin. p. 252 Of the Bishopric of Treguier. p. 254. Of the
Bishopric of St. Pol De Leon. p. 256.
CHAp. X.
Of the Government Orleanois. p. 258 Of the Country of Maine, or Le Maine. p.
265. Of the Country of Perch, or Le Perch. p. 270. Of Beauce. Proper Beauce.
p. 274, 275. Of Vendomois. p. 281. Of Anjou. p. 283. Of Touraine. p. 295. Of
Blaisois. p. 303. Of Proper Orleanois. p. 312. Of Gastinois. p. 324. Of
Nivernois. p. 331.
CHAP. XI.
Of Orleanois on the South of the Loire. Of Berry. p. 338. Of Poictou. p. 414.
Of Aunis p. 435. Of Angoumois. p. 439. Of the Islands depending on the
Government Orle^nois. p. 441.
CHAP. XII.
Of the Government of Guienne. p. 443. Of Proper Guienne. p. 448. Of Bazadois.
Of Agenois. p. 450, 451. Of Quercy. p. 452. Of Rouergue. p. 455. Of Limosin. p.
459. Of Perigord. p. 461. Of Saintonge. p. 463. Of Armagnac. p. 466 Of
Chaloffe. p. 469 Of Condomois. p. 470. Of the Lands. Of Lower Navarre. p. 452,
473 Of Soul. Of Labourd. p. 474, 475 Of Be^^n. p. 477 Of the County of
Bigorre. p. 479 Of Coming. p. 481 Of Conferans. p. 482
CHAP. XIII.
Of Languedoc. p. 484 Of Toulousan. p. 495 Of the Diocese of Toulouse. p. 496
Of the Diocese of Montauban. p. 508 Of the Diocese of La V^ur. p. 510 Of
Lauragais. p. 512 Of Albigeois. p. 515 Of the County of Foix. p. 522
CHAP. XIV.
Of Lower Languedoc. Of the Precinct of Narbonne. p. 527 Of the Precinct of
Beziers. p. 539 Of the Precinct of Nismes. p. 545
CHAP. XV.
Of the Cevennes. p. 565 Of Vivarais. p. 569 Of the Diocese of Uzes p. 562 Of
Gevaudan. p. 572 Of Velay. p. 575
CHAP. XVI.
Of Provence. p. 578 Of the Diocese of Aix. p. 584 Of the Diocese of Riez. p.
587 Of the Diocese of Senez. p. 588 Of the Diocese of Digne. p. 589 Of the the
Diocese of Arles. p. 500 Of the Diocese of Marseille. p. 594 Of the Diocese of
Toulon. Of the Diocese of Frejus. p. 596, 597 Of the Diocese of Grace. Of the
Diocese of Vence. p. 598, 599 Of the Diocese of Glandeve. Of the Diocese of
Sisteron. p. 600, 601 Of the Diocese of Apt. p. 602 Of the Coun^y Venaissin. p.
605 Of the Principality of Orange. p. 610 Of the Islands of Provence. p. 612
CHAP. XVII.
Of Dauphine. p. 615 Of High-Dauphine. Of Gresivaudan. p. 621 Of the County of
Dioi^. p. 628 Of the Baronnies. p. 631 Of Gapencois. p. 632 Of Ambrunois p. 634
Of Brianconnois. p. 366
CHAP. XVIII.
Of Low Dauphine. Of Viennois. p. 640 Of Valentinois p. 649 Of Tricastinois. p.
654
CHAP. XIX.
Of the Gouvernment of Lyonnois. p. 656 Of Proper Lyonnois. p. 658 Of Forez. p.
661 Of Beaujolois. Of Bourbonnois. p. 664, 665 Of Auvergne. p. 668 Of La
March. p. 675
CHAP. XX.
Of the Government of Burgundy. p. 678 Of Dijonnois. p. 683 Of Autunois. p. 666
Of Chalonois. Of the Country of La Montagne. p. 670, 671 Of Auxois. p. 673 Of
Auxerrois. p. 675 Of Charolois. Of Briennois. Of Masconnois. p. 676, 677 Of
Brosse. p. 679 Of Bugey. p. 681 Of the Bayliwick of Gex. Of the Principality of
Dombes. p. 683
CHAP. XXI.
Of the County of Burgundy. p. 685 Of the Bayliwick of Vesoul. p. 687 Of the
Bayliwick of Dole. p. 689 Of the Bayliwick of Poligny. p. 671
Books newly Printed for T. Salusbury, at the King-Arms next St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street.
3. THe Parson's Vade Mecum: Or, A Treatise containing Choice Observations
about the accounts of the year, Moveable Feasts, Ember Week^, Ecclesiastical
Censures, the memorable Things in the 3 first Centuries, and some after Ages,
Archbishops and Bishoprics, their Election, Consecration, Installment, etc.
Patronage, Institution, Induction, Non-residence, Dispensations, Pluralities,
Deprivation, Dilapidation, Privileges of Clergymen, Tithes and Simony; very fit
for all Clergymen and Gentlemen, in 12's. bound, price 1 s.

4. The Measurer's Guide, or the whole Art of Measuring made short, plain and
easy, showing how to measure any plain Superficies, all sorts of regular
Solids, Artificer's Works, viz. Carpenters, Jeyners, Plaisterers, Painters,
Paviers, Glaziers, Bricklayers, Tylers, etc. with the Art of Gauging, of
singular Use to all Gentlemen Artificers and others. J. Barker, in 12's. bound,
price 1 s.

5. Taxilla, or Love preferred before Duty; a Novel. By D. W. Gent. 12's.
bound, price 1 s.

6. Eachards Gazetteers, or Ne^esmans Interpreters, being a Geographical Inde^
of all Cities, Towns, etc. in Europe with their distances from each other, and
to what Prince they are ^ow subject to; very necessary for the right
understa^ing of all Foreign and Do^^^^^ck News, Letters and Gazetts* 12's. (...)
1 s. 6 d.

7. A most compl^^^ (...) of Geography, General and (...) ^^^c^ibing all the
Empires, Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World, collected according to the
latest Discoveries, and agreeing with the choicest and newest Maps, 12's bound,
price 2 s.

8. -- Exact Description of Ireland, Surveying all its Provinces and Counties;
showing the exact state of that Kingdom, and all the principal Things that are
necessary to be known; Illustrated with five Maps, one of the whole Kingdom,
the others of each particular Province, 12's bound, price 1 s. 6 d.

9. -- Flanders, or the Spanish Netherlands most accurately described, showing
the several, Provinces, their Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Riches and Strength,
with an exact description of the Cities, and who they are at present subject
to; very necessary for the understanding of Wars in those Countries, 12's
bound, price 1 s.

10. -- The Duke of Savoy's Dominions most accurately described, with some
adjacent parts, showing all that is necessary to be known, and very useful for
the understanding of the present War in those parts, price 3d. The five last
all done by Laurance Eachard, A. B. of Christ's College in Cambridge.

11. Nomo -- A Law-Dictionary, interpreting such difficult and obscure Words
and Terms as are found either in our Common or Statute, Ancient and Modern
Laws, with References to the several Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books,
Charters, Ancient Deeds and Manuscripts wherein the words are used, being the
very best extant. The Second Edition, By Tho. Blunt of the Inner Temple, Esquire;
in Folio bound, price 10. s.


