Londons Liberties: OR, A LEARNED ARGUMENT OF Law and Reason, Before the Lord
Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council, at Guild Hall. Between Mr.
Maynard, now the Kings Eldest Sergeant at Law. Mr. Hales, late Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench, and Mr. Wild, lately one of the Justices of the
same Court.
Of Council for the Livery-Men of London. And Major John Wildman, and Mr. John
Price.
Of Council for the Freemen of London. Wherein the Freedom of the Citizens of
London in their Elections of their Mayor, Sheriffs, Aldermen, and
Common-Council-men, is fully debated; their most Ancient Charters Examined, and
on both hands agreed to be but a Confirmation of their former Rights: With
their Opinions concerning the Forfeiture of Londons Charter.

LONDON, Printed for R. Read. 1682.

THE PREFACE.
THE unusual methods that have been made use of in the Election of Sheriffs for
London and Middlesex for the year ensuing, having raised great Disputes among
the Citizens, concerning the Manner of Choosing their Chief Officers, and those
Disputes produced great Heats and Animosities, I thought it my Duty, both as a
Protestant, and an Englishman, to use my utmost endeavors for putting an end
to such Disputes, that so the Cause being removed, the Effects might cease: To
this purpose I suppose the publication of the following Sheets will be judged
very seasonable by all unbiased Men; for whereas these Disputes and Heats have
engendered many Phamphlets, which have rather added fuel to, then extinguished
the differences, that have happened upon this occasion between the Citizens
that adhere to the Lord Mayor, and those that adhere to the Sheriffs: Methinks
this Argument, though now almost two and thirty years old, seems by Divine
Providence to have been calculated for deciding the Differences aforesaid, and
I question not this good Effect, if Men will lay aside Passion and Prejudice,
and entirely resign themselves to the conduct of Law and Reason, upon both
which we cannot doubt but the Argument is founded, unless we should suspect
want of skill in those three great Oracles of the Law. One of whom, was the
late incomparable Lord Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench, another one
of the Justices of the same Court, and the third now living, his Majesty's
Eldest Sergeant at Law: And certainly if any man should be so absurd as to
affirm, that any one of these three (much more that all three of them jointly)
should be mistaken in an Argument of such consequence, he would discover more
Ignorance than Malice.

August, 26. 1650. The Report of the Committee appointed for Examination of the
State of the Chamber of London.
ABout 1630. we find the Chamber to be indebted about the Sum of 050000:00:00

At Michaelmass 1649. the Account of the Chamber being then Cast up, the
Chamber was then in Debt: (Viz.)

To Orphans 169654:01:05 264066:14:09 To other Persons for Principal Money
094412:13:04The means whereby it came into Debt, are either Extraordinary, or
Ordinary. Extraordinary.
Anno l. s. d. A Gold Cup given the Prince 001191 04 05 1633. Presents given to
the King, Queen, and Prince 003260 00 00 1634. A Jewel given the Queen 004000
00 00 1634. Entertainment of the King and Queen at Merchant-Ta^lors-Hall.
001287 12 08 1634. Christening the Duke of York 000633 00 00 1639. A Cup of
Gold given the Queen Mother, and other Charges 001000 00 00 1639. Charges of
the Charter 002355 00 00 1639. Given the King 010000 00 00 1639. Composition
for Package and Scavage 004000 00 00 1649. Composition for Londonderry 012000
00 00 1639. To the Repair of St. Paul's 000600 00 00 1642. Entertainment of the
King and Queen 001786 00 00 For Building the Bridge 006400 00 00 For
Ship Money, and setting out Ships to Sea 017218 00 00 By Gifts and Rewards to
Officers for 20 years, at 1200 l. per Annum. 024000 00 00 By several bad Debts
089730 17 01 071739 14 01 Ordinary.
Charges for Marshal Causes for twenty years 035278 00 00 For Interest-money
paid 20 years, at 6000 l. per Annum 120000 00 00 By delivering up Bonds to be
Cancelled by Act of Common Council in 1640. to several Persons for money lent
them out of the Chamber 20 years before about 30000 l. Principal in all with
Interest 060000 00 00 For Officers standing Fees for about 20 years; at 1400 l.
per An. 028000 00 00 For Workmens Wages for 20 years, at 1000 l. per Annum
020000 00 00 Stuff for Reparation for about 20 years, at 1600 l. per Annum
030400 00 00 The total sum given, lost and expended for about 20 years, is
455148 11 02

Present, Mr. Sheriff Pack Mr. Ald. Chiverton Col. Mumering Mr. Cole Mr.
Barbone Mr. Dallison Mr. Ald. Hayes Mr. Ald. Titchborne Mr. Gibbs Mr. Bolt^n
Mr. Adams Mr. Manton.
August, 26. 1650.

Those Men being very sensible of this horrid abuse of the City, that the
Chamber, which has been esteemed like that among the Romans, a Sacred
Treasury, for safety and pitying the Orphans cries. And searching how the City
came to be thus Bankrupt, it was found that the chief Officers had been very
faulty; and thereupon it was considered how they were Elected; and there arose
the Question about the Right of Electing the chief Officers of the City. And it
came into Debate whether the Livery-Men ought to be the Electors, as now they
are. Thereupon the Companies of London Petitioned the Court that they might
continue their Elective Power: And diverse Freemen of the City Petitioned for
the Abolishing that Power of the Liveries or Companies: the Petitions are these:

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of the City of London; and to the Right
Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons in Common Council
Assembled. The Humble Petition of the several Companies and Societies of the
City of London.
Humbly Shows,
THat whereas it appears, That heretofore for diverse years, many great
differences did arise within this City, touching the Election of the Lord Mayor
and Sheriffs, to the great disturbance of the Peace thereof; the said Elections
being made diverse and several ways, and with continual alterations and often
disturbances, (viz.) in the seventh year of King Edward the third, by the Mayor
and Aldermen together, with the most sufficient men of every Ward, in the
Eighth year of the said King, as the King's Proclamation then commanded; By the
Aldermen, and the most discreet and ablest Citizens of the City? In the
twentieth year of that King, by the Mayor and all the Aldermen, and twelve,
eight, or six of every Ward, according as the Ward should be great or small, of
the richest and wisest men of every Ward: In the fiftieth year of the said
King, by a certain number of the good men of the several Mysteries (their Names
being certified by the several Companies.) In the eighth year of King Richard
the Second, by the Common Council, and the most sufficient men of the City. In
the ninth year of that King, by those as should be summoned of the most
sufficient men of the City, or of the Common Council. In the seventh Year of
King Edward the Fourth, by the General Council, the Masters and Warden, of
every Mystery of the City coming in their Liveries; and by other good men,
especially summoned, (and so the said unsettled Elections continued with many
disturbances) until in the Fifteenth year of the said King Edward the Fourth.
That the same Election was settled by Authority of this Honorable Court of
General Council, by an Act then made, That the Master and Wardens of the
Mysteries of this City, meeting in their Halls, or other fit places, and
associating with the good men of the Company, clothed in their last Liveries,
should come together to the Guild Hall of this City for the Election of the
Mayor and Sheriff. And that no other but the good men of the Common Council of
the City should be present at the said Elections; which course and custom has
been ever since yearly used and continued, to the honor, peace and happiness
of this City, and the well settled Government of the same.

And forasmuch as the Petitioners are given to understand, that there is an
endeavoring to deprive and take from them, that their ancient and lawful
Right, for the Election of Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, which for near two hundred
years together, they and their Predecessors (the Livery-men of the several
Companies) have lawfully and quietly enjoyed, as belonging to them, without any
question or disturbance.

Their humble desire and request therefore is, That this Honorable Court will
be pleased to take their just Cause into your serious Consideration, that as
they are for the most part the ancient^st and most able Citizens of this City,
and do undergo (as always they have done) the greatest part of the Charge, and
Service within the same; so they may not be put from that their Right of
Election, as they and their Predecessors, Livery-men, have (without alteration
or disturbance, lovingly and peaceably) held and enjoyed ever since the said
Act of the 15th. of Edward the Fourth, being near two hundred years, as
aforesaid, or be discouraged from bearing Charge, giving Attendan^e, and
performing services, as they have always done, and performed for the honor and
good of this City. And they shall, according to their duties, pray, etc.

Mercers.
Tho. Chamberlain, William Barbe.
Grocers.
Samu^l Harsnet, William Hulme.
Drapers.
Francis Peeke, Peter Jones.
Fishmongers.
Tho. Lusher, Gyles-Baggs.
Goldsmiths.
John Terry, John Perrin.
Skinners.
John Garrard, John Southwood.
Merchant-Taylors
George Alpers, Richard Orme.
John Green, Haberdasher. John Redding, Salter. Robert Cravenor, Ironmonger.
Vintners.
William Field, Wiliiam James.
Cloth-workers.
John Milles, Edward Chard.

I. Sadler.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Council Assembled. The Humble Petition of diverse Freemen; Inhabitants of
this Honorable City:
Shows,
THat whereas the Ancient Liberties of the City did admit only Freemen of the
same, to have his Vote in the choice of the Supreme Magistrates thereof: The
imposition of the Governors upon a People without their voluntary Election,
importing the prevalency of mere Tyranny and Slavery, And whereas the
Livery-men of each Company thereof not chosen either by the City, or their
respective Companies, and therefore not Representee^, either of the one or the
other, have for many years past, imposed such Supreme Magistrates upon the same
City as they pleased, without the suf^'rage of the Freemen thereof, either by
themselves or Representees chosen for that purpose; and for which end, your
Petitioners humbly conceive this Court has been Constituted, and sworn upon
the election of the Representative Members thereof in their several Wards.

The premises considered, the Petitioners humbly pray, that by an Act of this
honorable Court, such a competent number of Representees my be annually chosen
by the Freemen of every Word, in their respective Words, who together with the
Common Council-men, may be authorized to choose the Supreme Officers of this
City Annually for the time to come. And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

THese were referred to a Commitee, and Counsel for the Companies there heard,
And Mr. Price in the behalf of the Freemen: from thence it was referred to be
fully debated before the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Common Council. And
on Saturday the 14. of December, the Court being sat at Guild Hall, the
Companies brought for their Counsel, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Hales, and Mr. Wild,
Gentlemen most famous in the profession of the Law; and the Freemen (besides
Mr. John Price) had prevailed by much entreaty, with Major John Wildman, as I
am informed, without hopes of Fees or Rewards to plead their Cause; and so the
debate begun as follows:

Mr. Price. My Lord, I Only crave leave to speak one word in the behalf of my
self; for I acknowledge my self to be but weak in the knowledge of the Law; and
I therefore unable to withstand those Gentlemen of the long robe, come only as
a Citizen of London, to render a reason of my subscribing of that Petition that
was presented unto your Honor, and this worshipful Court; And I hope you will
not judge otherwise of my appearing here at this time. We began the last time
to speak of it, to vindicate it to them that opposed us herein; And they being
the first that spoke then, we desire that they may likewise begin now, and then
with your Lordships favor, we shall reply to them; for my part, I thought
there had been an issue put to the business, and little thought had I to appear
any more about it.


Mr. Recorder. They that oppose any thing that is settled, to the end to have it
altered, they usually begin first to show their grounds or Reasons, in all
Courts of Justice.


Mr. Mainard. The intent of our coming here, is not to introduce any novelty,
but to maintain the ancient privileges of this Famous City under which it has
for so many hundreds of years flourished, in all Happiness the Earth affords
with Peace and Plenty.

And therefore we conceive we shall not need to produce any arguments to defend
our cause, but to answer the objections that shall be made by such that do
oppose us in the enjoying our Right, always presuming that where the Possession
goes, there the Right is; and therefore if they on the other side have any
thing to Object, we are ready to give Answers to their Objections.


Mr. Price. We hope we are before such Men, as will not take notice so much of
the Persons as of the Arguments, that are brought on both sides; And therefore
my Lord, I shall begin to proceed where they please. The last time this
business was under consideration before the worshipful Committee to be heard,
the business was driven as I conceive, to this head by your Opponents, to know
whether the thing desired by us, be in your power to grant to us; And whether
the things desired by them, were in your power to deny them.

They Pleaded by their Council, that they maintained their Privileges by Right
of Custom, so that it was Argued that the Law of Election was not in this
Courts Power to give.

So that your Lordship and this Honorable Court, are by them made not so much
as Judges, much less Parties.


Mr. Recorder. Mr. Price, takes it for granted, That all this Court understands
the State of this Case, which they do not; and therefore I desire the Question
may be rightly stated, that is to be disputed upon, otherwise you will spend
much time and run into confusion, and it will be impossible for them that hear
you to understand the business; so that I desire the Question may be stated,
and the matter of Fact agreed upon.


Mr. Price. My Lord, I had thought to begin where we left the last time; and
the Question then stated, was reduced to this short point; Whether the Right of
Election of the chief Officers of this City, did belong to the Livery-men of
the several Companies, with the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, by virtue of
a Law of this Court, or by virtue of custom.


Mr. Recorder. I beseech you let it be clear what you go upon.


Mr. Wildman. My Lord, I am here desired by many Freemen of this City to
appear in their behalf, to enforce a Petition of theirs delivered to this
Court, and they also produced to me a Petition preferred to some others in
opposition to theirs; And as I conceive, that noble Gentleman Mr. Recorder,
desires that which is very requisite, that is, That the Question may be rightly
stated; and so the Arguments produced on either side; Now I conceive the
Question is this, Whether the Wardens, Assistants, and Livery-men of the
several Companies of this City of London, ought to have the Election of the
Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs of London, or whether the Freemen in general by
themselves or by their Deputies have the Right of that Election.


City-Counsell. The Question cannot be collected from the Petition, which
prays, That the People of the several Wards (where many Forreiners inhabit,)
may choose the Lord Mayor.


Mr. Wildman. My Lord, I believe those Gentlemen endeavor so to state the
Question, that they might make the Court believe, that we would split our
selves upon that Rock of Popular Confusion; but we shall endeavor to avoid
that Clamor. We conceive the Question to be this: Whether the Masters, Wardens,
Assistants, and Livery-men of the several Companies, of Right ought to Elect
the Lord Mayor, and the Sheriffs of this City; Or the Freemen of the City by
themselves or their Deputies. It will be concluded on both sides, That the Lord
Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, with the Common-Counsel men, may have a Right in
the Election.


City-Counsell. We say the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, and the
Common-Counsel, and the Masters, Assistants, and Liveries of the several
Companies, have the Right of the Election, and Possession of that Right.


Mr. Price. The Question is, Whether the Election as it is, shall continue, or
not continue; We deny not that the Right of Election does belong to the Wardens
and Livery-men of each Company, with my Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen. But
the Question is, Whether it belongs to them upon such grounds as are
unalterable by this Court; if they are unalterable by this Court, let them show
by what Law; if they are alterable, we are then in a fair way to have one
Petition granted.


Mr. Mainard. There is nothing pretended by the Petition that is endeavored to
be made the Question. They do complain in their Petition, That this Government
which you have so long enjoyed in this City, is an Imposition of Tyranny and
Slavery, and that imposed; when I came first hither, I thought I was to speak
to matter of Right, but they decline that, and speak to point of Crime.


Mr. Price. It is true, these words of Tyranny and Slavery are in the Petition,
but they are with a Parenthesis. I desire the Petition may be read.

(The Petition was then read.)


Mr. Price. We say that the imposition of such and such things is slavery? but
it is not in relation to this Court, but in Answer to their Petition, who call
it in their Petition their Ancient Right; if it be their Ancient Right, let
them show by what Law; And I conceive the Parenthesis is only in Relation to
that Expression.


Mr. Wildman. I humbly conceive (my Lord, and Gentlemen) the thing in Question
must be collected from the Prayer of both Petitions; the Sum of the Prayer of
one Petition is this, that the Representatives of all the Wards may (as of
Right they ought) Elect the chief Officers of this City.


Mr. Recorder. I think, the business before you, is to come to the Question in
hand; and I humbly beg, That for expressions on both sides, they may be wholly
waved; and if you will not speak the Question, that you would agree of it in
writing.


Mr. Mainard. I suppose it is conceived by all what we both aim at, I shall be
a suitor that those Gentlemen may go on to matter of Argument, and I shall
speak what I am able.


Mr. Wildman. May it please your Lordship, to let me pursue the Recorder's
motion; We humbly conceive that the Prayer of our Petition must direct us to
state the Question; we pray no more but this, That the chief Officers of the
City may be chosen by the several Wards, in their Representatives Annually. We
do admit that the Lord Mayor, the Court of Aldermen, and Common Council, may
have Right of Election, because they represent their Wards; but we pray that
our Right in Electing, as we are Freemen, may be restored to us.


Mr. Hales. My Lord, There Is no Officers of any Corporation in England, but are
by Usage or Charter; and if these Gentlemen be about Officers, their Question
is about the Officers of a Corporation; these Gentlemen would introduce some
new thing that has not been heretofore used, and we desire to know upon what
imagined pretense they would have it, and that they show us the persons to
enforce the thing they desire; otherwise, why do they Petition?


Mr. Wildman. My Lord, These Gentlemen would avoid the true stating the
Question, and engage us in Logomachi^'s, contentions about words; we would know
wherein they oppose the desire of our Petition, to have the Ancient Right of
the Citizens of Lond^n, restored to them in the Choice of the chief Officers of
the City.


Mr. Mainard. We deny That you desire in your Petition, is the Right of the
City of London. It is so far from being their Right, that when they put that in
Execution, they lose their Charter, and all their Franchises.


Mr. Price. The Question was reduced to this, Whether it was in the power of
this Court to alter what was then in custom, so that we shall not be looked
upon as adversaries to our Opponents, denying this Court their Right of
election; but if we make it good, that the custom was altered by you, why then
we trust we serve you in so doing, if we prove it in your power to alter it
now; and it shall encourage us to pray, and you also to give what we ask, if it
shall tend to the good Government of this City.

If the right of election belong to the Livery, it must appear by written Law,
or by custom time out of mind; if by a Law, it must be by some Law of the
Land, or by some Charter, or by some Act of Common Hall, or Common-Counsel. If
it be by Charter, we must insist upon the terms of the Charter, and expounded
the same by succeeding practices, and if this Charter granted in King John's
time be merely declarative, we shall know what the custom was by the
succeeding elections.

If you plead custom, we shall find custom for many years, that the chief
Officers of the City were elected by the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen,
Common-Counsel-men, and the Wards of the City, and not by the Liverymen of
every Company, as is desired by these Gentlemen.

To the 15. year of Ed. 4. they are in use from the 19. year of Ed. the first,
which was 194 years. It was the practice of the City to choose by Wards so
long; And the Aldermen and Common-Counsel-men are chosen out of the Wards. Now
for election of Mayors and Sheriffs by the wards, we will give you but a place
of that plenty we can give to that purpose, in the 19. year of Ed. the first
1231. and in the 31. year of Ed. the first. In the 19 of Ed. the first out of
twelve men of every Ward, were the Sheriffs chosen; and so was the Mayor Thomas
Blun chosen; the Sheriffs were chosen by the Lord Mayor, the Court of Aldermen,
and Common-Counsel, and twelve men out of every Ward; And John Lincoln was so
chosen.

And in the 32. of Ed. the first John Blun was so chosen again; and in the 33.
of Ed. the first, John Blun was chosen the fifth time Mayor so, and so were the
Sheriffs.

And again 1 Ed. the second, Peter Drove chosen Sheriff as before, and John
Blun was chosen Mayor the sixth time; the first of Ed. the second, Blun was
chosen the seventh time by the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and the Community
which was summoned thereunto, which was twelve men out of every Ward; and in
the 2. of Ed. the second, Bu^ler and Dov^r were chosen Sheriffs as before; the
time would fail if we should speak of Palmer and Edmonds, etc. and many others
who were chosen by the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, the Common-Counsel, and the
good men of Wards.

At the 22. year of Henry the sixth, were present at election of the Mayor, all
the Common-Counsel-men, and several discreet Citizens chosen out of every Ward;
its true they are called the Commons and Community, and if that you look in the
21. of Ed. the first, the Community there is expounded to be the honest,
discreet, and wise men of the Ward; so that they were Representatives chosen
out of the Wards; but if it be objected, that besides these twelve honest
discreet men of every Ward, there were certain other men that did belong unto
this election, and surely it may imply that the Livery-men did bel^ng unto the
election; surely no, but by those dark expressions, must be meant the honest
discreet men chosen out of the Wards, with the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, to whom
it belongs ex officio.

The main argument was this; that the chief Officers of the City were to be
chosen by the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, and Sheriffs, and
Common-Counsel-men, with twelve men chosen out of every Ward that were discreet
men, that was granted; but that they were such discreet men, as to exclude
other, was denied: If that these are the men, they must be distinguished from
other men, by another term than discreet men. Now you argue thus, that
Livery-men are discreet, and therefore the men that must choose my Lord Mayor,
are the Livery-men; as if you should argue, That the Lord Mayor wears a golden
Chain, therefore the Sheriffs are Lord Mayors, because they wear golden Chains.

I humbly offer these Considerations:

1. My Lord Mayor, nor the Aldermen choose not any officers of the Companies;
why should they then choose any chief Officers of the City?

2. The jurisdiction of the Mayor and Sheriffs extends to a Local Power; and by
these Gentlemen's pleading, Livery-men, Free of this City, may live at York; and
if they be at London that day my Lord Mayor is chosen, they may choose my Lord
Mayor and the Sheriffs of this City, and yet live not under their Power.

3. The way of election we plead for, does not exempt them from being chosen by
the Ward to elect.

4. Freemen of this City pay Shot and Lot, and are bound to assist the chief
Officers of this City: but Livery-men living not under these bounds, are not
under this obligation.

5. Again, this City is distributed by way of Wards; Quest-men, Jurymen,
Constables, and Scavengers, are all chosen by the Wards; and it is most
necessary for the well Government of this City, that the chief Officers of this
City be chosen by Representatives from every Ward.

6. If there be any miscarriage in Government, The Citizens living in the City
must be taxt, and pay any fine for misgovernment, and therefore it is most fit
they should have their vote in election.

7. And further, if any accident happen by Fire or the miscarriage of one of
more of the chief Officers, if it so fall out that the Treasure of the Chamber
should be exhausted and mis-imployed, that the Orphans cannot have their
portions, I desire to know who must be responsible for it; the Livery-men of
several Companies, or the whole Wards, and every particular man thereof?

And here give me leave to be heard with Charity: God knows my Heart, I speak
out of Love to you all, and as pressed in Conscience, what I have to say, I am
sure it is the whisperings, nay the Report of most, and I fear too true; That
the cry of the Fatherless and the Widow does solicit Heaven for vengeance,
for expending the poor Orphans Estates; and we trust and believe, that your
Honor and this Honorable Court, whose Faces, and Lives, and Conversations we
so well know, that we do verily believe that your Hearts and Hands are clean
from this pollution; but as we do believe, so we hope, that your Honor and the
rest will take some speedy course that the blood of the Fatherless and the
Widow may not stick to these Walls; Let our Blood and Estates go before the
Blood of poor Orphans, that that may not one day be charged upon this City. I
desire to be pardoned this digression.

I should answer some objections that are commonly made against this way of
election that we desire: The first is this, That this will destroy the
Companies, and so at last it will strike higher, to wit, the overthrow of my
Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen, and so consequently all Government; for
my part, I know not that Absolon among us, but did I know such a man, my Hand
should be upon him as soon as any man's; I say let a Bear robbed of her whelps
m^et me, rather then a People without Government; the Magistrates power is my
power, and is in him for my use, and for my part I am for the Majestry of
Magistrates: for when we read of Kings, we read of Thrones and Scepters, and
soft Raiment, etc.

It is true, though your chains are gold, yet they are chains as well as gold:
and though your Gowns be Honorable, yet they are burdensome as well as
Honorable.

But as for the business in hand, we speak not against the Form and the Beauty
of it, but let every Star shine in his own Orb.

Let there be no confusion; let Wards have their dues, and let Companies have
theirs; I want opportunity to set forth their Glory and their Excellency in
their proper places. As for the objections of Popularity and Confusion, we
shall answer them if they be insisted on.


Mr. Wildman. My Lord, I humbly propose no other end, but to enforce the
Petition of the Freemen of this City: the Question that was stated is this,
Whether the Companies of the several Mysteries in the City, or the Freemen in
the several Wards have right to choose Lord Mayor and Sheriffs. Now it rests
upon us to prove; that the Freemen in their Representatives, chosen out of the
Wards, are to choose; and we do assert this for a truth, That those, and those
only that shall be actually chosen to represent the Freemen of the City of
London, not excluding the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Common-Counsel,
have a right to this Election.

And my Lord, I might insist upon it, that this very City and Common-Counsel in
all things do acknowledge this to be the Peoples Right; For upon your Election
of your Representatives in Parliament, the Commissions you give them run in the
name of the whole Commonalty of the City. And it is generally admitted to be
the Peoples right in all Acts of Common-Counsel and other public Acts, which
run in the name of the Commonalty of the City, they are therefore supposed to
do those Acts by themselves or deputyes: But, my Lord, I shall wave this, lest
I should reduce all Government to an uncertainty, by dissolving it into the
first principles, and so seem at least to run upon that Rock of coufusion which
those Gentlemen would have us split our selves upon; But it is no way our
intention, and therefore I shall assert this proposition; That the Representers
of the several Wards ought to choose the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs, upon a
Right declared by written Law; only I crave leave to premise, or to inform this
Honorable Court, that those first Records that should make out the Peopels
right, are imbezeled, burnt or lost, there being no Record in your Treasury,
but since Edward. 1.

But my Lord, by Records that are extent the Liberties of the Citizens of
London appear to be more ancient then any Charter of the City that's visible to
us: in the 9. Chap. of Magna Charta it is said, The City of London shall have
all her Liberties and Customs she was used to have; so that there was Liberties
and Customs that the City had before the great Charter of England. Now it is
agreed by the Gentlemen of the long Robe, that the great Charter of England is
chiefly declarative of the Common Law; And Sir Edward Cook in his second part
of his Institutes upon that ground declares it for Law, that any Law made by
the Parliament it self, and contrary to the great Charter of England, and
contrary to right reason, is void of it self.

I suppose he adds these words (And contrary to right reason) to show that he
means only that a Statute made against that part of the great Charter which is
declarative of the Common Law, is null of it self; for the Common Law, being
right reason, it cannot be supposed without a contradiction, that Parliaments
should of Right have power to make a Law against Right. Now the Liberties of
London being confirmed by the great Charter, I cannot conceive that any other
Liberties are there intended to be confirmed, then those common Liberties that
were grounded upon right reason, and then those words of the ninth Chapter of
the great Charter do but declare the Common Law, and by consequence are
unalterable; and any Law made against those Liberties of London either by a
Power within the City, or without the City, is null of it self; now to make it
appear that it was one of the City Liberties before the great Charter, that the
Freemen should choose their chief Officers, we can go no farther then your
Charter granted by King John, in the year (1215.) 435 years since; that is the
first Charter the City of London has extant. And by that Charter it is said to
be granted to the Barons of London yearly to elect a Mayor and Sheriffs, and
the word Barons does import no more then the Freemen of London; for then the
Freemen of every Port were called Barons, though since it has been made a
name and title of honor peculiar to those called Noblemen. Now I conceive it
will be agreed by the Gentlemen of the other side, that this very Charter was
not the original of those Liberties of London that are mentioned there to be
granted, but that it was only declarative, showing what the Liberties of the
City were; and here I must infer, that this Charter declaring that the Barons
of the City (wherein every particular Citizen is included) should choose the
Mayor and the Sheriffs, this (I say) does but declare what was the Common rihgt
of all the Citizens of London before this Charter.

I may then from hence conclude, that before the great Charter it was the Right
of the Citizens of London, none Excluded, That they should Choose the Mayor and
their Sheriffs; and such a Right as I crave leave to affirm to be Unalterable,
that is justly so; for being a Right by the Law of Nature, it is superior to all
other Laws, and other Laws are only so far Right, as they agree with that;
however I may more bol^ly say, That this Liberty of the Citizens of London
being confirmed by the Great Charter, cannot be null by any Act of
Common Council; and I humbly conceive that it was not in the Common-Council's
Power, to make that Act in the Fifteenth of Edward the Fourth, to debar all but
the Liveries of the several Companies to come to the Election of the Mayor, and
Sheriffs: for they could not take away the Right of the Citizens declared by
their Charter; and in the First Charter, and all others, it is said to be
Giranted to the Citizens indefinitely, to Choose of themselves a Mayor: and the
Charter ought to be construed in favor of Right, and so it is to be taken that
it is Granted to all the Citizens: and this their Right is apparent by the use
of it, which is mentioned in all the most Ancient Records of the City: there is
one or two very clear to this purpose. The City growing great and very populous
after their first Charter, found it inconvenient to meet together, the
Commonalty being very great: and therefore according to this their Right, which
we Assert, the whole City at a Common Hall did make an Agreement, That Eight,
Ten, or Twelve, of every Ward should be Chosen by their Wards, and in their
Names, and in their Steads, Elect the Mayor and the Sheriffs of the City.

As in the Sixth Year of King Edward the Second, Lib. D. Fol. 3. which if you
please I desire may be Read; that you may not think I speak without Book.

The Act was Read. And in the Twentieth Year of Edward the Third, in the Year
1347. there is an Act of a Common Hall Recorded, wherein it is said that there
gathered together on Simon and Iu^es Day, the whole Commonalty into Guild Hall,
London, so that the whole Hall was full with the Commonalty.

The Act read in these words.

And it is agreeed that from henceforth there shall come the Mayor, the
Aldermen, and also out of every Ward of the City of London, Twelve, Eight, or
Six, according as the Ward shall be great or small, of the Richest and Wisest
of every Ward; and such Twelve, Eight, or Six, with the Mayor and Aldermen,
shall intermeddle, and Choose a Mayor and Sheriffs, for the Year following. I
conceive this is sufficient to prove, That it is the Citizens of Londons Right
to Choose the Mayor and Sheriffs of London; for accordingly they did meet
together, the whole Body of the Freemen; and finding that inconvenient, the
Commonalty did agree at a full Hall, that such a select number should be chosen
by every Ward, and sent to the Election of the Mayor and Sheriffs, as appears
by the Act that has been read; and it is probable, that this was not the first
time that such an Agreement was made, but that this was made after the
Commonalty had upon some Occasion reassumed the Power of Electing to
themselves; for according to this Agreement, it was the Practice of the City of
London for near two hundred years before it was put into the hands of the
Liverymen of each Company; in 19th. of Edward the First, Lib. C. Fol. 62. the
Election of the Mayor and Sheriffs, is said to have been by the Mayor,
Sheriffs, and Aldermen, and Twelve men of every Ward.

In the 19th. year of Edward the first, Blun was Chosen Mayor of the City of
London, by the Common-Counsel and Aldermen, and by the Assent of twelve honest
men of every Ward of the whole City.

My Lord, it is apparent that twelve men were Chosen by every Ward, that did
Elect the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs. And the very same words are in the 31.
of Edw. 1. where Martin and Burford were Chosen Sheriffs; and in the Thirty
Second of Edward the First, where John Blun was so Chosen Mayor. Lib. C. Fol.
111. and 112. And in the First Year of Edward the Second, Fol. 112. Picot and
Dury were so Chosen Sheriffs. I humbly submit it to your Lordship, whether you
will see these Records. I may quote more, as in the Third of Edward the Second,
Lib. C. Fol. 113. etc. It was the continual Practice from Year to Year, that
the Twelve Men Chosen by every Ward, did Elect the Lord Mayor, and the
Sheriffs; there is a whole Jury of Witnesses in the Records to this purpose.
And my Lord, where this Usage may seem to have ceased, because in other Records
it is said they were Elected by the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen, and the
whole Commonalty; we shall make it appear that this is meant the Selected Men
of the Wards; though however those Records are clear for us: for if the Choice
was by the whole Commonalty, it was either by themselves, or these Deputies.
Yet we find one Record in the Twenty First of Edward the First, Lib. C. Fol. 6.
where it is said, First, that there was Assembled the whole Commonalty, and then
it is Explained in these words, That is to say of every Ward, the Richest and
the Wisest.


The Record was Read. Mr. Wildman. I produce this Record for this End, to show
that where the Election is said to be by the Commonalty of the City, it is to
be understood the select number of every Wards Representatives; for it is
supposed every one is included; and therefore it is said to be by the
Commonalty. I pray my Lord observe these words in this Record, the whole
Commonalty, that is to say the more able and discreet men of every Ward. And to
confirm this, if there be any need of it, we can produce another Record in 113.
Fol. Libro C. where Election is said to be made by the Commonalty summoned
thereunto: yet in Page 112. of the same, it is said men of every Ward did
Choose: whence I Collect that by the expression of the Commonalty summoned
hereto, is understood the Twelve Men from the Wards; so that it appears
clearly in my humble Opinion, That it was the Practice of the City for near two
hundred Years, to Choose by their Representatives, before it came to be the
Usage of the City, to Choose by the Livery-men of the Companies.

And my Lord, if it were needful to strengthen this, we can show by Lib. C. Fo.
41. Edw. 1.
Records, That Parliament men where Chosen by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Twelve men of every Ward; these were the Representers of the Wards, that joined
with the Lord Mayor, and the Court of Aldermen, in such Elections; and the
Commissions given to the Parliament Men, are in the Name of the whole
Commonalty of the City, which admits they were all there in their Persons or in
their Deputies, to Choose them, and give them their Commissions: else the
Commonalty is abused in having their Names used in the Commissions.

Now my Lord, I shall take the boldness to conclude from all this evidence of
the Common Counsel of London, though I much honor their power, and would be
infinitely loath to detract from it: yet my Lord I must crave leave to affirm,
That it being the liberty of all the Freemen of L^ndon; by themselves or
deputies, to choose the Lord Mayor and Sherifis; and this being confirmed to
them by Magna Charia, as unalterable: and all the people having declared at a
full Common Hall that they had put it into the hands of twelve Men which were
their deputies, or Representatives to elect the chief Officers of of this City;
this my Lord being the case, I say, I humbly, affirm, that it was not in the
power of the Common Counsel by that Act 15 Edward 4 to take away the Free-mens
right, not to say who should be the Peoples deputies to make their elections,
they being by the People deputies themselves, and deputed to another power; So
that my Lord, I now conclude that it was the Ancient undoubted right of the
Citizens of London by themselves or their deputies, to make their election of
their Mayor and Sheriffs, and other chief Officers of the City; and I conceive
the Petition of the Freemen of the City of London, which I now endeavor to
enforce, amounts to no more then a modest humble claim of their Common right,
that elections might be future be made by the deputies of every Ward, which was
the ancient custom of the City before the great Charter; and all their
Charters, that of King John, and since, say that the election shall be
according to the ancient custom of the City.


Mr. Wildman. And if the King at any time sent Writs, or made-Proclamation for
the quieting the elections when there was disturbances, and prohibited the
access of People: Yet the more honest and discreet men of the several Wards are
mentioned as bound to come to the election, and it is commanded that they choose
prout moris est, according to their custom; and I conceive it has been proved
that it was their custom to choose by the Representatives of every Ward. I shall
say nothing for the convenience of this way of choice that I plead for, because
we claim it as our right: and we expect that the Arguments against us will be
chiefly from pretended inconveniences s and when those Arguments are produced,
we shall endeavor to answer them.


Mr. Mainard. I suppose to satisfy your Consciences what is the Right in that
which is indeavored by these Gentlemen to be defended, which they have taken
very great pains about, in collecting what has been said to you; I shall
endeavor Gentlemen in the first place to remove that which seems to lie in
my way, and so come to that which I have to say in Answer to what has been
spoken by you.

The Gentleman that first spoke, taking Occasion to make an Apology for his own
inability to perform the Work in his hands, he was pleased to say that which I
conceive you do not believe; he would make as if he wanted parts, when
certainly he showed very great Skill in the very entrance of the business; and
when the Fact was but a little stated, he would have laid hold of* you all, and
so of making you Judges, he would have made you Parties; And indeed it is well
that you are both Judges and Parties; they said, and doubtless they are
ingenious, that they desire you to proceed according as you should be satisfied
in conscience, the which for my part I doubt not but that you will; there was
much said how much it did behove you in point of danger; but what that danger
is I understand not; but he tells you he urged it out of zeal; also he tells you
much of some secret Absalom; but for my part I understand not what, nor who he
means hereby; I will take no advantage of any man's affection nor inclinations
at all; but the man which that Gentlemen spoke to the business in hand, was
that he cited many precedents and records for the practice of what he now
desires my be effected; But truly I do extremely much misunderstand those
presidents and Records that he produces, If that they are not as full against
them, as any thing can be said.

I shall first offer the weight of their reasons, which they urge without
president; which deals most heartily, you shall judge; for I shall involve the
former in the latter, Mr. Price in Mr. Wildman; and first, That that was urged
by Mr. Wildman by way of reason was this, that it is a principle of Common
right, that just subjection cannot be but by assent, and there is no way
whereby this assent may be but this he speaks of. I do deny his Major. I shall
deny his first proposition; there is, and may be just subjection without
assent; and certainly the experience of all generations in the World evidences
this truth, that there may be just subjection without assent; and there be but
few Governments but are established without assent: it is true, where the
assent is, the easier is the subjection born. But what does he mean by assent?
a vertual or personal assent? if he means personal assent, why then when should
there be any such assent? but to say no man nor People shall be Governed but by
Assent, we deny; for is not a Lawful Conquest a Lawful Title in some Cases? the
matter is not to make the Business impossible without assent. But to that which
they deliver, I can no way assent. He tells you that the several Wards must have
Representatives to elect the chief Officers of this City, and he tells you the
first Records were lost and imbezeled; But it is not right placed.

But Gentlemen, what does he conclude? he tells you there were Records, and he
tells you without all question, if that they were extant, they would speak for
them; although he nor none else know the Contents of them. But says he, The
Liberties of London are Ancienter then the Great Charter; and the Liberties of
London being Confirmed by that Law; therefore any Law made against that, is
void and null: and therefore the Common-Counsel cannot change them.


Mr. Wildman. I said that wherein the great Charter was declarative of the
Common Law, i. e. right Reason, it was unalterable, and any Liberty of London
of that nature, such as is that we now Plead for, ought also to be unalterable.


Mr. Mainard. You said this, that our City Liberties are Ancienter th^n Magna
Charta; and that they are confirmed by Magna Charta, and therefore cannot be
altered by any Law, much less by the Common-Counsel.

I shall appeal to the whole Auditory for the Argument; then what ever Magna
Charta has confirmed cannot be by any Law repealed; and when this comes to
generals, this may be of very sad consequence; I see Laws are edged tools;
those that understand them, make good use of them: and those that do not
understand them, will find that they are sharp, and will cut;

Now he comes to the presidents which I did tell you before, and hope to make
it clear, that the presidents cited do overthrow that which they bring them
for. I shall offer unto you, that which according to the best of my Judgment,
is matter of reason, and proof of that which has been affirmed by them. I
shall not beg any favor from you, in regard I sp^ak for that which is dear to
you all, which is the Peace, Prosperity, and well Government of this famous
City: we shall first lay before you the fact, and from thence proceed to the
Question. From the fifteenth of E^ward the fourth, there has been a succession
of Election this way, and that cannot be denied by any, which is nigh two
hundred years. If any man lay claim to any thing, he either does claim of
right, or prescription.

Now if a man should come and put you to prove your right, when you have had
possession of an Estate 150 years past, you would think your self hardly dealt
withal. Now we shall prove that there has been 180. years possession of
Election this way, and it has by the blessing of God brought with it Peace,
Prosperity, and plenty to you; and I hope you are not so ungrateful, but to
acknowledge it; but it is told you, and much pains is taken to persuade you by
these Gentlemen that this must be removed; but under favor upon little grounds.

You see here are but two, and these two differ in what they would maintain.
Now all Truths stand one with another; says one, this is lawful; says
another, this cannot be changed; either you must conclude the present is lawful
or unlawful; if lawful, why is it desired to be changed? But judge you the
consequents of this; if you deny this way now established to be lawful, then the
whole City of London for above two hundred years never had one lawful Mayor,
and all Actions performed by them may be questioned. Now in the forty one of
Queen Elizabeth, there being a difference in the City about Election of
Officers, all the Judges of England were caused to meet together about this
very thing; and it was expressly resolved by them all, that such Elections were
lawful, and London is named in the Resolution; and it is said they found it a
Question of very great Advice, and those Judges were very grave, pious, and
godly men, for some of them, as Popham and Anderson, and Pyriam also a famous
man; so that Gentlemen, fifty years ago this Question was on foot, and all the
Judges of the Land did then give their Resolutions, that it would be matter of
very great inconveniency to alter it, and they gave it as in right of Law to
belong, as it had been before; and if it be not lawful, then this City has
forfeited its Charter, and is liable, when they that are above in Power and
Authority at any time shall be pleased, to be questioned for it; I do apprehend
that the foundation of your right does not depend upon any Charter; those
Charters you have, are matter of confirmation, and not Charters that do give
you your Right; the antientest Record that you produce, is from King John, but
the first year of Richard the first is the utmost bounds of memory. If that it
be not by prescription, why then are many customs of the City void? For there
are many customs and usages for which there is no Charter, nor is it possible
there should be; and therefore it must of necessity follow, that Mayors was
time out of Mind; and the truth is, Mayors were in use before the Charter; they
were indeed called Portwards and Portrifts; but the Name was changed in Richard
the First's time, and from thence they were called Mayors, and the Charter was
granted in the Name of the Mayor; so that though the Officers Name be changed,
it is the same Officer still, the Power the same, but not the Name, if they
were not by Custom; for you must know what is by Custom, is not by Charter,
and what is by Charter is not by Custom. Now then what is the Charter? the
Barons of themselves may choose a Mayor; this Charter being of this Antiquity,
it shall be construed according to usage, and that is a rule in Law, and that
is your consequence; for if we shall be forced to find out the meaning of
words, you shall be to seek; for Citizens in those times were called Barons.
But we shall now come to answer their objections, and to make those objections
we have to say on the other sides. Those Records that they produce, say, we
shall all choose, and if that you hold your selves to the letter, Then you are
tied to an impossibility, that is every Citizen none excluded, and then yon
will reduce your selves to an absolute impossibility; but say they, we would
have a Representative made out of every Ward, and so they with the Mayor and
Court of Aldermen, should choose the chief Officers of the City; but this does
no more stand as an objection against the present choice; for if you look to
the words of the Record produced, it does not bear it; for does the Charter
grant you any such Representative? Taking it for granted, the Right is founded
upon Charter, and and not upon custom: and I take it to be by Ancient custom
before the Charter, or else the Charter would not bear it, that they should
choose a Mayor, and not telling them how and when; for this general grant was
made because it was their custom; but an objection is made, that in this way
which we now choose, all do not choose. But I answer; all do choose, though not
by their own votes; you say, when did we give our right to the Livery Men to
give vote for us? I answer a Man sees with his eye, ye we say the Man sees; a
Man's hand moves, but it is the Man that moves it; so though every part does
not do every thing in the City, yet the whole does every thing, and the City
does choose, though every member thereof be not at the choice; so that the
question is whether you do believe this was lawfully done by those that do it.
Now if Lawfully why then they are the Cities Representatives; as for example
for the Parliament, every member thereof cannot give his vote for the passing
of all things: for many times, many of them are in the Country when many Acts
are past, and yet we say the Parliament does it; as in election of Parliament
Men in the Country, the Writs run, that the People shall choose; and yet we all
know that none choose but such as are Freeholders, although there may be many
as good men as Freeholders, yet they have no vote: and yet this Act is
accounted the Act of all the Commons in England, though they come in but by
some parts, and some have no vote in the choice of them; we may not depart from
this; for by this we hold all we have; so if this be a lawful choice, why then
the Law supposes that where there is a continuance of a lawful possession,
there all lawful means is supposed to maintain the possession.

If that all the City should meet together, and set down this Order, if that it
be once settled, that for ever hereafter these and these shall choose; then you
make those your Trustees, and it supposes such an ancient custom was. And
truly, Gentlemen, the choice as now it is, is no otherwise; for the Aldermen
they are chosen by the Ward, and so are the Common Council.

I will put you a Case, which to my Understanding, is like this. In the 28.
year of Edw. the 1st. there was a Statute made, wherein the King grants to the
People, that they shall choose the Sheriffs, or conservators of the Peace;
whenas there was nothing more clear, that none but the Freeholders should choose
them. Mark the parallel; and yet this is an Act of Parliament that has its
beginning at that time: and yet that is accounted the choice of the People.

I shall now come to examine that which I told you of, the Presidents which
they produced; which I was bold to tell you, that every one of them made
against them.

That which is desired is, That every Ward should choose them Representatives,
and that those Representatives, together with my Lord Mayor, and Court of
Aldermen, should choose the chief Officers of the City. And in proof to this, I
shall appeal to your Memories, and to the words of the Presidents, whether one
President that they produce, prove that those 6, 8, or 12 men that were
summoned to choose, were chosen by the Ward. You shall see what a pass you will
come to, if you go according to their meaning of those Presidents. Says the
first President, They were summoned from each Ward. They did not summon
themselves. Pray then who summoned them? Why, it was the Mayor that summoned
them: The Mayor summoned whom he would; sometimes 6, sometimes 8, sometimes 12, at
his pleasure; and he summoned sometimes the Honest men, sometimes the Rich men,
and sometimes the Wise men; and they came and made Election of the Mayor. There
is not the least tittle in all the Records that they produce, that they were
chosen by the Ward. It is one thing to say, 12 Men that were summoned from such
a Ward, came, and another thing to say, 12 Men that were elected by the Ward,
came and chose: and yet so it is said, that at that Convention there should be
6, 8, or 12 of the Honestest, Wisest, and Richest men of the Ward chose.

If that there should be such a Summons (...) out, That all the Richest, and
all the Wisest of such and such a Ward should come, what a kind of Summons is
this! And how shall you judge of these persons? etc.

But it appears the Mayor sent out his Process and summoned them, and so a Law
is made, that none should come but those who are thus summoned: as it appears
in the Election of Blunn Mayor, and all along no mention made of electing the
persons, but summoning them to appear.

Otherwise this must be understood to be the Common Council of the City of
London, for they have had several terms; and a man may very well say, when the
right is in the Commons to do this, or that, that when it is done by their
Trustee, it is done by the Commons. Now the Common Council are often so called,
the Commons of this City. Now how will you understand that these 6, 8, or 12
men were only chosen for this end, To choose the chief Officers? There is
nothing less in the 2 Ed. 1. fol. 41.
Record: only Master Wildman fancies that the Ward met upon this occasion, and
elected them; and then the Mayor should summon them. So that, I say, there
could not be stronger Presidents than what they have produced, that make
against themselves. I shall now conclude what inconveniences would follow in
point of Law, in case they had their desire.

Secondly, You put your selves upon this hazard, that if you part from that
which is warranted by Charter, and warranted by the possession of 200 years,
and warranted by the Resolution of those 12 Judges, I say, Then you will
forfeit your Charter which you have so long enjoyed.

Thirdly, It will be inconvenient to you, in regard of your Liberty in the
Ancient Laws of England. No man dwelt in any Ward, but was sworn to appear upon
all summons to Courts.

Your Wards have Courts of Inquest: and over them you have the Sheriffs Court;
and this Court, which is above that: and no man can live out of those
Jurisdictions.

Your Wards in the City are like your Hundred-Courts in the Country. And
heretofore, in all Wards, every one was to be summoned, as soon as one was 12
years old, they were to be summoned to give an account of their Life.

In a Ward you know there are many that are not Freemen; and there are many
Freemen that have their Habitations abroad. Now if you admit of all to come to
choice, why then Foreigners that live in the Ward, shall have more freedom than
Freemen that live out of the Ward; and it may so fall out, that in some Wards
there may be more Strangers than Freemen. So that in this way of choice by the
Ward, oftentimes those that are Citizens may be excluded, and those that are
Foreigners may be included.

But you may say, we will exclude those that are not Freemen from choice. But
was there ever any such thing done in this World?

The next thing that will follow it will be this, Popularity. Gentlemen, you
must remember that I told you that the Ward consists of every Inhabitant
thereof: and when you are in such a populous place as this City is, and when
that they shall all meet together, what Breaches of Peace and Insurrections may
come! I speak not of that which is without president: and such Meetings cannot
be, in any wise man's apprehension; but this will follow.

But truly I do not look upon this as the greatest danger; but there is this in
it also: The foundation upon which this is grounded, which the Doctrinal part
of the Law, in this case is undermined, and the Example of such a thing as
this: For after this Example, truly all the Government or Corporations of this
Kingdom will receive such shakings, as I blush to mention, when they shall
consider the Ancient Government of this City, so backed with Lawful Authority,
put into a new way. There is not a more dangerous thing in my Understanding.

Heretofore when the Prer^^^tive did lie upon you, you did show your selves
constant to your own Interest. Truly this is a mere design to betray you; and
it will shake you all to pieces, if you look not to it; for it is an
Earthquake under you, and will blow you up.

As for that Principle Mr W. asserted concerning just Subjection, because he
left it, lest he should reduce things to an uncertainty, I shall say nothing.

Mr. Hayles. My Lord and Gentlemen, First, It is agreed to by them, that the
power of the choice of my Lord Mayor is not merely by Charter, but by
Prescription too; That the Charter is a Confirmation, and not the Original: For
we do say, that there was the same Office of Mayor many Years before K. John:
So that your Officers of the City have been time out of mind, and not barely by
the Charter. And if it were not so, that would overthrow all your Courts and
Franchises.

Secondly, This is agreed to on both sides, that without all question the
Common Council shall have a Vote in Election of the Mayor; in this we agree:
But the Dispute is, whether or no the Livery and Assistants of the Companies
shall come in with their Voice, or whether there shall be a new device, that
the Citizens shall meet and choose 12 Men of each Ward, as they do in the choice
of the Common Council; and so they shall elect the Mayor.

Thirdly, We agree in this, that is, that the way of Election has been by the
Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, and Livery Men, and has been used for about
180 years. And they affirm that this was grounded upon an Act of Common Council.

These three things are agreed unto on both sides.

But now the great heat is against the Livery Men; and the Reasons they give
against them are these Three:

First, They argue from point of Inconveniency. That is, because the Mayor and
Aldermen do not choose the Masters and Wardens of the Companies, therefore they
should not choose the Mayor, and Officers of the City.

The Second Reason they give, is in point of right. I shall say no more of that
than what has been said already: You have had a choice of Mayor and Sheriffs,
for near 200 years, by the Aldermen, Common Council, and Livery, to argue
Election out of convenience, that you have been under 200 years. To alter it
upon M. Prise's Opinion, I think you will not, you having found it every way so
convenient and profitable to you.

But if so be there be any inconveniency in this, a popular choice will be very
much more inconvenient. I pray consider but this one thing: If so be the People
should come hereafter, and dispute the validity of this choice you plead for,
and say, What do you tell us of Representatives! We will all choose our selves;
What imaginary grounds can there be to say, These fears are but imaginary? How
will it be, when it will come to be thus? They will say, We will go and choose a
Mayor our selves; there is nothing of Right in this, but merely Imaginations:
if you allow of 10, or 12, they may say, why not 50, or 100, or 200? But for
point of Right you have heard what has been said of these 3 Heads.

But, says M. Wildman, the foundation of all power is in the People first: If
that shall be a ground to let in all the generality of Citizens into an actual
choice of Officers, will there not be the same reason for Apprentices, and
Foreigners, to plead for Votes in your Election? A Foreigner is under the power
of the Mayor, and Apprentices live under the command of the Mayor.

The next Reason is, they would endeavor to prove that this course of Election
they plead for, was heretofore usual. I shall say but two words to that.

First, They insist upon the Charter, and that of King John: the words are,
They shall Elect a Mayor.

And they produce some Presidents of 31 Edw. 1. and 1 Edw. 2.

I shall repeat one word or two of that my Brother Maynard omitted.

First, You will remember we proved a constant usage of near 200 Years in this
way of Election; and their pretense is but for a few certain Years, that the
choice was in that way which they desired.

A second thing shows their pitiful mistake. The Common Council are agreed to
have a choice: why if they examine it, they will find the Common Council are
men chosen by the Ward. They do find here and there mention made, that the
Mayor was chosen by the Aldermen, and about 6, 8, or 12 men summoned. And here
they think, that they must needs be Representatives chosen by the Ward; whenas
in truth, these might very well be the Common Council of the Ward.

I think there is nothing left for me to say to that. What I shall offer, shall
be out of Record, and never mention the conveniences nor inconveniences. I
shall read the Records unto you, that they produce, and I will take hold of
some words of them. The words are these: There shall come out of every Ward
Twelve, Eight, or Six men, according to the greatness of the Ward. And
according to the Wards of London, the Common Council Men were sent, some more,
and some less. And this is very obvious, that where there is such a description
of the number for each Ward, there must needs be meant the Common Councils. So
that of necessity these words extend to the Common Council Men, or else the
Common Council must be excluded.

And again, from a Record Edw. 3. they argue the Commonalty to be the 12 Men,
when they are the Liveries. So they mistake in their Application.

We are not to dispute who may alter the custom; but they say, this is your
custom, and they say, that is.

We will admit, that that which is by a fundamental Law or Charter, cannot be
altered by an Act of Common Council. But if your present choice be not lawful,
then all Bargains made since Edw. 1. by your Officers are void, and you have no
power to judge; for you are no Common Council.

(M. Wild spoke last for the City Liveries to the same purpose as the other: He
had no new Argument, only an observation from 28 Edw. 1.)

M. Prise: I humbly conceive I may answer him to what has been objected
against what I delivered according to Reason. You say that I did declare, that
just Subjection cannot be but by assent. Under favor, that was not offered by
me: But I affirm that just Subjection cannot be but by right of assent.

Secondly, They urge that we differ upon our grounds. The one says that it is
lawful, the other says not. And the Reason is, because they that grant it have
no power to grant it: But for my part I did not assert any such thing.

As concerning the Resolution of the Judges that you so much speak of, in some
cases it is considerable, and in some cases little weight is to be given to
the^r Resolutions. For we all know, in the case of Ship-Mony, they gave in
their Resolutions, that it was according to Law. And we also know, that this
was afterward condemned by the Parliament, to be contrary to Law and Illegal.

Secondly, The Resolutions of those very Judges you so much extol, do no way
refer to the business.

We offer to grant a select number may lawfully choose; but the Liveries are
not so. And the Opinion of the Judges only say, that a select number may choose.

Thirdly, Whereas it is said the Charter is declarative; to that I answer. The
Practice succeeding does declare what the custom then was; and we have no
mention of any Masters, or Livery-Men of Companies in Election. And for
Exposition of the Charter, if that we tie you to the Letter of it, you say we
tie you to an impossibility: But we only plead for the Representatives of
Wards, to choose, not all personally: and therein is no impossibility.

And besides, in 21 Ed. 1. it is expounded what was meant by those words.

We proved the Charter gave it the City, and the City gave it the Common
Council, and the Common Council gave it to the Livery; and if they gave it for
good, if they find it prejudicial, ye may take it away again.

Whereas they say that by the number of 6, 8, or 10, is doubtless meant the
Common Council; How do you know the Common Council-Men did consist of so many
in every Ward?

And then for the Exposition of the Ward Moat: Whereas they say some Foreigners
may choose, yea, they may infer as well, Foreigners may be chosen.

To that I answer, many men may be summoned together about business, and some
of them may have a right to some things there in hand, and some may not.

We have a President: Once one that was no Freeman was chosen to be a Sheriff
of London, and because he was no Freeman, therefore the Election was null. So
though it be granted, that every particular man of every Ward, be summoned to
come to the Ward-Moat, yet it does not follow that he has a right to all the
work to be done in that Court. Again for the Popularity and consequences which
they so much plead, that will every whit reflect upon this Honorable Court;
for every Member of this Honorable Court is chosen by that Party which they
call Popular: therefore let them speak of that till to morrow morning all will
reflect upon you. That which is now pleaded for is custom.

Thirdly, That this has been the practice for 180 Years, I do not deny; but I
do not grant it. Suppose we do grant it, and yet we bring a Practice for within
12 Years, that was another Practice; whether an intermission of Practices do
not rend that which is called custom, I humbly offer. For my part I did not
offer the Argument of convenience in relation to the present Practice* but
according to this Principle I argue against the unreasonableness of this
Privilege, that these Gentlemen would have to this Right, and not by Authority
of this Court. Again they say, that if Election be by the Ward, men will plead
thus: Why not 50, or 100, as well as 6, 8, or 12?

Again they urge, that Livery-Men were called the Commonalty; but how aptly,
and how fitly, we offer unto you to determine.


Major Wildman's Reply. MAy it please your Lordship, and this Honorable Court,
to give me leave to make some Answers to what the learned Gentlemen on the
other side have pleased to object and take exceptions at what was affirmed. I
shall not (my Lord) endeavor (as that Gentleman did) captare benevolentiam, to
take the Affections of the People, before I begin to debate the matter in
question. I shall not tell them that I will not insinuate into their minds any
thing but what will stand upon the foundation of Truth; but offer my thoughts,
and freely submit to your Judgment: Yet I hope to answer particularly M.
Maynard's Exceptions.

He was pleased, first, to take exception at that general Principle that I
averred, from whence I said might be deduced the Right of all the Wards to
choose the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs by their Representatives: Though the
Gentleman might have pleased to remember, I did say I would wave th^se
Principles of common Right, lest he should say we intended to bring all things
to an uncertainty, by unravelling the bottom of Government to its first
Principle; and therefore I insisted upon nothing but what we claim as our
written Right.

The second thing the Gentleman was pleased to except against, was that which
he only imagined in his own Brain, misreciting my words, like a man created by
his fancy to ^ry his skill upon: for he supposed I did say, That if we had the
Records that are now lost, we doubted not but that they would prove the
assertion we maintain: whereas I said, If we had the Records of those times,
that are lest, they would show us what the Rights of People then were. And that
I conceive to be without Execption.

The next thing he takes exception against, is, what I said concerning Magna
Charta; and would make this Court believe that I had thought all that great
Charter was unalterable: But the truth is, I did only say, That Magna Charta,
the great Charter of England, was unalterable, according to the Principles of
the Gentlemen of the long Robe: I only spoke it upon their bottom. I said, If I
should believe Sir Edw. Cook in what he said upon the Statute of 42 Edw. 3. I
must then say, that an Act of Parliament made contrary to that part of the
great Charter that was declarative of the Common Law, was null of it self; for
he said that part of it was unalterable. Thus I gave them only their own
Authority, and made it no assertion of mine absolutely: Tho, under his favor,
I think a man may assert, that what is founded upon the true Common Law of
England, as Sir Ed. Cook says, which is Right Reason, no Authority whatsoever
ought to alter: (I speak not of circumstances) for if we should aver that, we
should aver contradictions in the very terms, and say, that Right Reason of
right may be altered from Right Reason, I shall let pass what the Gentleman was
pleased to say of the Laws being edge-tools, and of men cutting themselves with
them. I believe he met with an Argument for the Peoples Right that was an edge
tool in his way, and he was loath to break his shins over it, and therefore he
past over the Argument with a grave caution of the sharpness of the Law, that
he might divert your thoughts from it: But the Gentleman coming a little nearer
to the matter, lays down his Maxim, which is this, That ever since the 15 Ed.
4. these Liveries have had the choice. And then he argues thus: Says he, The
case would be very hard to have your titles of Land, after 190 years
possession, to be questioned: And is it not as hard, that the right of the
Liveries to Elections should now be questioned? Under the Gentleman's favor,
the case is very different. I suppose no man pleads for the like title to a
Power or Authority over the People, that men have to their Lands, nor upon the
same grounds. If the Titles were alike, it were just to buy and sell Authority,
or places of Trust and Government, as we buy and sell Lands or ^orses in
Smithfield; and this our Common Law abhors. If we speak of People that are
arrant mere Vassals, like the Slaves in Argier, Authority over them is indeed
bought and sold; but I hope we are not to be so esteemed, and yet the Ju^^ice
of those bargains is not clear. But certainly men's titles to Land; and to a
power of Government, are, or ought to be of a different nature: And I shall
make bold to assert, That it is no hard case, that the Right of any number of
men claiming a power in or about Government by Succession only, should after
190 Years possession be questioned. Suppose M. Maynard could have made good the
Livery Men's claims to the Election of the chief Officers of the City by custom,
(but then he must have more than doubled the time of the usage he spoke of,)
yet I humbly conceive that the Exercise of any power about Government is not
made just by continuance of time, unless it were just in the Original. If long
usurpation of a Power, in or about Government, could give a right to that
Power, all the foundations of just Government were overturned, and by
consequence it were not right or just to take away an usurped Power if the
Usurpers be grown old.

Next the Gentleman is pleased before he comes to his material Arguments, to
insinuate strange, huge, dreadful, monstrous Consequences that would ensue in
case any man shall deny his Assertions, he is pleaded to say, What strange
consequences would ensue, if we should say, for 190 years all the Lord Mayors
or Sheriffs of the City of London have been unlawfully chosen? but suppose that
which he suggests, that the Mayors have been chosen unlawfully so long, it is
time then to provide for a lawful choice, and the continuance of the un^awful
will breed more of M. Maynard's monstrous consequences; and if it be unlawful,
it is not forbearing to say so that will amend the Consequences.

But now the Gentleman comes to his Position, and says, That this Government
that is now is lawful. The Gentleman might have pleased to have spared that; I
did not yet assert that the Government that is now is unlawful, yet he may take
some answers to his Arguments, or rather Authorities for the legality of it.

The 1st. Ground he builds upon for the lawfulness of this Government is the
Opinion of the Judges, which makes a huge Cry. But by the way, the question is
not now concerning the Government, but only concerning the choosers or electers
of the Governors; the Government may be the same still, though the manner and
way of electing these Governors may be altered from what it is at present. Yet
to that Opinion of the Judges, which makes the great noise in the Court; Oh
(says he) it is the Opinion of all the learned Judges, and then he paraphrases
upon the goodness, honesty, learning, and fame of the Judges that were named in
the Book produced. It may be those Gentlemen of the Long Robe were Black-Swans;
yet the Argument from Authority is none of the strongest, It Is not a very good
consequence, that the thing is just because good men thought so.

Yet under favor the Opinion of the Judges I take to be not the most certain
or unalterable amongst men, nor the most unbyassed by their own Interest, I
believe if a man should go to the 12 Judges, he shall scarce find 4 or 3 of the
12 of the same opinion in a dubious case; yet if there were more that agreed,
the late opinion of the Judges in the case of Ship-Mony may inform us how free
the Judges opinions are from the Bias of private Interest in such (...) how
fit it is for us to depend upon them; but however the opinion of the ^^ges
produced by Mr. Maynard, I crave leave to affirm to be against him in this
Case, at least not for him. I desire it may be read.


The Case of Corporations, touching the Election of Governors in the fourth of
the Lord Cooks Reports, fol. 77, 78.
In the same Term at Serjeants-Inn in Fleet street, it was demanded of the
chief Justices, Popham, and Anderson, and Periam, chief Baron, and of the other
Justices, That where diverse Cities, Buroughs, and Towns are incorporate by
Charters, whether by the name of the Mayor and Commonalty, or the Mayor and
Burgesses, and of the Bailiffs and Burgesses, etc. or the Aldermen and
Burgesses, or the Provost and Sheriffs, or Burgesses, or the like; and in the
said Charters it be prescribed that the Mayor, Bailiffs, Aldermen, Provosts
shall be chosen by the Commonalty or Burgesses* and of the ancient and usual
Elections of Mayor, Baiiffs, Provosts, and by a certain chosen number of the
chief of the Commonalty, or of the Burgesses, commonly called the Common
Council, or by other name, and not in general by all the Commonalty or
Burgesses, or not by so many of them as will come to the Election, shall be
good in Law, forasmuch as by these words of the Charters the Election shall be
indefinitely by the Commonalty, or all the Burgesses. And which Question being
of great importance and consequence, was r^ferred by the Lords of the Council
to the Justices, to know the Law in that case; for that diverse attempts were
now of late in diverse Corporations, contrary to the ancient usage, to make
popular Elections; and it was resolved by the Justices upon great deliberation,
and upon conference had amongst themselves, that such ancient usual Elections
were good, and well warranted by their Charter, and by the Law also; for in
every of their Charters they have power given them to make Laws, Ordinances and
Constitutions, for the better Government and Order of their Cities or
Buroughs, and by force of which, and for avoiding popular confusion, they by
their common assent constitute or ordain, That the Mayor, Bailisfs, or other
principal Officers, shall be chosen by one certain select number of the
principal of the Commonalty, or of the Burgesses, as is aforesaid, and
prescribe also how such selected numbers shall choose; and such Ordinances and
Constitutions was resolved to be good, and allowable, and agreeable with the
Law, and their Charters, for avo^ding of popular disorder and confusion; and
although that no such Constitution or Ordinance can be showed, yet it shall be
presumed and intended in respect of such special manner of ancient and
continual Election, which special Election is not begun without common consent;
that at the first la^e Ordinance or Constitution was made, such reverend
respect of Law does give to ancient and continual allowance and usage, as it
had been within time of Memory. And the custom of most faithful Antiquity is to
be esteemed; the things which are done contrary to the custom and usage of the
Ancients either please, or seem right, and the frequency of the Act premiseth
much, and according to that Resolution the ancient and continual Usages have
been in the Cities of London and Norwich, and other ancient Cities and
Corporations. And God defend that they shall be now innovated or altered, for
that many and great Inconveniences will arise upon the same; all which the Law
has well prevented, as appears by that Resolution.

First, My Lord, observe, that the Question here resolved is not our Question,
the Question here resolved was this, Whether an Election of a Mayor, not made
by all the Commonalty in a Corporation, or at least as many as would come, was
good in Law? But our present question is only this, Whether the Commonalty of
this City ought not to have their Representers to choose the Lord Mayor? So that
we do grant, that an Election not made by all the Commonalty may be good.

Now, my Lord, observe the Judges Resolution of the Question; they resolve that
an Election made by the Mayor and Aldermen, and a certain chosen number of the
choice of the Commonalty, is good in Law. We concur with the Judges, keeping
close to their words* A certain chosen number of the Commonalty; and to those
other words of theirs, viz. Such ancient usual Elections; that is to say, such
ancient Elections by the chosen number of the Commonalty are good in Law. Now
we deny that the present Election of the the Ld. Mayor by the Livery-Men is the
most ancient usual way of Electing, and that the Livery-Men are a chosen number
of the Commonalty, I mean, chosen according to any right of choice, that right
being in the Commonalty.

But, my Lord, it is very observable in this Opinion of the Judges, upon what
Ground they judged such Elections valid in Law; the ground is this, For it is to
be imagined or supposed, say they, that such ancient and continued Elections
did not begin without common assent. Hence it is evident, that the Judges
imagined that all the Citizens had the right of choice in them, and that they
had agreed that a chosen number of themselves should choose in their stead; So
that the Judges in their Opinion took the chosen number of the chief of the
Commonalty, that did elect the chief Officers to be the Represent^rs of the
whole Commonalty.

Now if your Lordship please to remember we produced an Act of the Common Hall
of London, made long before the Liveries made any claim to be the choosers, and
at an Assembly, when the Guild Hall was filled with the Commonalty, wherein
they did assent, that there should be a certain number of every Ward
proportionably that should be the Electers of the Mayor and Sheriffs; so that
the way we propose, of several men of every Ward, representing the Wards to
elect, is founded upon a common Assent. They produce no one Act of a common
Hall, that should make it appear, that it was ever assented unto by the
Commonalty, that the Livery-Men of the Mysteries should be the choosers of the
Mayor.

Now my Lord I humbly offer it to this Honorable Court, whether this opinion
of the Judges about Elections produced by Mr Maynard as the pillar whereon they
build the lawfulness of the Liveries Elections, do not rather speak them to be
unlawful, in my humble opinion, this that those learned Gentlemen flourished
like Goliah's Sword against us, ^^ays themselves.

After Mr. Maynard had produced the Authority of the Judges as he supposed for
his Cl^ents case, he argues from consequences, says he, If this present way of
Electing by the Liveries were not lawful, mark the consequences, your Charter,
says he, is forfeited; this I confess is a big bellied word; but how will this
assertion agree with what M. Maynard, M. Hales, and M. Wild all affirmed, that
the Charters of the City did not originally give the City those Liberties that
are mentioned in the Charter, but that the Charters were only D^clarative of
Cities Rights, showing what their Rights were before the Charters? Now if the
Charters give not the City their Rights, certainly you cannot forfeit your
Charters, unless the learned Gentlemen shall please to say. You shall forfeit
the Declaration of your Rights, (for the Charters are no more by their own
confession) and if your forfeiture be no more you may enjoy your Liberties
still, notwithstanding such a forfeiture as they pretend. But suppose a man
should say what I did not yet say, that the present way of Electing the Mayor
is unlawful, is it any more than this, that the Citizens have suffered their
Right to be taken from them for many Years, and others to enjoy it unlawfully,
and how will this consequence be deduced from thence, that the City has
forfeited their Rights; I confess I understand not by the Law that a Body
politic or Corporation, as such, is under harder Laws in our Nation, than the
Members of the Commonwealth severally; now no man in England can forfeit his
Rights without a legal conviction of some crime for which the Law censures him
to forfeit his Rights; and I know no reason why the City should have such hard
measure, that in case the free men have suffered the Companies to usurp their
right, that therefore all the Cities rights should be forfeited.

Mr. Maynards next argument for the Liveries Elections, was this, That it is
founded upon a constant usage, time out of mind, so that, says he, the City
now prescribes unto this way of Electing; and yet the Gentleman was pleased
afterward to confess, that to make a title by prescription there must be a
constant usage since Rich. the firsts time, and they only produce an Act of a
Common Council for the Liveries Electing about 174 years since, and will
suppose that that act of Common Council was in confirmation of what was the
custom before, whereas they produce no one footstep of a Record before that
time to prove that it was the usage to choose by Livery-men, but on the contrary
it has appeared that the Election has been 400 years since by a select number
out of the several Wards, which cannot be any way supposed to be meant of
Livery-men, they not coming as men from several Wards, but as men from several
Companies.

The next thing the Gentleman said, was this, that he hoped we would grant that
we did both depart from the Charter it self; for, says he, if we found the way
of Electing upon the Charter, the Charter running to the Citizens indefinitely,
it must be understood of all the Citizens and Barons; and, says he, you grant,
it is impossible they should altogether make the Election, so we both depart
from it. Under his Favor I must be bold to deny it; We depart not from the
Charter, for we say, that the Charter giving a right of choice to all the
Citizens, they may proceed in their Elections, either by themselves personally,
or their Deputies; and they finding it inconvenient to meet Personally, may
depute others to make their Elections; and an Election so made, is truly said
to be made by the Citizens. So that in case that way of Electing were admitted
which the Pertitioners propose, it were directly agreeable to the Charter; for,
then indeed the Citizens should choose, because they choose every one of them by
their Deputies, as all the People of England make Laws in Parliament, because
every man's Deputy is, or ought to be, there in Parliament.

Next Mr. Maynard answers an Objection; If, says he, it be objected, that in
the way of Election that is by the Livery men, all are not represented; says
he, it is true, if you take it in some sense; but, says he, if you take it in
the sense of the Law, therein they are represented, and it is the City makes
these Elections; Says he, the Law says so; as, says he, in case a man's hand
moves, it is the man that moves, or his eye sees a Color, it is the man that
sees. I hope the Gentleman will please to confess a vast difference between a
Body natural, and a Body politic; Because he may truly say, if a man's hand
moves, all the man moves, therefore will he say that what a few, or one member
of the City does, is the Cities action? If so, if one in the City commit
Treason, all the City are Traitors. I believe, Gentlemen, you would be loath to
admit of such a Law.

But to confirm this assertion, the Gentleman produced something out of that
which he called Articuli super Chartas, where he says, the King granted to the
People to choose Sheriffs, and yet the People did not choose them all in general,
it was the Freeholders chose them. Mr. Maynard, If he pleases, could have told
when the People in general were restrained from electing Parliament Men, and
other the Sheriffs also, and upon what pretense it was put upon Freeholders
only, and how it served the Kings ends to procure that Statute of Restriction;
if I forget not the time, it was in the 8 of Henry 6. Chap. 7. But however Mr.
Maynard should have proved this to be just, before he can prove the other to be
just by this.

Now the Gentleman is pleased to come to examine the presidents we produced,
and says, he will turn our own swords into our own bowels; and endeavors to do
it thus;

First, says he, you prove that the Wards did send several Persons to these
Elections 400 years since, but you prove not that the Wards chose these
Persons; you read indeed Records that said these Persons were summoned to the
Election, but who summoned them? certainly the Mayor summoned them, and he
summoned whom he would. I verily believe this would be a very bitter Pill for
the Citizens to digest, to ^ay the Lord Mayor should summon when he pleased,
and whom he pleased, out of every Ward to come to the Election, the Government
would be turned topsie turvy, if that were admitted* then he that should be
once Lord Mayor, might be for ever Lord Mayor, if he could make but a friend or
two in every Ward, and if this be imagined to have been the custom of the City,
I wonder who summoned those that chose the first Mayor.

But the Gentleman is pleased to make his Argument thus; says he, it is not
named in the Record you produce, that these men were Elected by the Wards,
though summoned from the Wards; therefore says he, they were not elected. It
is a new kind of logic that must make this argument good; It Is not recited in
the Record that they were chosen, therefore they were not chosen; I might as
well say that in your summon to a Common Coun^el, your being chosen by the
Wards is not recited, therefore you Gentlemen of this Court were not chosen. I
confess I am not very well verst in the Acts that are in this Court, but I
think there is no act of the Court recorded, wherein it is said, There were
present the Common Council that were chosen by such Wards, shall I therefore
conclude that they were not chosen by the Wards? I must first learn a new
Logic, before I shall ^are so to conclude.

The second thing he objected against the presidents, was this, Those Twelve
men of the Wards that are said to elect the Mayor, says he, must needs be
understood to be Common Council men; Truly, besides the Answer of Mr. Price,
that it was not probable, because the number of Common Council would then have
been far greater, than now it is, when the City was far less* to let that pass,
I only answer thus, that if they please to look in 22 of Henry the sixth, it is
in Lib. K. fol. 214. It is said in the writ that came down from the King to
prevent disturbances at that Election of the Mayor, that none should be there
but they that have an interest to be there, those that were in Common Counsel,
And the more discreet and able men of the Wards, so that besides the
Common Counsel, there were others that were wise and able discreet men in the
Wards that were to come to the Elections, which probably were those that were
chosen by the Wards. If your Honor please the Record may be read. The former
answer serves to Mr. Mayards Observation of the Election of the Parliament Men
for the City, wherein it is said only six of a ward were called to be there,
but not chosen; I propose it to him, whether it is probable that the Lord Mayor
had power to pick six men out of a Ward to choose the Parliament men for the
City, or whether this be a good Argument, because they are said to be summoned
by the Lord Mayor, and not said to be elected, therefore they were not elected.
I hope the Gentlemen of the Long-Robe have better arguments.

The last thing that Mr. Manard avers, is, the inconveniences in point of Law
that would ensue upon that which we pray for, which he calls an Innovation. But
I humbly crave leave to aver, unless I could see his confutation, that it is an
ancient Right of the Citizens of this City. Those inconveniences in point of
Law, he says, are these, the hazard of forfeiting of Charters. I conceive that
to be answered before, That if a City should depart from a just way, if their
Charter were but the confirmation of their right before, there is no forfeiting
of that Charter, for the Charter gives them not that Right.

The next Argument he draws from every man's living in a Court-^eet, and that at
twelve years old he ought to meet there, and he says from thence, if there
should be Representers of the Wards chosen, to make the choice, it might be
that those that are no Citizens might mere to choose a Mayor, and Citizens that
live without should not choose. I think under his favor the common practice
will answer to that, when the Wards meet for the choice of Aldermen, or
Common Counsel Men, none but Citizens have their Votes in it, there is no
danger that those that are Aliens should either be chosen or choosers.

His next Argument against this Petition is this, says Mr. Maynard, It will
tend to Popularity, if this should be admitted, that the Wards should choose;
and I leave it, says he, to the Court to judge what the Consequent of that
would be; all men's Educations, says he, are not such as make them fit for
Government, or fit to choose Governors. Truly if it please the honorable Court
but to consider who they are that are now the Electors, this Arrow of the
Gentleman's returns upon himself: I could say more of it, if I should not be
thought to reflect, because I have a reverend respect to all kind of Trades;
but if I should speak of all the several Companies, the Bricklayers, Bowyers,
Fletchers, Turners, Coopers, Tallow-Chandlers, etc. If I should speak of the
Education of most of the Livery-Men of forty Companies of the City, and compute
their number, and tell you upon what terms most are admitted to be of the
Liveries, that is, for a small sum of Money; I conceive the Court would quickly
judge which way of Election tends most to Popularity, as he calls it, and who
proposes most men that are unfit for Government to choose the Lord Mayor and
Sheriffs. Will any man suppose that the Educations of all the Handicraft men of
the Liveries render them so able and discreet, that they are fit for
Government? I submit it to the Court.

As for the great Word Mr. Maynard was pleased to add about the ill consequents
of this change that would be to other Corporations, saying, That this is an
Earthquake comes under them. I shall conceive his Oratory in this to be of the
Earthquakes nature, a swelling vapor, unless he will be pleased to show me how
the Liberty of the City, or any one Citizen, is undermined by what is proposed,
only I must observe to the Court, that where Arguments are wanting, their room
is commonly supplied with words and pretenses of huge strange consequences,
that will ensue, if their desires be crossed; But the arguments from a
consequence, I believe they well know their strength is not of the first
degree; but however to suppose an ill consequence may ensue upon a City, or
company of persons exercising their right, and thence to conclude they must not
enjoy it, is a way of arguing that I understand not.

I confess Mr. Hales is pleased to deal very ingenuously in laying down those
principles wherein we agreed, which was, That the Liberties of the City were by
prescription, and that the Charters were but Declarations of what our Liberties
were, and that the Common-Councel-Men ought to have a Vote in their Elections;
But I said not they ought, but that they might have their Votes if they were
chosen to that purpose: But he was pleased to say that the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common-Counsel, were a kind of a Representative of the City, and
therefore he would thence aver, that there is no inconvenience to the City,
seeing they have such a Representative. I shall answer Mr. Hales thus, If a man
should say the Parliament represent the Commonwealth, and seeing we have a
Representative, what matter if that 200. or 300. men more went into the
Parliament and voted with them, the people of England surely would not think
themselves well dealt withal, nor think those Acts so passed to be valid. Mr.
Hales is pleased also to pursue Mr. Maynards mode of imagining strange kind of
consequences that may ensue upon this, and says he, How if the People will
say, when you brought it to the Representatives, we will not be bound to
Representatives, but we will come and choose personally; what then (says he)
would be the consequence of this? Truly if Mr. Hales will suppose that the
people will not be bound by any Government, not by Acts of Parliament, he may
fill his fancy with bad consequences: and why may it not be supposed as well,
that all the people in England should say, we will go and make Laws our selves
in Parliament, as well as that the people should not be willing to be bound in
the Wards to choose the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs by their Representatives? I
shall let pass also, what Mr. Hales was pleased to urge concerning that
principle of a just subjection of Peoples to Governors, to be founded upon an
Assent, because he was pleased to confess very ingenuously, that I waved those
Arguments that might reduce Government to an uncertainty, or to the first
principles of general Common-Right. But says Mr. Hales, if that principle be
allowed amongst a free People, that subjection to their Governors ought to be
by mere assent, sath he, we must consider there is a Personal and a Virtual
assent, and it shall be conceived to be a Virtual consent, where there has
been an usage time out of mind for the People to be subject to any form of
Government. Of which nature he endeavored to prove the way of electing the
Lord Mayor and Sheriffs by the Livery-Men of the several Mysteries; whereas if
Mr. Hales please to remember, they do all aver the usage of this way of
Electing, but to have been for 174. years that they can prove. As for any
suppositions that it was before, I think there is enough answered to that,
there being no ancient Records that mention the choice to have been by the
Livery-Men, who come not as sent from Wards. And though Mr. Hales is pleased to
balance the Records produced on one hand and on the other, and says thus,
that they produce for one hundred seventy four years, to show that this has
been the way of electing which now is; but says he, those Records produced to
prove another way of Electing, is but a short time. If he please to remember
there is no foot-step or mention made of any Livery-Man, or of any of the
Mysteries having a Power to elect, until that 15. of Edw. 4. and we find from
Edward the first, about 200 years before, that there were twelve men in the
Wards that were Electors, which we may well think to be the Representors of
those Wards, and chosen by them for that purpose; and no footsteps of the
discontinuance of it, from that time produced; but we may well say that all the
Records that mention the Communaltyes choice, are to be interpreted by the
former Records, until that Record comes wherein mention is made of Livery-men,
there being no mention made of them formerly, under that, or any other name as
such.

That which he was pleased to allege, that it was the Common-Counsel-men that
were those twelve men, is answered before in Mr. Maynards, and therefore I pass
it over.

But Mr. Hales seems to think it hard measure that we should exclude the
Livery, because there is no mention made of them. I shall only answer, that it
is as hard for them to say, because the Common-Counsel men are not mentioned to
join with the 12 of the Wards, therefore they were excluded. But says Mr.
Hales, it is the usage that shall explain what is meant by the Communalty, and
what is meant by those more able and discreet men in the City that are chosen;
we desire but to stand to the explanation of the Record; we produced an ancient
Record that had these words, viz. The whole Communalty; that is to say, the
more able and discreet men of the Ward; we would fain have him produce a Record
where it is said, The whole Communalty, that is to say, the Livery-Men, at
least any time before that of Edward the fourth.

As to the Arguments from the consequences, if this Government were not right,
then says Mr. Hales, all the Purchases you have made since that time you
altered the way of Elections, is null.

I must humbly crave leave not to submit to his Judgment in that, till he give
me better reasons; for I suppose it is grounded upon that of forfeiting a
Charter, which was answered before; for though the Body corporate have not had
their Officers rightly Elected, yet the Body is not thereby dissolved, and
therefore their purchase may be good, and without fear of forfeiture.

The Arguments Mr. Wild was pleased to use, were but to enforce what his
Brethren had said, that by the 12 Electors of the Wards must be meant the
Common-Counsel, because (says he) no mention is made of the Common-Counsel;
but it has been proved that in an election mention is made of the
Common Counsel, and of other honest men of the City, before any mention is made
of Livery-men; and though no mention were made of the Common-Counsel, yet to
say they were not mentioned, therefore they were not called to that Assembly
when the Election was made, is no good consequence; upon the grounds before
asserted, Mr. Wilds objection that we would endeavor to introduce a novelty,
falls to the ground; for we conceive the way of twelve men out of the Wards, to
be far more ancient than the way that is now practiced. And as for Mr. Wilds
Arguments concerning the danger that would ensue upon the multitude coming to
Elections, upon the same ground he may say; the Wards must not choose their
Aldermen nor Common Counsel Men, if the Citizens should be deprived of their
right upon that ground, that it is popularity, or they may be divided, and fall
to blows; upon the same grounds they may take away the liberty of choosing
Common Counsel Men and Aldermen, and all their common Freedoms; and if these
fears shall affright men from the claim of their right, they may be told next
that the Sky may fall, and therefore they must not go abroad.

As for the last objection of Mr. Wilds, that in this way of popularity it is
possible a choice may be made of unfit men. I shall only offer this to the
consideration of the Court, Whether it is more probable that a whole Ward
meeting together to choose a small number of men that should represent them in
the electing their Superior Officers, should choose more unfit men for that
Election, then a company it may be of Coopers, Tallow-Chandlers, or other
manuel occupations should admit to the Livery, who admit all that will give so
much money to be of the Livery; who are the likeliest men to send fittest men
for the choice, I humbly refer to the Honorable Court, though it is strange to
me to hear that the fear of popularity, or of giving way so much to the Liberty
of the people, is so much insisted on, now we are come into the way of a common
Wealth; it is a little dissonant to the present constitution.

Now I shall humbly submit to the Court, what has been offered in answer to
that which the Gentlemen on the other-side have objected; and humbly crave
leave to be still of opinion, that I see nothing of strength objected against
our assertion, viz. That the liberty of Electing is the Right of the Citizens
of London in general, and so declared by the first Charter we find upon Record;
And if it be the liberty of the Citizens in general to choose, every man must
choose either by himself or deputy, and they all agree it is impossible they
should all choose Personally; why they should not then choose by their
representatives, I humbly leave to the judgment of this Honorable Court.


Mr. Maynard. WE have taken up a great deal of time and patience, I will repeat
nothing of what has been said, only I think Mr. Wildman fears nothing of a
popularity; for the matter, the measure is before you, how long one, how long
another, we differ upon the Records recited, we think they are for us, they
think the contrary; it lies in your judgments, and the measure of time how much
it is; I am sure they cited no presidents before Edward the first's time, and
none since Edward the third's time; somewhat was spoken of Henry the sixth; I
will not enter into a particular recapitulation, but there has been nothing of
that I apprehend we have said, but has been answered only by the by; and that
which is the strength of that we rely upon, has been let go, and some generals
taken hold of only; I shall give you but this observation, that it is like
enough the Mayor and Sheriffs, the Chamberlain who is the keeper of all the
wealth of the City, and the great trust of the City reposed in them, will much
depend upon this string; Two Gentlemen have here argued; and observe it, the
one grants what the other will not; we all agree, and how they will agree when
a great many comes together. I leave it to you to judge.


Mr. Hales. Only this, Gentlemen, some two or three little mistakes there have
been: I think not that they are wilful.

First of all, Whereas they would offer it to you, that the Words of all the
Commonalty, should be intended of the twelve men of the Wards, that is
mistaken: for, Gentlemen, it was in a case of a choice of Aldermen, which is
made by the Wards, and is not made by twelve men, as the very Record it self
speaks; and therefore that is misapplied. It is in case of a choice of
Aldermen, which is made by the Wards in their bulks; and not in twelve men.

And then next of all, for the continual Usage, they mistake in that, For that
Usage, they give an instance in the third of King Edward the first, till some
later time in Edward the second, and in the twentyeth of Edward the third: But
from the twentyeth of Edward the third, not any instance at all of Electing men
out of Wards. That which they say now they are driven to it, now they would
indeed exclude the Common Counsel from having any voice of right. We say, You
do well. If the Common Counsel have no right, then may the Livery-Men have no
right neither; for their Rights will stand and fall upon the same bottom. We
say only this: For that Record of Henry the sixth's time, it is nothing at all
to the purpose; for that is this, That all those that were in the
Common Counsel, together with other persons that were called in, either from
the Wards or City, be it which it will: there is no man doubts but most of the
Liveries they live in the Wards; and therefore it is not an Argument that they
were not persons that were of the Wards. And whereas we have no footsteps of
the Livery in Record, it is true, the stiling of the Record is not of the
Liveries; your Elections are not said to be by the Liveries at this day, but by
the Commonalty, as it was near two hundred years ago; and yet in truth done by
the Common Council and Liveries, so that all is one.


Mr. Wild. My Lord, I shall only desire Mr. Latham may read this Record in the
twentyeth of Edward the third; it is that whereupon I built my Argument; that
is, Thus it was agreed by all the commonalty of the City, that the Lord Mayor
for the time being shall be chosen by twelve, eight, or six out of every Ward,
according to the greatness or bigness of the Ward. That must of necessity be
the Common Counsel.


Mr. Maynard. One thing I forgot in that, That your Livery-Men come not by
number; Common-Councel-Men they are Summoned by a certain number


Here the Record was read. Mr. Hales. This is that we say, and here we leave
it. We say, That that Reason that these Gentlemen do use upon their presidents
in Edward the first's time, and Edward the second's time, is to exclude the
Common Council, as well as the Common Hall; and we say, that upon the same
reasons they may exclude the one as well as the other. There is no mention made
of the Common Counsel to have a voice in any of the Elections in Records, and
therefore they would exclude them. We say, They do the Record and themselves
wrong; for though it is Truth, there is mention made of the Mayor, Aldermen, and
some others, it is not exclusive; for some others there might be, and yet
notwithstanding it is agreed that the Common Counsel may make an election, and
vote, and are not excluded; and therefore the Livery-Men may do the same. And
when as it has gone on so long, and not been contradicted, we hope you will
continue on that continued course.


Mr. Wildman. My Lord, We still insist upon it, that those presidents produced,
being for twelve men out of every Ward, cannot probably be conceived to be the
Common Counsel; for how can we conceive that the Common Counsel, at that time
when the City was not a fourth part of what it is, should consist of as many or
more then it does now? But by the Record now read, it appears, that it was
agreed that so many men of every Ward should come to the Election; and then
further agreed, that every Alderman of every Ward should cause such a number, a
smaller number than the other, to be chosen, to be of the Common Counsel; and
it is not said that they should be the Electors. The Record speaks of two things
agreed unto: First, that one number of men should be Elected for the Wards;
Secondly, that another number of men should be chosen by the Wards, to consult,
as the Record says, de arduis negotiis, to consult about the hard matters that
concerned the City.

But suppose I should grant the learned Gentlemen of the other side that which
they so much contend for, viz. That the twelve men of the Wards, mentioned in
the Records to be the Electors of the Mayor, were the Common Counsel; and that,
as Mr. Wild would have it, the twelve, eight, or six of every Ward, that the
Common Hall agreed in the 20 of Edward 3d. should be the chusers of the Mayor,
that those were the Common Counsel; suppose this, What advantage to their cause
will the Gentlemen gain from thence? The conclusion from thence would be* That
the Common Counsel were the only Electors of the Mayor; and what becomes of the
Compa^^es Liveries, for whose power in electing they plead? And if it were the
Common Counsel that were the electors, it does establish our foundation, which
is this, That all those who are chosen by the Wards, and do represent them,
ought to choose the chief Officers of the City. And if the Wards would trust the
Common Counsel only to be the chusers now, and declare it in the choice of
them, we should not oppose it.


M. Maynard. Gentlemen, I forget one word, that M. Wildman was pleased to
deliver for Law, that you may believe, if you think good, That there is no
forfeiture of Charters. Now what the Parliament may do under favor, is no
question; but no doubt but there is forfeiture of Charters. And he says,
Twelve Judges there are, and but few of them agree. You must be sure, That it
is the Judges part to judge your actions at last.


FINIS.

