A SERMON Preached, before the Lord Mayor And COURT of ALDERMEN, AT THE
GVILDHALL-CHAPEL; On the Fifth of February, 1681/2.

By J. LAMB, M.A. One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

Moore Mayor, Jovis nono die Februarii 1681/2. Annoque Regis Carol. Secund.
Angl. etc. 34o.
UPon the motion of Sir John Lawrence Knight and Alderman, This Court does
desire Mr. Lamb to Print his Sermon Preached at the Guild Hall Chapel on
Sunday Morning last before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of this City.

WAGSTAFFE.

TO The Right Honorable Sr John Moore, Knight. LORD MAYOR, And to the Right
Worshipful Sir JOHN LAWRENCE, Knight and Alderman, AND To the rest of the
Right Worshipful Aldermen of the City of LONDON.
My LORD,
IN the following Sermon, Preached before Your Lordship, I have considered the
Condition of man under some of the Principal circumstances of this present
life, and have endeavored from thence to State the Notion of his Happiness: to
Prove the Possibility of Attaining it; and to direct to the means and Methods
by which it may be acquired. This indeed is an Argument of the Greatest Weight,
of general Concernment, hard to be explained and frequently mistaken. But
coming after so many great Philosophers and Learned men of all Ages, who have
considered this Subject, and transmitted their thoughts upon it, I cannot
reasonably hope, to have added any thing that was not observed before, or
Illustrated any thing that was obscure. Yet in Obedience to Your Lordship's
Order, and in hope that the consideration of our common, as well as our
greatest good, which the practice of our Religion will bestow upon us, may
somewhat conduce to compose the distractions, and allay the animosities which
Particular respects, Private interests and parties of Religion have raised
among us; therefore, under Your Lordship's Patronage, I have Presumed to make
my Sermon Public, who am

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant J. Lamb.

PSALM CXIX. 165. Great peace have they that love thy Law. --
WE judge of the Excellency of beings by the Perfection of their forms, the
Freedom of their motions, and the undisturbed exercise of their proper Powers.
In proportion therefore the Happiness of a reasonable creature is measured by
the Liberty of his Mind, the equal Government of his Soul, the Authority of his
Reason, the proper use, but due subjection of his inferior Faculties. And
wheresoever this order is interrupted, (...). Arria. in Epict.
wheresoever passion and self-will, Usurp the Dominion of our understanding;
there must be Sickness, Strife, Distraction, and all the violent effects of
Eccentrick motions and intestine Wars.

But this is the miserable State of the generality of men! Inferior objects,
grateful to sense, continually present, and easily enjoyed, Subdue our
affections, withdraw our obedience, undermine the Government of reason, and
subject us to the Tyranny of boundless will and passion. And thus we are
inslaved to sense, Jam 1.8. Job. 5.2. Pro. 24.28.
moved by inconstant Principles, governed by violence and contradictions, acted
by furious uncertain imaginations of our fancy. Our Nature is forced, our
constitution corrupted, the mind restless, the heart faint, from the Sole of
the foot to the Crown of the head, there is no sound part in us.

Would we therefore be healed of these infirmities? would we be restored to our
Original health, serenity and ease? Would we be delivered from the power of
passion, and all the vexations which arise from a foolish extemporary way of
life? We must then return to our Duty and Allegiance, restrain this Brutish
liberty, conform to rules of Government, and finally resolve our will into
these Laws and limits which Infinite Wisdom and Goodness have prescribed. Then
shall our broken bones be healed, then every part shall be re-instated in its
proper place, our lives shall be steady, our motions orderly, our desires
regular, our ends consonant, our wills obedient, and our whole selves thoroughly
cheerful and contented; according to the experience of the Psalmist in this
Pathetick declaration of my text, Great peace have they that Love thy Law.

In the handling of these words I shall briefly consider these Four things;

First, what is meant by the Law of God, and when a man may be said to love it.
Secondly, what we are to understand by Peace, which the Psalmist joins with the
love of the Law of God, as an inseparable adjunct or effect thereof. Thirdly, I
shall illustrate the truth of the Assertion, and consider the various
Efficacies and Operations of the love of the Law of God, to the production of
joy and peace. Fourthly, I shall show you the full and perfect Agreement of
this Peace thus flowing from the love of the Law of God, to the Character of my
text, Great Peace, etc. And Lastly, make Application of the whole.
I. I begin with the first of these, namely to consider what is meant by the
Law of God, and when a man may be said to love it.

Though the Law in Scripture, sometimes signifies the particular economy of
the Jews; sometimes but a part of the Mosaic institution; Yet here in my Text
it must be understood in the Largest sense, of all the various Manifestations
of the will of God, as well in the secret impressions of our duty upon minds,
as in those more sensible revelations (so far as their reasons were general,
and their obligations Moral) to the Patriarchs, to Moses, and the Prophets of
old, and at last, by his Son our Savior. And that because there is no
restriction in the Text, no confinement of it to any particular part of the
Law, which then had been absolutely necessary for the understanding and
practice of the Proposition. But chiefly because the necessity of the matter it
self requires it, forasmuch as an Habitual peace could never be said to flow
from the love of a part, where our Obligations are alike to the whole Law.

Now to love the Law of God, if we comprehend it in a Word, is so to discern
the Worth, the Beauty and Perfection of it, as to prefer it, to choose it, and
govern our lives according to it.

For a quick and lively sense of Excellencies in an object, or of Particular
Kindness and beneficence to our selves, are the Necessary and Only Causes and
Principles of Love, which shows it self in Admiration, Pleasure, and impatient
desire of the most intimate and complete Enjoyment.

Now the Excellencies of a Law are the Authority of its Author, the Wisdom,
Benefit, Equity, Compassion and Impartiality of the Law it self. Wheresoever
therefore we discern these Lovely qualities (glorious in themselves, and the
highest perfections of a Law,) our Judgment of Necessity will approve it, our
Affections will be ravished, our Souls will desire to be Conformed and United
to it, to be cast into the same mold, to be Tinctured with the same
Perfections, to do, and to be what the Law requires, as the most perfect, the
most exquisite, nay the only way of enjoying the goodness and Excellencies of
it.

Three things therefore are Essentially necessary to the Love of the Law of God.

First, a distinct and accurate knowledge of the Law it self in its Precepts
and Truths, Encouragements and Threatenings. Secondly, Romans 7.12, 16. Rom 13.14.
Ephesians. 3.17. Philem. 3. Psalm. 119.40.54, 97.
a sincere and full consent to the Law that it is holy, just and good. Thirdly,
an ingenuous entire Devoting of our selves to be governed by it, as the end or
termination of our knowledge and esteem in the most solid and complete
Fruition.
II. And so I proceed in the Second place, to consider what we are to
understand by Peace, which the Psalmist joins with the Love of the Law of God,
as the inseparable adjunct or effect thereof.

The word (...) is a comprehensive term, Genesis 29.6. 1 Samuel 25.5, 6.
and signifies all prosperity in the Hebrew Style. Peace be unto you was the
Salutation of the Jews, And, let your Peace be upon the House, was the General
form of Benediction which our Savior prescribed to his Disciples. Mat. 10.17.
Instances are many, but unnecessary to be produced, because the word is ever
used in this comprehensive Sense, where the context does not evidently
determine it to some particulars; as in that of the Acts, c. 9. v. 31. The
Churches (...) had Peace throughout all Judea, which must be interpreted of
rest and ease, because it immediately follows the account of their persecution.
So that of St. Paul to the Romans c. 14. v. 19. Let us therefore follow after
the things which make for Peace, is interpreted of Love and Unity, because it
concludes a severe Reproof of their uncharitable Feuds and Animosities
concerning meats and days. But wheresoever the word is used Indefinitely, as in
my Text, there, without any exception, it signifies all Felicity, Blessedness
and Prosperity in General.

Whatsoever therefore is the Happiness of a man under the Circumstances of this
present life, that is the Peace in my Text, which is assured to those who Love
the Law.

And though the difference of our fortunes, our Relation, our Capacities, and
desires are great, yet our Happiness is the very same. For, after the strictest
search that can be made, after all the Forms and Schemes of Happiness which
have been framed and considered; we are forced to acknowledge that it is not
confined to any particular Figure or State of things, but must be, and is
resolved into inward contentation, serenity of mind, full satisfaction in our
State and Place, upon a faithful deliberate judgment of our whole affairs. For
we are not capable of Absolute perfection here; neither can we be happy in
utter Cessation or Inactivity; and there remains but a Third which is right
Judgment, prudent managery, and a wise Content.

Perfect Happiness cannot be expected in this uncertain World. Such a condition
wherein all our faculties and appetites shall be filled and satisfied with
proper objects; and all our Springs of motion always regular, without intention
and remission, is inconsistent with our Nature, and the purposes of our being,
who seem to be designed for Action, and Passion, for struggling and
difficulties, for mixtures of Good and Evil. To Fear nothing, to Desire
nothing, to Meet with nothing impossible is only competent to God, says
Epictetus. And as for a Stoical Apathy, Ench.
or such a deadness to the World that we shall cease to at in it, or be
Affected with the accidents of it; that that is so far from a Blessing that it
is unsuitable to us and Monstrous; and therefore cannot be the Happiness of a
man, or the Peace of my Text. For man is an active creature furnished with
organs of Reflection, Prevision, Design and Enjoyment. But mere cessation is
contrary to the quickness and activity of the mind, a spiritless, dull and
heavy state; and therefore impossible to give us Peace or make us Happy.

It remains then, upon the whole matter, that the Peace of my Text must be such
as shall consist with the design and order of Society, with our Station, our
Business, our Capacities, and Relations in the World. And being thus involved
in the midst of many Uncertainties, cross events, and continual vexations, the
Psalmist encourages us to govern our lives by the Law of God, from the most
pregnant motive that can be offered to the minds of men, viz. that then we
shall have Peace, Acquiescence in our State, Satisfaction in our minds,
cheerful reflection upon our lives, pleasant converse with our own thoughts,
liberty from impatient desire, from control and struglings, full approbation of
our proceedings, and content in all Events.

And as this is the proper happiness of a man, in this Probationary life, so it
is the certain and the utmost signification of the word Peace; Nay, the only
kind of peace that naturally flows from the observation of a Law of life, which
supposes every man contriving his business and pursuing his ends, and Assists
him with arts of management, in the midst of those many passions, and various
accidents we are subject to.

As for that Spiritual joy which fills the hearts of pious men, tough this is
also the certain Effect of Loving the Law of God, as we shall discourse in its
order: Yet that follows not so much from the Nature of the thing, as from the
promises of God, by whose special Grace it is derived unto us.

Having thus discovered the nature and quality of that Peace which is proper
and agreeable to our present State, I shall now proceed to consider the methods
of obtaining it, the springs and Principles from whence it flows.

And this is the Noblest Argument, that can possibly be discussed, because it
is Peace that distinguishes Life from Madness, it is this alone can make our
being Pleasant or Desirable; it is this that renders our powers of Prevision
and Reflection beneficial, which without it are the certain instruments of
intolerable pain and anguish.

And in this inquiry it is but reasonable to exspect success. For it is
impossible to conceive that Discords and Contradictions should by God himself
have been mingled with our Constitutions; that some of our powers and faculties
should be designed by Him to vex and discompose the frame by Jarring, and
striking against the rest. It cannot be believed that Impetuosity of desire,
and Turbulency of passion, which almost all men, of whatever condition are
oppressed with, should be the necessary result of our composition.

There must be therefore methods of peaceable life, and self-enjoyment, suitable
to the Powers and Dispositions of our nature, if we could find them out; There
must be rules of Steerage, arts of Defense, and measures of prudent Conduct, in
the midst of those varieties of Action and Passion which divide our Lives.

And these the Psalmist tells us, are contained and only to be found in the Law
of God, who out of his Infinite goodness and compassion of our weakness, has
prescribed us rules of life, which in the Love and Practice are a certain
Cause, an inexhaustible Fountain of Joy and Peace. Which leads me to the Third
head of discourse proposed, namely;

III. To Illustrate the truth of the Assertion that this Blessed Peace and
content of mind will certainly follow upon the Love and practice of the Law of
God. Great Peace have they that Love thy Law.

First, now this inward Serenity or Peace of mind may either arise from the
Smoothness, the Steddyness, the Agreement of our Actions; or, Secondly, from a
prudent government of our selves, and our affairs under all circumstances, and
in all conditions; or, Thirdly, from Internal, Spiritual communications of
courage, joy and comfort to the Soul. But the Love of the Law of God will both
dispose us for, and effectually operate to the production of Peace after all
these several ways, and according to all our Capacities of receiving it. And,
First, Content or peace of mind arises from the Smoothness, the Steddyness and
Agreement of our Actions. But the Law of God is compiled with so much Wisdom,
and with such respect to Inclinations of the humane nature, that it guides its
subjects, through all the parts and Scenes of life in a consonant, equal,
suitable procedure,

To govern our lives by a Rule with reguard to one last End, which shall run
through all our actions, causes Peace and Acquiescence how unwarily soever we
have chosen, or however we may have forced and contradicted our Wills, and live
in a kind of Violence to our Inclinations; because we have Approved and are
Resolved; we are delivered from multiplicity of ends and objects, from the
repugnancies of contrary desires, from the contradiction of diverse interests,
from the torment of hesitation, shame and confusion.

But the Peace which flows from the Love of the Law of God, is not only the
satisfaction of Order and Uniformity in our motions, or the terminations of all
our actions in the one great end of Glorifying God, and saving our Souls; But
the Duties themselves, which the Law requires are the proper actions of
reasonable creatures, the very best motions of our own minds, the most
exquisite Pleasures and Entertainments of our being.

If therefore the constant observation of a Rule, be a certain Principle of
Peace and Satisfaction, how much more the Observation of such a Rule, the
commands whereof are the very vital Powers and Perfection of our Natures. For
the Soul enjoys and exercises its life, chiefly, by the mediation of the body,
in the way of action. Such therefore as our actions are, such is the Health or
Sickness, the Strength or Weakness, the Beauty or Degeneracy of the mind. Psam.
19 7. 119.142. Jer. 31.33.
But the Law of the Lord is Perfect; It is written in our hearts; it is within
our selves; directing us to such a government of our Affections, Wills and
Actions as we our selves cannot but approve. For it is not a matter of dispute,
but we Know infallibly, by an exquisite sense, of the Tendencies and
Inclinations of our inward life, that to be wife and just, to be pure and holy,
to imitate the life of God, are the unquestionable Excellencies of our being;
the habits, or Perfection of those Dispositions. which we feel in our selves.
And the more we Practice it, the more we shall discern the kind agreeable
nature of it: because the Prejudices of contrary opinions and desires will wear
away; the Soul will be more and more Awakned into a sense of its own life, and
by degrees recover a beautiful habit, a sound, vivacious constitution.

Perfect content and Peace, is therefore the necessary effect of Loving the Law
of God, because the right Opinions, the true Relishes, the proper Exercises of
the Soul are the same which the Law it self commands. There is a Sympathy, an
affinity between the Mind and Virtue. Whosoever therefore are under the power
of Godlike dispositions are, eo nomine, in a full Possession of Pleasure, Ease
and Peace. That is the First.

Secondly, Content or Peace of mind, proceeds from a prudent Government of our
selves and our affairs under all circumstances; from a Judicious prosecution of
Good, from a dexterous eschewing of Evil, and from a ready application of
reasons or means of peace to our selves in all Events.

But the Law of God is contrived with such respect to the Happiness of men,
that those who are under its Power and Conduct, are thoroughly instructed in all
the arts of a wise procedure. And, First, in the most Effectual methods of
Acquiring good, and Diverting evil. And, Secondly, in such Dispositions of
mind, and principles of Reason, that none of the passions or accidents of life,
shall Deject our mind, or Destroy our peace.


First, It instructs us in the most Effectual methods of acquiring good, and
diverting evil.

The destruction of most men is from themselves. Either our ends are out of our
reach, or some way or other unsuitable to us. Or if we have Chosen well, yet how
many thousands miscarry in the Prosecution. Either we are Vain and Presuming,
or Timorous and Dejected; Debauched and Negligent, or Rash and Violent; Giddy
and Inconstant, or Conceited and Ungovernable. Our own Temper, our own
pretended Wisdom are the Principal instruments of our vexation and
disappointment.

But the Law of God is a lively and exact Image, of an Understanding infinitely
Perfect. Those therefore whose minds, whose wills and actions are informed and
governed by it, partake in a proper sense of the Wisdom of God himself; and
are moved in some sort by the vigor and activity of a Perfect Mind. Hence
Solomon represents Religion, speaking of it selt, Wise counsel is mine, and
sound wisdom, I have understanding, I have strength. Pro. 11.3. For Virtue
disciplines and subjects the body, stills the passions, files off the chains,
and removes the weights which depress and sink the soul into a sluggish
unactive State, and restores it to a Free and ingenuous exercise of its own
life and being.

And thus redeemed from the dominion of passion, from the power and impulse of
the lower Spirit; our Apprehensions of things will be distinct and clear, our
Inward Sense will be true and quick, our Judgment masterly and comprehensive,
directing our faculties and instruments of action with an assured Light. In a
word, whosoever is under the Power of the Law of God will improve in his
knowledge, he will be prudent in the choice of his ends, Sparing of his
Affections, Master of his Passions, advised in his proceedings. Resolute in
difficulties, Seasonable in his applications, Vigorous in his Executions, and
always present to Himself. And thus his decrees shall be established, and the
light shall shine upon his ways. Job. 22.28. It would be tedious to state
particular cases, and show how this Principle of Love to the Law of God would
act and show it self in laying the Design, disposing the instruments,
foreseeing the difficulties, and finally, compassing the End; it is enough that
the Law is the Wisdom of God, the most exact and Perfect disposition of the
Soul. The same therefore that Health is to the body, which enables it to Judge
of sounds and tastes, and other objects of sense; such is virtue to the mind,
which enables it to Judge exactly of propositions Moral, of wise and good, of
fit and proper, of things Convenient and Decent. And this is an Infinite,
inexhaustible Principle, which, (according to the Laws of production,) will
Inform the various, and innumerable Issues of the mind with the tincture or
wisdom of the root.

And as the Law of God enables those who love it to judge of things distinctly,
and disposes them to an excellent government of themselves, which are the
Greatest Advantages in the pursuit of Good, and the Best Securities against the
Power of evil; So also, it accomplishes the mind with such Principles, such
dispositions, and such a right Opiniou of things, that none of the passions or
evils of humane life, shall be able to destroy our peace.

A Pilot, de Tranq.
(as Plutarch speaks upon the like occasion) can neither Command the Heavens,
rule the Seas, still the Wind, nor gain the Port at pleasure; But he can
preserve his Vessel by his art, he can strike his Sails, weather and ride out
the Storm. So the Love of the Law of God, though it gives us great Advantages,
above other men, of diverting evil and acquiring good; Yet the Efficacies of it
are not Positive and Necessary, but Moral and Conditional. We still remain in
the midst of innu^merable contingencies; We are still the Subjects of passion,
and of all the various operations of second causes.

Religion is no Charm or Amulet, it changes not the nature of things, nor
forces blind unconscious causes to conspire the Accomplishment of all our
ends. But it supplies the Soul with such Preparatives, Principles and Opinions,
that no event shall make too deep an impression, nothing shall Deject our mind
or destroy our Peace.

The weather may be black over our heads, the winds may Ruffel our Sails, the
storms may Rise about us; but the Strength and trimming of the Vessel, the skill
of the Pilot, and the ready Obedience of the Sailers, our passions, will then
be such that the proudest waves may Break before us, but shall never Overrun
or sink us,

-- Fortunaque perdat
Opposita virtute, Luc.
minas. --
Now the Principal springs of disorder and trouble are these three.

First, Desire and Hope Unsatisfied. Secondly, Fears and Apprehensions of
future Events. Thirdly, Sudden Accidents, or the Surprise of misfortunes.
First, Desire and Hope Unsatisfied.

As it is the common Infirmity of mankind to be ever Desiring and never
Contented; to Forget what is past, to be weary of what we Possess, and to fix
our eyes and our hearts upon things before us and without us; so it is the most
fruitful principle of pain and misery. Earnest, violent Desire, though
hereafter it should be satisfied, yet simply, in it self, it is grievous and
afflicting; Because it is commonly attended with Clashing of passions, with
commotions of Hope and Fear, with struggling and difficulties, with successions
of cross events, with immoderate anger, with envy, ambition, and the
Perfidiousness of instruments. It frequently puts us upon things most Irksom
and disagreeable to the Spirit of a man. How often are men forced to give
thanks for Injuries, to court an Enemy, to smile of Affronts, to Entreat for a
debt, nay, to offer Satisfaction, where they themselves received the Wrong.
This, and a great deal more they are forced to suffer and submit to according
as the Nature of their Ends, the Quality of their. Instruments, and the
vehemence of their Desires may be.

It is hard to conceive a more miserable man than one whose Heart is
passionately fixed upon a design, which is, chiefly to be brought to pass, as
all things are, by the Assistance of others, and the concurrence of uncertain
causes; unless it be Him, who after all he has Done and Suffered can never
Attain his End. Simple Desire, if it be passionate is painful and uneasy, but
Desire Unsatisfied is the perfection of Moral Torment.

Sometimes men vex themselves with Shame, for so much of the ill success as was
owing to themselves; Anon they resolve upon a new Attempt, when of a sudden,
they sink under the Pressures of Despair. Sometimes they are distracted with
Tumults of inconsistent thoughts, with Anxious Meditations of malice and
revenge. In a word, it is a constant pungent Gnawing in the mind, a kind of
furious unintermitting Madness.

But the Love of the Law of God will prevent, or cure, the evils of desire, the
impatience of hope, and the vexation of disappointment.

1. For it gives us a, right Understanding of the Weight and value of all
things. It is Esteem that creates desire. An accurate Judgment therefore would
remove by far the greater part of the Miseries of Humane life. Epict. Ench.
(...). For it is not the Accident, but our Opinion that gives us trouble.

2. Again, It Emancipates and enlarges the Soul, and redeems us from Slavery to
inferior things. It is the narrowness of out Knowledge and the scantiness of
our ends that Chains us so firmly to any Object. But Religion fills our
affections with the Love of God, who is simply and Originally Good; and
acquaints us with the Excellency of our own nature, the Liberty of our will,
our right of dominion over most of the creatures; And affects us with the
Dishonor of admitting our Slave into our bed and bosom. (...). The are
properly our Goods, our Instruments, Hier. au. Car^.
it is absurd to make them our very selves, says Hierocles.

3. Again, It teaches us to propose such ends as are Modest in themselves,
easily managed, and likely to be Accomplished; and instructs us to pursue them
with such a Just indifference as is suitable to the Vuncertainty of events. He
that would be happy says Plutarch must not set up greater sails than the Vessel
will bear, nor build his hopes but upon a sure Foundation. For (he goes on)
neither they that would shoot an arrow out of a Plough, Or hunt the hare with
an Ox, Plut. de Tranq. an.
Or catch the Heart in a castingnet, are crossed, in the failure of their
purposes, by wicked Angels, or malignant Spirits; but their ill success is
owing to their inconsiderate rashness in attempting things impossible.

4. Again, Religion subdues our Pride, and gives us a low conceit of our own
Deserts. A storm is less dangerous when the Sails are down. Pride is the very
form and essence of Impatience, Envy and Discontent; We resolve what we
deserve, and are angry that all the world is not of our Opinion.

5. And lastly, It turns our eyes Within, and affects us with a thankful sense
of the Blessings we do enjoy. It is Plutarch's observation (...). Plut. de Tran.
Whatsoever good befalls us is unregarded as a drop that falls into the Ocean;
but whatever happens ill affects us as the overflowing of the Sea. But a wise
man will make the best of what he does enjoy, and always set the fairest side
of his fortune before his thoughts, that is the first.

Secondly, Vexation and trouble proceed from sad and dismal Apprehensions of
future Evils.

And this is easily distinguished from the other, for Desire and hope, suppose
us in a state of want and defect, but this in a state of Possession and
Enjoyment.

Fear, if we derive it from its Original cause, is the offspring and effect of
Love. The possession of what we Value, the high Opinion of our Acquisitions,
and the Pleasures of Enjoyment, give us content and Satisfaction in our selves,
and Unite and, Terminate our Affections in these objects.

Hence, the reflection upon the Uncertainty of our fortune, the knowledge, it
may be, of some Particular causes, which may destroy our happiness, Or the sad
Ideas, the melancholy tumultuous fancies of a Jealous mind, and a strong
affection vex us with continual Fears of losing what we so passionately Love.
And in proportion to the Violence of our affection, the Strength of our
Jealousies, the Quickness and Activity of our Passions; Such are the Influences
of these apprehensions upon the peace and pleasure of our lives.

But the Love of the Law of God will intercept the entries and avenues of Fear;
because it directs and governs our affections.

It gives us a more Copious view of Objects, and so prevents an Ignorant
Admiration. It furnishes us with Distinct and Perfect notions of Worth and
Beauty, and so corrects the futility, and wantonness of Love.

It affects us with a Constant sense of the unstable nature of the World, and
so preserves our Passions within our Power. For no man of common sense will
engage his affections to any Object which he knows he can neither Command nor
Keep.

It instructs us to be content that the World should fluctuate in perpetual
uncertainty.

It teaches us to Resign our selves to the disposal of infinite Wisdom and
Goodness.

It assures us that we are always in the best and most happy state; and no man
is afraid of his best Fortune.

It raises the Spirit, Heb. 11.32. 2 Cor. 4.16. Heb. 6.19.
and gives us Courage in the Confidence of Omnipotent power to Defend and
Assist us. The Guilt of the wicked inhanses their Fear; they know their
Demerits, and are therefore in continual Dread of Armed Almighty Justice. Job.
11.15.
But if wickedness dwell not in thy Tabernacle, thou shall be steadfast and not
fear. For the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear Him, Psalm. 32.18.
and hope in his mercy. Be of Good Courage therefore, and He shall strengthen
your hearts, all ye that trust in the Lord. Psalm. 31.24.


But above all it submits and even unites our Will to the Will of God, and so
Removes the Causes, nay the very Possibilities of Fear, by disposing our minds
to choose, and desire what pleases God, that is, whatsoever Happens. Non est
aliud essugium necessitatis quam velle quod ipsa cogat. That is the second.

Thirdly, Vexation and trouble proceed from Sudden Accidents, from the surprise
of Misfortunes.

1. And these are either less considerable, the Occurrences of every day. 2. Or
of greater Moment such as Affect or threaten our greatest interests, as our
Liberty, Health, Estate or Life.
And First of those which are lest considerable.

The several Relations of Subjects, Children, Servants, Friends, Correspondents
and the like, are so many certain causes of Passion and trouble; Because the
neglects and miscarriages of persons in the Discharge of their respective
duties, are a Continual Provocation.

But how unhappy do we generally make our selves by an immoderate Resentment of
these trivial and common Accidents? By the exorbitancy of our passion, and by
over vehement transports we punish our selves for the faults of others; and by
the Indecency of our actions, and the intemperance of our Speech, by the shame
and servility which usually follow such Furious Motions, we Expose our selves
to the Contempt of those we would Correct.

But the Law of God in the Love and practice of it, is a principle of Sobriety
and Discretion, of Humility and Condescension, of Pity and Forgiveness. It
teaches us Kindness and Humanity, which are apt to Subdue the most rugged
tempers, and oblige the Hearts and Affections of men to the service of one
another, and so removes the occasions of passion and displeasure. And it
instructs us to consider our own infirmities, to be moderate in our
expectations, to be Candid in our constructions, to be meek and lowly in mind,
and finally if we are angry yet so as not to sin. de Tran. An
Now as dogs, says Plutarch, That are apt to snarle and bark at every noise,
will be taken off by the voice of those they are used too; so we might easily
still and allay our passions, if we Accustomed our Minds to these Meditations,
and had them always ready to throw in as occasion offered.

As for those sadder accidents which affect or threaten us in our highest
interests, as our Liberty, Health, Estate or Life: I confess they are the
fiercest Trials of our Reason and Religion. Experience daily shows their
weight and power. How suddenly do they depress the Spirit, and crush men into
Distraction, Despair and Death.

But a Principle of Religion grown up into the strengths of Love will enable
us, to preserve the serenity of our mind under any the most pressing Calamities
of humane life. For besides a firm dependence upon God, and an humble
resignation to his will; It teaches us to exspect the Worst before it comes,
and to make the most terrible accidents Familiar to our thoughts. Constant
delight Emasculates the mind, but Hardship and ill weather, prepare us for
difficulties and cross events.

The greatest part of any evil is the Surprise of it: We promise our selves a
long Prosperity; we put the evil day far from us, and say to our Soul, take
thine ease; Whenever therefore the dark side of the Tables is turned toward
us, it is Strange and Terrible as Troubled Fancy will night; as Horrid as a
Troubled Fancy will represent it to it self.

But Religion inures us to self-denial, and Exercises our thoughts with poverty
and exile, with reproach and death.

It teaches us to separate the Adventitious parts of the Calamity; To pull off
these terrible Weeds which false Opinion has dressed it up in. It so instructs
us in the whole Doctrine of Divine Providence that we shall not be at all
surprised, when that which is always in Posse appears in Act. (...). Cuivis
potest accidere quod cuiquam potest Sen. (a Zen.) de vit. beat.
He that would never be Miserable must always prepare himself for the worst,
and remember that there is nothing either New or Strange; that almost all
events are the proper effects of common causes, agreeable to the Nature of
things, the economy of the world, and the Liberty of agents, and all disposed
according to the good will and pleasure of a Supreme agent.

And thus I have drawn together the most considerable Moral Assistances, which
the Love of the Law of God will Furnish us withal, for the Acquiring good,
Diverting evil, and the Pacification of our minds in all Events.

(...) Hier. in Aur. Car. (...) Plut. de Tranq. an.
But the wicked are exposed to Misery and torment for want of these pious arts
of Defense and safety. They govern themselves by Inconstant Principles, by
Diversities of Goodness, and are distracted by Multiplicity of Objects. They
steer their lives at Adventure. The Images, and representations of a corrupted
fancy, are the best Reason and Council of their Resolutions; which are pursued
and executed by a torrent of Hot ungoverned Spirits: They grope in the dark and
stagger like a drunken man, as it is in the 12. of Job. v. 25. And the steps of
his strength shall be straightened, his own Counsel shall cast him down. Job.
18.7. Pro. 4.18. Isa. 1.56. But he that has Chosen the Law of God for the rule
of his life is instructed in all the moral Instruments of Peace. His passions
are Temperate, his Mind Enlarged, his Judgment True, his Resolutions Steady,
his Counsel Solid, his Confidence Unshaken, his Courage Invincible, his
Execution Vigorous; but above all, whatsoever happens, he is satisfied in
himself that he has endeavored to do the Best.

3. And as Peace or tranquillity of mind proceeds from the Equality of our
lives, and from the Moral Accomplishments of the mind, so Lastly, from Divine
and secret communication of Joy and comfort, of Courage and assurance, of
Unspeakable Bliss and Glory to the Soul.

But this is the certain effect of Loving the Law of God. For the Law of God is
God dilated and spread forth to us; And the pleasures of God are not distinct
from himself, but the Reflection upon, and the Enjoyment of his own Perfections,
The display and exercise of his Wisdom, Providence, Power and Goodness. For
nothing without himself can entertain a being that is infinitely perfect.
Whatsoever therefore is Good is Pleasant, and in Perfect Good there is Perfect
Pleasure. The weakest disposition therefore to the Life of God has so much in
it of Absolute Delight as it partakes of the Divine nature. But he that Loves
his Law, is the lively Image of God Himself, he desires by His affections, he
is moved by his Will, he acts by the measures of Infinite Goodness, he
preserves the Unity of his Soul with its Root and Principle, and shall
therefore be filled with those Divine. delights, which flow, and are
Inseparable from the Life of God.

But the Complement and Perfection of this inward Peace and Joy, Job. 22.22.
Psam 17 15.
are the Secret Testimonies of the Favor of God, and the Irradiations of His
Love. These are the greatest Rewards of Virtue upon earth; the Positive
pleasures of Religion. And though they do not flow, by Natural Causality from
Obedience to the Law; Yet an humble expectation of such a Blissful Presence of
God in the Soul, is both Reasonable in it self, and much encouraged in the Holy
Scriptures.

For a man Regenerate and sanctified by the Law of God approaches so near to
his likness, Sympathizes so exactly with His being, lives His Life, does His
actions, serves His purposes, and magnifies His glory, that it is not Immodest
to expect the rays of the Divine light should Shine into him, that God should
Encourage his virtue with Sensible expressions of His Love. That, according to
his promises, He should manifest Himself unto Him, Joh. 14.27.15.11. Ephesians.
5.30.31 Psalm. 36.7.94.19.
And cause Him to drink of the rivers of His pleasure. And whenever God does
thus unfold Himself and His Love to the Soul, it must needs be touched with
Inexpressible Ecstacy and Joy.

And thus I have finished the Third head of discourse proposed, and have
endeavored to prove that the Love of the Law of God will both dispose us for,
and Effectually operate to the Production of peace after all the several ways
by which it is possible the effect should be produced, and according to all our
several Capacities of receiving it.

IV. And so I proceed, as I proposed, in the 4th. Place, To consider the full
and perfect agreement of this Peace, thus flowing from the Love of the Law of
God to the Character of my Text, Great Peace, etc.

And forasmuch as nothing Greater can be said of a Principle of Peace, than
what I have endeavored to prove true of the Love of the Law of God, namely,
that it Operates after all the ways by which it is possible the effect should
be produced, and to the Highest Degrees the subject is Capable of receiving it;
It would therefore now be superfluous to collect and in-large any further upon
the most Excellent qualities of Peace, and to show their agreement with the
Peace of my Text. I have anticipated my pains in this particular, by a full
description of its nature.

It is therefore unnecessary, to remark, the Universality of its Influence;
that every faculty will be Exercised with its proper actions and entertained
with its Greatest pleasures. That the whole Soul is vigorously informed,
rightly Habituated, and filled up to the very brim. Sen. de. Vit. Beat.
Habitum implevit, finibus se suis cinxit, and nihil extra totum est, he has
all and there is nothing beyond it.

It is needless to Commend the Steadyness, the Constancy and Duration of it;
Because that evidently follows from the Nature of the thing. For love is the
deepest root and therefore best secured against External violence. Joh. 16.22.
Romans 8.37.
It is a Principle incorporated into our very frame and nature; the effects are
therefore necessary, and its Virtue infinite and Inexhaustible. For Peace of
mind, and the habit of Love to the Law of God, arc in order of time the same;
and hardly ever to be Separated.

I shall therefore choose to improve the little time that is left, in
discovering the Weakness, and Imperfection of all other Principles and Kinds of
Peace whatever, which will render the Peace of my Text exceeding Great and
Glorious, not only in it self but because there is none Besides it.

And there are three Dispositions or habits of mind, which comprehend the rest,
and in especial manner, Pretend to give us Peace.

The First is that which is falsely called Liberty of mind, the banishment of
Religion, and the fear of Invisible Powers. Thinking, Speaking and Doing what
we list. The Second is an obsequious superstition, or the Compensation of a
licentious life by External rites and services. The Third is an Vnconsidering,
Vnreflecting state; a life of Mirth and Jollity.
It is deplorable to observe how almost eve^^ man takes sanctuary in one of
these. And yet how sadly we shall find them shrink from the test? How miserable
will they leave us in the days of Trial, when we stand in the greatest need of
support and Comfort?

And First, of the Peace which pretends to arise from the Liberty of our mind,
from the banishment of Religion, and the fear of invisible powers, from
thinking, speaking and doing what we list.

Religion is accused of Depressing the minds of men, of restraining, our
Liberty, that we dare not Court what we Love, nor Pursue what we Desire, that
we loose the pleasure of our present being, by the fear and care of our future
state. But he that is free from all apprehensions of Religion, is Master of
himself satisfied in his own proceedings, all his Actions make the same
Impressions upon his mind, he has no Control, but his Will is both his Law,
and his Delight.

But these are all Chymaera's and vain Imaginations. I have read of many
Athiests, that have discovered the Imperfection of their own Hypothesis, in
occasional expressions of Fear; but I never read of any that in all points was
true to his own Pretensions.

For it is Impossible for a man of any wit to be thoroughly Satisfied, not only
because the Arguments for God and Immortality are too strong to be answered,
but because the negative part of the question, viz. that there is no God, is
Impossible to be Proved. And how should we be Easy, till we are absolutely
secured, which we cannot be, against Eternal Misery?

But suppose we were thoroughly Satisfied and utterly void of Fear; Yet an
Atheist is the most miserable man upon earth. What comfort can there be to live
in the midst of Fortuitous Motions? If Inconscious atoms, united themselves
into the Frame of the World, there is nothing hinders the parts that are still
in motion, but by a Casual Violence and Agreement they may Separate the parts
United, and put them to Shift about, till they Join together again in new
appearances. So that, under these Apprehensions, there can be no security of
enjoying any thing. And any the most Excellent Being, though otherwise never so
perfect, were yet miserable without Immortality: But besides this, the Atheist
looks upon God and Religion in a False Light, for the Duties commanded are our
proper Liberty, the very best and freest actions of our nature, Which flow
easily, secundo flumine, as we have heard. And God, or a Perfect Being, is not
all Will, but infinite, Goodness, as well as Power.

The Existence therefore of such a Being is the most Desirable thing that can
be. It is the presence of all Perfection; It is a Security that all things
happen Woll, that the world is governed by infinite Understanding, and fastened
upon sure things. Here is Strength to confide in, Goodness and Power to hope
in, and Immortality to expect hereafter.

But because the Burdens of this present life are greater to every man than
the Pleasures of it; therefore no condition can be so miserable as his, who
has nothing in his view but Eternal Night.

The Second pretended Principle of Peace is an obsequious superstition, or the
Compensation of a Licentious life, by external Rites and Services. It was not
therefore by Chance that the Psalmist entitles those to Peace, who Love the
Law; but on purpose to anticipate the expectation of the Hypocrite.

For the Peace of Superstition is not free and Genuine, but a force upon our
Understandings. We will Mistake Religion, and resolve of our selves that we are
Happy without an Impartial view, or a serious Judgment of our State.

But no men are more Miserable than these, because they are afraid of
themselves, and dare not Search into the strength of their own supports. But
times of Trial and Adversity discover their rottenness whether we will or no.
They then shall find their Hope cut off, and that their trust is in a Spiders
web, they shall lean upon their house, but it will not Stand. Job. 8.14.15. and
In the days of Calamity the sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the hypocrite. Jer, Isa. 38.14.
2.37. And every one, says our Savior, that hears these sayings of mine and
does them not, shall be likned to a foolish man that built his house upon the
sand. Mat. 7.26.

There is no man indeed, can seriously expect the Favor of God upon the
services of an Histrionical Verbal Piety; or without conformity of our
Affections to his Law. Our consciences tell us that it is no better than
Blasphemy to praise His Wisdom if we are not Governed by it, or his Goodness
if we do not Imitate it. It is Profaneness and Affront to look obsequiously
with eyes and hands lift up to God in our devotions, whom we Scorn and Revile
in our Lives and Actions. In a word, no man Heartily believes that God will
love impurity, or be reconciled to any thing that is contrary to His own
essential Holiness.

The Last pretended Principle of Peace, is an unthinking, unreflecting state,
continual Mirth and Jollity.

But is this the peace of a man, which is but the pleasure of a brute? Shall we
be Content to resolve our Peace into that which destroys our Being? Is
Stupefaction a Cure of Diseases, a Healthful pleasant state? But thus it is,
Isa. 5.12.
the Harp, the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe are in their Dwellings, and they
regard not the Lord, nor the Operation of his hands. The Souls of these men are
Congealed and benumbed by sensuality; they are not at Ease but Stupid. The
Principles of torment are many, but the Sense and apprehension are for a time
diverted by a Cheerful Madness.

But if any of us are under such a Lethargy, let us not Glory in our Peace, but
endeavor to recover our sense betimes, or else the day approaches when our
Consciences shall be so Awakened, that nothing in heaven or earth shall ever
Still them. The longer it has been Smothered the more dreadful the flame will
be when it does break out. And thus we may Discern the Lameness and
Imperfection of all other Habits and Principles that pretend to give us Peace.
Which Magnifies the Principle and the Peace of my Text, because the one is the
only Spring from whence it Flows, and the other, the only Peace that is solid
and Substantial.

depressed with the Misfortunes of the World; that the Virtuous as well as
others, are affected with misery and trouble.

Concurrence of proper Qualifications in the Subject, before it is possible the
Effect should be Produced. We say of a medicine that it will Cure a Disease,
but we suppose a due Application and a proper Disposition in the Patient.
Whosoever Loves the Law of God, though his Temper be altered, yet he is still
but a Man. This new Principle does not act him by violence and Necessity, but
in a way that is suitable to a Free Agent. He still remains Obnoxious to
Frowardness and Inadvertency, to Mistakes and Infirmities, to Temptations,
Scruples, Dejection, Melancholy, and many other Habits, which hinder the free
Emanation and efficacies of the Principle.

But, notwithstanding all this, if the Subject, be Judicious and Inquisitive,
Watchful and Industrious, in a word, if he make it his business, he will
quickly discern his advantages, and be able to draw out the Virtues of the
root, and in time, his mind will be at Perfect ease and remain Impregnable
against all the Assaults of Evil.

As for that part of the Peace of a good man which is Communicated to the Soul
immediately by God himself, we are indeed more Passive in that than in the
other; Yet even this requires a Suitable Disposition in the Patient besides the
sincerity of his Love. For as our temper may be, it may exalt us above what is
meet, Cherish Conceit, Nourish Vanity, and Divert our minds from the duties of
our place, to a continual expectation of Extatick Joy. It is therefore governed
by the Infinite Wisdom of God, and dispensed according as our Temper will bear
it, and our needs require it. Times of great temptation, doubtful conflicts,
prevailing fears, dejection and despondence, are proper seasons for an
Encouraging Manifestation of the Glory and Love of God.

And it is no disparagement to the Doctrine of my Text, that Infinite Wisdom
should dispense that part of our Peace which is properly a Reward as our Temper
will bear it, and our Needs require it.

And thus the Principle may contain a Full and Uninterrupted Peace within it
self, though its Virtue, through accidental Impediments, should not always and
alike refresh the Subject.

Yet nevertheless whosoever truly Loves the Law of God is Habitually pleased
and easy. Every good man has a disposition to Perfection, an Interest in the
Love of God, and the joys of Heaven. Suppose him then a person of the weakest
understanding, yet he finds the pleasure of an equal life, and knows how to
resign himself to Almighty Goodness. He has a well grounded hope that God is
pleased with him, that his Enemies are Conquered, that he has a title to great
Treasures, ^^er. in (...) Car.
which will give him such a peace and satisfaction, that he shall never Repent
his Choice.

In a word, our Joy and Peace are commonly proportioned to the Strength of our
Love, the Abilities of our mind, the Temper of our Soul, and the Wisdom of
God, and he that desires more is a stranger to the Wise economy of the World,
the Nature of man, and the General Reason of things.

Applic. And now I could wish with the Philosopher, (...). ^oc. de ^ace.
That it were as easieto persuade to the Practice of Virtue as it is to Commend
it.

The proportion is as true as our Faculties, and the Motive is the Strongest
that can be offered to the minds of men. It takes away the great Objection
against Religion, that it Restrains our liberty, and contradicts our
inclinations; that it is a Force and Violence to our nature and disposition.

It is true indeed, so long as we are under the Power of vicious Habits we can
see no Loveliness in the Law of God, nothing but Labor and self-denial. Such a
Through Change in body, soul and spirit, as the Law requires, cannot be
accomplished without a mighty Resolution, and Unwearied Diligence. But if we
are in Earnest, our reluctance and aversation will wear away. It is the
property of Religion that it makes us New creatures, and gives us another
Spirit, another Taste and Relish of things.

Nothing therefore but Wretched Cowardice or stupid Incredulity, can hinder the
effects of this discourse. What cutting and lancing are we content to endure
for the preservation of the body? What dangers so great that we do not Court
for the advancement of our name and fortune? The hopes of glory and reward,
make the Difficulties of an enterprise, to men that are Brave, the most
cheerful Circumstance.

They that would be great, must not content themselves with Common Actions, but
they must atchieve such things as shall demonstrate their Wisdom, Resolution
and Conduct.

It is true, it is impossible for a vicious man to Comprehend the inward sense
of this discourse in every point. An Orator commending the Sweetness of a Rose,
may affect our Fancy, but he can never touch our Nerves with the Very Fragrancy
it self. Without Virtue the Pleasures of Virtue are impossible to be Discerned.
(...) Hier. au. Car.
There is no Proportion between the Object and the Faculty. But in this as in
other Cases, we ought to be moved by the Probability of the Thing, and the
Reports of Credible and Experienced persons, who with one consent, assure us,
that, whosoever enters into the School of wisdom, (...), he shall be sure to
return, with the Advantages of Peace and Happiness, (...) Epict. ^^nch.
(...). If you do not believe it Try, as Arrianus speaks.

In a word, to study the Law of God till we like and love it, is to Proceed
upon the best Reason, to Follow the steps of the Wisest men, to pursue a Real
good; to Advise with infinite Wisdom and to Strengthen our selves with the
best supports.

These are the men that are never Amazed, Surprised or Vanquished, that can bear
up boldly to a Storm, and Sail securely before the Wind. These are the only men
that are fit to live amongst Contingencies, that can make the best of all
Events, and be happy in all conditions; till at last our Souls shall return to
God that gave them: our Victories shall be Crowned with Glory, our Faith shall
be perfected in Vision, our Hope in Enjoyment, and our Peace Consummate in the
Full and Everlasting Joys of Heaven.

FINIS.

