A VINDICATION OF THE Primitive Christians, In point of Obedience to their
Prince, AGAINST The Calumnies of a Book entitled THE Life of Julian, Written
by ECEBOLIUS the Sophist.

As also the Doctrine of Passive Obedience Cleared, in Defense of Dr. HICKS.

Together with an APPENDIX: Being a more full and distinct Answer to Mr. Tho.
Hunt's Preface and Postscript.

Unto all which is added The Life of Julian enlarged.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, and are to be sold by Robert
Kettlewell, at the Hand and Scepter over against St. Dunstan's Church. 1683.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, By Divine Providence Lord Archbp
of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, And one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Grace,
ALthough (as Solomon says) Every thing is beautiful in his season; and there
was a time when a Cup of cold Water was an acceptable Present to an Emperor:
yet should I not have presumed to offer so mean a Present to so Great a Person,
as a little Water in a homely Vessel, taken up in haste and disorder, (as men
are wont to do when the Neighborhood is on fire) had it not been that the
Firebrarnds which I endeavor to extinguish, have not only been scattered up
and down among combustible matter through the Nation, but that the Boutefeus
have been so desperately bold, as to throw some of their Fireballs into the
August Assembly of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. Such was the
Barbarous Celeusma, the Answers to Dr. Stillingfleet, etc. and now a Traitorous
Preface and Postscript dedicated by one Tho. Hunt to the Right Honorable John
Earl of Radnor, etc. Lord President of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

I am well assured, that that Judicious and Noble Lord has either so contemned
those seditious and treasonable Libels, as not to vouchsafe them the Reading;
or if he has read them, that they kindled a just indignation in his loyal
breast, and condemned them to the fire, as designed to set the Nation in a
flame. The Author tells us truly, that the reason of his Dedication was to
create a Prejudice: and the thing is self-evident, that the greatest
Adversaries which that Noble Lord has (if at least he has any: for I know he
can have none, but among the factious and seditious Rabble that are acted by
such Seducers) could not have offered a greater Affront to a Person of his
known Wisdom and Integrity, than such a Dedication amounts unto; and therefore
I doubt not but those fiery Darts which that Author has shot against so firm a
Fortress of Religion and Loyalty, will recoil on his own head.

If men of such fiery tempers have presumed of favor from so Great Persons, I
cannot but hope for your Graces pardon, who have endeavored, though in a hasty
and rude manner, to extinguish those Wilde-fires which they have kindled: for
God only knows how great a matter a little such fire, blown (as it is) with
popular breath, may kindle, if not timely prevented.

The Devil was wont to carry on his designs formerly as an Angel of Light; and
then the deluded Instruments deserved some pity: But now that he appears in his
proper Colors, a Noon-day-Devil, breathing our flames of fire and a horrible
stench, none but such as are by his Sorceries and Witchcrafs become his
covenanted Servants, would seek to bring others under the same sins and
condemnation with themselves, as being already self-condemned, and having
sinned away all hopes of mercy from God or man.

All those Coals of Sedition and Rebellion which were raked up under the Ashes
of this ruined Nation, and which we might in reason hope, had been quite
extinguished by the enjoyment of Peace and Truth, Prosperity and Plenty, for
twenty years together, have been secretly fomented, and are now publicly
scattered, to cause a New Conflagration.

I humbly beg your Graces patience to mind the present Age, how ready they are
to be led over the same Precipices, by the same Impostures, and by some of the
same men by whom the former Age was ruined: only, they were led on by degrees,
and colorable pretenses; the Snare was not spread in their sight, as it is now
in ours, who are persuaded with open eyes, and a dreadful prospect of Rebellion
and Damnation before us, to cast our selves headlong into them both.

It was after a long Progress and unhappy success of the former War, that John
Goodwin (and others) published his Evangelium Armatum, his new Gospel-liberty,
affirming, That the lawfulness of Resistance is now discovered to Gods Church,
as the necessary means to ruin Antichrist: for the Kings of the Earth (says
he) will never be persuaded to effect this great and holy work, and therefore
the People must. He in the 30, 31, 32 pages of his Anti-Cavalierism, among many
other Passages, has these words, which every Christian that reads them must
abhor.

Amongst many other Truths which were of necessity to be laid asleep, for the
passing of this Beast (Antichrist) unto his great power and authority, and for
the maintaining and safe guarding of him in the possession thereof, this is one
of special consideration, That Christians may lawfully in a lawful way stand up
to defend themselves, in case they be able, against any unlawful Assaults, by
what Assailants, or by what pretended Authority soever made upon them: for had
this Opinion been timeously enough, and substantially taught in the Church, it
would certainly have caused an Abortion in Antichrists birth, and so have
disappointed the Devil of his firstborn, had not the Spirits, and Judgments,
and Consciences of men been as it were cowed and marvellously embased and kept
under, and so prepared for Antichrists Lure, by Doctrines and Tenets
excessively advancing the power of Superiors over Inferiors, and binding Iron
yokes and heavy burdens on those that were in subjection; doubtless they would
never have bowed down their backs so low, as to let such a Be ^^rule over them;
they would ne^ have resigned up their Judgments and Consciences into the hands
of such a Spiritual Tyrant as he. So that you see there was a special
necessity, for the letting of Antichrist into the world; yea and for the
continuance of him in his Throne, that no such Opinion as this which we speak
of, whether truth or untruth, should be taught and believed; I mean, which
vindicateth and maintains the just Rights, and Liberties, and Privileges of
those that live under authority and subjection to others. Whereas now on the
contrary, that time of Gods preordination and purpose for the downfall of
Antichrist drawing near, there is a kind of necessity that those truths, which
have slept for many years, should now be awakened; and particularly, That God
should reveal and discover unto his faithful Ministers and other his servants,
the just bounds and limits of Authority and Power, and consequently the just
and full extent of the lawful Liberties of those that live in subjection. --
Evident it is, that they are the Commonalty of Christians, I mean Christians of
ordinary Rank and Quality, that shall be most active, and have the principal
hand in executing the Judgments of God upon the Whore. Consider that place,
Rev. 18.4, 5, 6. Now that this service shall be performed unto God by them,
(Christians I mean of under Rank and Quality) contrary to the will, desires, or
commands of those Kings and Princes under whom they live, it appears by that
which immediately follows, v. 9. And whereas the Text says expressly that the
ten Kings shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and eat
her flesh, and burn her with fire; for God has put it in their hearts to
fulfill his will, and to agree and give their Kingdom unto the Beast until the
Words of God shall be fulfilled: To prevent this Objection, because God in his
good time will arm the Kings to fight jointly the Lords battle against the
Beast; he thus interprets that place; I conceive (says he) this is not meant
of the persons of Kings, but of their States and Kingdoms, ( i. e.) of the
generality of the people under them, p. 32. As if the meaning of -- The Kings
shall hate the Beast, were, The People shall hate their Kings, and rebel
against them, in order to the destruction of Antichrist.

Nothing is more evident, than that this Doctrine which he would promote for
the pulling down of Antichrist, was that by which Antichrist was advanced to
that sublimity of Power which he now has, and by which he is still supported
in it; unless they will deny the Pope to be Antichrist: for this Resistance of
lawful Authority is still practiced and defended by that Church. And how can
they blame that Church, who teach and practice the same things? If ever the
Pope be pulled down by the Doctrine and Practice of Resistance of lawful
Princes, it will be to set up Another in his room.

Now that the Doctrine which was taught by this wretched man and John Milton,
the only two persons that publicly defended the Parricide committed on that
incomparable King, when he was cast out of his Throne, and an Usurper placed in
it, is the same which is now revived by these two Authors whom I have under
consideration; I submit to your Graces judgment, and the Consciences of all
impartial Readers. And to what a prodigious height of Impiety are they come,
who in such times of Peace, under a most gracious and religious Prince, and
after such experiences of the miserable effects of them, shall openly plead for
the same Antiscriptural and Antichristian Doctrines and Practices, by which
these men endeavor at one leap, (as the Devil did the herd of Swine) to plunge
the Multitude over head and ears in Rebellion and Confusion! And yet to court
the People, Mr. Hunt tells them in the close of his Preface, That Loyalty,
Religion, and the Prosperity and Peace of his Country, have entirely conducted
his thoughts and guided his hand in this Work, (whereas if he were not the same
person, yet he uses the same Arguments as an anonymous Author did in a Tract
concerning Mixed and Limited Monarchy): That he has affirmed nothing but what
is publicly known for truth: That Justice it self will acquit him from having
done any thing amiss: That he has encircled himself (in his own
considerations) as in a brazen wall (when it is but a brazen face). And as for
the fears of Rage and Injustice, they shall never affect him: but I fear the
handwriting of the Laws, and the sentence of Justice may one day shake his
confidence.

I join Issues with him in his Appeal concerning his Writings, and the Reply
now made to them: and though he have provoked me to say something that may
balance the Reputation of Religion and Loyalty, etc. which he assumes to
himself, I shall only say, That I am one who have served in the Ministry of
the Established Religion for forty years together; I have kept my Station, and
defended my Post against all Assaults: I have seen those deplorable times,
wherein it was counted a daring thing to assert the use of the Lords Prayer in
the Public Assemblies, against the Blasphemies of J. O. I have withstood the
attempts of Mr. Baxter, Humfries, Lob, and others, for the disturbance of our
public Peace. And though by age and other infirmities I might claim the
privilege of a Miles Emeritus, yet have I engaged once more against these two
Incendiaries; and having the same cause of Religion and Loyalty to defend, I
cannot doubt of success against such Aggressors, of whom your Grace will find a
far different Character from that which they give of themselves: for,

These two Authors, like Simeon and Levi, are so confederate, that they strive
who shall exceed the other in doing mischief. The one undermines the foundation
of the Church in her Ministry: The other, that of the State in the Royal
Authority. Again, The one plays with the Crown, as if it were a Tennis-ball:
The other derides the Doctrine of the Cross, comparing it with that of the
Great Turks Bow-string. The one encourages Resistance, and very modestly
insinuates a Reward due to such as shall kill those (be they Princes or others)
who oppose the Religion which they approve of: The other more confidently
asserts the excluding (not of a single Monarch, but) even Monarchy it self,
though it be in the glorious Family of the STVARTS, as he Ironically calls
them. Yet so great is the Revolt of our People both from God and the King, that
these two (like Jeroboam's Calves which he set up as well to alter the
established Worship, as to translate the Kingdom from the Family of David) are
worshipped by the Rabble from Dan to Beersheba.

And now I beseech your Grace not to be offended with this Confident Address of
an obscure Person, who after various tossings, having through the great mercy
of God escaped Shipwreck in that great Hurricane wherein many thousands more
worthy persons perished, is still embarked in that ancient Vessel wherein he
hopes to end his days in peace; nothing doubting, but that God, who stilled the
raging of that Sea, and the madness of that People, will also lead us without
any harm through those Fires which so many busybodies are now kindling
against us; and that he will preserve us even in the flames; at which though we
be affrighted, as Moses was at the burning Bush, yet we shall not be consumed
by them: Especially while we have such a CAESAR, who all his lifetime has
been a Favorite of Heaven; being born, preserved, restored, guided, and
supported by a Chain of Miracles: And such a principal Member of that Church of
Christ embarked with us, against which the gates of Hell shall never prevail;
and having also such a pious and experienced Pilot as your Grace, who has both
his Eyes and his Heart to Heaven for his own direction, and both his hands to
the Helm, for the conduct of the People committed to his Charge.

There remains nothing to the perfecting our Establishment, but the casting out
those Jonahs which lie asleep in the bottom of the Ship; I mean our sins, which
have caused the wrath of God to kindle those fires in the midst of us, which
may justly make us as desolate as Sodom or Gomorrha. That with penitent Tears,
fervent and unanimous Prayers, seasonable and serious reformation of our Lives,
we would deprecate Gods displeasure, and that yet he would make us of one heart
and mind in considering and doing the things that belong to our peace, before
they are hid from our eyes: That in these things I may do some acceptable
service to the Church of Christ on Earth, and with it have my Reward in Heaven,
is the hearty Prayers and great Ambition of

Your Graces most humble and most dutiful Servant, Tho. Long.

L. Cook's third part of Institutes, p. 36.
PEruse over all Books, Records, and Histories, and you shall find a Principle
in Law, a Rule in Reason, and a Trial in Experience, That Treason does ever
produce fatal and final destruction to the Offender; and never attains to the
desired end (two incidents inseparable thereunto). And therefore let all men
abandon it, as the poisonous Bait of the Devil; and follow the Precept in Holy
Scripture: Serve God, and honor the King; and have no company with the
Seditious.

Mr. Hunt's Preface to the Argument for Bishops.
OUr Adversaries were treated too kindly, and deserve sharper reflections than
are made upon them for their false and perverse Reasonings; and ought to lose
that Reputation which they abuse to the hurt of the Government. -- Nor is it
for the honor of our Faculty, that never fails to supply the worst Cause with
Advocates.

ERRATA.
PAge 17. line 4. r. Or. In the Preface, for Cyril, r. Gregory in four places.
p. 46. l. 1. r. contradictious Zeal. p. 49. r. Justitia. p. 50. r. templa. p.
90. r. Constantium. p. 91. r. (...). p. 96. dele And Basil. p. 107. r. Annum.
ibid. for Curtis r. Curtius. p. 124. after patience, add of. p. 129. r.
confirmed. p. 152. r. though. p. 185. r. atrocia. p. 189. r. paries. p. 205. r.
Sumus. p. 224. r. (...). p. 226. r. foretold. p. 233. r. Reges. ibid. r.
Depravari. p. 242. l. 25. r. Or. ibid. r. suppose. p. 262. dele after the fifth
line four lines which are doubled.

TO THE READER.
AS often as I consider the numerous Pamphlets which the Scribblers of this Age
have brought forth, it calls to my mind what I have read of a sort of Indian
Rats, which are said to be pregnant whilst they are in the belly of their Dams.
Every Libel propagates such a numberless Issue, that, as one observed of the
increase of Faction, the first Separation might say to its Offspring, Arise,
Separation, and go to thy Separation; for thy Separation's Separation has a
Separation.

But of all the Libels that have been lately written, none are more fruitful
(as it is mostly with Venomous Creatures) than those which have been written
against the Established Government. There was a Swarm of such in the Late
Unhappy Times; and some of the Authors, (as well as that sort of Writings) are
yet alive, or revived, to create new Disturbances: And as Horace observes,
Aetas parentum pejor avis
Tulit progeniem vitiosiorem.
Every Pamphlet has more of venom, than that from whence it had its birth.

Prynne, Burton, and Bastwick, were the Great Grandsires of this monstrous
Progeny: The Covenanters, Nigh, Marshal, and the Smectymnuans, were their
genuine Offspring. To these succeed (notwithstanding the peremptory Vote for
Exclusion) John Goodwin, Owen, Harington, and Baxter; all right
Commonwealths-men; with Milton, and May, and many others, whose Writings have
by men of like Principles been reviewed, reprinted, and recommended to the
present Age.

I shall only instance in the Treatise now under consideration, which has
contracted and improved the Antimonarchical principles which lay scattered in
the Authors last mentioned, and in the Character of the Popish Successor, Plato
Redivivus, and other seditious Pamphlets; but especially from Mr. Hunt's
Postscript: for certainly our Author's teeth were set on edge by Mr. Hunt's
sour Grapes; and he makes it his business to blow up the Coals which he had
kinled. The great Notion on which all his Discourse is builded, is from Mr.
Hunt, p. 46, and 47. (And facile est inventis addere). Let no man (says Mr.
Hunt) betray his Country and Religion, by pretending the example of the
patience and sufferings of the Primitive Christians for our Rule. The Reformed
Religion has acquired a Civil right, and the protection of Laws. If we ought
not to lose our Lives, Liberties, and Estates, but where forfeited by Law; we
ought much rather not to lose them for the profession of the best Religion,
which by Law is made the Public National Religion, etc. This gave occasion to
the greatest part of his Book, which is a loud and notorious Calumny against
the Primitive Christians, viz. their patient submission to their unjust and
cruel Persecutors.

From Mr. Hunt he took his instance of Mary Queen of Scots, of whom he speaks,
p. 48. and says, Scarce a Child but has heard what was done, said, and
maintained by the Clergy of England in the case of Mary Queen of Scots, a
Popish Successor, in the earliest time of our Reformation. Upon this our Author
paraphraseth at large, from p. 12. to the 18th of his Preface.

His deriding of the Succession in the right Line, is taken from Mr. Hunt, p.
47. If any be so vain as to say that a lawful course of Succession is
established among us by Divine Right, he is a man fitted to believe
Transubstantiation, and the Infallibility of the Pope. And our Authors Comments
on this, fill many pages. Concerning Arbitrary Power, compare Mr. Hunt, p. 42.
and 52. with the 78. of our Author's: and p. 241. Mr. Hunt minded him of the
Doctrine of Sibthorpe and Manwaring, of which in p. 77.

P. 47. Mr. Hunt's Comparison between Popery and Paganism, gave him a Text for
another part of his book; and from a hint in p. 49. That we must not suspend
all the legal security we have for our preservation upon the life of our
present King; there are a hundred hints for that one, to prepare people for
actual Resistance and Rebellion.

Thus the Leprosy of Naaman cleaves to this covetous Gehazi, and spreads it
self through the whole book, so as it becomes a continued Scab. And I pray God
it may creep no farther.

But for this one thing our Author is very culpable, that having got these and
many other Materials for his Babel, he never mentions his Founder: Only, p.
88. he says, A worthy person has lately observed, That one single Arm
unresisted, may go a great way in murdering a Nation. But works of darkness
hate the light, and therefore he thought fit to conceal both their names.

The Author of the Life of Julian seems very fit to describe an Apostate,
having himself apostatized from the Doctrine of the Church whereof he has long
professed himself to be a Member, as also from the judgment and practice of the
Primitive Christians, against whom his book is a very notorious Libel; and by
which (if it should be credited) he would wound the Reputation of those
Primitive Christians more than Julian has done. For he says himself, That (but
for their name) Julian had better have fallen among so many Barbarians than
among them, p. 66.

These two things are what I design: first, to wipe off the dirty Aspersions
cast by the Author on the Christians in Julian's time, which have more of an
Invective against them, than any thing that St. Cyril wrote against Julian
himself. And secondly, to prevent the infection of those false and dangerous
Opinions in the case of Obedience to Magistrates, which this distempered
Generation are too much disposed to receive, and (as is usual with infected
persons) to propagate, and make them epidemical. I intend not a Vindication of
the Papists, nor of Julian, though (as the Proverb says) The Devil is not so
black as he is painted, (let Baal plead for himself) I only design a short
Apology for the Primitive Christians, whom our Author represents as so many
Apostates from their Predecessors in the days of Dioclesian, when by their
patient sufferings they more honored the Gospel, than the Christian Emperors
did by all the Privileges and Largesses wherewith they endowed the Church. And
he might with equal truth have objected the same things against the Christians
in the time of Constantius, as he does against Jul^an: for he being an Arian,
and violently persecuting many Orthodox Bishops, setting the Arians in their
places, some of them did speak far otherwise of him than St. Cyril does; yet
none attempted to resist him, but prayed for him, and patiently submitted to
his unjust Chastisements, as being their lawful Governor. Of which hereafter.

AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE OF OUR Author's Life of JVLIAN.
OUr Author seems better read in the Alcaron than the Scriptures; that has
found out a Comparison for his Majesty's Subjects from a Vision of Mahomet,
when he might have found more suitable representations of them from the holy
Scriptures, as in David's Subjects, who were careful not only of his safety,
but all his house, 2 Samuel 19.14. Christ himself and his Apostles have delivered
for the good of all succeeding Ages, such Precepts and Examples of Christian
obedience and subjection, as the most loyal Addressers (even the men of Rippon
themselves) come short of. It was their bounden duty at such a time to make
their Profession to adhere to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; it was no
more than what the Law of God and the Nation has obliged them to; so that they
are neither Guelphs, nor Gibelines, nor Papists, nor Phanaticks, but such as
are ready to render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar, and unto God the
things which are Gods: nor could they sufficiently express their thankfulness
to his Majesty, (when too many began to exercise an arbitrary way of vexing
their fellow subjects, and supersede the established Laws) for his gracious
Declaration to govern according to the established Laws, and (which is that
which gives offense to too many) to cause others to do so too.

They know best how to reconcile Contradictions, that could swallow Covenants
and Engagements after the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and all their
Obligations to God and his Church, and knew how to make a glorious King by
bringing him to the Block, and to establish Religion by dividing it, which our
Savior says is the ready way to destroy it: for a Kingdom or house divided
cannot stand. If the men of Rippon had a^ apprehension of the mischiefs that in
all probability would follow upon a Bill of Exclusion, I cannot see but their
Fears were more reasonable than the groundless Jealousy of such as trouble
themselves with what may never be; or if it should, is but a just judgment of
God to punish those by some Rehoboam, who were so malecontent with the pious
and peaceable Governments of a David and Solomon. And I have often thought,
that one reason why God set a Julian over the Christians of that Age, was,
because in the times of Constantine and Constantius they degenerated into
Heresies and Schisms, (such as the Arians and Donatists) and began to bite and
devour one another. The Shepherds have generally observed, that when Sheep push
and chase each other, it betokens an approaching Storm.

As to what you mind us of, p. 4, 5. That a Popish Successor will be an heavy
judgment of of God, and ought to be deprecated by all good men: As far as
Prayers and Tears and other lawful endeavors may be employed, all good men
will readily join with you: but if it shall please God for our wantonness and
ungovernableness to lay that heavy Yoke upon us, it is in vain to resist, lest
we be found to fight against God. I shall at present only send you to a
Heathen to learn better behavior; Quomodo sterilitatem aut nimios imbres, and
caetera naturae mala; it a luxum vel avaritiam dominantium tolerate, vitia
erunt donec homines* sed neque haec continua, and meliorum interventu
pensantur, i. e. As we endure scarcity or immoderate rain, and other natural
evils; so ought we to bear with the luxury or avarice of our Rulers, for there
will be faults as long as there are men: but neither are these still continued;
the interchange of what is good, will make compensation for that which is evil:
as Tacitus says.

Our Savior would have us to live without distracting fear of those events
which are not in our power to prevent, especially when our groundless fears may
be the chief cause of drawing those evils on our selves. Few Rebellions were
ever hatched, but by the warmth of a pretended zeal for Religion and
Reformation; and Fears and Jealousies (how groundless soever) have animated it,
and given it growth and strength. The panick fear of a change of Government,
(he means Arbitrary Government) was the principal cause of the late War, says
Mr. Hunt in his Postscript, p. 52. The noise of Popery to be brought in by the
King and Archbishop Land, who were the Heads of the Grotian Papists, (as Mr.
Baxter says) was another: yet I hope neither Mr. Hunt nor our Author will
warrant that Rebellion under their hands, upon such false and ungodly
pretenses, when they shall consider to what real evils these feigned Bugbears
and Fancies did precipitate us.

It is true, a Popish Successor will be an affliction to sincere Protestants,
in respect of temporal accommodations, and spiritual advantages also; yet that
evil may be improved to our eternal advantages, our Savior having promised,
that great shall be their reward in heaven, that are reviled, persecuted, and
slandered, for his sake, Matthew. 5.11, 12. And St. Peter tells us, If we suffer
for well-doing, and take it patiently, this is acceptable with God, 1 Pet.
2.20. And if it be the Will of God if shall be so, we must learn of David,
though in another case, Psalm. 39.8. I was dumb and opened not my mouth, for it
was thy doing.

P. 5. You seem not satisfied with Hippocrates Receipt of Cito, long, tarde,
which preserved many Confessors in the days of Queen Mary, and is prescribed by
a greater than Hippocrates, in this very case; If they persecute you in one
City, flee to another, Matthew. 10.23. You are for Fires and Fumes of Pitch and
Tar, etc. for Imprisonment and close Confinement even of innocent persons. The
Papists indeed apply such Causticks in cases of Heresy, Apostasy, and Tyranny;
but I never read that the Primitive Christians used them against their Princes,
not against Dioclesian a Tyrant, Constantius an Arian, or Julian an Apostate.
Nay even the Doctors of Rome forbid such Medicines, even in the case of
Tyranny, without which the other two may not much hurt a sound Christian, till
the Disease be universalis manifesta, and cum obstinatione, (i. e.) till after
they find all other means ineffectual, and he is resolved to make a total
overthrow of his People. Concerning which we are yet in the dark as to our own
Case; and you give us some light to comfort us, when you say, p. 65. of
Julian's Persecution, That it was but a flea-biting, a short and weak assault
of the Devil; and that he was rather a Tempter than a Persecutor: which makes
their behavior toward him (if it were so barbarous as you represent it) the
less excusable. Until a Plague be epidemical and wasting, it is not charitable
nor just to confine suspected persons; much less them that are sound, and to
deal with them as persons destined to destruction, to bury them alive; and to
make their own Relations instruments of these severities, who may justly fear
the like are intended for themselves.

Though some intend only to lop off a degenerate Branch, yet having got the Ax
in their hand, others may make use of it to strike a blow at the Root; and (to
answer your Parenthesis) plain English is as well understood on this side Trent
as the other; so that there is more fear lest we should lose a Protestant King
(as we have once already) than a Popish Successor: for though such an one may
be deprecated as a Judgment, and may prove as a Plague to the Nation, yet may
we not presently cut Throats to prevent what may never come, or if it should,
make use of a Remedy worse than the Disease: for, Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23.

That Remedy which you suppose may be effectual to prevent this mischief, will
prove to be of that nature; which is a Compound of belying the Primitive
Christians, and betraying Modern ones into a sin of Rebellion, which may do
more hurt (as Experience has shown us) than all the Arts and Witchcrafts of
Julian: In writing of whose Life, you have not, I confess, impoverished the
Subject (p. 6.), for you have only weeded it, as Mr. Baxter has done the
Ecclesiastical History, in his Profane one of the Bishops and Councils*

P. 7. You say, you wrote this discourse only to render that of Julian 's
Succession intelligible. It is a strange course you take to make his Succession
intelligible, which you your self confess was from God by a legal descent, and
most agreeable to the Laws of the Roman Empire, and yet seek to overthrow it:
you had done more to your purpose, if you had shown what party of Christians
they were, and on what grounds of Religion or Law they went, what Sedition or
Armies the Christians had raised to oppose his Succession; of all which you
give us not the least notice; you only suppose, that if Constantius had known
Julian's Religion before he was Emperor, he would have gotten a Bill of
Exclusion; or if not, the Christians would have resisted him.

And from their behavior toward him after he was Emperor, (which is
scandalously represented, as is also the carriage of former Christians) you
would reconcile the Christian Religion and Rebellion. This you have done
intelligibly enough: but that the Christians did or would have resisted his
Succession, I find no show of Argument or History; only you give us some
Rhetorical expressions out of St. Cyril's Invectives, from which you infer more
than the Premises will bear. And you do not report, as it becomes an Historian,
but only suggest, add, and invent what may ensnare your Readers. I
ingenuously confess, I do not believe all that St. Cyril speaks in praise of
Constantius, nor against Julian. Panegyricks, and Stelliteuticks, have not the
authority of true Histories, with discerning men.

P. 7. You say your business is to show how wide a difference there was betwixt
the Case of Christians in Julian 's time, and that of the first Christians; and
make it as great as Laws for men and against men could possibly make it: yet
you confess that what you have written is contrary to what is commonly reported
of them, and to the carriage of former Christians. It is then some such New
Light as Jo. Goodwin's Doctrine of Resistance, that is your Guide: but you take
no notice of the unalterable Laws of God, which bind all men in all Ages to be
subject to the Higher Powers without distinction, not only for fear of Wrath,
but for Conscience sake. There are few men that intend a Rebellion, but will
pretend to have the Laws on their side; and if they may be Judges in their own
Case, will as certainly condemn the Legislator, as dispute his Laws.

It were well if you would keep close to your Principle, That the Laws of your
Country are the Measures of your civil Obedience. I am sure you want none to
require your active Obedience to the just Laws of your Prince; nor your passive
Obedience, if at any time you suffer wrongfully: And this is not enjoined by
Mahomet, but by Christ himself; it is the Doctrine of the Cross, and not of the
Bow-string. The violation of the Law on the Princes side, does not discharge
the Obligation of the Subjects; they are under a higher Law than that of the
Land. The chief Magistrate's obliging himself to certain Rules for
administration of his Government, is not the just Measure or chiefest Tie of
the Subjects Obedience. The eternal Laws of God and our Savior, that require
Obedience and Submission even to wicked Princes, and that for Conscience sake,
and threatening Resistance with Damnation, is a safer Rule for the saving of our
Souls, though not for the preservation of our Lives and Estates.

When St. Peter drew a Sword to defend his Master, in a way of resisting, and
revenging him against the Officers of a lawful Magistrate, he was commanded to
put up his Sword, and threatened, that they that use the Sword should perish by
the Sword, Matthew. 26.52. And when some other Disciples would have his consent
to call for fire from heaven to consume the Samaritans, he tells them, they
knew not what Spirit they were of. The contrary Doctrines are not from the
blessed Jesus, but the accursed Jesuits, and to be abhorred of all good
Christians: and yet it is that which you chiefly track, and seek to bring into
practice. St. Aug. speaking of St. Peter's using the Sword, and of Moses
slaying the Egyptian, says, lib. 22. chap. 7. Contra Faustum Manicheum; Vterque
Justitiae regulam excessit; and hie fraterno, ille Dominico amore peccavit.

P. 8. You say, It is impossible in so short a Treatise as yours is to say the
tenth part of what is to be said, to show how intolerable that Doctrine (of
Passive Obedience) is, and how contrary to the Gospel, and the Law of the Land.
If you had not said the tenth part of what you have, to show how intolerable
the Doctrine of Passive Obedience is, and that it is contrary to the Gospel and
the Law of the Land; you had said too much, as will appear hereafter.
Christianity indeed does not enslave us, or divest us of the Rights and
Privileges that we have; but it teaches us to exchange them for better.
Terrestria non eripit, Sedulius.
qui regna dat Caelestia. And it assures us, that he that loses his life for
Christ's sake, shall save it, Matthew. 16.25.

P. 8. To prove your Assertion from the Gospel, you commend your Reader to Dr.
Hammond's Paraphrase on 1 Cor. 7.21, 22, 23. which speaks little to your
purpose; it concerns only such Christians as were in bondage to heathen
Masters. -- That if they could by any fair and regular means attain their
freedom, they might make use of them, and prefer Liberty before Servitude;
which they might have done if they had never been Christians: And that they who
have obtained Liberty, and were formerly Servants to Heathen, should not sell
themselves again, and revert to that condition of slavery, but prefer Liberty
rather. But what is this to that Exposition which he gives us of Romans 13. in
these words? -- Then for the Judicial Laws, that great supreme one ought to be
taken into special care of all Christians, that of Obedience to the Supreme
Powers rightly established and constituted, although they be not Jews but
Romans. Nothing in Christianity ought to be pretended or made use of to give
any man immunity from Obedience, which from all Subjects, of what quality
soever, Apostles, Teachers, etc. is due to those to whom Allegiance belongs (
contrary to the Gnostics Doctrine and Practice, Jude 8.) but on the contrary,
every person under government, of what Rank soever, is to yield subjection to
his Supreme Governor legally placed in that Kingdom, as to him that has
commission from God, as every Supreme Magistrate must be resolved to have,
though he be a Heathen. Verse. 2. From which Divine Commission it is directly
consequent, that he that makes any violent resistance or opposition to the
Supreme. Magistrate, opposes that violence to Gods Commission, and shall
accordingly receive that punishment which belongs to so sacrilegious a
Contumacie; the wrath and judgment of God belongs to it. With more to that
purpose.

As to St. Paul's dealing with the Centurion, Acts 22.25. the Apostle neither
spoke nor acted any thing that tended to resistance; he only asked the
Centurion, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and
uncondemned? In like manner, Acts 16.39. Paul and Silas only made the Officers
sensible of their wrongful imprisonment. It is strange that any man that
pretends to Sense or Religion, should wrest these places to the countenancing
of Resistance, when the Doctrine which Christ and his Apostles taught and
practiced, and which we have received from this great Apostle of the Gentiles,
is so opposite to it. Maledicta Glossa quae corrumpit Textum. What consequence
is this? St. Paul and Silas got their liberty by pleading their Privileges;
Therefore it is lawful to resist. It is against the yielding of Passive
Obedience to the Supreme Magistrate, that you urge it.

P. 9. As for the Laws of the Land, that Doctrine (you say) overthrows Magna
Charta, Chap. 29. That Chapter says thus: No Freeman shall be taken or
imprisoned, or disseized of his Freehold and Liberties, etc. but by lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. But if any or all these
should happen to some particular man, will that justify a Rebellion? When a
Roman Emperor gave a Senator a Sword, saying, If I rule well, use it for me;
if otherwise, against me; was it intended think you by him that gave, or him
that received it, that an Act of Violence, or a High Court of Justice should be
employed against that Emperor upon every Transgression? (the Apostles rule of
Submission non obstante). It is a sad return of Gratitude, when Christian
Princes have granted the greatest Privileges and Immunities to their Subjects,
that they should on all occasions be requited with Affronts and Severities.

P. 9. and 10. You propose the Case of a Pursevant slain in the execution of a
Warrant out of the High-Commission-Court; and then add, Any man may see that
my Discourse does not descend to such petty matters as false Arrests. True: it
is evident enough you fly at a more noble Game, the resisting of Princes and
their lawful Successors. I pray speak out: When King CHARLES of blessed memory
came to the House of Commons to demand Justice against the five Members,
against whom he had Articles of Treason prepared, was it lawful for the
Parliament to make resistance, and to raise that War that cost so many thousand
lives, and millions of money, on pretense of a breach of their Privileges,
rather than to deliver them up to a legal Trial? I doubt the man that killed
the Pursevant did not well know whether his Authority were lawful or not; if he
did, he might more safely have submitted, than drawn the blood of an unadvised
man. But however, Currat Lex, let the Law have its course; and if by accident
it be interrupted, or overflow its just bounds, we may not for that cause dam
up the Fountain.

P. 11. You say you have honestly pursued the end of our Saviors coming into
the world, Luke 9.56. Not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. But
doubtless, whereas the Meekness, Obedience, and Patience, which the Gospel
teaches, has destroyed one man's life, (and that our Savior assures us is not
lost, but exchanged for a better) the Doctrine of Resistance and Rebellion has
destroyed thousands. And you may see plainly by the Context, our Savior
commends Passive Obedience, and not Resistance, as the means to preserve men's
lives. You rather pursue another end, which our Savior mentions, not as a
proper effect of his Gospel, but of the malice of men against it, Matthew. 10.24.
I came not to send peace, but a sword.

You say, p. 11. That the Laws of the Land have taken particular care of those
who are put on an inevitable necessity of defending themselves, etc. How far a
man that is assaulted, and put on an inevitable necessity of defending himself
against the injuries of private men, is one thing; and what he may do against
his Prince, (of whom you seem to discourse) is another: In this case we may
apply that in Rev. 13.10. He that kills with the sword, shall be killed with
the sword. This is the patience and faith of the Saints.

P. 11. This Doctrine (of Passive Obedience) you say, quite alters the Oath of
Allegiance, which requires you to be obedient to all the Kings Majesty's Laws,
Precepts, and Process proceeding from the same. I do not find those words in
that Oath, as set forth by King James; but I find what you overlook (viz.) I
will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and him and them will defend to the utmost of my power, against all
Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever. And thus I find more particularly in a
Declaration (which I believe our Author has subscribed) thus amplified: I do
declare, that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms
against the King: And that I do abhor that traitorous Position of taking Arms
by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are commissionated
by him.

P. 11. After a large Preface little to your purpose, telling us, That the
Church of England reserves her Faith entire for the Canonical books of
Scripture (which I hope you also do,) and that she divides her Reverence
between the Fathers and the first Reformers of this Church, who partly were
Martyrs that died for the Protestant Religion, and partly Confessors that
afterward settled it. (And now to the business.) How much the Fathers would have
been for a Bill of Exclusion (you say) we have seen already. No, not one word
of it from the beginning, nor I believe any mention of it from one Argument
tending to it to the end of the Book, from any of the Fathers, as will shortly
appear. But what say our Martyrs, Confessors, and Reformers? First he tells us
what some men would have persuaded King Edward to do, if they could have had
their wills confirmed by Act of Parliament: They showed what they would have
done if they could, says our Author: They never spoke such bad English as our
Author does in his Taunton-Dean Proverb, Chud eat more Cheese an chad it; which
being interpreted, is, We would rebel if we had power. The Duke of
Northumberland indeed did cause the Lady Jane Gray's Title to be proclaimed,
but here the Bishops must be the men that were chiefly engaged in that design
of Exclusion: whereas I read not that any of them were ever consulted with, nor
ever declared any thing to that purpose; but in their joint and most solemn
Writings enjoin the clean contrary, as shall now appear.

P. 12. The Bishops in Queen Elizabeth 's time, to whom, under God and that
Queen, we owe the settlement of our Church, concurred to the making of that
Statute which makes it High Treason in her Reign, and forfeiture of Goods and
Chattels ever after, in any wise to hold or affirm, That an Act of Parliament
is not of sufficient force and validity to limit and bind the Crown of this
Realm, and the descent, limitation, inheritance, and government thereof, 13
Eliz. chap. 1. But our Author never considered the grounds and reasons of that
Act; Ex malis moribus bonae Leges; it was the iniquity of those times, and the
traitorous practices of the Queen of Scots, which gave occasion to that
Statute: for there were many Pamphlets written by Saunders and the Author of
Doleman, which denied the Title of Queen Elizabeth, and proclaimed her an
Usurper; and the Queen of Scots made actual claim to the Crown of England; she
assumed the Arms of England and other Regalia; and by her Confederates
endeavored to raise a Rebellion, and conspired against the life of the Queen;
for which causes she was condemned, as may appear by her Sentence which was
passed upon her, viz. That diverse things were compassed and imagined within
this Kingdom of England with the privity of the said Queen, who pretended a
Title to the Crown of this Kingdom, and which tended to the hurt, death, and
destruction of the Royal Person of our Sovereign Queen. Cambdens Eliz. p. 464.
( Leiden 1625.) Such practices gave occasion to that Statute, to prevent the
Mischiefs that might befall Queen Elizabeth and the Nation, And that Statute
consists of many heads: As first, Whoever should compass, imagine, devise, or
intend the death or destruction, or any bodily harm tending to death,
destruction, or wounding of the Royal person of the Queen, or deprive or depose
her of or from the Style, Honor, or Kingly name of the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, etc. or leavy War against her Majesty within this Kingdom or without, or
move any Strangers to invade this Kingdom or Ireland, etc. or shall maliciously
publish and declare, by any printing, writing, word, or sayings, that our
Sovereign Lady during her life is not, or ought not to be Queen of this Realm,
etc. or that any other person or persons ought of right to be King or Queen of
the same; or that our said Queen is a Heretic or Schismatic, Tyrant, Infidel,
or an Usurper of the said Crown, etc. these shall he guilty of High Treason.
Also if any after thirty days from the Session of this Parliament, and in the
life of our said Queen, shall claim, pretend, declare, or publish themselves or
any other besides our said Queen to have Right or Title to have and enjoy the
Crown of England, or shall usurp the same. or the Royal Style, Title, or
Dignity of the Crown, or shall affirm that our said Queen has not right to
hold and enjoy the same; such shall be utterly disabled during their natural
lives only, to have or enjoy the Crown or Realm of England in Succession,
Inheritance, or otherwise. Then follows the Case of Succession: That if any
person shall hold or affirm, that the Common Laws of this Realm, not altered by
Parliament, ought not to direct the Right of this Crown, or that our said Queen
by the Authority of Parliament is not able to make Laws and Statutes of
sufficient force, etc. as above.

Yet was not the Queen of Scots condemned upon the Statute of the 13 of Eliz.
but on that made in the 27 of her Reign; wherein it was provided, That twenty
four persons at least, part being of the Privy Council, and the rest Peers of
the Realm, should by the Queens Commission examine such as should make any open
Rebellion or Invasion of this Realm, or attempt to hurt the Queens person, by
or for any pretended Title to the Crown. In which Commission I find no Bishop
save the Archbishop, who at first refused to act: nor when the whole Parliament
petitioned for the Execution, do we find that the Bishops (who were denied to
vote in case of Blood) did join or were consulted with. And Cambden observes,
that the same day when the Sentence was pronounced against the Queen of Scots,
it was declared by the Delegates and Judges of the Kingdom, That that Sentence
should derogate nothing from the Right or Honor of James King of Scots; but
that he should be in the same Estate, Order, and Right, as if that Sentence had
never been given, p. 465. So that the whole matter being considered, here was
no Exclusion of a Popish Successor, but rather a tacit confirmation of one
that was a Protestant; and consequently, it must be a great slander on those
worthy Bishops by him named, that they were zealous for such Acts of Exclusion:
for the business of the Queen of Scots did concern matters of Treason, such as
you say might exclude her out of the world; as also the Reasons of Sir Simon
d'Ewes tended to the taking away of her life; and therefore come not home to
the Case of Succession: nor does Sir Simon tell us whose Reasons they were; and
I suspect them to be the Opinions of some private person, who having spoken
all-along in the plural number, he discovers himself at the end in these
words; God I trust in time shall open her Majesty's eyes to see their cruel
purposes, etc.

P. 18. You say (what another has said before you) That a Bill of Exclusion is
a perfect Courtship to these Reasons. True, if the Heir apparent or presumptive
were under the same circumstance with that Queen: but it is perfect Cruelty to
endeavor the like Exclusion of a Popish Successor, as such only, not only
from his Right, but out of his Life. And now no man else needs turn his fury or
reproaches upon those Bishops; you have done that sufficiently.

As for your Protestation, p. 19. that if but one Reason can be given to prove
a Bill of Exclusion to be unlawful, which will be owned to be a Reason a week
after, and the owners not be ashamed, you do solemnly promise to join in
renouncing those Old Reformers, and readily follow their New Guides and Lights.
The Apostle gives you a Reason which is of eternal verity, viz. We may not do
evil that good may come of it: And he assures you, that the condemnation of
such as affirm the contrary is just, Romans 3.8. And to any but an Ignoramus,
that of Dan. 4.25. may serve as another Reason; The most High rules in the
Kingdom of men, and gives it to whom he will. To which add, If it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it, lest ye be found to fight against God, Acts 4.39. And
for your renouncing the Old Reformers, you have done that with the utmost spite
and reproach that all the Wit of a Julian or the Malice of a College of
Jesuits could invent, as if they had been the Judges and Executioners of the
Queen of Scots under the Notion of a Popish Successor. Wherefore I would advise
our Author to consider what occasion he has given to the Enemies of that
Church (whereof I suppose him a Member, if not a Priest) to reproach her: for
from this Story of his, no doubt it was, that the scurrilous and Bedlam-Author
of the Pamphlet called Crape-Gownorum has thus commented: It is plain that the
Church of England- men did hold King-killing, or Queen-killing Doctrine, (which
is the same thing); so that if Knox, Buchanan, or Calvin first taught the
Speculative part, the other (meaning those Bishops named by our Author) first
put it in practice, and set the fatal president that others followed, (that
is), in the murder of King Charles the first; for at that he aims, when he
threatens us to let 641 sleep in Oblivion, lest we awake 587. intimating, that
what was done in the process of that War, ( viz. that barbarous Murder
perpetrated on the Royal Person of Charles the First) may be justified on the
Principles of our Reformers. Whatever may be told in Gath, and published in the
streets of Askalon, to make those Philistims rejoice; I cannot permit this
diabolical Slander to pass without a brand on the Author of it here at home;
and to vindicate those Worthies, and silence our Adversaries the Jesuits, and
to prevent the ill consequents of this Forgery, which may stir up the
Phanaticks of this Nation to act over our former Tragedies.

I shall first relate the matter of fact, and the grounds of that Severity
which was used against that Queen; and show you the most deliberate Judgment of
those Reverend Bishops in the Case of Resisting lawful Authority.

First, As to the matter of fact, it is beyond denial, that the Queen of Scots
married the Lord Darly a Subject to the Crown of England, who being slain,
(whether by her consent, or not, I will not determine, but) she was questioned
by her Subjects for incontinent living, the death of her Husband, and for
Tyranny; and was forced to resign her Crown to her Son, then about thirteen
months old; so that she was no longer a Crowned head. After which, she raises
an Army, and is defeated by Murray; and being imprisoned, makes an escape into
England, where a Council was called to consult how to dispose of her. It was
resolved, that to let her pass into France, might prove dangerous; and worse to
send her back to Scotland: And to prevent farther mischief, she should not be
dismissed from England till she had made satisfaction for the death of her
Husband a Subject and Peer of England, and for usurping the Arms of England,
and pretending a Title to the Crown. During her restraint here, she contrives
many Plots against the Peace of the Nation; both with France by the Duke of
Guise, and D'Alva Governor of the Netherlands; and at home, by the Dukes of
Northumberland (to whom she promised marriage) and Westmoreland, who raised a
Rebellion in the North for her Rescue: both which suffered, the first was
beheaded, the last died in Exile. By her instigation a Bull was sent from Rome,
discharging the Subjects of England from their Obedience to the Queen. Then
follows the Conspiracy of Tho. and Edw. Stanly, Sons to the Earl of Darby.
Several Invasions were also made in Ireland, to disturb that Kingdom, by the
joint Counsels of the King of Spain and Pope Gregory the 13th, and a swarm of
Jesuits are sent into England, and contrive with Throgmorton, Paget, and
others, for another Insurrection; which was prevented. The Nobles and Gentry
seeing no hopes of Peace through such daily practices, entered into an
Association to prosecute all those even to death that should attempt any thing
against the Queen; and prevailed for a closer restraint of her: which
notwithstanding, one Babington conveyed Letters between Her and France, and
engaged diverse to murder the Queen; which was discovered to Secretary
Walsingham, as also the manner how the Queen of Scots conveyed Letters to the
Spanish Ambassador, and other Confederates: whereupon fourteen of them were
executed; and in the Parliament convened about that time, Throgmorton, the two
Pagets, Englefield, Babington, Salisbury, etc. were proscribed. So that the
Nation being continually alarmed with the news of Invasions, Insurrections, and
Conspiracies, during the life of that unfortunate Queen, who can blame the
Parliament for soliciting the execution of a Just Sentence?

Of all men living, our Author ought not to object it, much less to charge the
Bishops with that (if they had been guilty) for which they are ready now to
pronounce them Papists, as not consenting to the Exclusion of a Popish
Successor.

But secondly, what the Judgment of those Reformers was concerning the Doctrine
of Resisting lawful Princes on any pretense, I shall now demonstrate.

P. 103, 104. of his Book, our Author is pleased to recommend the Homilies of
our Church to every bodies reading, as one of the best Books that he knows in
the world, next to the Bible, (as Mr. Hunt had done before him). I shall
therefore entreat him to judge of the Opinion of our Reformers and Confessors
in point of Obedience, out of the public Doctrines set forth by them in that
excellent Book. In the first Homily against Disobedience and wilful Rebellion,
they say, p 277. If Servants ought to obey their Masters not only being
gentle, but such as be froward, much more ought Subjects to be obedient not
only to their good and courteous, but also to their sharp and rigorous
Princes, 1 Pet. 2.18. And p. 278. It comes not of Chance or Fortune, nor of
the Ambition of Mortal men climbing up of their own accord to Dominion, that
there be Kings, Queens, Princes, and other Governors over men being their
Subjects; but all Kings, Queens, and other Governors, are specially appointed
by the Ordinance of God. P. 279. A Rebel is worse than the worst Prince, and
Rebellion worse than the worst Government of the worst Prince that hitherto
has been. -- Whatsoever the Prince be, or his Government, it is evident that
for the most part those Princes whom some Subjects do think to be very godly,
and under whose Government they rejoice to live, some other Subjects do take
the same to be evil and ungodly, and do wish for a Change. If therefore all
Subjects that mislike of their Prince should revel, no Realm should ever be
without Rebellion. P. 280. But what if a Prince be evil indeed, and undiscreet,
and it is evident to all men's eyes that he is so? I ask again, What if it be
long of the wickedness of his Subjects that he is so, shall the Subjects by
their wickedness both provoke God for their deserved punishment to give them an
evil and indiscreet Prince, and also rebel against him, and withal against God,
who for the punishment of their sins did give them such a Prince? Will you hear
the Scripture in this point? God makes a wicked man to reign, for the sins of
the people. Again, God gives a Prince in his anger, meaning an evil one, and
takes away a Prince in his displeasure, meaning when he takes away a good
Prince for the sins of the people: as in our memory he took away our good
Josias King Edward, for our wickedness. Again, God makes a wise and good King
to reign over that people whom he loves, and who love him. And again, If the
people obey God, both they and their King shall prosper. -- And for Subjects to
deserve through their sins to have an evil Prince, and then to rebel against
him, were double and treble evil, by provoking God more to plague them, let us
either deserve to have a good Prince, or let us patiently suffer and obey such
as we deserve: and whether the Prince be good or evil, let us according to the
Scriptures pray for him for his continuance and increase in goodness if he be
good, and for his amendment if he be evil.

The Bishops that were their Predecessors, and our first Reformers in the days
of King Henry the Eighth and King Edward the Sixth, were of the same judgment,
as appears in a Book called The Institution of a Christian man, whereof
Cranmer, Ridly, and other Martyrs were the Compilers. On the Fifth Commandment
they say, Subjects be bound not to withdraw their Fealty, Truth, Love, and
Obedience toward their Prince, FOR ANY CAUSE WHATSOEVER; ne for any Cause may
they conspire against his Person, ne do any thing toward the hindrance or hurt
thereof, nor of his Estate. And by this Commandment they be bound to obey all
the Laws, Proclamations, Precepts, and Commandments made by their Princes,
except they be contrary to the Commandments of God: With much more to that
purpose. And on the Sixth Commandment, No Subjects may draw their Swords
against their Princes, FOR ANY CAUSE WHATSOEVER IT BE. -- And though Princes,
which be the Supreme Heads of their Realms, do otherwise than they ought; yet
God has assigned no Judges over them in this world. The contrary to this is a
Popish Doctrine, who think it cause enough to depose a King, because he is a
Protestant: and it is a Lesson which some sorts of Protestants have learnt from
them, to depose any that is a Papist. A Doctrine which all the Reformed
Churches have hitherto condemned: and yet this is the Sophistry which our
Author has detected, to his own shame, and the honor of those Worthies whom
he has reproached: and if our Author's Politics should be embraced Kings
would be of all men most miserable: for if they be Protestants, the Papists may
depose them; and if they be Papists, Protestants may resist them; which is
tantamount.

P. 19. Is a discourse against the Oath of Allegiance, which he forms in an
Objection and Answer. The Objection is this: You are preengaged, and cannot
consent to a Bill of Exclusion; if you do, you are forsworn, having long since
sworn Allegiance to the King, his lawful Heirs and Successors. His Answer: Now
though the Lawyers tell us an hundred times, no man can have an Heir as long as
he lives, yet this will not overcome that deceitful prejudice which is
occasioned by our common speech. Reply. Yet our Author presently adds, That a
man and his Heirs may live at once in the some house, and eat and drink
together every day. I pretend not to the knowledge of Lawterms; yet I am
confident those Lawyers which penned that Oath did not put it in in vain; nor
would they make it Treason to conspire the death of the Heir of the Crown of
England, if there could be no such person in being. One clause of that Oath is
this: I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them will defend to the utmost of my power, against all
Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his or their
persons, their Crown or Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise: and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and treacherous
Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of to be against him or any of them.
And I do farther swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as
impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, that Princes which
be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects or any other whatsoever. -- And all these things I plainly and
sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these express words by me spoken,
and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same
words, without any Equivocation, or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation
whatsoever, etc. Now let any man judge whether you have not taught the Jesuits
themselves how to equivocate, and to make void that solemn Oath, by affirming
that there can be no such person as an Heir to the Crown while the King is
living.

Your own distinction of an Heir Apparent and Presumptive, seems a sufficient
Confutation of your senseless Assertion. Besides, though it may be true of a
Testamentary Heir, that he is not actually so till the death of the Testator;
yet a Legal Heir, upon whom an Estate is intailed, as the Royal Crown of
England is upon the next in Blood, is truly an Heir, and ought to inherit. And
in this Opinion I am confirmed by the Apostle, Gal. 4.1. who says, That though
the Heir as long as he is a child, ( i.e. as long as his Father lives)
differs nothing from a servant, yet he is Lord of all: and if he be a Son, or
next in Blood to a Prince whose Kingdom is hereditary, then is he his Heir, v.
7. as St. Paul argues.

You seem to grant, that this is the Law-sence of the words Heirs and
Successors in an Act of Parliament, as in the Duty of Excise granted to the
King, his Heirs, and Successors; But an Oath of Allegiance (you say) ought to
be conceived in plain words, and in the common sense of those words. Which I
should think to be that which the Lawyers that penned that Oath, and the
Lawgivers that enjoined it, did intend; and unless you will justify Papists in
their Equivocations, and absolve them from the obligation of that Oath, it
cannot be taken in any other but the Law-sence. Well, (say you) if it be so,
(and so it must be) let them be sure to keep it in that sense in which they
have or should take it at sixteen years of age in the Court Leet; viz. I will
be true Liegeman, and true faith and troth bear to our Sovereign Lord the King
that now is, and to his Highness Heirs and lawful Successors. Kings and Queens
of this Realm of England. To which you add this pitiful and worse than
Jesuitical Evasion: It is plain to every body, that no one certain or known
person in the world has any interest at present in the Oath of Allegiance
besides his Majesty that now is. For which you give this as a Reason, which is
none at all: For who shall be King or Queen of England hereafter, none but God
himself knows. And if God, by whom Kings reign, had not wonderfully restored
his Majesty, we should have had none at this time. But God by a Miracle has
restored the right Heir against all oppesition.

Page 21. He brings in another Objection against the Bill of Exclusion, fetched
from the Common Prayer (to which I perceive he is no great Friend): viz. No
Church of-England-man can be for it with a good Conscience, being to the
prejudice of his R. H. because we there pray that God would prosper him with
all happiness here and hereafter. Now by the way, no such words (as here and
hereafter) are expressed, though we grant they are implied under the word All.
But we especially (though not only) intend it to that happiness which flows
from the Spirit and grace of God, and may bring him and all the Royal Family to
Gods everlasting Kingdom; and as a means thereunto, that he would endue them
with his holy Spirit, and enrich them with his heavenly Grace. You say, No man
in the Communion of the Church of England prays that Prayer more heartily than
you do. But if you do indeed think him to be a Julian, and your self such as
those Christians that said their Prayers backward, that prayed him to death,
and would not so much as desire his conversion, this would certainly be a Curse
in the mouth or heart of any Protestant. And I hope there are no such in the
Communion of our Church, though you intimate that they were all such in the
Primitive Church, and that we should be such also: for p. 96. you say, You find
not one single wish among the Ancients for Julian's conversion, but all for his
downright destruction. It is a good Rule that, Pro quibus orandum, pro iis
laborandum. We should by a meek and Christian behavior, enforce our Devotions:
for it is the Prayer of the Righteous man that avails much. If we could
thoroughly inspect the Arguments that prevailed for the reputed defection of that
Prince, I believe the unchristian behavior of those who oppose his Succession,
was most cogent. And who knows but our amendment, moderation, and meekness,
might yet reclaim him? But to pray coldly without faith, for what you say ( p.
22.) there is no hope, and to act contrary to your Prayers, is to beg a denial.
And I hope many others pray more heartily than you do: For when we pray God to
indue him with his Holy Spirit, etc. we pray that he may return to the
Protestant Religion, and not that he may be exposed to an invincible
Temptation, and a kind of necessity to extirpate it, as you maliciously accuse
us. Nor are we to distrust the power of divine Grace either to restrain or
sanctify those whom we pray for; and so to limit the Holy One of Israel, as if
he had not the hearts of Kings in his hand, or had no rule over the Governors
of the world. Cambden, p. 5. of his Remains, reports, that when Brithwald the
Monk was troubled about the Succession, the Blood Royal being almost
extinguished, he heard a voice saying, The Kingdom of England is Gods Kingdom,
and God will provide for it. And why should not we acquiesce in the same Divine
Providence?

P. 79. You argue against a Popish Successor a possibili, because he may be a
Persecutor. Some have accounted both our present Sovereign and his Father of
blessed memory such: they sent the One out of the world with an Exit Tyrannus,
though the meekest and most gracious Prince in the world; and what the effects
of a Bill of Exclusion, as some men would manage it, may be, is dreadful to
consider. But as you suppose the Popish Successessour may be; so I suppose he
may not be a Persecutor. And for the proof of this, I appeal to your Friend
Plato Redivivus, who in p. 207. gives an instance in the Prince of Hanover, who
was perverted to the Roman Church, went to Rome to abjure Heresy; and
returning home, lived and governed as he did before, without the least
animosity of his Subjects for his change, or any endeavor to introduce any to
his Government or People; and dying the last Spring, left the peaceable and
undisturbed Rule of his Subjects to the next Successor his Brother the Bishop
of Osnaburg, who is a Protestant. Now (as Solomon says) there is no new thing
under the Sun, but what has been may be; and if we do our duties, we may be
the more confident of the success of our Prayers, That God will endue the Royal
Family with his Holy Spirit, etc.. You do very naughtily therefore to represent
the case as impossible and desperate, as if God himself could not or would not
order this great affair for the good of his People. I am almost persuaded, that
the sins of the Nation to which this clamor against Succession has given
occasion, by planting in the hearts of too many, malice, bitter enmity,
revilings, and even abhorrence of one another, is a greater evil than we are
yet like to suffer from a Popish Successor. And did we think he might prove to
be such a one as he is (too boldly) represented, we do very ill to exasperate
and imbitter his Spirit, by such Libels, Slanders, and such unlawful
Contrivances as in all probability made Julian worse than he would have been. I
therefore heartily wish that you had spared that Grinning Complement (to use
your term, which you borrowed from Dr. Howel in his life of Julian) That if it
stand with his H.'s good liking, he would enjoy that Religion to the greatest
advantage, and take his fill of it at the Fountainhead. I shall rather pray he
may never go thither: There are too many Crowned heads at the devotion of his
Holiness already. Such Complementers I am sure do not pray heartily that God
would prosper him with all happiness here and hereafter. What? to persuade him
to cast himself down over some precipice, as Curtis did, p. 19. of the
Character of a Popish Successor? or like that mentioned by our Author to be
presented to Cromwell, p. 87. that to kill himself is no Murder? If it be out
of the abundance of the heart that the mouth speaks, none but men of
murtherous intentions will so speak.

P. 23. You are thoroughly satisfied (you say) that the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy are Protestant Oaths ( as a great Assertor* of our Religion and Laws
(now with God) thought fit to term them). Sir W.J. I confess, was a good
Lawyer, but how he could call them Protestant Oaths I know not. See L. Cooks
Reports N. 7. fol. 6. and fol. 7. in Calvin's Case. And his Institutes Sect. 94.
and 259.
The Oath of Allegiance was long before the name of Protestants came up; King
James only enlarged it, and appointed it to be taken of all in Court-Leets at
Sixteen Years of age, as you have observed. Nor is there any new thing at all
in that Oath, more than what all Protestant Princes do generally require of
their Subjects. And as for that of Supremacy, it is one of the ancient Regalia
of the Kings of England, which our Parliaments still defended against the
encroachments of the Pope; so that the thing was in being long before King
Henry the Eighth brought it into a form: and he was yet a Popish Prince when he
did it. And I have read, that Queen Mary her self would hardly part with the
acknowledgement of her Supremacy. It is not peculiar then to Protestants; or
if it were, I am afraid that some who term themselves the true Protestants
would be found no great Friends to it: For there are many other Sects, as well
as the Anabaptists, who are now called sound Protestants, refuse it: And the
late Sanctions were intended equally against them all. I agree with you, that
we are all bound by them to endeavor in our place to keep out Popery; but not
by Rebellion, and the bringing in of Confusion.

As to what you say of twisting a Popish Interest with these Oaths, as Julian
endeavored to entangle the Christians. There are matters more pertinent, and
more fully related by St. Gregory Nazianzene than by you -- There was (says
he) an Anniversarie-day wherein the Emperor bestowed Donatives of Gold on his
Soldiers, when at the same time he had provided Fire, Frankincense, and
several persons to persuade the Soldiers to kindle the Incense, as an ancient
Rite, and more becoming the Imperial Dignity. By such arts and persuasions,
many of the inconsiderate Soldiers were circumvented, and kindled the
Frankincense: but, at their return and feasting together, they drank to each
other, and with Eyes lifted up, and using the Sign of the Cross, they made
mention of Christ. Whereupon one of their Company said, What strange thing is
this! Do ye call on Christ after you have denied him? At which they being
astonished, said, How have we denied him? what is your meaning? He answered, By
throwing Frankincense into the Fire, which is a denial of Christ. Whereat
leaping up speedily from their Feast, they ran forth as so many distracted men
into the Marketplace, proclaiming, We are Christians, we are Christians in our
hearts. Let all men hear us, and God above all, to whom we live, and to whom we
will die. We have not broken our Covenant with thee, O Christ our Savior, nor
abjured our blessed Profession. If our Hands have offended, our Minds are not
guilty, It was not the Gold, but the Emperor's fraud that circumvented us: We
have put off impiety, having been purged in blood. Then hasting to the
Emperor, and with great resolution casting their Gold at his Feet, said, We
have not received a Donary, O Emperor, but a Condemnation: You called us not
to receive marks of Honor, but a brand of Ignominy: Let your Soldiers receive
such Largesses; slay and sacrifice us to Christ, to whose Empire only we
submit our selves. Revenge one fire with another, and reduce us to dust for the
dust that we have cast into the fire: Cut off those hands which we have
unhappily stretched out, and those Feet that carried us to it. Give your Gold
to such as may not repent the receiving it: Christ alone suffices us, whom we
value above all things. Having said thus, and informing others of the fraud,
and exhorted them to recover themselves out of this snare, and satisfy Christ
even with their Blood: The Emperor, though highly provoked, would not make a
public slaughter of them, who as much as in them lay were desirous of it; he
commanded them to be banished. Methinks here is much of the resolution of the
Thebaean Legion, who voluntarily offered themselves to death, rather than have
the guilt of kindling Incense, though without any evil intention, at the
command of the Emperor. From whence I gather, that these Heroic Christians
thought themselves under the same obligation in Julian's time, as the Thebaeans
did in that of Maximian. Which is your (...), such an error in your
foundation, as we shall see to enfeeble the whole Fabric. And here you may be
instructed what you ought to say and do, when a Prince (as you phrase it) shall
put a border of Popery about his Picture, which you would fain honor; namely,
as these noble Confessors did; We reverence your Person and Authority; we will
fight your Battles, and follow your Commands; but if you will draw us to
Idolatry, (though by the Laws we might resist) we will rather die at your Feet
than do either. This is the Faith and Patience of those exemplarie Soldiers:
and this may serve also to free you from those afflicting thoughts which had
almost made you to forget a passage of great consequence which rises up
against all that you have said, delivered by St. Augustine on Psalm. 124. to
this effect: That the Christian Soldiers served under this Heathen Emperor;
and where their Religion was not concerned, made conscience of obeying him; but
where it came to the Cause of Christ, there they made as much conscience of
disobeying him. True, they would not obey him, but neither would they rise up
against him, though (as you take for granted) they had the Law on their side.
They would lose their Lives rather than offend God, or rebel against their
Emperor: which is the very thing that St. Augustine persuades, having shown
that Servants must obey their froward Masters: Quod de domino ac servo dixi,
hoc de Regibus intelligite; commending Julians Soldiers, who for the sake of
their Master in Heaven, did serve their Earthly master.

P. 26. You would have the Reader take notice, that the whole Contest between
Julian and those Christians was purely on the score of Religion, and not from
any lawless and ungovernable humor. And certainly such lawless and
ungovernable humors as you mention, did no way become the Christian Religion:
for that instructs us to practice meekness and forbearance; not to avenge our
selves, but to give place to wrath; not to speak evil of Dignities, or curse
the Rulers of the people. Whereas you present them under such a black
Character, as would make some believe that they were the Apostates and
Persecutors, and not Julian. They are almost your own words, p. 66. For how do
they treat the Emperor, reproaching him, ruffling him, vexing every Vein in
his Royal Heart, saying all their Prayers backward, and calling down vengeance
upon his head -- dancing and leaping for joy at his death, and insulting over
his Memory; and but for the name of Christians, he had better fallen among
Barbarians: and when he often put them in mind of their Christianity -- they
call him by the bloudiest names of the Devil, for telling them they must not
avenge themselves, nor render evil for evil, but pray for and wish well to
those that injure and persecute them: and tell him he must not think to drive
all men up to the top and Pinnacle of Virtue; for there are several Commands in
the Gospel which are no more than Counsels of perfection, which bring Honor
and Reward to them that keep them; but to those that do not keep them, no
manner of danger at all. Pudet haec Opprobria, etc. I am sorry to hear that
distinction applied to the practice of those Virtues which do more especially
discriminate Christians, and show them to be of a more excellent spirit than
other men: For we need such graces as these in our daily conversation; and what
do we more than others, if we only be kind and loving to them that are so to
us? Yet this distinction of Counsels and Precepts will be but a sorry excuse
for such as neglect those Duties enjoined Matthew. 5.44. etc. If these and
suchlike are Counsels, and we may do as the Julian Christians are said to do,
the design of the Gospel is quite another thing than what all the learned and
serious professors of it in all Ages have believed and practiced: Non tali
auxilio aut defensoribus istis Christus egit. I have heard of some that have
turned the Gospel into Burlesque; but it is more strange, that one whom I
suppose a Minister of the Gospel should make the grand design of it Ridicule.

P. 26. As for the Soldiers fighting under Julian against the Persians or any
common enemy, and obeying the word of Command, when they received his Pay; it
is such a low part of Honesty, that our Author would have done it himself, for
his Pay. But he that would have fought for Julian, will scarce sit down quiet
under a Popish Prince, which he thinks to be ten times worse than a Julian; and
probably would rejoice as much at such a slippery trick as was showed to Julian
in Persia, as (he says) those Christians did that lived under him. For why are
these things propounded and applauded, but to commend them as examples to the
present Generation? But I hope we shall not have many such Reformado's.

You say, p. 26. Every body knows how the Church was rent in sunder by
Arianism; And there might be too much stiffness and rigidness on the other hand
about words, for ought I know: but miserably rent it was; which gave great
advantage to Julian against the Christian Religion. I know not what our Author
means in excusing the Arians, and charging the Orthodox with too much
stiffness. What more dangerous Error could there be, than to oppose the Deity
of Christ, and deny the Lord that bought them? In such a Case, and when almost
the whole world was turned Arian, the Orthodox could not be too stout and
resolute: and if there were so good an Effect of a bad Cause, as the Union of
Christians, under Julian; I wish our fears of what you call a greater evil
might have the like effect on us, whose Divisions have not so great a cause as
abjuring the Deity of our Savior was. And he that shall extenuate that cause
of dissension, as if inconsiderable, and but a mistake about words, as our
Author (after Mr. Baxter) has done, and yet aggravate the grounds of Division
among our selves, as if the Scrupulosity which the Dissenters so pertinaciously
defend, were (as Mr. Hunt says) from God, has quite outrun the Men of Rippon
for Contradictions Zeal like another Satyr, he can blow hot and cold; he is
extremely hot in Punctilio's, and as cold in Fundamentals; he serves some other
Interest than that of Peace, Truth, or Piety.

P. 27. Now what did the Christians do? Did the Orthodox go and side with
Julian, to revenge the injuries which they received from the Arians in
Constantius 's time? or make use of Julians favor which he showed in restoring
them, to crush their brethren which dissented from them? No, there was no
seeking to him by either side: Only the Donastists of Africa complemented him,
and received some small favor from him. The design of Julian's recalling the
Orthodox Bishops was, as Ecclesiastical Historians affirm, either to cast an
Odium on Constantius, who had banished them; or to dash them and the Arians and
Donatists against each other, thereby to Eo modo nomen Christi de terris perire
putavit, si Sacrilegas dissentiones liberas esse permisit. St. Aug. Epist. 166.
ruin both; or at least that they might not find any opportunity of disturbing
him, being wholly employed in the destruction of one another. 'Two or three
things I shall briefly demonstrate, on occasion of this Paragraph.

1. That the Donatists and Arians were united among themselves against the
Orthodox. 2. That they courted Julian's favor to strengthen their Faction
against the Orthodox. And 3. They did commit greater outrages where they had
power, than Julian himself.
As to the first, Donatus himself wrote a book de Spiritu Sancto, agreeable to
the Doctrine of Arius, as St. Hierome has observed: the Macedonians also, who,
as St. Ambrose observes, blotted out of their books that of St. John, God is a
Spirit, joined with them. See St. Ambrose de Spiritu Sancto, lib. 3. cap. 11.

Secondly, They courted Julian's favor, and got a Toleration, by their
flattering Petitions, applauding him as a man with whom alone Justice did
reside. And in truth, all that has been said in favor of a Popish Successor,
comes short of what they said in favor of Julian. And whereas the Orthodox
looked on this Indulgence of the Emperor as a design that would prove fatal to
Christianity; for as St. Augustine says, Quae pejor mors animae, quam libertas
erroris? There is no death so evil as the licensing of error, which is the
destruction of the Soul: Yet the Donatists on the contrary are loud in their
Acclamations to Julian as a most gracious Prince; and when he was dead, would,
if it had been possible, have prayed him alive again. And to ingratiate
themselves yet more, they pull down the Cross which Constantius had set up in
public places to the honor of Christ, and set up Julians Image in its place.
And by how much he was more severe against the Catholics, so much the more
they applauded him: nor would he have done so much Mischief as he did, had not
they solicited him by their frequent and fawning Petitions. Such Orthodox
Bishops as were famous for Learning, were all silenced: Athanasius indeed
returned to Alexandria, but was presently banished again by their means, who
informed the Emperor that Athanasius had baptized many Noble Persons, to the
great disgrace of Julian's Empire and Religion. See Baronius's Annals, Anno
Christi 362. p. 115. Tom. 4. Mogunt. So that Athanasius, St. Basil, and St.
Gregory, Fugerius Antiochenus, and both the Apollinares, were banished and
persecuted by means of the Arians. St. Augustine calls Julian, Desertor Christi
and inimicus, an Apostate from Christ, and enemy to his Church: but vester
Julianus, so great a friend to the Donatists, that he was wholly theirs.

Julian's affection to George an Arian Bishop, whose Writings he earnestly
desired, intending probably to make use of them against the Orthodox, is
recorded by himself in his Epistles, and was made known by setting up him in
the place of Athanasius, as he generally did Arians in the room of the
Orthodox. And Baronius, p. 117. speaking of the Catholics, says, In quos
conversus est furor Gentilium, Arianorum, pariter and Judaeorum: they agreed
with the most opposite parties against the Catholics; Jews, Gentiles, and
Arians. Perhaps you may give some credit to what is said by Mr. Baxter's
History of Councils enlarged. The Arians possessed Constantine with hard thoughts
of Athanasius: And it could not be expected that Julian should countenance the
best, when Constantius had done so much against them, and got most of the
Churches headed with Arian Bishops. So that Julian maintained diverse of the
Leaders of the Factions as his Favorites and Pensioners, to balance the
Orthodox, that they might be in a continual hurry, and find no establishment,
but suffer as evil doers, and the causers of Division, when they only asserted
the Evangelical Doctrine, as well against the Arians as Pagans.

Rogatianus and Pontius, two Donatists, in a Petition of theirs to Julian,
style him the only Assertor of public liberty, from whom alone Justice and
Clemency could be hoped for. Than which flatteries. St. Augustine says, Nil
injustius, nil pernitiosius? Their words were, Quod apud eum sola justitiam
haberet locum, Epist. 166. that he would do nothing but what was just. The
Catholics wondered (as well they might) that the Donatists should be so
short-sighted, as not to perceive that Julian was striking at the very root of
Christianity; of which they often minded them, and gave them this plain
Demonstration: That by the same Edict by which they were indulged, the Worship
of Idols was enjoined; and the Devil and they were let loose together, to
compass the Earth, and make Proselytes to their Party. Tunc reddidit (Julianus)
Basilicas Donatistis, quando Templae Daemoniis, Aug. Epist. 166. Optatus, l. 2.
p. 54. Eo modo putans Christianum nomen de terris posse perire, si unitati
Ecclesiae de qua lapsus fuerat, invideret, etc. haec erat ejus praedicanda
justitia. Yet when Julian was dead, and Jovian a Catholic Emperor succeeded,
the Donatists bewailed his death, and often wished that their good Protector
were alive again: Julianum ab inferis excitaretis. St. Aug. ubi supra.

As to the third particular, it would fill a Volume to acquaint you that
Outrages were committed by the Donatists upon the Orthodox during Julian's
Reign: I shall only name one or two, that may parallel those which were
committed by the Pagans. The first shall be from Optatus, p. 55. Felix and
Januarius, two Donatist Bishops came to the Castle of Lemelle, where the
Catholics had a Church; which being shut against them, they commanded the
Rabble that followed them to pull it down: who presently got upon the roof and
uncovered it; and perceiving the Deacons defending the Altar, they threw down
the Tile-stones, and slew two of the Deacons in the place. In Thypasia a City
of Mauritania, Albanius Formensis and Felix Idicrensis, with their bloody
Companions, assaulted an Assembly of the Catholics while they were at their
Devotions; and driving them out of the Church, slew and wounded a great part of
them, without respect of Sex or Age: The Bread of the Consecrated Eucharist
they threw to their Dogs; which having eaten it, by the Judgment of God grew
mad, and fell on their Masters, renting some of them in pieces: They sold the
Consecrated Chalices to Women for vile uses, or to the Heathen for the service
of their Gods; pulling down the Altars; and burnt the books of the Holy
Scriptures. Felix one of their Leaders deflowered a Virgin that had a little
before owned him for her Spiritual Father. None of the Heathen committed
greater Outrages than some of their Bishops. And by their instigation, Julian
shut up their Church-doors. Honorius the Emperor posted them for it, and
caused an Edict to be set up in public places as a Memorial, Quo omnibus
innotescat, and Catholicae confidentiae constantia, and Donatistarum desperatio
and fucata perfidia; of the constancy of the Catholics, and the baseness of
the Donatists in making use of Julian's power to oppress them. These practices
gave occasion to Ammianus Marcellinus to say, No Beasts were more cruel to
Christians, than they were to one another. And they who shall close with
Usurpers and Persecutors to favor and support their Faction against a true
Church, deserve to be stigmatized as those Donatists were, In perpetuam rei
memoriam.

P. 27. of the Alexandrian Synod, Zozomen (lib. 5. cap. 11.) gives us a better
account. You are ready to catch at every thing that may make for a Toleration
of Schism and Heresy, and therefore mention their Agreement not to use those
terms which might puzzle ordinary understandings, and not on every occasion in
Popular Orations, but in disputes against the Heretics that denied the
Consubstantiality of the Son and Holy Ghost. But you omit their confirmation of
the Nicene Council, which Zozomen there names, (viz.) That Athanasius and
Eusebius having assembled the Bishops of diverse Cities, did confirm the Decrees
of that Council, and confessed that the Son and the Holy Ghost were
consubstantial with the Father; and these they named the Trinity; and that they
desired only that the words(...) and(...) might not be used at that time,
(...), unseasonably to disturb the Church, and continue strife and disputes:
but when the errors of Sabellius came in their way, they ought to refute them.
However, it were well if the Dissenters would make the same use which you say
the Christians did, (especially having once been inslaved by one as bad as
Julian already) i.e. to be united with the Orthodox: this might be a means not
only to secure us from our fears of a Popish Successor, but also what may
prove as destructive, those dangerous Heresies which when our Succession was
interrupted did overrun the Land, and brought all things Sacred and Civil into
Confusion.

You conclude your Preface thus: I have been as careful in the Citations as
ever I was in telling Money; and can only say as they usually do in that case,
I hope it is all right: and if it should chance in any one particular to prove
otherwise, am ready to make it good. I have not yet time to account over your
Money; I fear it will fall short of the value you pretend it to be* for at
first view, I perceive the metal is base and counterfeit, and intended to put a
Cheat on the common sort of Christistians, who are not well acquainted with
such Brimigems. Besides, a great part of it is unreasonably clipped; and though
you profess your self ready (as to particular Quotations) I fear you will never
be able to make just satisfaction as to the Summa Totalis, i. e. you can never
make good your design, That it is lawful for Christians to resist their
Princes on pretense of Religion. But to ease you of your afflicting thoughts,
at present I shall take my leave of you, desiring you well to meditate on the
following story. -- Rodolphus Duke of Suevia swore Allegiance to Henry the
Fourth: Pope Hildebrand absolves him of his Oath, being persuaded by some of
the Popes Clergy to a Revolt. After which, he never prospered; and by Gods
just judgment, his right hand, with which he swore, gangrened, and was cut off.
Whereupon, he told some of those Bishops that had dissuaded him from his
Allegiance, This is the hand that was lifted up when I swore Fidelity to my
Emperor, which is now justly cut off for my Perjury and Rebellion; for which
you are to answer who persuaded me to those perfidious practices. Should I that
have taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and made such a Declaration
as is abovementioned, by any Writing renounce the same, and teach others so to
do; I should think the loss of that hand which was instrumental in it, a very
gentle and easy punishment.

THE CHAPTERS ANSWERED.
An Answer to our Author's CHAP. I. A short Account of Julian 's Life.
I Shall not interrupt my Discourse, which is designed as a Vindication of the
Loyalty of the Primitive Christians, against the false, impudent, and impious
Calumnies of this Author, with a History of Julian 's Life, which I intend in a
more full and impartial Relation by it self. It shall therefore suffice to
observe here with our Author, p. 9. That Julian charged the people that they
should injure none of the Christians, nor reproach them, nor draw them to
sacrifice against their wills. So that the violencies offered to the
Christians, were more from the insolency of the Heathen, than any Law made by
Julian, as our Author observes. And indeed the Heathen, even in Julian's time,
never acted such Cruelties upon the Christians, as the Arians and Donatists
did; which made Ammianus Marcellinus a Heathen, to say, that no Beasts were so
cruel to one another as the Christians were. And, in a word, if we should (...)
all that our Author says of Julian's per^^^^ting the Christians in this
Chapter, and all that he says of the Christians persecuting Julian in all the
rest, to be true, we might be tempted to think that the Christians were the
greatest Persecutors.

An Answer to our Author's CHAP. II.
THis Chapter you say contains the sense of the Primitive Christians about his
Succession; of which you speak, p. 19. under these two heads: 1. how the
Succession stood, and 2. what Right and Title Julian had to succeed to the
Empire.
This first, I confess, you have (but against your will) clearly stated; and it
will be enough to discredit all that you suggest concerning the second; which
is, That the Christians would have been willing to set aside his Title, and to
have excluded him purely for his Religion; which upon your Reasons I suppose
the generality of Christians would never have attempted, though some few might
have been willing enough.

As to the first, the reason you mention from Eusebius is, That the Throne of
the Empire descended to Constantine from his Father, and by the Law of Nature
(which is a divine Law) was reserved for his Sons and their Posterity, and was
to descend for ever, as another Paternal Inheritance does. And that this is the
Law of Nature, you confirm from Eumenius a Heathen then, (and others) who says,
It was not the casual consent of men, or any sudden effect of their favor,
which made (Julian) a Prince; he gained it by being born into the world: which
seems to me the first and greatest Gift of the Gods. Now if by the Law of
Nature, as well as of the Empire, Julian was to succeed; I cannot see how the
Christians could by their Principles resist him in the administration of it,
without resisting the Ordinance of God. For this, I have quoted Dr. Hammond's
Paraphrase on Romans 13.1, 2. etc. and that Saying of Tacitus, That we ought to
endure wicked Princes as we do Inundations or Scarcity, which are of Gods
sending.

These, you say, p. 20. are full and pregnant proofs; and I think, ad hominem
cogent: for if, as you observe from Eusebius, the Empire was to descend as
other Paternal Inheritances, then it must be more unlawful to resist or exclude
a Prince from enjoying his Inheritance, than any private person. And then
surely no sound Christian could have joined in an Address to Constantius to
exclude a person appointed as it were by the Voice of God, as you say of
Constantine that he was declared absolute Emperor by the (...) and long before
that, by God himself the great King of all, p. 21. And St. Augustine says the
same, viz. God that gave the Empire to Constantine, gave it to Julian. Only by
the way, I do not think that your (...), nor (...) neither, will, in the sense
of the Greek Fathers, bear your interpretation of the Law of Nature: for (...)
is often used by Greek Authors for Custom. And I believe that Father whom you
mention, intended no more than a Right of Succession for two or three
Generations; which carried the name of a Law, as it does also in our Common
Law, where Consuetudo Lex est. And it is well known, that when the Heirs of the
Emperors have been living, the Roman Soldiers have created their Emperors out
of Obscure Families: but these are no Patterns for us Christians to follow, nor
for us in this Nation above others. For William the Conqueror claimed the Crown
not so much by his Sword, as by Right of Succession, (if you will believe the
Author of that Fanatical book called The Rights of the Kingdom) to King Edward,
whose Kinsman he was, and his Heir by Will, as appears by the Laws of St.
Edward and William, p. 197. So that in this respect the Descent of the Crown of
England is much more firm and established than that of the Empire, having been
continued through more Generations, and confirmed by many Laws, which whoever
shall infringe, takes off the Government from its Hinges, and leaves all to
Confusion. For when a private Estate is intailed on a man and his Heirs, it is
necessary that to bar the Heir, and alienate the Estate, the original Intail
must be cut off, and then he that is in possession may dispose of the
Inheritance to one or more. And perhaps this was the intent of the Bill for
Exclusion, to make it an Act for the Dissolution of Monarchy, and reduce us to
a Commonwealth again. And it were better we should suffer some Inconveniences
(if the Will of God be so) which yet are uncertain, than against the Will of
God to do things unjust, and draw more certain troubles on our own heads. For
in the Contest between the Houses of York and Lancaster, when the first always
pleaded the Right of Descent, the other alleged the Acts of Parliaments;
there were infinite troubles, which cost the lives of above 200000 men, whereof
eight were Kings and Princes, forty Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, besides Barons
and Gentlemen; and after all, the Kingdom fixed on this Maxim, Jus Sanguinis
nullo Jure dirimi possit, i. e. The Right of Blood cannot be abrogated by any
Law. And the Author of the Rights of the Kingdom says, that in the days of
Henry the Third and Richard the First, when was a motion of some great men that
a Bastard might inherit, the Parliament at Merton cried out, Nolumus leges
Angliae mutare, p. 264. Therefore I wonder that the same Author, p. 98. making
a Supposition. That if any one man of all the Commons in Parliament should
usurp the Crown with all its dues: (He mentions not the whole House, for that
has been done already) What should I? what may I do? (says he) and answers,
Nothing, but mind my Calling, and attend the Judgment of the highest Court that
I know, that may command my Body and Judgment much. It is a Maxim in our Law,
That the King never dies: The King and his Heirs are looked on in the eye of
the Law as an Individual; and to prevent Tumults and Disputes, they are joined
in most of those Acts that concern the Dignity of the Crown and public Peace;
and the Son has sometime been Crowned in his Fathers lifetime. Yet we plead
not Providence in the long continuance of the Succession, nor the Law of the
Land, upon which for other matters you lay the stress of your whole Discourse;
but upon the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 17.8. where it was ordained as a Statute of
Judgment, ( i. e. say Fagius and Munster, a firm and immutable Law, and as the
Vulgar, Sanctum Lege perpetua) That IF A MAN DYE WITHOUT CHILDREN, THE
INHERITANCE MVST BE GIVEN TO HIS BRETHREN. And Ainsworth from Solomon Jarchi,
says, The Brother of him that was dead, or his Brothers seed, shall inherit.
All this has been observed by the Law of Nations where Kingdoms are
hereditary, That as it is unjust, so it has been always unhappie to alter the
Succession; and even in private estates, the disinheriting the right Heir has
been very much condemned and unfortunate.

And yet, (p. 22. you say) the Fathers had the Conscience to set aside such a
Title. They could not do it with a good Conscience, the thing being in it self
evil: for as the Law of God forbids to countenance a poor man in his Cause, so
does it also to defraud the rich, or follow a multitude to do evil, neither to
speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment. None of us would
judge it reasonable to be deprived of his right contrary to Law; and why then
should we think it lawful to deprive another of that right to which we owe the
preservation of our own? Athenagoras more clearly shows what was the consent of
the Fathers in this case: We pray for your Empire, and that the Son, as it is
just, may succeed in his Fathers Throne. And yet they both were Pagans. But
what would the Consent of Fathers, and the sense of the primitive Christians
signify against the Decree and Laws of Heaven? who cannot more plainly declare
his will to us, than by the voice of Nature, by his written Word, by pointing
out, as by his finger, in his Providence, in making Heirs to Kingdoms as well
as other Estates by a long and legal descent: and, as St. Augustine said, God
that gave the Empire to good Constantine, gave it also to Julian. So
Tertullian: Inde est Imperator, unde and Homo antequam Imperator. -- And
Irenoeus: By whose command they were born Men, by his they are ordained Kings.

And yet all this Crack of the Fathers and Primitive Christians, and (p. 31.)
the whole Christian world, produces nothing but a flash of Rhetoric from an
Invective in Gregory Nazianzen against Julian; from which if we appeal to the
same Author in a more temperate and Christian Zeal, when he delivered himself
dogmatically to the people committed to his charge, we shall find him teaching
and exhorting a different Doctrine and Practice from what is here delivered by
him: of which I shall speak at large hereafter; and only note by the way, That
the Oration was made long after Julian's death: which savoured not very much of
humanity; and if it were upon occasion of some disappointment, as is reported,
it had as little of Christianity. And this will appear a truth, that he did
exceed as well in the praise of Constantius the first Arian Emperiour, as in
the dispraise of Julian, and the misrepresentation of the Christians in his
time. All which circumstances considered, and no other proof produced, our
Author deserves to do public Penance for abusing the Fathers and Primitive
Christians, and, as he says, the whole Christian world. And yet what can
Gregory blame in Constantius, but that which he calls his Ignorance or Mistake?
not being aware of his Apostacy. And it was too unchristian to blame the
Emperor not only for making him a King, but keeping him alive. This (you say,
p. 24.) is enough to show that Constantius would never have made Julian Caesar
if he had known him to have been such. And, in my judgment, here is as much
said to prove that Constantius ought to have slain him when his Brother Gallus
was slain; Although this was a thing which he repented of in his Deathbed, and
would undoubtedly be more unworthy of a Christian Emperor to exclude him out
of the life, than to leave him to a Succession that descended by inheritance to
him. And if it be such a Bill of Exclusion that you contend for, I am sure none
of the Fathers nor any good Christian would ever consent to it.

P. 24. Is an Exclamation against the Emperor, having first said that
Constantius did far excel all other Kings in Wisdom and Understanding, p. 25.
and that he was led by the Hand of God into every Counsel and Enterprise (what,
in turning Arian, and persecuting Athanasius and other Orthodox Bishops, and
putting Arians in their seats?) your wisdom was admired above your power, and
again your power more than your wisdom: but your Piety was valued above them
both. Then he comes to blame the Emperor as the only ignorant and
inconsiderate person -- and which of the Devils stole in along with you at that
Consult? And yet again, p. 26. he says of this first Arian Emperor, That he
would have parted not only with his Empire, and all that he had in this world,
even his Life it self, for the security and safety of the Christian Religion,
etc. And our Author says, that at his death he showed with much earnestness
the concernment he had for the true Religion, p. 28, 29.

But for ought I yet see, Julian's Apostacy was not yet known, but he was
generally accounted both a pious and a stout man; and therefore his repenting
of making Julian Caesar was not on the account of Religion, but for some other
respect, Julian having been declared Augustus by his Soldiers, who often
disposed of the Empire, and being then on his march to dispute the Title with
Constantius; (for hitherto Julian kept to the Christian Assemblies, and was not
known to be a Pagan, as you show from Ammianus Marcellinus, p. 28.) After that
Julian was declared Emperor, he still feigned himself a Christian; and though
in private he performed his Heathenish Rites, trusting some few with the
secret, yet he publicly went to Church on Twelfth-day; and after he had been
devout at the Service, he came away again. This was done at Vienna, not quite
Ten Months before the Emperor's death.

This is all that our Author produces for the sense of the Fathers and
primitive Christians for the Exclusion of Julian; his Title was divine, his
Religion at most only suspected, not know. Yet says our Author, p. 30. If
this Doctrine (concerning the alteration of Succession) shall displease any,
which is contrary to what these Fathers (which will not amount to one single
person) assert with so much vehemency: He thinks it reasonable that first they
confute this Doctrine (of Exclusion) which they dislike. And secondly, That
they would never fetch their Mountebank-Receipts of Prayers and Tears* and
suchlike encouragements to Arbitrarie Government, out of the Writings of these
very Fathers. This our Author knew could easily be done, and therefore he
thought to prejudice his Readers against it, by calling them
Mountebank-Receipts, and Antimonarchical Authors, and encouragements to
Arbitrarie Government. Than which I scarce know any thing more profane, but the
downright Blasphemy of the Doctrine of Christ, and the practice of the best
Christians, who counted not their lives dear unto them, that the Doctrine of
the Gospel might not be evil spoken of, as if Christianity were an utter Enemy
to Caesar, or as another Mahomet to establish his Kingdom by the Sword. What an
easy matter does our Author think it, to impose any falsehood on the Vulgar,
when he tells them of Fathers and primitive Christians with so much vehemency
asserting the lawfulness of excluding Julian; and instead of all other proofs,
produces only a Rhetorical Expression of a person in some passion; from which
it might be proved as lawful to Murder Julian, as to Exclude him from the
Succession? Hercules tuam fidem! But to answer our Author's demand.

I shall endeavor to confute his Doctrine, (viz.) That the Fathers and
Primitive Christians of the whole World were for the Exclusion of Julian from
the Empire. Iraeneus, Tertullian, and St. Augustine, you have seen to be of a
contrary Judgment.

1. The true Christians could not be for it, upon your Position, That he had a
right to it by the Law of Nature, and the Hand of God gave it him: which you
seem to assert. 2. It is certain the Arian Fathers were not, as has been
already shown; they congratulated Julian's advent to the Kingdom: Much less
could the Orthodox be for it upon Gregory's surmise that Constantius would have
excluded him out of the Life as well as the Empire. 3. From their behavior
toward Constantius a vehement Arian, the Orthodox Fathers show they were not
for Exclusion. Constans his Brother was joined with him in the Empire, and he
defended Athanasius and the Orthodox Bishops against Constantius; yet these
Christians never sided with Constans against Constantius: they never resisted
or sought to depose or exclude him, although his Heresy was extremely
dangerous, and propagated by Force and Persecution of more eminent Divines than
any that suffered under Julian. And as our Author says that Popery is ten
times worse than Paganism; so I have heard as wise and good men as himself say,
that Socinianism is as bad as Popery; and the Arians, who denied the Deity of
the Son and the Holy Ghost, were much like our Socinians. Mr. Baxter has so
much Charity as to think that some that died in the Communion of the Church of
Rome are Saints in Heaven; though he will scarce grant it to such as die in the
Communion of the Church of England, and therefore much less to those that die
in the belief of the Socinians, who renounce the Doctrine of the Blessed
Trinity, and the use and efficacy of the Holy Sacraments. 4. Constantius
himself would never have consented to the Murder of Julian, upon due
consideration; the Murder of others being repented of upon his Deathbed: and
here is but one Argument for both his Exclusion and his Murder.
Now although our Author has sufficiently refuted himself in what has been
said, yet because the Calumny against the Christians of that Age, though
asserted only with noise and confidence, (and, as the saying is, Fortiter
Calumniare aliquid adhaerebit) may beget a false opinion both of those
Primitive Christians, and the Doctrine of Christianity it self, and also
infect the present Generation, in which too many are glad to hear what power
they may exercise on such Governors as are not of their own Judgment; I shall
in due time enquire strictly into this Authors Opinion concerning Resistance,
and show, that his whole Fabric will be crushed by the authority and reason
of those very Authors upon whose bare names he seeks to raise it. But for this
I must desire the Readers patience.

An Answer to our Author's CHAP. III. Their Behavior toward him in Words.
THe Reader may understand that our Author has done with Julian as a
Successor, and now shows how the Christians treated him when he was in full
possession of the Empire, and that by Divine Appointment (as he grants). And
therefore I hope it will be considered, that the following Reflections do show,
from the practice of the Christians of that Age, how the Christians of this may
behave themselves toward their lawful Governors. And he begins, p. 32. with a
great variety of Instances, as he calls them, of the hatred and contempt of
those Christians toward Julian. And I shall also desire that the Reader will
consider not only the matters of fact, but the lawfulness of such Words and
Actions as were spoken and done against Julian. A facto ad jus non valet
argumentum. And then by what number of Christians, and of what condition they
were that spoke and acted such things as were spoken and acted: For we have
known in our Age such things spoken and done, by no small company of men,
against a Prince of known Integrity, as will make all sober Christians to be
ashamed and confounded at the report of them. And if such behavior of our
present Christians shall be a hundred years hence read in our Annals, it will
be a grand Calumny against such as were more Loyal and Pious, for any Reader
to conclude that such was the general practice of the Christians in that Age;
or that because one discontented Bishop turned Apostate, and fought against his
Prince, that all the Bishops and Christians then alive were Rebels.

P. 33. Of their behavior you inform us under these three Heads. 1. Of their
Words. 2. Their Actions. 3. Their Devotions.


Of their Words. You say they were quit with him for calling them Galilaeans,
in calling him Idolianus. This, I confess, savours of the Wit of that Age: So
the Arians called Athanasius Sathanasius; so the Pharisees called our Savior
Beelzebub. But did they return railing for railing? I am sure they taught us to
return Blessing and Prayers even to our Persecutors. What if the Antiochians
libelled him, and played with his Beard, and twitted him with some natural
Blemishes and Imperfections, whereof he himself gives the world an account in
his Misopogon? Is that sufficient authority for us to libel our Governors? Is
it becoming a Christian to deride the bodily Infirmities, as the Shape of the
Body, the Gate, the Beard, and, as you say, p. 33. every thing that belonged to
him? Julian himself showed more wisdom and humanity in scorning these impotent
Reproaches, than they did Christianity in seeking by such boyish language to
vex every Vein in his Royal Heart, p. 66. It is a sign that he had more of
moderation than they; for had they had his Power, (by your description of them)
they wanted no Will utterly to ruin him. But I think it more agreeable to
Truth, though some few over-zealous persons might Lampoon his sorry Beard as
fit to make Ropes of, etc. that yet the generality were better principled, and
neither used their Tongues nor their Swords against that Heathen Emperor. As
for those that did so reproach him, Julian tells them truly they had renounced
the Laws, and him that had the keeping of them, (i. e. They dealt with him, as
you say, like Barbarians). And if the Christians were first in the
Transgression, it was not like Julian would be long behind them, or be less
barbarous than they. And yet though he could have revenged himself with the
Sword, he did it only with the Pen: And when he was put into a fit of anger,
he only told them as a punishment that he would see them no more. Nondum ira
quam ex compellationibus and probris conceperat emolita loquebatur, asperius se
eos asserens postea non visurum, Am. Marcell. l. 23. I think in this particular
one would take them to be the Apostates, and not Julian (as you say, p. 66.)

P. 36. You give a particular instance of a single man in Berea, whose Son
warping to the false Religion, his Father turned him out of doors and
disinherited him; who related this whole matter to the Emperor, then coming to
Berea. The Emperor being arrived, invited among other Magistrates and Chief
men, this young man and his Father, and set these two next himself; and tells
the Father, that in his mind it was not just to force a man's Judgment otherwise
inclined, to reduce it to the other side: Therefore don't you (says Julian)
force your Son against his mind to follow your Opinion; for neither do I force
you to follow mine, though I could easily compel you. The Father sharpning his
Discourse, with a Divine Faith, answered, O King, do you speak of this Villain,
who is hated by God, and has preferred a Lie, before the true Religion? But
says Julian, putting on a vizard of Meekness again, Friend, leave railing; and
turning to the young man, said, I will take care of you my self, since I have
not prevailed with your Father to do it. This Berean deserves the Title of
Noble for his Zeal; but it reaches not to a demonstration of what you produce
it for, p. 35. that the Christians took the freedom to reproach him and his
Religion to his face: for though he despised his Religion, yet for ought that
appears, he owned his Authority, and reverenced his Person, bespeaking him by
the Title of O King. And here is no example for railing words, neither from
that Noble Berean against Julian, nor from Julian against him.

P. 38. you give another instance of Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, who being
blind, was led to the Emperor as he was Sacrificing to Fortune, for which he
called him Impious Apostate, and Atheist; and Julian reproached him again with
his blindness, saying, his Galilaean God would not cure him. Maris replied, I
thank God for striking me with blindness, that I may not see thy face. This was
bold and well; for he reflected not on his Person, but his Paganism. The
sayings of Juventinus and Maximus you think fit to omit; but I shall shortly
mind you of them. It is strange that our Author could find no instances more
pertinent to his purpose than these two, wherein (as he says, p. 45.) they
showed themselves to be men of like passions with other men: though neither of
them showed themselves to be men of a capricious humor, but declaring their
just indignation against his Apostacy, yet spared his Person and his Office;
as knowing that they ought not to speak evil of the Ruler of the People, though
they were such as had been Usurpers, and caused them to be smitten contrary to
the Law, as St. Paul informs us; much less when they only smite us with their
tongues, as Julian did in the case alleged. And if it were done in passion, as
you intimate, you know how our Savior condemned that in his own Disciples that
would call for fire from Heaven on the Samaritans.

Now against the speaking evil of Dignities, which Jude, verse. 8. sharply
reproves in the Gnostics of his time, I shall produce the practices of other
eminent Christians, even in Julians Reign. Athanasius was a great Pillar of the
Church at that time, and a great example of passive Obedience under the severe
Persecutions both of Constantius and Julian; yet he gave his Oath that he never
spoke evil of him, as you shall hear anon. St. Ambrose spoke of the same times,
The Christian Ledentibus non irascitur, Spoliantibus non resistit, caedentibus
non repugnat, etc. Lactantins lived somewhat sooner, but shows the practice of
Christians in his time, which was under Dioclesian and Maximian, the two
greatest Tyrants: Cum tam nefanda perpetimur, NE VERBO quidem reluctamur, sed
Deo remittimus ultionem, Instit. l. 5. c. 21. and the same patience he says was
practiced every where; That though they endured unspeakable miseries, yet none
of the Christians did resist, so much as in a word.

P. 38. It would be endless (you say; that is, it would not be to your end and
intent) to reckon up the Sayings of Juventinus and Maximus; which you name
again, p. 39. but wisely pass by. For they being accused for speaking against
Julian, by some such Witnesses as your self, do without any maledictions thus
plead for themselves: We, O Emperor, who were brought up in the true Religion,
and have lived in obedience to those excellent Laws made by Constantine and his
Sons, cannot but greatly lament to see all things defiled with impiety -- our
Meats and Drink are polluted. (The Emperor had caused some of the Water, or
the Sacrifices offered to his Gods, to be mixed or sprinkled with their Meat;
which did not hinder the most Christians from using them, according to what the
Apostle allowed, 1 Cor. 10.): But do they rail or rebel? No: they are
Lachrymists; Those things (say they) cause us to shed many tears at home, and
they constrain us to make our sorrowful complaint before thee. We are offended
at nothing else in your Government. This you wisely omitted; using only their
names, to make up a number. Ad populum has Phaleras.

An Answer to our Author's CHAP. IV. Of their Actions.
FRom their Words you come to speak of Blows; yet none that I perceive fell
upon Julian's person: for you give us but two Instances of this; and neither of
them reached his person, and but one an Officer that was inferior to him that
struck him: and that was Valentinian, a Colonel of the Houshold-guards, who as
he was going before the Emperor to the Temple of Fortune, was sprinkled with
Holy Water by one of the Chaplains (as our Author calls him): which coming nigh
to Valentinian's Clothes, he struck the Sacrist, saying, It would rather defile
than cleanse him. I am at a loss how to reconcile this History with another
more generally reported by Gregory Nazianzen, as well as others, That
Valentinian voluntarily stripped himself of his Military Girdle (that is, laid
down his Commission) upon an Edict of Julian's, That no Christian should bear
Office in his Army; for which noble act St. Augustine (De civit. Dei, lib. 18.
cap. 52.) calls him a Confessor. But if it be true that he was Colonel of the
Guards when he made this Assault, and that Julian ipso facto sent him away to a
Garrison lying by a Desert to spend his days there, then the other History must
be false; and I think it more safe to believe that History which Gregory
Nazianzen delivers, attested by many others, than that which comes on the
single report of Theodoret. But if the Colonel of the Guards had struck a
Sprinkler of Holy Water, what was this to the striking of Julian?

The next Instance is from a passage of Gregory Nazianzen, of which this is a
brief account. Who is there to be found that more despised the Emperor, or had
a greater hand in destroying him, than my Father? Of his contempt, amongst many
others, both those Archers and THEIR COMMANDER are a proof, whom HE BROVGHT
against our Church, as either to take possession of it, or to destroy it: for
having assaulted many others; he came hither likewise with the same intent, and
imperiously demanded the Temple. He so far failed of accomplishing any thing of
what he desired, that if he had not presently got out of my Fathers way (being
aware of it, either of himself, or by some bodies advice) he might have gone
away kicked; the Bishop boiling with Anger against him, and with Zeal for the
Temple. A very hot fit of Anger and Zeal together, it must needs be, that did
animate so ancient a Bishop (being ninety years old) to lift up his heel
against a young Emperor of thirty two, in the head of an Army, who having
assaulted many other Churches, came resolved to seize this also. Who can think
Julian would be diverted with the notice of the old Bishops lying in wait for
him; or that he who had read what David said concerning Saul, (after that he
also had apostatized from God, as I suppose that old Bishop had done) viz. Who
can lift up his hand against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless, 1 Samuel 26.9.
should think of lifting up his heels against Julian in the head of his Army?
Either therefore this must be such an (...) as is not to be paralleled in all
Longinus, or such an heroic intention as never entered into the heart of any
Zealot among the Jews. But to come more close to the matter; you say, p. 43.
You have often tried to make this beating intended for the Captain of the
Archers, and have been ready to make Solaecisms in the Greek, to avoid the
greater Soloecism of an Emperor of the world awed and terrified with the fear
of a kicking. But it will not do. No; the Proverb hinders it, None so blind as
he that will not see. It might have been done easily enough, if you had not
committed a Soloecism your self, in translating the word (...), he Brought, but
had kept the righter sense of that word, which Billius, the learned Interpreter
of Gregory Nazianzen translates immiserat, he sent; or, which your Elias
Cretensis uses, concitabat, he stirred up, or compelled to go against that
Church; which if the Emperor had been in person, he need not to have done. And
therefore I suppose Gregory Nazianzen meant it of the Captain of the Archers,
that demanded the Church (...), not pro imperio, by virtue of a Mandamus or
Commission from the Emperor: for sure the Emperor himself needed no such
Commission. Nor is it probable that the Emperor himself would in his March
against Persia trot up and down from one Church to another: for you say, he had
assaulted many others to make a seizure of them. Nor is it a Soloecism to say
the Emperor seized those Churches which another did seize by his command. Our
Author I suppose was led into this error by taking the word (...) from (...),
which signifies induco, to lead or introduce: whereas the Interpreters that
render it immitto, or concito, being better Grecians than himself, understand
it to be from the Verb (...), of which every Lexicon will give him such a
sense, as that, without a wresting of it, it must refer to the Captain of the
Archers. But we are come to the end of this Tragi-comedy: The Emperor kept
himself in a whole skin; the Bishops Anger vented it self some other way, and
all was hushed and calmed. But certainly our Author, who has first begun this
Quarrel between the Emperor and the Bishop, is much to be blamed, whether he
did it ignorantly (which is the best construction that his Friends can make) or
else maliciously, which appears by forsaking the Translations of Billius and
Cretensis, and preferring another that might favor his design. And I
challenge him to be as big as his word, and make satisfaction for this base
Coinage. And that you may not be guilty of such a wilful mistake for the
future, I shall give you this Token to be worn as a Frontlet on your brow, That
from (...) is derived (...), an Instigator.

P. 44. Here you have a description of one of the Lachrymists of old, etc. How
far this Bishop was a Lachrymist, we shall see hereafter. It were fitter for
the Wit of a Julian, than the Piety of a Christian, to deride the Prayers and
Tears of those ancient Christians. Whatever Garlands and Trophies Nazianzen or
Basil erected for that old Bishop, are now pulled down by the hands of a young
P -- who represents him as a Hector, and a Striker, expressly contrary to our
Savior's Example, and St. Paul's Injunction.

You add, p. 44. And now I know no more than the Pope of Rome, what to make of
all this; what they meant by it, or on what Principles they proceeded. I
question not the Principles of those in whom you have instanced; it suffices
me that you say it was done in a fit of boiling anger. But when, speaking of
the Principles of such as offer violence to their lawful Emperors, you say you
know no more than the Pope of Rome: I say, it is pity that you should know or
divulge half so much: For what you have suggested concerning these pretended
Violences offered by Primitive Christians to their lawful Emperors, has a
very malign influence on the present Age; and for this and other such Reasons,
(as I said) I would rather lose my right hand than be the Author of them. But
if you know their Principles as well as the Pope of Rome, you know he holds it
lawful to depose or kill any Prince whom he shall judge and Excommunicate as a
Heretic or Tyrant; and he can teach you to distinguish between resisting
Julian, and resisting the Devil that was in him: That the King is Vniversis
minor, and that the people who gave him his power may resume it, etc.

You say, p. 45. none of those Bishops had ever been in Scotland, nor had
learnt to fawn upon an Apostate, and a mortal Enemy to Religion. Parcius ista:
For though some may think you are reflecting only on a Popish Successor; yet
others, considering you speak of Julian, who was now a lawful Emperor, may
stretch this line too far. Scotland indeed has been glutted with the blood of
their Kings; whereof about Thirty have sussered violent Deaths. I acquit those
Bishops from confederacy with Scotland; they never contributed to the
destruction of any: I wish I could do so by the Presbyterians. Yet I perceive
you know how to yoke the Popes Bull and the Scottish Heifer together, and with
them to make large Furrows on the backs of Kings. There was, I remember, for
above Forty years since, a great Correspondence between Rome and Scotland, who
then communicated their Principles to each other; and though none of the old
Bishops were acquainted with them, yet some late Presbyters have espoused them,
and can on all occasions (for the disturbance of our English Nation) talk as
Whiggishly as ever Knox or Buchanan did. But they are so disingenuous as to
conceal the names of their good Teachers, from whom they learned to distinguish
not only between Julian and the Devil in him, but between Charles Stuart and
the King, that they might destroy him in a double capacity; first, as a King,
and then as a Man. And if, as you say, the Laws of our Land do not allow any
one to imagine violence to their lawful Emperor: And if, as Bracton says, fama
apud graves and bonos viros, is a proof of Treason, I fear an Indictment may
lie against the Author of Julian's Life; for that -- Not having the fear of God
before his Eyes, but being moved, etc. It is therefore a most profane and
Reproachful inference, with which you conclude Chap. 6. That in that Age the
best Prayers and Tears were those that contributed most to Julian 's
destruction.

An Answer to our Author's CHAP. V. Of their Devotions: And first of their
Psalms.
THis was indeed the Devotion of our late Times, to begin with a Psalm, not
regarding the Scriptures, or as much as the Commandments, Creed, or Lords
Prayer; and then to preach in their Prayers, and pray in their Preaching; or,
if you will, in our Authors Language, to say their Prayers backward. In their
Devotions, you say, p. 45. It might be expected we should see the flights of
their self-denying and suffering Religion; and one may expect they should lay
aside their annimositie against Julian, though he were their Ememie, and for
that reason pray the harder for him. -- This certainly was their duty, wherein
they might have shown themselves Christians indeed: But this, our Author
thinks, was fit only for the Christians in Dioclesians time, and those that
lived in the most Primitive times. I am as sure that they used the right method
of Devotion in praying for their Heathen Persecutors, as our Author can be of
what he seems to glory in, that these in Julian's time prayed the wrong way,
p. 46. They cannot sing a Psalm (says he) but they make his Confusion the
burden of it. Such Psalms as these, are none of the Songs of Sion, which should
make for Peace; nor had he the Wisdom of Solomon that composed them, or they
the Spirit of Christ that sung them. Our Savior (as we read) sung a Hymn a
little before his Passion; but it was not for confusion of those that came to
apprehend and crucified him; he prayed for them: Father, forgive them, etc. Now
though the Brethren of Scotland bave been silent of late, yet among the Sisters
there are many such sweet Singers still, who in their Rhapsodies dart up
Arrows, Firebrands, and Death against Heaven it self; which have deservedly
recoiled on their own heads, and spoiled their singing. And if such be their
running Verses, and the Burden of their Songs, sing Quicunque vult for me; I
will be none of that black Quire: St. Stephens example is fitter for a
Christian, who prayed for his Persecutors while they were stoning of him, Lord,
lay not this sin to their charge, Acts 7. v. 60. And all sober Christians will
rather take St. James his advice than the Author of Julian, who tells us, if we
use our Tongues to bless God even the Father, and to curse men which are made
after the similitude of God, (and Princes have a double Image of God; as they
are Men, and as they are Princes) if we are double-tongued, and out of the same
mouth proceeds blessing and cursing: my brethren (says he) these things ought
not so to be, James 3.9, 10. And now let us consider his Proofs. And first, as
to the instance of those who removed the Bones of Babilas; it was ill done to
set David's Psalms to the tune of Sheba's Trumpet, We have no portion in David,
neither have we any inheritance in the Son of Jesse: Every man to his Tents, O
Israel. Doubtless, they should rather have prayed for his Conversion than his
Confusion. How unsuitable was this to the Funeral-Solemnitie of a Martyr, when
they should have rather blessed God for the example of the Faith and Patience
of Babilas, than have provoked the Emperor to have made it their own
Funeral-dirge! Our Savior advised his Disciples to flee from persecution, not
to draw it on their own heads.

The second instance, is of Publia and her Maidens, who sung to the same tune,
and contrary to what St. James prescribes; having praised God her Creator, by
and by, in a fit of Rage, whereof (you say, p. 50.) there seemed to be some
quantity, she turned her Devotion into Curses plainly levelled at the head of
Julian: And it is a wonder, that having to do with such an Emperor, that they
had not like Swans ended their Lives with their Songs. But did any company of
Christians at that time meet solemnly together, and make use of such a
Directorie for their public Devotions? No; they were but the passionate acts
of a few private persons, contrary to the general practice of the Fathers and
serious Christians, as shall most undeniably appear anon. But this calls to my
mind a more rude and barbarous behavior of some (who accounted themselves the
best Christians) toward the Royal Martyr, who honoring one of their
Congregations with his presence, when they came to sing a Psalm, by whose
instigation it was I know not, the 52 Psalm was named, and begun to be read:
Why do thou Tyrant boast abroad
Thy wicked works to praise?
Whereat the good King lifting up himself, says, I pray you to sing the 56
Psalm, Have mercy, Lord, on me, I pray,
For man would me devour.
And the Congregation cheerfully sung with his Majesty. This was one great
fault (says he) of the Common Prayer, that it taught them to pray so often for
me; to which prayers they had not loyalty enough to say Amen. It is a most
profane Custom, though it has of late years been too much in use, to turn our
Prayers into Satyrs, and our Psalms into Pasquils and Libels; and to vomit
forth our Spleen, when we should pour out our Hearts before God.

I shall conclude this Chapter with Athanasius his answer to Constantius, when
he had been accused for stirring up Constans against his Brother Constantius to
restore him by Arms. I am not so mad, O Emperor, that you should suspect me to
have had any such thought. I call God to witness against my Soul, and I swear,
the Lord can bear me witness, and his Anointed your Brother, I never mentioned
you for any evil before your Brother; neither ever stirred him up against you,
as these (Arians) slander me: but whenever I had access to him, he himself
mentioned your gracious inclination; And God knows what mention I made of your
godly disposition. -- I am not so mad, neither have I forgotten the voice of
God, which says, Curse not the King in thine heart, nor the mighty in the
secret of thy chamber; for the birds of the air shall reveal it, etc. If the
things spoken in secret touching you Princes cannot be hid, is it likely that I
in the presence of a Prince, and many standing by, would say any thing of you
otherwise than what was good? -- I beseech your Highness call to mind my
behavior when you admitted me to your presence at Vimimachum, at Caesaria, and
Antioch; whether I did so much as offer an evil word of Eusebius my bitter
Enemy, or of any my persecutors: And if I refrained my tongue when I was to
plead against them in my own defense, what madness had it been to traduce an
Emperor before an Emperor, and to stir up one Brother against another?
Athanasii Apol. ad Imperatorem Constantius. Yet was this Bishop turned out of
his Church without kicking the Emperor, or any Officer of his, as may be there
read: he departed peaceably; and though the Citizens were ready to take Arms on
Ambrose his behalf, he pacified them and departed.

An Answer to our Author's CHAP. VI. Their Prayers and Tears.
WHereof, he says, Gregory gives a large account. So large indeed, that our
Author only picked and chose what might make most for his purpose, omitting
what was most material: for in that second Oration against Julian, p. 127. he
says, (...) How great provision of Armor and inventions of Engines; how many
myriads of men and armed Soldiers could effect those things which we by our
Prayers only, and God by his Will has done? Nor is it probable that the
Christians at that time did want force to restrain the violence of the
Emperor, seeing our Author confesses, that he who though it a small business
to conquer the Persians, thought it a great work to reduce the Christians. And
doubtless that Pagan wanted not malice to root them out, but he distrusted his
Power: for even of that Army which he led into Persia, the far greatest part,
if not all, were Christians; which appears not only by their choosing Jovian to
be their Emperor Greg. p. 117.
immediately after his death) who had renounced all his Honor, and suffered
exile for Christianity; but by their unanimous See Russ. l. 2. c. 1. Socr. l.
3. c. 22. Theod. l. 4. c. 1.
Acclamation, when Jovian told them he was unwilling to undertake the
Government of a Pagan Army, We are all Christians! we are all Christians!

This consideration, drew from the Learned Mountague upon the relation of St.
Gregory ((...)) this Note; It was not because they could not, but because they
would not resist: for they had strength sufficient to have suppressed the
Tyrant, as St. Augustine and Gregory declare: The Christian interest was so
largely propagated, and had taken such deep roots, that it could not be
destroyed, unless the Empire had perished with it. Tertullian says, the
Christians were pars pene major cujusque Civitatis, and vestra Omnia
implevimus; And if they had but deserted the Empire, it would have been as a
Wilderness: Yet it appeared to be true, That Christianus nullius est hostis
nedum Imperatoris. And St. Cyprian ad Demetr. Nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur
reluctatur, nee se adversus injustam violentiam vestram, (quamvis nimius and
copiosus sit populus noster) ulciscitur.) But those Christians had learned
patience in the School of Christ, as well by example as precept; and not to
overturn and bring all to confusion, with a Flectere si nequeo superos,
Acheronta movebo. So the Learned Mountague. So that when Gregory says, they had
no other defense, but all was cut off from them, he may be well understood,
concerning the use of any other means, all violence and resistance being
forbidden them; for, id possumus quod Jure possumus: they were forbid to use
the Sword for revenging themselves upon the Emperor. And St Gregory in his 1.
Orat. says, that the enemy of Christianity was defeated by Gods mercy, and the
Christians tears, which were many, and shed by many,(...), having no other
remedy against that Persecutor.

Besides, as they wanted not Soldiers, so neither valiant and experienced
Captains that had the entire affections of the Soldiers, and which were
approved Christians. Jovianus, Valentinian, and Valens (which three after the
death of Julian were successively chosen Emperors) could each of them have
engaged Legions to follow them: and how well the Soldiers were affected to
them, you have seen already by their choice of Jovian presently on the death of
Julian. So that it might be as truly objected that they wanted Soldiers and
Commanders, as that they wanted Arms, Castles and Fortresses. They had not
indeed suprized any of the Imperial Forts, or held them out in actual Rebellion
against Julian, (as you know who did in the last Age:) but many of them were
Garisoned with Christian Soldiers, who doubtless would have declared for the
Christian Religion, against the Atheism and Persecution of Julian, had not
these renowned Confessors been restrained by the Command of Christ to fear God
and honor the King,

Besides, I have two other Considerations of great weight with me, that it was
not for want of Strength, or doubt of Success, that the Christians did not
oppose Julian.

As first, it was usual with the Roman Soldiers upon any disgust with their
Emperors, to kill their Emperors, and set others in their Thrones. Six of the
twelve Caesar's were slain, pas some Historians account; but never was there
such a thing done by the Christian Soldiers: For after such time as the Roman
Strength was put into the hands of Christians, they never deposed any one of
their Emperors, though there wanted no Strength on their parts, nor
Provocations on their enemies part, many of them being Persecuting Arians. And
though Julian by his rashness, against the advice of Sallustius, a man of great
experience, and generally beloved of his whole Army, was resolved on the
Persian War, and had foolishly exposed them to great hazards and danger, by his
following the directions of a Renegado Persian, who led them into a barren, and
almost inaccessible Country, and burning his Ships that might have served for a
retreat; yet was there no Associating or banding against him in his lifetime;
but as soon as he was dead, they all professed themselves Christians, and chose
a Christian Emperor.

Secondly, The power which the Clergy had with the People, who could hardly
restrain then from tumults and fighting in their desence, is another Argument
with me: for even at that time Athanasius convened in the great City of
Alexandria, a great number, not only of the Bishops of the Greek Church, which
were near at hand, but from Italy, Egypt, Arabia, and Libya; which argues that
the affairs of Christianity were in no low or despisable condition. And if it
be true that Gregory's Father alone thought of braving the Emperor, what might
the united Interest of these Bishops and the Soldiery in their Sees have done?
But they thought it better to flee as Athanasius did, or betake themselves to
their Spiritual Armory of prayers and tears, than to lift up a hand against
Julian. And I cannot but think that St. Gregory was of the same Judgment, when
he wrote without any passion to the Citizens of Alexandria, being affrighted
with the noise of Persecution, in his 17th Oration, to this effect: (N. B.)
this is one of our Laws, and of those laudable ones most excellently ordained
by the Spirit of God, who knew best how to temper his Law with a mixture of
what was possible to us, and honest in it self, That as Servants should be
obedient to their Masters, and Wives to their Husbands, and the Church to our
Lord, and Disciples to their Pastors and Teachers: So should we also be subject
to all higher powers, not only for fear of punishment, but also for.
Conscience sake. St. Gregory also in a Funeral-Oration, n. 20. for St. Basil,
records an Answer of his to Modestus Governor of his Country under Valens an
Arian Emperor -- Where the Cause of God is in danger, we neglect other things,
and look only to him: Fire, Sword, and Beasts, are matters of rejoicing to us,
rather than terror: Reproach, threaten, and do to us what thou please,
employ thy Authority, let the Emperor also hear of this; Thou shall not
overcome nor persuade us to consent to Impiety. So that both Gregory and Basil
the Divine, and Basil the Great, which were no Mountebanks, but Great Doctors
of the Church, were for the prescription of prayers and tears, although you
would force them to the contrary.

I have reserved another Testimony of Athanasius for this place, being an
account of the Public Prayers made by himself for Constantius the Emperor,
though he had remeved him from his Pastoral charge. In his Apology to
Constantius. Witness hereof (says he) is first the Lord, who heard us, and
granted unto you the entire Empire, which was left unto you by your Ancestors;
then those who at that time were present: for the words I used were these
only; Let us pray for the welfare of the most religious Emperor Constantius;
and the whole People with one voice cried presently, O Christ, be favorable to
Constantius; and so continued praying a long time. And then he concludes, Let
truth take place with you, and leave not the whole Church under a suspicion, as
though such things (as tended to the death of Constans) should be thought on or
written by Christians, and especially by Bishops. Athanasius was also accused
for celebrating Public Prayers in the Church of Alexandria; which he
confesses he did, being urged thereto by the importunity of the People; that
they might pray for the welfare of the Emperor in that Church which he himself
had builded, being ready otherwise to go out of the City, and to assemble
themselves in the Deserts. But thus he expostulates with the Emperor: And you,
O King, most beloved of God, where would you have had the People stretch out
their hands and pray for you? there where the Pagans did pass by, or in the
place which bore your name, and which from the first foundation thereof all men
did call a Church? And then he prays thus for the Emperor -- O Lord Christ,
who art indeed King of kings, the only begotten Son of God, the Word and
Wisdom of the Father; because the People have implored thy goodness, and by
thee called upon thy Father, who is God over all, for the welfare of thy most
religious servant Constantius, I am now accused. And then speaking to the
Emperor, You do not forbid, but are willing that all men should pray, knowing
that this is the Prayer of all, that you may live in safety, and continually
reign in peace. -- And as for you, O Emperor, beloved of God, many years I
pray you may live, and accomplish the Dedication of this Church: for those
Prayers that are made therein for your welfare, do no way hinder the solemnity
of the Dedication. And whereas Athanasius was accused also for not obeying the
Emperors Command to depart from Alexandria, he says, I do not oppose the
Command of your Majesty; God forbid; I am not such a man as would oppose the
very Treasurer of the City, much less so great an Emperor. -- I was not so
mad as to oppose such a Command of yours: I neither did oppose it, nor will
enter into Alexandria, until you of your humanity be pleased I shall so do. If
old Gregory was of another mind, it was but one Doctors Opinion. And I think
our Author in the same case is a Dissenter from all Christian Divines, as well
as from the Church of England; and from Mr. Baxter too, who says, that hurtful
prayers and desires are seldom from God: and he speaks it in the very case of
Julian, p. 17. of his Direct. part 4.

I shall here add the example of that Legion which was called (...), or the
Thundering Legion, consisting of 6666 Christians, under marcus Aurelius; of whom
Zephiline speaks thus: The Emperors Army being in great distress for want of
water, and being compassed about by their Adversaries, the Prefect of the
Praetorians told Marcus, That there was nothing which those Christians could
not obtain by their Prayers: Marcus therefore desired the Prefect that he
would entreat them to pray unto their God; which they had no sooner done, but
the Lord by thunder and lightning discomfited their enemies, and with
seasonable showers refreshed the whole Army, which otherwise might have
perished.

St. Ambrose was another of those Lachrymists which our Author derides; he
lived under Valentinian the younger, another Arian Emperor; and yet, as
Ruffinus says of him, (Hist. Eccless. l. 2. c. 26.) he did not defend himself
by his hand or weapon, but with fastings and continual watchings, and remaining
under Gods Altar, by his Prayers prevailed with God to be a Defender both of
him and his Church. I will give you St Ambrose his own words to his Church at
Millain: -- I will never forsake you willingly; being constrained, I know not
how to make opposition. Dolere potero, potero flere, potero gemere adversus
arma Milites Gothos; Lachrymae meae arma sunt; talia enim munimenta sunt
Sacerdotis; aliter NEC DEBEO NEC POSSUM RESISTERE. I can sorrow, I can weep, I
can sigh against Arms, Soldiers, and Goths; Tears are my weapons; for such is
the Munition of a Priest; in any other manner I OUGHT NOT, I CANNOT RESIST. And
his People were much of the same mind, as he describes it, Epist. 33. or as in
some Editions, the 13. Ad Marcellinam, What could have been better spoken by
Christian men, than that which the Holy Ghost spoke in you this day? Rogamus,
Auguste, non pugnamus, We entreat, O Emperor, we fight not; we are not afraid,
yet we entreat. This (says St. Ambrose) does become Christians, that both the
tranquillity of peace be desired by them, and their constancy in faith and
truth should not be deserted, no not with the peril of death. And in his Tract
de Renovatione fidelium: Laud magis scribendum est, non tam male facere non
posse, quam nolle; whereof St. Peter told us the sense long before, 1 Pet.
2.19. This is thank-worthie to God, if a man endure grief, suffering
wrongfully: And that man does certainly suffer wrongfully, that has the Laws
of God and man on his side. But there is no Law of God for resistance of a
lawful Magistrate. The Apostle did not calculate his Doctrine for the three
first Centuries under Heathen, and that it should expire under Christian
Magistrates: the Spirit of God foresaw that Kings should be nursing Fathers to
his Church, and made good Laws for the security thereof; but he never meant
that Princes should be resisted, though in some things they should act contrary
to those Laws.

So that when our Author demands by what Law we must die? p. 81. and answers,
Not by the Law of God, for being of that Religion which he approves: I answer,
Yes, 1. By the Law of God, rather than make resistance; that we may bear
testimony to that Law by suffering of death for our Religion, rather than to
violate it by our Rebellion. 2. By the Laws of our Country too: for though by
the favor of Christian Princes many good Laws are made for obedient Subjects,
which the Prince may not violate without his great sin against God; yet has
the Supreme Authority of the Land provided especially for the security of the
Prince, who is a Common good.
We see how in Nature light things do sometimes descend, and things that are
heavy will ascend, against their natural propension, for the preservation of
the Universe; and if private men do submit themselves to some Violencies and
Injustice for the preservation of the public Peace, it is but their duty: and
if the Prince do invade our Rights, that is no ground for us to invade his, in
whom the happiness of the whole Nation does consist.

St. Bernard was another Lachrymist, Epist. 221. speaking to Lewis then King of
France; Whatever it pleases you to do concerning your Kingdom, Crown, and
Soul, we that are the Children of the Church, cannot conceal the injuries done
to our Mother; we will stand and fight even to death for our Mother, if need
be; but Armis quibus licet; non scutis and gladiis, sed precibus fletibusque ad
Deum: with such Arms as are allowed us; not with Sword and Buckler, but with
Prayers and Tears to God.

I could multiply many Testimonies in this kind; nor can any other than such as
our Author produces of some private passionate and mistaken Christians, be
pretended to the contrary, until such time as the Pope erected the Standard of
Antichrist against Christian Kings, which was after the time of Gregory the
Great; or, until Presbytery, as a Reformado, fought under the same Banner.

Now to say as you do, in the close of this Chapter, p. 55. That in that Age
the best Prayers and Tears were those which did best execution upon an Apostate
Emperor, and contributed most to his destruction; and again, p. 96. I do not
find among the Ancients one single wish for Julian 's Conversion, but all for
his downright Destruction, is a very unchristian insinuation, especially for
one who pretends to say the Prayer for the Royal Family as heartily as any man
(in the Preface.)

P. 93. Our Author, by way of Postscript, tells us, he has many more
exceptions against the Artillery of Prayers and Tears, than he can stay to
insist on. The first is a great exception indeed, which makes St. Gregory to
overthrow all that our Author had quoted from him; for St. Gregory, p. 57. of
the first Invective ( Eaton-edition) says thus: Julian was hindered by the
goodness of God, and the Tears of Christians, which were shed in great plenty
by many who had this only remedy against the Persecutor. Now it is well
observed by our Author, here are no Prayers mentioned; none at all for his
confusion, no such Prayers as are no better than Treason by our Law, p. 95.
Secondly, Gregory does not tell us here that they had no Arms, or Walls, or
that these Lachrymists cried, CHVD EAT CHEESE AN CHAD IT; but that they had
this only Remedy against the Persecutor, (i. e.) as our Author says, They had
no other way to help themselves: And though here be no Prayers mentioned, yet
in other places St. Gregory mentions Prayers, and was as great a Lachrymist at
Prayer as any.

P. 96. Our Author parallels these Prayers with some, which he says were made
Treason in Queen Mary 's days, of which the Act says, ( Anno 1. and 2. of
Philip and Mary, lib. 9.) That some prayed that God would turn her heart from
Idolatry to the true Faith, or else to shorten her days, or take her quickly
out of the way. Though they had used such Prayers in secret, they should
methinks for their own sakes have for born them in their Conventicles, where
the Act says they were used, and where (as you would have it) such murdering
Prayers are too frequent in our Age. And I doubt whether God might not have
rejected such Prayers with a Quis requisivit? I believe verily it was never in
our Savior's mind, when he bids us to pray for them that persecute us; nor of
his Apostle, when he injoyns that Prayers and Supplications, etc. be made for
Kings and all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2.1. And whereas that Act says,
Such a Prayer was never heard or read to have been used by any good Christian
man against any Prince, though he were a Pagan; you think you have given
presidents for it in the case of Julian, where the Christians prayed for his
Destruction, not his Conversion. If (as you say) you pray as heartily for his
R. H. as any man, in the Collect for the Royal Family, you cannot but mind his
Conversion. And no president that ever I heard of will warrant any other
Prayers, but to this effect: ENDVE THEM WITH THY HOLY SPIRIT, ENRICH THEM WITH
THY HEAVENLY GRACE, PROSPER THEM WITH ALL HAPPINESS, AND BRING THEM TO THINE
EVERLASTING KINGDOM, etc. Here is nothing at all for Destruction, but all for
Conversion. And though I know you are a daring man, yet pray do not think of
reforming the English Liturgy by your Julian nor Gregorian Account, and teach
us by your example to say our Prayers backward.

Gregory himself was so great a Lachrymist, that our Author, if he have any
spark of Grace, or intention to repent, must needs weep with him, and (as he
did) recant that as publicly, in other more serious Writings, which he
delivered in a fit of Passion, or to show his Rhetoric. Gregory Nazianzen,
Orat. 17. p. 267. to the Citizens of Nazianzum, that were in great fear by
reason of the displeasure of their Prefect, persuades them to make use of
these weapons, (...), Ps. 34.17. If thou turn to the Lord with mourning, thou
shall be saved: Ye see (says Gregory) how Salvation is annexed to Mourning,
(...), nothing can come between your Prayers and the Blessings that you ask.
Does the Spirit of God prescribe Mountebank-Receipts in the opinion of Gregory?
or ought not he to repent that calls them Mountebank-Receipts*

Then minding them of the instability of Humane Affairs, and of the great
benefit they may reap by their patience and submission to Gods Chastisements,
he adds, -- Let us submit our selves to God, to one another, and to those who
have the Government on Earth, (the word is (...), the same that St. Paul uses
Romans 13.5.) -- To God in all things, to each other in brotherly charity, and
to our Governors for the sake of good order. (He adds) it is a heinous and
dangerous thing to exhaust the Clemency (of the Ruler) by needing daily
pardon. Among other Laws of our Religion, we have this given us by the Spirit
of God; who has joined that which we are able to do, to that which is just and
honest, and has established it by a most laudable Law; That as Servants obey
their Masters and Wives their Husbands, and the Church Christ, and Disciples
their Pastors; so we also are commanded to obey the higher Powers, not only
for Wrath, but for Conscience Sake, as being bound to yield them Tribute; nor
let us give occasion by our wickedness to bring the Law into contempt, and to
provoke the revenging Sword, but rather being made better through our fears,
endeavor to obtain praise from the higher Powers. Decies repetite placebit. I
wish I could say of our Author, Et hinc illae Lacrymae; but our Author has
other thoughts: he thinks he has much obliged the whole Nation, turning their
Mourning into Mirth, and instructing them, after the new fashions of Rome and
France, to exchange their Prayers and Tears for Fire and Sword, for Gunpowder,
Pistols, Poniards? and therefore he first says it was a Christian that killed
Julian; and from Zozomen, that he was to be commended for the fact, p. 60, 61.

Sigebert, in his Chron. ad Anno 1088. tells us, That this noveltie, that I say
not Heresy, was not yet risen up in the world, that the Priests of God (who
says to a King Remove, and makes an Hypocrite to reign for the sins of a
people) should teach the people that they owe no subjection to wicked Kings;
and though they have given an Oath of Fidelity to them, yet they owe no
Fidelity to them; nor are to be accounted perjured, though they fight against
them; and that he that obeys the King shall be excommunicated, and he that
opposes him shall be absolved from the guilt of Injustice and Perjurie. So
that although these Ancient Bishops were never in Scotland, yet a man may think
our Scotizing Presbyters have been at Rome; whose Principles and Practices run
such parallels, as would sill a bigger Volume than I intend.

I shall only show, that the Fathers give us a better Form of praying for
Kings than your Directorie does; and the Law of God and Man enjoins us
Uniformity in the use of it.

Tertul. Apol. c. 31, etc. You that say we regard not the welfare of Caesar,
look into our Scriptures, which command us to pray for our Enemies and
Persecutors, especially that we pray for Kings, and all in authority: For with
them the whole Empire is shaken, and we our selves as Members thereof are in
hazard: therefore we sacrifice for the safety of the Emperor, but to God; and
as God has commanded, with pure Prayer we pray for them and their Officers and
Magistrates, for faithful Armies, seasonable Times, and a quiet Age, etc.
Having our arms spread to God, let Hooks tear us, Crosses hang us, etc. a
praying Christian is prepared for any torment: Come then, you Praefects, and
force out our Souls praying for the Emperor.

Athenagoras in his Apology to M. Aurelius: We pray for your Empire, that the
Son ((...)) as it is most just, may succeed the Father in the Kingdom, and that
your Empire may increase and flourish; all being subject to you: which would be
much for our good, that we leading a quiet and peaceable life, may readily obey
you in all your commands.

St. Cyprian to Demetrian: We pray day and night, propitiating and appeasing
God for your peace and safety, and that the Reign of Valerian and Galien may
continue unshaken. So Eusebius observes, l. 6. c. 11. Eccl. Hist. of Dionysius
Bishop of Alexandria, That he prayed for the same Emperors, that their Kingdom
might continue. St. Sebastian lived under Dioclesian and Maximian, and fought
for them, and prayed; and assures us, the rest of the Soldiers did the like.
The Priests of the Temples do possess your Majesty's minds (says he) with
unjust surmises, as if we (the Christians) were Enemies to the Commonwealth;
whereas by our Prayers the Commonwealth is bettered and increased: for we cease
not to pray for your Empire, and the safety of the Roman Army. See Surius on
Jan. 20.

Optatus, l. 3. contra Parmen. The Apostle teaches us to pray for Kings and
those that are in Authority, etiamsi talis eslet Imperator qui Gentiliter
viveret, though he were a Pagan. The Council of Paris 6th, p. 534. of the
Second Tome of the French Councils: If Jeremy the Prophet admonished to pray
for the Life of Nebuchadonozor that Idolatrous King, how much more ought
Supplications to be made for all Christian Kings? Aphraates a zealous
Christian, being demanded by Valens an Arian Emperor, whither he went; I am
going (says he) to pray for your Empire. Theophilus Bishop of Antioch: I will
honor the King, not adoring him, but praying for him.

So likewise in the Preamble of the Council of Agatha, where the Catholic
Bishops pray for an Arian King after this manner: With Knees bended on the
ground, we pray for the continuance of your Kingdom and People; that as you
have granted us liberty to assemble our selves, so God would extend your
Kingdom with Happiness, govern it with Justice, and protect it with Virtue.
Prooemium Synodi Agathensis.

When by the instigation of Pope Paschal the Second, the Emperor was unjustly
deprived, the Church of Liege blame the Pope for it, saying, If he were such as
you describe him, yet should we suffer him to reign over us, because our Sins
have deserved it; and such a Prince ought not to be repelled by taking Arms
against him, but by pouring out our Prayers. Resp. Eccles. Leoardensis ad
Epistolam Pasch. 2d.

So that whether our Author will or no, it will still be owned as a Maxim
among Christians, Preces and lachrymae sunt Arma Ecclesiae. Prayers and Tears
are the Churches Artillery; and your new MILITIA will never prevail against
this COMMISSION OF ARRAY.

An Answer to our Author's CHAP. VII. Julian's Death.
THis Chapter is mostly the relation of two wonderful discoveries of Julian's
Death; the one of a Christian Schoolmaster, (for it seems the Christians at
Antioch, though it were the place that Julian most hated, had Christian Masters
to instruct their Children) who being asked by Libanius the Sophister what the
Carpenters Son was doing, answered, He is making a Coffin. And yet perhaps he
thought no more of Julian's death than Libanius, whose expression of a
Carpenters Son might give occasion to such a Reply.

Then for his other story of his double St. Julian Sabba, (for our Author has
Sainted him before and behind); That he whilst he was praying should be in a
Trance, and cry out, The wild Boar, the Enemy of the Lords Vineyard, has
suffered the punishment of his faults, and lies dead: I cannot admit such
Miracles into my Creed (...) but look on them no otherwise than such
conjectures as Julian himself made, when at the fall of the man that lifted him
up to his horse, he cried out, He that raised me up is fallen; and as the
Historian says, Constantius died at that very time. But the merriest Scene is
behind, p. 58. That as soon as the Christians at Antioch heard of it, they had
public joyful meetings, and had not only Dances in the Churches and Chapels
of their Martyrs, (and then likely they had the music of Organs, or some other
instruments too) but likewise in the Theater they proclaimed the Victory of
the Cross. Such Thanksgivings we had in this Nation at the Butchery of the
Royal Martyr. But though they brought their Horse-guards into St. Paul's, I do
not find they danced in the Churches.

The manner of his death our Author reports, p. 59. as an uncertainty, but
jumps in his Opinion with the Heathen Libanius, that he who killed him was a
Christian, although I have quoted two Authors who aver that it was done by the
hand of an Enemy: Yet to serve his Hypothesis, that it is lawful for a
Christian to kill a Heathen Emperor, he will needs cast it on the Christians.

Yet our Author, p. 60. says, Truly this is a strange concession: but that
which we may more wonder at, is, that Zozomen should justify such a traitorous
Assassination, as he does (in these words, p. 60.) It is not improbable that
some one of the Soldiers might take into consideration how the Heathens and
all men to this day do still praise those who long since have killed Tyrants,
as men that were willing to die for the Common Liberty, and defended in that
manner their Country men, Kinsmen, and Friends: and you can hardly blame him
who shows himself so courageous for God, and for that Religion which he
approves; in Zozomen's words, (...), (i. e.) quam colebat, referring not to
God, but the Votarie. And then at this rate, the Murder of the two Henry's of
France, and that of our Royal Sovereign may be justified, by our Author's Rule,
because they were slain as Enemies to that Religion which their Assassinates
professed: A very dangerous insinuation this, and not fit to be presented to
such a Prince as Theodosius was. Yet that Author speaks of the Opinion of the
Heathen Greeks, and of slaying Tyrants in the days of old (not after
Christianity prevailed, that teaches a contrary behavior.)

They were the (...), and they were Heathens that commended them: for the
ancient Greek Cities had wholly rejected the Government of Kings, and set up
Aristocracie or Democracie, so that in time the word Tyrannus, which in a good
old sense signified a King, was by them generally used for a Tyrant or
Oppressor; and if any such attempted the reducing their Popular Government into
Monarchy, they thought it lawful to kill them. But will this warrant a Clement
or Ravilliack to assassinate their Prince; or a High Court of Justice to murder
their King? If Zozomen or our Author mean this, I look on them as Heathen
Greeks still, of whom it has been observed, Inter Regem and Tyrannum non
discernunt Graii. Lampridius wondered that no man slew Heliogabalus the Tyrant,
Cum Neroni, Vitellio, Caligulae, caeterisque hujusmodi nunquam Tyrannicida
defuerit. But no such thing was attempted by good Christians.

An Answer to our Author's CHAP. VIII. How they used his Memory.
DE mortuis nil nisi bonum: That we ought to speak well of the dead, or
nothing, is a Rule commonly received by all men. To trample on a dead Lion is
no point of valor, much less to rail at them that have received the just
punishment of their sins. Such language therefore as Gregory uses, and our
Author would have inscribed on Julian 's Pillars long after his death, was as
unseasonable, as it would have been offensive in his lifetime, viz. p. 63. Thou
Persecutor next to Herod, thou Traitor next to Judas, (only thou have not
testified thy Repentance by hanging thy self) thou killer of Christ after
Pilate, and next to the Jews thou hater of God. These are very hard names in
the mouth of a Divine, concerning a dead Emperor.

Well may our Author say he is weary of such reproachful and ignominious
Titles which the Christian Tongues lavishly bestowed on him. Doubtless you
cannot find in all the rest of the Ecclesiastical Historians such as these: and
if an Index expurgatorius had past only on such Sentences, it would have been
less culpable than it is.

But what Protestants (say you) ever treated their worst Persecutors at this
rate? Shall I tell you again what sort of Protestants treated not a Persecutor,
but a meek and gracious Prince, at a far worse rate? And who ever called Queen
Mary Mad Bitch? Sir, you do very ill to prepare such expressions for the
Vulgar: Children are too apt to learn naughty things of their Teachers. Some
have called a Queen of England by the names of Proserpine, and Lupam
Anglicanam; which I forbear to English. But what little reason there was for
all these passionate Expressions, you show us in the next.

An Answer to our Author's CHAP. IX. Reflections on the Behavior of those
Christians.
JUlian 's Persecution was but a Flea-biting to what the Christians formerly
felt; a short and weak assault of the Devil; so that if any fell from
Christianity, they were ridiculously overcome; and if they persevered, it was
no great matter to lose a Trade or Profession for their Religion; -- and this
was the greatest severitie (says our Author) of all Julian 's Edicts. -- To
speak properly, he was rather a Tempter than a Persecutor; seducing some with
Money, others with Places of Trust and Honors of all sorts; others by the
witchcraft of his words, and by his own example. -- And as for what he designed
against Christianity, it was far short of what other Emperors had executed.
So far our Author, whom I must name, lest you should not think it his: For how
could the man of such a Character deserve all those virulent expressions of
Gregory (of which before) or those rudenesses of some Christians which follow
in our Author? p. 66. How do the Christians treat this Emperor, reproaching
him, ruffling with him, vexing every vein in his royal Heart, saying all their
Prayers backwards, calling down vengeance upon his head, dancing and leaping
for joy at his death, and insulting over his memory; calling him by the
bloudiest names of the Devil! P. 67. and (pray mark them, they are our Authors
words) But for he name of Christians, he had better fallen among Barbarians.
And would our Author have these to be examples for true Protestants?

But does not our Author also say his lesson backward, and write a Panegyric
for Julian, and Invectives against Christians? Or is it his meaning, that if a
Prince incline (though but a little) to Tyranny or Irreligion, it is lawful to
use him as those Christians did Julian? He does plainly at once Calumniate the
whole body of Christians and their Teachers in that Age, from the
mis-behaviours of a few; and seeks to debauch the present Generation, which are
too bad already.

Julian taught better Doctrine to them that were his Christian Subjects,
(though he did it spightfully -- Not to avenge themselves, not to go to Law,
nor render evil for evil, but pray for and wish well to their persecutors) than
you do for their behavior toward their Princes, and that spightfully enough:
for this (as you acknowledge) is a right course to gloss away all their duty,
and to break all the measures by which all the Ancient and Suffering Christians
have gone in all former persecutions. And does it become a Christian, or a
Divine, one that would be numbered among the more peaceable and stricter sort of
his Brethren, to vent such things? What? to deride the prayers and tears, the
faith and patience of Martyrs and Confessors, and to applaud the insolences
and extravagancies of the seditious Rabble? Let me whisper it softly in your
ear: I think Julian the Apostate did less prejudice the Christian Religion,
than such a one as Lucian the Scoffer. Mr. Baxter, Christian Direct. p. 20. I
do not think Nero or Dioclesian martyred near so many, as the People turned
loose would have done. Much more was Julian a Protector of the Church from
popular rage, etc. And you shall sooner wash a Black-more white, than cleanse
your self from that Contagious Leprosy which over-runs your whole Book: (and I
pray God it has not seized on your Heart), which you do in vain endeavor by
the following Discourse; which I now consider.

P. 68. you say, The truth of the Matter is this: Their case differed very
much, and they were in quite other circumstances than the first Christians
were. When Julian came to the Crown, he found them in full and quiet possession
of their Religion, which they had enjoyed without interruption for almost fifty
years, and which was such an inestimable blessing, that they had plainly
undervalued it, if they had not done their utmost to keep it: and then to have
this treasure wrested out of their hands by one bred up in the bosom of the
Church, who professed himself a Christian, and never pulled off his Masque till
it was too late for them to help themselves; this was enough to raise not only
all their Zeal, but all their Indignation too. Your almost saves your
computation of fifty years wherein the Christians enjoyed a full and quiet
possession of their Religion without interruption, from a great Untruth: for it
was a good while after Constantine came to the Empire, that he did or could
show any great favor to the Christians, he being brought up under Dioclesian,
and not being baptized himself until toward the end of his Reign. That he
banished Athanasius the great Pillar of the Christian Religion, is not to be
denied; nor that Constantius was himself an Arian, and promoted those
destructive errors in such a manner, as that the Orthodox Bishops whom
Constantius had banished, and were recalled by Julian, seemed to be in a better
condition under him than under Constantius; many Bishops being banished for
refusing to subscribe against Athanasius and his Creed in the Council of
Millain: And Athanasius, with many others of his persuasion, lived in desert
places until the death of Constantius. So that though the fifty years did run
out at length; yet in all Constantius his time, which was reckoned above twenty
years, the Orthodox were mightily afflicted by the Arians, Donatists, and
Circumcellians. And you may as well say the Church of England had a full and
quiet possession of their Religion without interruption in the times of our
late Confusion, when every Mushrome-Sect sprung up above it, as that it was so
with the Primitive Christians during the time of Constantius.

I might add much more; but desire the Reader to be satisfied with that one
instance of the Arians dealing with old Hosius a Bishop of a hundred years old;
whom in a Council of theirs at Sirmium they so tormented, that they forced him
to subscribe to them to save his life. And how ill it was with others, even in
the days of Constantine, see the History of the Donatists lately printed.

But then for the poor Primitive Christians of all, they were born to
Persecution; they neither knew better, nor expected it -- The Laws of the
Empire were always in force against them -- their Religion at best was in the
world but upon sufferance, as Abraham in the Land of Canaan, where he had no
Inheritance, no not so much as to set his foot on. But as his afflicted
Posterity were afterward Lords of that Country, so after another Egyptian
Bondage, Christianity was advanced to be the established Religion of the
Empire. All this, and much more, is but Mr. Hunts Argument in other words: for
p. 46. he says, The Reformed Religion has acquired a civil Right, and the
protection of Laws: if we ought not to lose our Lives, Liberties and Estates,
but where forfeited by Law, we ought much rather not to lose them for the
profession of the best Religion, which by Law is made the public National
Religion. And it is strange that some men of the same Religion in profession,
can think (that notwithstanding) it makes no matter what is done to a man if he
be Religious; but if he be not so, the least public injuries and injustice may
be resisted, vindicated, remedied, and by right defended by old Laws, or new
ones to be made for that purpose. The Christian Religion was published when the
whole world was Pagan, and therefore it was submitted to such usage as the
Governors would give it. But when the Christian Faith had by Miracles of
patience declared it self to be of Heaven, according to the Prophecies on that
behalf, it took possession of the Empire, and Crowns and Scepters became
submitted to the Cross; and the Christians acquired a civil Right of protection
and immunity, which they ought not, they cannot relinquish and abandon, no more
than they can destroy themselves. Such as thus perish, shall never wear a
Martyrs Crown, but perish in the next world for perishin in this. This will be
interpretatively Crucifying Christ afresh, after that he is received up into
Glory, (i. e.) after his Religion is exalted into Dignity, Honor, and civil
Authority, etc.

Thus far Simeon and Levi are agreed; and these were precious hints to our
Julian; for till he hit on this new Notion, there was nothing in the whole
Book, that favored of Common sense, or had any show of Reason; but his Pages,
as the Builders of Babel, misunderstand one another; and what one builds up,
the other throws down; and after a long evaporation of smoke and ashes, and
sometimes fire, (as ancient Historians relate of Aetna) our modern Historian
makes the same Mountain to pour out such a deluge of Water as drowns all the
Faith and Patience Christian men, and leaves only Julian to triumph at the
overthrow of Christianity.

If these men be not in too great haste, and their Guilt and Fears drive them
not into Corners, I would expostulate with them a while: Can the Laws of men
make void the Law of God? and have you Authority to distinguish where the Law
of God makes no distinction? Does not that speak plain, that we must submit not
only to Masters that are good and gentle, but also to the froward, 1 Pet.
2.18. and to Parents that correct us according to their pleasure: and the
believing Wife is to submit her self to her unbelieving Husband in every thing,
Ephesians. 5.24. not contrary to Gods Word? and is it not true, that what is said of
the submission of Servants, Children, and Wives, the same may be said of
Subjects? as St. Augustine affirms, after Gregory Nazianzen. Was a Heathen
Emperor to be submitted to in all things, and not a Christian? Shall the
Privileges which Christian Princes grant us, be used as Weapons to fight and
rebel against them? Was it lawful for the Catholics to rebel against
Constantius when he was a declared Heretic, and by great violence promoted
that damnable Heresy, as Bishop Usher calls it, suppressing and banishing the
Orthodox, and setting up the Arian? Is it not said, that if we suffer
wrongfully, (i. e. against Law and Equity) and take it patiently, this is
thankworthy with God?

Can you without Sacrilege take away the Crowns from all the Martyrs that died
ever since Julians time, and tell us they died like Fools or mad men, and were
felo's de se, for not selling their Lives at a dearer rate, and like Sampson,
pull down the Pillars of the Empire, with an (...), If I must perish, let the
whole world perish with me! Or can you think that they perished in the next
world for perishing in this, when Christ tells them, he that loses his life
shall save it? If it be unjust in the Prince to deprive us of our Rights
against the Law of the Land, is it not much more so, for us to deprive him of
his against the Law of God, as well as that of the Land too? And have we not
generally (I mean the Clergy at least) Subscribed, That it is not lawful, upon
any pretense whatsoever, (not of Religion, nor of the Laws) to take up Arms?
etc. Non debet minor potestas irasci, si major praelata sit: The Laws of the
Land must give place to the Law of God.

The contrary to all these, are the monstrous Consequences of your new
distinction, that allows of Rebellion when we suppose the Laws of the Land to
be on our side: I say, suppose them; for Wars have been raised and maintained
on such a false Supposition. And if when the Prince declares that he does and
will govern by the known Laws, we shall Remonstrate that he does not, and
suggest our groundless and unreasonable Fears and Jealousies that he will not;
who shall be Judge in this Case? Shall the people take the Sword in their hands
to cut this Gordian-knot, and cut us all in pieces? We have (God be thanked)
many good Laws for our security, and a gracious Prince that hitherto has and
will govern by them: but we have one great Law of God, and another of the Land,
that though he should not, yet we may not rebel.

That excessive commendation which our Author gives of Constantius, makes me
think he has exceeded also in the dispraise of Julian, p. 70. Never any man in
this world set his heart so much upon any other thing, as he did to see the
Christians flourish, and to have all the advantages of glory and power: And
neither conquered Nations, nor a well-governed Empire, nor great Treasures, nor
excessive Glory, nor being King of Kings, nor all other things which make up
other men's notions of Happiness, did delight him so much, as to have the honor
of bringing honor to the Christians, and of leaving them established for ever
in the possession of Power and Authority. And yet as it was said of Naaman
that mighty man of Valor, But he was a Leper: so it is recorded of
Constantius, he was an Arian, and persecuted the Church of God.

I think I have said enough already to confute the insignificant Instances
produced by our Author, when I gave you the more sober sense of St. Gregory
himself, of St. Basil, Ambrose, and Bernard, all which lived when they had the
Laws on their side, and the best Religion in the world to defend; and yet they
durst not do it by the Sword, if they could have done it; for I shall not now
question their power; Tertullian did assert that of old, and the Learned
Hammond has put the truth of it out of question, in his Answer to Mr. Stephen
Marshal.

But says our Author, p. 70. For Julian, who by his Baptism first, and entering
into Orders after, and going to Church after that, sufficiently engaged himself
to maintain Christianity; to endeavor on the other hand to dispossess them of
their Freehold, is an insupportable injury. It was so indeed: and I would have
our Author consider, whether for a man that has been received into the Bosom
of the Church, and has eaten of her Bread, and approved of her Doctrine, to
become an Apostate from that holy Profession, and expose that Church and
Christianity it self to scorn and contempt, be not to outdo Julian.

I shall desire the Reader patiently to look on, while I remove those few
Blockadoes which our Author has laid in my way; and then I shall attack that
enchanted Castle, wherein those two Giants think themselves so secure, as to
laugh at all opposition that can be made against them. That of Juventinus and
Maximus, mentioned a third time in p. 72. is already levelled: if there were a
Sham-plot against them, our Author seems to be one of their accusers for
talking too boldly against the Emperor, which they utterly denied. A second
Sham-plot was of Sacrilege, p. 72. but I see no man concerned in that; neither
shall I fight with Shadows, as our Author does.

P. 73. Old Bracton is conjured up; and he presently flies in the face of the
Conjurers, and tells them, that when Laws are made by. the consent of the
people and the Royal Authority, they cannot be altered or destroyed without the
joint consent of all those by whom they were concerned: And yet the Laws of
Queen Elizabeth for keeping her Subjects in due obedience are exploded as some
of the Grievances of the Nation. With what face can they plead the Laws of the
Land for their security, who daily violate and contemn them, and teach others
to do so?

And in p. 74. our Author is surprised with the Thebaean Legion, which appeared
to him as a Legion of Noonday Devils; and he wonders who should raise them up:
he cries out as that Legion, Matthew. 8.22. Art thou come to torment us? What
have we to do with thee, O Thebaean Legion! what have we to do with their
Example! No, I Will warrant my Author he shall never die for his Religion as they
did, he has parted with that already for fear of what might come. And this
Thebaean Legion is such a terrible immortal Army, as will defeat all Rebels to
the worlds end. Are we (says our Author) to go to Mass to morrow, or else to
have our Throats cut? No; nor are we to cut our Princes Throat to day, for fear
lest he should compel us to go to Mass to morrow. Such fears were as groundless
in the days of Charles the First, as of Charles the Second, yet we see what
was then done.

Again, Are we under a Sentence of Death according to the Laws of our Country,
if we do not presently renounce our Religion? No; but if we presently renounce
our Religion, as our Author has done, and then contrive a Rebellion, we are
under a Sentence of a twofold death; one by the Law of God, and another by the
Law of Man. The Thebaean Legion so frighted our Author, that he cannot get them
out of his mind: Poor men they were! to sacrifice or be sacrificed! They never
heard the Doctrine of Resistance preached to them, but professed another
Doctrine which they received according to the commandment of Christ, and
practiced after his example, suffering patiently for well doing. They never
were in Scotland, to learn that there was a reward due to them that should kill
tyrannical Princes: They never had the examples of a Christians killing Julian,
and being commended for it in Ecclesiastical History. These glorious lights and
achievements were reserved for our blessed Age, whereof (notwithstanding) the
Scripture foretold, that in the latter days there should be traitors, heady,
high minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof. And many such who have called
themselves good Protestants, have made a shift to die in Rebellion under the
pretense of their Religion.

But the comfort is, as our Author says, That can never happen to us, but by
our own treachery to our Religion, in parting with those good Laws which
protect it, and in agreeing to those that shall destroy it. What needs then all
these Celeusma's and barbarous clamours of Ho-up against a Popish Successor
which may never come; or if he should, can never do us hurt without our own
consent? Queen Mary her self could not so much as out a Parish Priest, till she
had procured a Parliament for her turn; and still kept the Church Lands, and by
Parliament had the Supremacy settled on her as far as any of her Predecessors
enjoyed it. And if such things can never happen but by our treachery in parting
with those good Laws as protect our Religion, and agreeing to such as shall
destroy it, why are we so willing to part with those, whereby that
otherwise-impregnable Fortress and Bulwork against Popery is preserved, and to
make new ones for Comprehension, Indulgence, and Toleration, even of Popery it
self, as well as other Sects and Factions? which is the ready way cast up by
our Adversaries to bring us to confusion. When it is come plainly to this
Dilemma, That we must agree to obey our Superiors, or perish; we must agree
among our selves as Brethren, or be swallowed up by a common Enemy: Yet no Law
of God or man can prevail to keep us in obedience to our Governors, or Charity
among our selves; Is not this as near a way to ruin, as our Adversaries can
chalk out?

P. 76. It is a general Notion among the Fathers, that we ought to spare our
persecutors, and not suffer them to be guilty of Murder: Gregory gives that as
a very good reason of Marcus his flight from Arethusa. Gregory gives a better
reason than that, viz. that he was moved by that Precept of our Savior, Matthew.
10.23. When you are persecuted in one City, flee ye to another; and p. 88. he
foresaw, that if he had tarried, the people might for his defense have risen
against the Officers and Soldiers of the Emperor; and if they had died then,
they had been felo's de se. To prevent their destruction therefore, as well as
the guilt of their Persecutors, he quietly yielded himself into their hands;
and though he endured great torments, yet, as if he had been a felo de se, is
he as little pitied by Gregory as by his Persecutors: for Gregory having noted
that this Mark was one of them that saved Julian's life when Gallus was slain;
for this one thing (says Gregory) (...), he suffered those things deservedly,
and was worthy to have suffered more. This Passive Obedience is an abominable
thing!

In the same p. he relates a passage of Chrysoslom, and infers from it, that
David meant no more than only to prevent the effusion of innocent blood, as
appears by the several opportunities he had to cut off Saul, but the sense of
his duty made him to abhor the least thought of it. This I like so well, that I
shall transcribe a little more concerning David's behavior toward Saul, out
of the excellent Book of Homelies. P. 287. Now let David answer to such demands
as men desirous of Rebellion do use to make: Shall not we, being so good men as
we are, rise and rebel against a Prince hated of God, and Gods enemy? and
therefore likely not to prosper either in war or peace? but to be hurtful and
pernicious to the Commonwealth? No, says good and godly David, Gods and such a
Kings faithful Subject: and so convicting such Subjects as attempt any
Rebellion against such a King, to be neither good subjects nor good men. But
say they, Shall we not rise and rebel against so unkind a Prince, nothing
considering and regarding our true faith and painful Service, nor the safe
guard of our posterity? No, says good David, whom no such unkindness could
cause to forsake his due Obedience to his Sovereign. Shall we not, say they,
rise and rebel against our known mortal and deadly enemy that seeks our lives?
No, says good David, who had learned that lesson which our Savior afterward
plainly taught, that we should do no hurt to our fellow subjects, though they
hate us and be our enemies; much less to our Prince, though he were our enemy.
Shall not we assemble an Army of such good fellows as we are, and by hazarding
our lives, and the lives of such as stand with us, and withal hazarding the
State of our Country, remove so naughty a Prince? No, says godly David; for I
when I might, without assembling force, without tumult, or hazard of any man's
life, or shedding a drop of blood, have delivered my self and Country of an
evil Prince, yet would I not do it. Are not they, say some, lusty and
courageous Captains, that do venture to kill and depose their King, being a
naughty Prince, and their mortal enemy? They may be as courageous as they list,
yet, says godly David, they can be no good or goodly men that so do; for I not
only have rebuked, but commanded him to be stain as a wicked man, which slew
King Saul my enemy, though he being weary of his life, desired that man to slay
him. What shall we then do to an evil and unkind Prince, an enemy to us, hated
of God, hurtful to the Commonwealth? etc. Lay no violent hands upon him, says
good David, but let him live until God appoint and work his end by natural
death, or in War by lawful enemies, not by traitorous subjects. So far our
Homily: and if good and godly men answered No to all these Questions, they are
not of the godly party, though they call themselves so, who answer Yea to them;
although it be not against a wicked, malicious, and Apostate Prince, as Saul
was, but a pious and gracious one.

P. 77. We are to suffer persecution (...) if need be, as St. Peter's words are,
and not else. Now I humbly conceive, seeing the Writ De Haeretico comburendo is
taken away in time, and the Laws protect us in our Religion, it is a needless
thing to go to Smithfield, and there be burnt for an Heretic. It is better, if
it pleased God, that we should die as Heretics, if with St. Paul we truly
worship God in a way that is so called, than to go to Tyburn and be hanged as
Traitors and Regicides -- For, though that Law be taken away, yet the Law of
God stands firm, which enjoins us to submit our selves not only for fear, but
for Conscience sake; and the(...) in St. Peter in the case of our submission
for Conscience sake as well as for fear of wrath, is determined by St. Paul
with an (...) ye must needs be subject.

P. 77. And so far it is fit to inform the Popish Crew; lest they should be
mistaken in the good Protestant Religion of our good Church, as Coleman calls
it. I pray let them not be informed that we obey more for fear than for
Conscience sake; No, nor that we are afraid to dye for our Religion of God call
us to do it. As to your Parenthesis that we have no apprehension of persecution
from any other quarter; I tell you, we have felt a greater persecution in our
Age from Geneva, than from Rome; and if the one have since the Reformation in
this Nation killed a thousand, the other have slain ten thousand.

Your next Reflection is on the Pulpit-law (as you say the Lord Faulkland
called it) of Sibthorp and Manwaring, and complained it had almost ruined the
Nation. That noble Lord was indeed a great lover of his Religion and Country,
and therefore was an enemy to Arbitrary Government. But when he perceived that
the outcry against Arbitrarie power in the King, was made with a design to
grasp it into other men's hands; and they began to exercise it not only on the
Gentry, Clergy, and Nobility of the Land, but the Royal Family also; he
repented, and so faithfully adhered to the King in defense of his Authority,
that he lost his life in the Quarrel. It was the Pulpit-law in 41. and 42. that
destroyed us, and brought in Arbitrary Power.

But how near does our Author come to put a border of Treason on his impolitick
discourse, p. 78. where he says, The Arbitrary Doctrine of those times, (to
which both he and Mr. Hunt impute the beginning of the Late War) did not bring
any great terror with it; it was then but a Rake, and served only to scrape
up a little paltrie passive money: But now it is become a Murdering-piece
laden with I know not how many bullets. Who are they, I wonder, that preach up
such an Arbitrarie Power? or who are they that make such a Murdering-piece of
it? Is it not rather a Fiction of some men, who would find a pretense for a
second War?

For if, as Mr. Hunt says, p. 52. That the Panick fear of a change of the
Government that this Doctrine (to wit, of Arbitrary Power before 41.)
occasioned, and the Divisions it made among us, was the principal cause of the
Late War, is it not evident that the same fears are now made Panick or Popular,
to prepare the hearts of the People for another War? What else mean the
bleatings of the Sheep, and the lowing of Oxen? the Vulgar Murmurs, and loud
Cries of the Multitude, as if it were intended we should be ruled by a Standing
Army, and That his Majesty's Guards are a grievance; That the dissolution of a
Parliament gave us cause to fear that the King had no more business for
Parliaments? Hunt, p. 22. and p. 60. of our Author, That Parliaments should sit
till they have done that for which they were called, ( i. e. says our Author in
his Marginal Note) till all Grievances are redressed, and Petitions answered.
And then for ought I know, they might sit for ever, and so no more need of a
King. What means the denying him a Supply, when Tangier was like to be lost?
and not only withholding their own, but denying him to dispose of his Credit
or Revenues for his just occasions? What mean our new Associations and Bandying
into Parties, and advice even to the Clergy, not to suspend all the legal
security they have upon the life of our present King? Hunt, p. 49. All these
strongly argue that they have a suspicion of Arbitrary Power; and that, by our
Author's confession, was in 41, (and therefore may be suspected to be made use
of now as) an incitement to Rebellion.

And though our Author ( p. 78.) confesses, That the malignitie of this
Doctrine cannot be discovered under his Majesty's gracious Reign; yet he thinks
fit to put him in mind of the Security he has given the Nation by his
Coronation Oath, which all Protestant Princes value and look upon as Sacred;
and likewise of many gracious Promises that he will govern according to Law.
All this caution argues more than Suspicion, it looks like an Accasation;
though I know no defect, but the neglect of executing the Laws against
Transgressors. But if it do not fall out in his Majesty's Reign, it will appear
in its colors, and we may feel the sting of it, if it please God so sharply to
punish us for our sins, as to let us fall under a Popish Successor, p. 78, 79.
We have (I confess) deserved such a punishment, for kicking against our
Protestant Princes: but by the blessing of God, we may not have such a One: For
who shall be King or Queen of this Realm of England hereafter (you tell us)
none but God himself knows, p. 21. of the Preface.

But you tell us of another may be; the Successor may be a Papist, and then he
may persecute: but he may not be; or if he be so, yet I have proved he may not
persecute; and our Author has granted, p. 75. That it can never happen but by
our own Treachery, etc. Such a formidable Persecution as you suggest, is a
thing impracticable, and morally impossible: it has never yet been acted by
any Prince, Papist or Heathen: the Marian Tempest did not so destroy
Protestants, though it had been but newly planted, but in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign it grew up again, and covered the Land in a few days. Now to disturb our
Peace and Settlement with two such may be's as are more likely may not be; to
suppose such things as are morally impossible, is unreasonable, and to fear
where no fear is, (says Mr. Hunt, p. 250.)

But such suppositions as our Author makes, ought not at all to be supposed:
for there is greater hurt to be feared from them, (as Mr. Faukner says, p. 545.
of his Christian Loyalty) than from the thing supposed; since it is much more
likely that such designs should be imagined and believed to be true, when they
are false (as they were in the unjust Outcries against our late gracious
Sovereign) than that they should be certainly true: And every good man, yea
every reasonable man, may have as great confidence that no such Case will
really happen, as can be had concerning the future state and condition of any
thing in this world. For which he there gives many Reasons, to which I refer
the Reader, and proceed.

P. 80. In this case (says our Author) all Protestants cannot fly -- and many
may be persuaded not to fly. And men are taught that the Gospel does prescribe
no other remedy but slight, allowing no other means between denying and dying
for the Faith. It is certain this is the special remedy prescribed by our
Savior, though there be other means which may be as effectual as this; Prayers
and Tears, and Fasting and Humiliation have done mighty wonders. When God by
Joel (cap. 22.) threatened his People with an Enemy great and strong, there
has not been ever the like, neither ever shall be, even to the years of many
Generations; the chief means prescribed by God himself, you may see was this,
verse. 12. Therefore now, says the Lord, turn ye unto me with all your heart,
and with fasting, weeping, and mourning: who knows if he will return and
repent, and leave a blessing behind him? And verse. 17. Let the Priests the
Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say,
Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thy Heritage to reproach, that the
heathen should rule over them. Wherefore should they say among the heathen,
Where is their God? Then will the Lord be jealous over his Land, and spare his
people. I hope our Author will not deride such Lachrymists: if he do, Solomon
tells him who will laugh at him when calamity comes on him, Prove. 1.

Again, Supplications and Petitions to our Kings may have the desired success:
for hitherto the Kings of England have been merciful Kings; nor have any of
them taken delight in shedding blood, or designed the general ruin of their
people; their own interest being bound up in theirs. Magnanimo, satis est
pros^asse.

Besides, it is the duty of the Chief Clergy to reprove them with meekness and
lowliness, to mind them of a Superior Potentate who will judge all men without
respect of persons; which is excellently done by Gregory, Orat. 17. You govern
together with Christ, and reign with him; you are the Image of God, and should
imitate him in showing mercy, and not the Devil in exercising cruelty; but
should remember that he has a Master in Heaven, who will so judge him as he
does the people committed to his charge. That whole Oration is worthy your
perusal. When Theodosius had made a great slaughter among the Thessalonians, to
the number of seven thousand, and coming afterward to the Church, St. Ambrose
shuts the doors against him, and minds him of his Cruelty; and tells him, That
from dust he came, and to dust he shall return: Let not therefore the
brightness of thy clothes hide from thee the weakness of thy flesh that is
under them. Thy subjects are of the same metal with thee, and serve the same
Lord -- will thou with those hands which yet drop with the blood of Innocents,
receive the body of the Lord? Depart, and refuse not this sentence which the
Lord does ratify in Heaven. This wrought so with him, that he repented, and
with much ado obtained Absolution.

The Church of Liege wrote an Epistle to Pope Paschal, when he persuaded Robert
Earl of Flanders to rebel against the Emperor, and invade his Dominions,
wherein they told the Pope, That Princes must be admonished and reproved
gently; and if they will not amend, are to be left to the just judgment of God.
Omne sub Regno graviore Regnum -- Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.

To the Assertion of an unnamed Doctor, That the Gospel prescribes no other
remedy but flight against the Persecutions of a lawful Magistrate, our Author
answers, p. 80. It is one thing what the Gospel prescribes; what it allows,
another. As if the Gospel did allow any thing contrary to its Precepts: This is
that the Author would be at: for none ever questioned but things in their
nature indifferent and expedient, are allowed by the Gospel without an express
command. But that which this Author contends for, is Resistance of a lawful
power in case of persecution; which is against many express Precepts of the
Gospel. The Gnostics held it lawful (for the avoiding of persecution) to deny
Christ, and to comply with either Jews or Gentiles. And to resist the Ordinance
of God, rather than to suffer persecution, will be interpreted a denial and
betraying of our Religion ( i. e. of Christ himself). An Argument of so low a
Spirit, as falls beneath the courage of a Heathen, or the hearty professors of
any Religion. Seneca says of his wise man, Placebit ei ignis per quem bona
fides collucebit; That he will embrace the Fire, rather than betray his Faith.
And the Stoic says, Tormenta a me abesse velim, sed si sustinenda fuerint, ut
me in illis fortiter, animose, honest geram, optabo. How is the valor of a
Soldier known, but by following his Commander with a generous contempt of
death? and shall the Christian Soldier that has so good a Captain, be the
only coward, and follow his Master at a distance, and utterly forsake him,
when any Conflict is at hand?

When therefore he demands by what Law we must die; I answer, By the Law of
God: rather than resist a lawful Power, we must submit to the Will of God and
our Savior, who have promised, that he that loses his life shall preserve it,
Luke 17.33. and if we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. And
herein Christ himself has given us an example, 1 Pet. 2.21. that we should
walk in his steps; who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: yet
when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not;
but committed himself to him that judges righteously. And to such a Passive
Obedience we are called, says the Apostle. And it is not our calling only,
but an act of Grace and good will,(...), given to us, as to believe in Christ,
so to suffer for Christ's sake, Phil. 1.29. which they that refuse to do, are
said to deny Christ. So that there is little difference between resisting the
Command and Ordinance of Christ, and denying him: the sin is the same, and the
punishment also; which St. Paul says is Damnation.

P. 82. As for the Kings Prerogative, I dare not be so bold with that as you
are: the Disputes between that and Privilege have cost us dear already: if it
were as well known as other parts of the Law are, you would not make so bold
with it, though you set light by some other Laws. But even other parts of the
Law, which are very well known and approved, are yet disobeyed, despised, and
opposed, (as well as the Kings Prerogative) and counted the Grievance of a
great Party.

P. 82. Old Bracton appears again, and is made to eat his own words: for
whereas he had said of the King, That every one is under him, and he under none
but God; and that he can have no equal in his Kingdom; for so he should lose
his command, because one equal has no power over another: now he is made to
contradict himself, That Rex est sub lege, quia lex facit Regem, etc. which is
utterly false, not only because the Kings Predecessors came in by Conquest,
but also because it is the Royal Assent that passes all Bills into Laws. Mr.
Baxter answers this, p. 14. part 4. of Christian Directory: That Lex being
taken for the signification of the Sovereigns will to oblige the Subject, the
Law does not make the King, but the King the Law. For which he quoteth Grotius,
lib. 8. p. 195. Neminem sibi imperare posse, a quo mutata voluntate nequeat
recedere. And Grotius quotes S. Augustine, Imperatorem non esse subjectum
Legibus suis. And doubtless this is true in every Free Monarchy; as England is
by Historians and Lawyers granted to be.

Now consider that Bracton wrote in the Reign of Henry the Third, when his
Earls and Barons often confederated, and rose actual War against him, and made
him to capitulate with them, having got the strength of the Nation in their
hands; in favor of whom he seems to write, and calls them the Kings higher
Court: not (as some) higher than the King, but than other of the Kings Courts.
Yet was this no Parliament, for the Commons are not mentioned by Bracton. Now
let any judge when Bracton was in the right, and when in the wrong opinion, by
what follows in the same Chapter: for as our Author blames the Doctor for not
reading on; so do I much more blame him, because he came nearer to it. And thus
Bracton says: Si autem ab eo peccatur, locus erit supplicationi quod factum
suum corrigat and emendat: quod si non fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad poenam
quod Dominum expectet Vltorem: Nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare,
multo fortius contra factum suum venire. (i. e.) If the King do offend, there
is liberty of petitioning that he would amend what is amiss: which if he will
not do, there is no punishment for the King, but to expect God to be his
Avenger: but let no man presume to dispute of his doings, much less to make
opposition against what he does. And this is agreeable to that Scripture,
Eccles. 8.4. Who may say to him, What do thou? If therefore we should grant
it to be true what Bracton says, according to practice rather than Law, in
those lawless times; yet Now, (as Plowden, as great a Lawyer as Bracton, says)
the Case is altered: And the Oath of Supremacy against the Pope, which Bracton
would by no means admit, and the Oath of Allegiance, and Act of Parliament for
not taking up Arms on any pretense whatsoever, would have quite overthrown
Bracton's Opinion, if he had not done it himself.

Our Author seems to apply the Premises only against a Popish Successor; and
freely grants, that when he is lawfully possessed of the Crown, he is inviolable,
and unaccountable as to his own person, and ought by no means to have any
violence offered to him, p. 84. To what purpose then has he given Instances of
reproach proachful and provoking Language, Prayers and Devotions that helped on
his death, all for his Destruction, none for his Conversion; threatening to kick
him, and (from Zozomen) encouraging the Assassination of him, when Julian was
in quiet possession of the Empire?

P. 94. You quote a Saying of Asterius; How great a resort is there from the
Church to the Altars? etc. This is answered by Bishop Bilson, p. 502. of
Christian Subjection: You find (says he) that multitudes ran from Christ to
Paganism after Julian, to Arianism after Valens; but do you find that the Godly
did rebel against them? What presumption is this in you, to control the Wisdom
and Goodness of God, sifting his Church by the rage and fury of wicked Princes,
and crowning those that be his, as patient in Trial and constant in Truth! Were
you thoroughly persuaded that the hearts of Kings are in the hands of God, and
that the hairs of our heads are numbered, so that no persecution can apprehend
his, which he disposes not for the experience of their faith, or recompense of
their sins; you would as well honor the Justice of God in erecting Tyrants
that our unrighteousness may be punished in this world, as embrace his Mercy
in giving rest to his Church by the favor of good Princes. Experto Creed. This
good Bishop says, We have these twenty seven years endured all sorts of
calamities that may befall men in exile, therefore charge not us to be worldly
minded, p. 501. See Mr. Baxter to this purpose, part 4. of the Christian
Directory.

What our Author says concerning Passive Obedience, p. 85. etc. shall be
considered anon.

P. 89. He is very angry that the Doctor should reflect on some dangerous
Pamphlets, as that of the History of Succession, The Dialogue between Tutor and
Pupil, and another that affirms, That Parliaments should sit till they have
done that for which they were called. And contrariwise, so far commends the
treasonable Popish book of Doleman, as that it was impossible to write a
History of Succession, without borrowing from it. Their Tools are so dull,
they must needs be beholding to the Philistines to set an edge on them upon
their Whetstones of Lies and Forgeries. Quam been convenient!

P. 91. The Thebaean Legion, like a malus Genius, meets him again; and for
their sakes, he is resolved rather to die a Murderer than a Martyr: for p. 85.
he puts the Case, though he confesses it to be a rare Case: for bad Princes
seldom stoop so low as to be Executioners of their own cruelty. But the
Question is, if they should, How far, notwithstanding, men may endeavor to
save themselves without breach of their Allegiance, and of that true Faith and
Loyalty which they ought to bear of life and limb, and terrene honor. If they
have a mind to know, they may ask advice, (i. e.) How far, notwithstanding the
Oath of Allegiance, men may resist their Prince. For the Authors part, he is
resolved already, but will not discover to every one what is in his heart: if
he thought it unlawful to resist the Kings person, in case he should offer
violence to a Subject, he would certainly have published it; but his Silence
speaks his Consent. Now if the King be forced for his defense to take an armed
Guard, as our Late Sovereign was; And our Author, with other Malcontents that
think themselves highly wronged, because they are not rewarded according to
their deserts, should meet him with another Armed Company, and fight him; he
may kill his person, without breaking his Allegiance for bearing true Faith and
Loyalty of life and limb, or any way injuring the King: for the King may be at
Westminster, when they are fighting against him in the Field; And it is not
Julian they resist, but the Devil that is in him. And yet I suppose that our
Author, as the Law requires, has declared his abhorrence of that traitorous
Position of taking Arms by his authority against his person, or against those
that are commissionated by him. But where shall we go to be resolved in this
weighty Case? shall we go to the Romish Casuists? they are positively for
killing the King; Mariana, and Bellarmine, and many others, own it in diverse
cases. But we need not go so far; our Author has, tanquam ex Tripode,
determined it, in the Case of Julian, that such a King is to be pursued, as if
he were a Midnight-Thief, or a Highway Robber, p. 73. and it is as lawful to
destroy him, as for a hungry Welsh man to eat up his Cheese, and cry, Chud eat
mere an chad it, p. 95. To this end Our Author quoteth Gregory calling on the
Angels whose work it was to destroy the Tyrant, who had not killed a Sihon King
of the Amorites, nor an Og the King of Basan, but (in so doing) had killed the
Dragon, an Apostate, the great Designer, the common Enemy and Adversary of all,
with an etc. p. 23. And again, p. 61. If any one had killed Julian, he was not
to be blamed (no, but to be rewarded rather) as one who showed himself so
courageous for God, and for that Religion which he approves. St. Chrysostom in
his first Homily of David and Saul, teaches another Doctrine: If we reverence
and fear those Magistrates (says he) that are elected by the King, although
they be wicked, although they be Thieves and Robbers, although they be unjust;
and whatever they be, not despising them for their wickedness, but standing in
awe of them for the dignity of him that did elect them; much more ought we
thus to do in the Case of God. And Gregory Nazianzen speaks home to the Case,
in that 27 Oration, p. 171. Continue faithful to your Kings; but first of all
to God, and for him to them also, to whom you have been committed by him. And
Elias Cretensis gives this Reason for it; Because if ye fear God, and
studiously observe his Commandments, you will be faithful also to your Kings
for Gods sake. Now Julian's Soldiers, as our Author says, p. 8. were men
principl'd in the true Religion, and therefore thought Julian stood in fear of
them, as he says; yet they never did him hurt by Open Rebellion, or Secret
Conspiracies: nor is our Author too old to learn of them.

P. 92. He sums up the strength of what has been said, in these Five

PROPOSITIONS. ANSWER. 1. Christianity destroys no man's Natural or Civil
Rights, but confirms them. 1. Christianity obliges us to prefer our Spiritual
and Eternal Rights above our Temporal and Civil. 2. All men have both a Natural
and Civil Right and Property in their Lives, till they have forfeited them by
the Laws of their Country. 2. Our Lives are to be parted with in obedience to
God's Laws, though not forfeited by the Laws of our Country. 3. When the laws
of God and of our Country interfere, and it is made death by the Law of the
Land to be a good Christian, then we are to lay down our Lives for Christ sake.
This is the only case wherein the Gospel requires Passive Obedience, namely,
when the Laws are against a man. And this was the Case of the first Christians.
3. It is not the only Case wherein the Gospel requires Passive Obedience, when
the Laws are against a man. There was no Law of the Romans by which Christ
might be put to death; yet when he suffered, he threatened not, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.19, 20, 21. and hereunto we
are called. To what? to suffer, though wrongfully, v. 19. and take it patiently
for Conscience sake toward God. 4. That killing of a man contrary to Law, is
Murder. 4. If we suffer death wrongfully, it is Martyrdom, and acceptable to
God, though it be Murder in our Enemies. 5. That every man is bound to prevent
Murder, as far as the Law allows; and ought not to submit to be murdered, if he
can help it. 5. We may so by our appeal to the Supreme Magistrate; as St. Paul,
when he was like to be condemned contrary to Law, appealed to Caesar, having
all the Law on his side, Acts 25.8. Neither against the Law of the Jews, nor
against the Temple, nor yet against Caesar have I offended: yet doubtless if
Caesar had condemned him, he would have patiently submitted, after the Example
of his Master, though he could have had Legions of Angels to defend him.

P. 93. Now I desire those men who of late have thundered in all public places
with the Thebaean Legion, to keep that complete and admirable Example till they
have got another Maximian, and till that Maximian has got authority at once to
cut 6666 throats.

I think there was never more need than now, to press that noble Example: for
though we have not a Maximian, but another Constantine set over us; no Julian
that commands us to sacrifice to Idols, but One that makes it his business that
we should all with one consent worship God and our Savior in the beauty of
Holiness. Though he have all the Laws of God and man to secure him from
malicious and violent men, yet how are the tongues of wicked men sharpened
against him, (and all his Ministers in Church and State!) How are all those
devilish arts of Calumny and Reproach, the fears and jealousies of Arbitrary
Power and Popery renewed, which encouraged a Rebellious multitude to the
cutting of the throats not of one Legion, but of twenty at least; and the
cutting off the head of a most incomparable Prince too! Would the Thebaean
Legion, that laid down their lives at the Command of a Maximian, have murtered
a word against so good a Governor? And when the same things are attempted a
second time, shall we not bring forth the Thebaean Legion to withstand such
impious practices, and rise up in judgment against them, who, notwithstanding
the Laws of God and our Country too, would not only decimate us, but, if it
were in their power, destroy us (as Nero wished that the Citizens of Rome had
but one Neck, that he might cut them all off) at a stroke? I would gladly add
the consideration of the Thundering Legion to this of the Thebaean: They by
their Prayers obtained relief from Heaven, and Victory too, for the Army of a
persecuting Heathen; we are taught to pray for the Confusion of a Christian
Prince. But this shall suffice.

Under those cruel Emperors, Dioclesian and Maximian, that most illustrious
example of Passive Obedience presents it self to our view, which the Thebaean
Legion showed, consisting of 6666 valiant Christians; the tenth man of whom
when Maximian had caused to be executed for refusing to slay their
Fellow Christians, and to offer Sacrifice to his false Gods; Mauritius taking
the rest of the Legion aside, used this Oration unto them (as Eucherius
Archbishop of Lions relates in the Acts of their Martyrdom.)

I congratulate your Virtue, most worthy Fellow Soldiers, that for the love of
Religion the Command of Caesar wrought no fear at all in you. You have seen
your Fellow Soldiers, in a manner with rejoicing minds, to have been delivered
up to a glorious death. How did I fear lest any of you, as it was easy for
armed men to do (under pretense of Defense) should by lifting up his hands give
interruption to their most blessed Funerals? I had now ready at hand for the
forbidding this attempt, the Example of our Christ, who by the Command of his
own mouth -- Put up thy Sword which was unsheathed by his Apostle: teaching
thereby, that the Virtue of Christian-Confidence is greater than all Weapons:
here Christ our God did clearly Prohibit our minds and hands, that none with
mortal hands should resist the Divine Work, but rather with ever-continued
Religion add a consummation to the work begun. Hitherto we have read examples
inserted into the Holy Scriptures, but even now we our selves have beheld whom
we ought to imitate.

After this, Maximian having commanded a second decimation of those that
remained, (among which it is likely that Mauritius suffered) Exuperius taking
the Ensigns of his Legion, spoke thus:

My most worthy Fellow Soldiers, I hold as you see the Ensigns of a secular
warfare; but to those Arms I provoke you not: I excite not your Courage and
Valor to such wars as these; another kind of fight is to be chosen by us. It
is not by these Swords that you can make your way to the Kingdom of Heaven.

And then wishes this Message might be returned to the persecuting Emperor:

We are thy Soldiers indeed; but withal, Gods Servants: to thee we owe our
employment in the War, to him our Innocence; from thee have we received the
reward of our labor, to him we are beholding for the beginning of our life: we
cannot so follow thee in this, though our Prince, as to deny God who is our
Maker, and, whether thou will or wilt not, is thine also -- As for us, even
this necessity of our Life does not drive us to Rebellion -- Despair it self,
which most strengthens men in dangers, has not been able* to arm us against
thee. Behold, we have our Weapons, and yet resist not, as willing rather to die
than overcome; and choosing rather to perish innocent, than live Traitors. If to
what thou have already decreed against us, thou will add more, be it Fire,
Torture, or Sword, we are ready for it. WE ARE CHRISTIANS; and such as our
selves we cannot persecute. Consider, O Caesar, the courage of this Legion: our
Weapons we cast away, and thy Executioner shall find our hands unarmed, but our
breasts armed with the Catholic Faith. Kill us, down with us, without all
fear; we offer our Necks to be cut off by the Swords appointed to slay us.

And so they were all cut in pieces, and each of them were more than
Conquerours, obtaining a Crown and Kingdom infinitely more glorious than that
of the Roman Empire.

Now suppose some Dissenting Apostate Chaplain of that noble Army, that had
rather lose his Religion than his Life, and had more hopes to divide the spoils
of a Temporal Crown, than to trust his Savior for an entire Eternal one, had
held forth* to them after this manner:

My dearly beloved Brethren, Fellow Soldiers and fellow-Saints, we have
hitherto hazzarded our Lives under a Pagan and Tyrannical Prince, who has
employed us as a Forlorn Hope on all desperate designs, purposely to destroy
us; and though he be drunk with the blood of our Brethren now spilt before our
Eyes, yet does he thirst after ours also, having appointed us as so many Sheep
for the Slaughter. Hearken, my beloved, the Kings of the Earth ever were, and
ever will be, Enemies to the King of Heaven: It is not I, but the Spirit of God
by David tells you, The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take
Counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed; but the same
Spirit tells us, that notwithstanding, he has set his King upon the holy hill
of Sion, who shall break the Kings of the Earth with a Rod of Iron, and dash
them in pieces like a Potters Vessel; and his Saints shall have the honor of
binding their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron. Moreover,
Brethren, we read how in old time, for the sake of his Elect, God reproved
Kings, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. It is true,
that God has appointed Government as his Ordinance, but he has not tied us up
to Monarchy, which all the Wise men of Greece have rejected, and called them
all by the name they deserved, Tyrants. And though our Emperors came in upon
us by Conquest and Surprise, yet we have been governed heretofore by a Senate;
and sometime the Senate, and sometime the Soldiery have cut off their
Emperors for their Arbitrary Government, and set up others in the room. So
that if we grant the Office to be from God, yet the person appointed to that
Office is a Creature of man, or a Humane Creature; and they that set them up,
may pull them down; for they are appointed to be a terror to evildoers, and
to be the Ministers of God to us for our good: But when he is a Murderer of
them that do well, as we see by this bloody Execution on our Fellow Soldiers,
he is the Devils Minister, not Gods; and in resisting, we fight not against
him, but the Devil that is in him. Besides, that which this Tyrant intends, is
such an arbitrary Act of his own, that the great Senate, whose Counsel and
Authority he has rejected, are afraid of the like cruelty, and would be glad
to be restored to their Authority. Let us therefore be no longer Servants of
such men, but stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free:
Has not he made us his Firstborn, higher than the Kings of the Earth? Are not
we a Royal Priesthood? and have not the Saints a promise that they shall
inherit the Earth? The Gentiles may permit Kings to exercise Lordship over
them, but it ought not to be so with us, It Is in vain to expect till the
Emperors become Christians; we Christians must make our selves Emperors; at
least we may divide the Empire among us, and set up Christ alone to rule as
King in the midst of us, in a HOLY COMMONWEALTH. And now is the time, or never:
If we should tamely submit to the Tyrants Sword, our Religion, which is bound
up in our Lives, will perish with us, and the Generations yet unborn will curse
us. Did not Moses slay the Egyptian that assaulted his Brother? and were not
the Israelites commanded to kill the Canaanites? What if some one of our
number, who undervalues his Life, go and dispatch the Tyrant? Melius pereat
unus quam unitas: you Romans know my meaning.

Once more, my Brethren, there is a Law and dictate of nature that will
justify us in resisting those that would take away our Lives.
Self-preservation is a Law above any humane Constitution. By what Law must we
die, that have the Law of Nature for our Self-preservation, which is equivalent
to the Law of God? And did not Cicero that great Commonwealths-man tell us,
that Salus Populi Suprema Lex? If those Infidels that are appointed to cut our
Throats will venture their Lives for such an Earthly Master, shall we lay them
down cowardly without doing any thing for our Heavenly Master, for our
Religion, which he has entrusted us with, and will require it at our hands, if
we betray it, and seek not to convey it to our Children? And if we die without
endeavoring it, we may perish in the next world for perishing so tamely in
this. And thus I hope I have satisfied all scruples of Conscience. And now, I
beseech you, suffer a word of Exhortation.

Now is the time that God will redeem his People by our hands. Now is the time
that we must vindicate our Christian Liberty. Now is the time that we must
destroy those Romish Wolves that would devour the Flock of Christ. What though
we be in our selves but few in number? Were not the people so by whom God
delivered Israel, by the hands of Joshua and Gideon? What though our Enemies be
many? has it not been known, when one has chased a Thousand, and two put ten
thousand to flight? and may not the Roman Valor, assisted by the Arm of
Christ, do more than the Jewish? Besides, though there be but this one Legion
that are entirely Christians, there are infinite numbers scattered up and down
the Empire, whose hearts are ASSOCIATED with us already, and wait for such an
opportunity as our stout resistance will give them. Did not Pliny complain to
Trajan, that the Christian Assemblies were so great, that their Heathen Temples
were quite forsaken, Et sacra Solennia diu intermissa? Did not Tertullian many
years since tell us, that the Cities and Garrisons, and Camp, were filled with
Christian Soldiers? and are there not great numbers multiplied now, and ready
to join with us? And a later Doctor, Cyprian, a holy Martyr, told us, that our
number is Nimius and Copiosus: and the numbers of such faithful brethren are
much increased rather than diminished, since that time. Be strong then, and
courageous; be not afraid nor dismayed, for Maximian, nor all the multitude with
him: there are more with us than there are with him: With them is the Arm of
flesh, with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battles. Up
then and be doing, ye mighty men of Valor; fight the Lords battles, and he
will fight for you. Do not basely cast away your lives like so many felo's de
se; sell them at as dear a rate as you can. It better becomes the Roman Valor
to dye like men in defense of their lives and Religion, than ignominiously to
have their throats cut like so many Swine by a bloody Butcher: If we perish in
such a glorious enterpize, yet we shall live in the records of the Ages to
come, and give the world a good example: but if we survive, we shall enjoy the
honors and glories of the world; Religion will flourish with us, and the
Church here on Earth be like that in Heaven, no more Militant, but Triumphant.

Such have been the Harangues of Dissenters in our latter Age, and by them they
have led on a multitude to Rebellion and destruction: and to such an end our
Author has proposed the example of the Julian-Christians.

But there was not one of these Worthies (of whom the world was not worthy)
durst mutter a syllable to such a purpose; they had not so learnt Christ, as to
scandalize and defame him and his Doctrine, as if they were enemies to Caesar:
We are Christians (say they) we have Christ's Example before our eyes to teach
us Obedience and Patience, and his Command not to unsheath our Swords against
lawful Authority, neither in our own or his defense. We value not the honors
of this life, but hasten to the glories of a better; and in confidence of a
speedy enjoyment of them, we will not make resistance, nor accept deliverance
by any ungodly act. And though we see the example of Cruelty before our eyes
in the death of our Brethren that have been cut asunder and slain with the
Sword, we are ready to suffer as patiently, as we hope to reign gloriously
with them.

Now let any serious man among us judge which were the best Christians; these
Primitive Worthies, who often took their lives in their hands to fight the
battles of a Pagan and Tyrannical Emperor, and patiently laid them down at
last, rather than make resistance against him; or those Modern Zealots, who
will hazard their lives against a Christian and gracious Prince, and by their
resistance, rather take away his life, than live in obedience to him, or
surrender their own into the hands of God that gave it, when God calls for it?
They who say of a Heathen Persecutor, He is Gods Minister, we must obey him,
not only for fear, but for Conscience sake; he has no power but what is given
him from above for the punishment of our sins: Or they that say, This is the
Heir, come, let us kill him, and the Inheritance shall be ours?

If our Author be to be credited in any thing, this which he says, p. 68. is
the plain truth of the matter: The Julian Christians were in quite other
circumstances than the first Christians were; they were in full and quiet
possession of their Religion, when Julian came to the Crown; and they should
have undervalued it, if they had not done their utmost to keep it: -- whereas
the poor Primitive Christians were born to persecution; they neither knew
better, nor expected it. And after a large flourish, he sums up all in a word,
p. 71. The first Christians suffered according to the Laws of their Country,
whereas these under Julian were persecuted contrary to Law.

We never heard that the Christians in Julian's time pleaded the Laws for their
indemnite: Nor had they any ground so to do more than the Thebaean Legion had.
For,

1. No Law of Man could make void the Law of God, of worshipping God only: And
if (as St. Augustine says) he that disobeys the Prefect that he may obey the
Emperor* is guiltless; so is he that disobeys the Emperor that he may obey
God. 2. There was no Public Law that one Legion should be cut in pieces for
being Christians, by another; yet this was their case: They were commanded by
that Tyrant Maximius to assist him in destroying the Christians. But they
answered. We are Christians, and such as our selves we cannot persecute. So
that either the Emperor's Will was a Law, or else they suffered contrary to
Law.
Therefore the truth of the matter is this: Our Author had committed an error
in the Foundation, and now is forced to patch and daub for hiding of it; He
supposes the Christians in Julian's time did generally do or approve of what
he represents some few of the weak and ungovernable part to have done; the
contrary whereof, as to the sounder, more learned, and pious body of the
Christians of that Age, has been sufficiently demonstrated.

So that I shall now appeal to the Judgment of the Reader, and to the
Conscience of the Author (if it be not seared) whether this be not the plain
truth of the matter which follows. The Primitive Christians, for the first 300
years, abounded in Christian simplicity; they never relished the pleasures of
the World; Ambition and Covetousness never possessed nor adulterated their
spirits; the Blood and Spirit of Christ and his Apostles ran warm in their
Veins, and leapt for joy, as brisk as generous Wine, when it was poured out,
for the Gospel sake, to bear witness to the truths thereof. Then it was that
they were afraid to speak evil of Dignities in the Church or State: then it was
said, Ecce quam se invicem diligunt! Behold how they love one another! Then it
was that such Dissenters that betrayed any truth of the Gospel, or any of their
Fathers or Brethren, were branded with the black character of Traditores or
Traitors. If ever we will learn purity of Doctrine, or innocence of Life, we
must take our measures from the Example and Practice of those Primitive times,
whenas yet they had so many Apostolical Guides among them, that sealed their
Doctrine with their blood, as Clemens, and Ignatius, and Polycarp, Justine
Martyr, Irenaeus, etc. And therefore we of all others should abhor the Doctrine
of Resistance on pretense of the Laws, when our Laws say, We may not resist
under any pretense whatsoever.

Again, is not this the truth of the matter, that when Constantine established
the Church in outward splendor, and Christianity was the way to Preferment
and Secular honors and advantages, Hodie Venenum infusum est Ecclesioe? From
thenceforward the sins of Ambition, Emulation, and Contention, imbittered and
poisoned their Spirits; they grew wanton, and began to vex and disquiet their
Governors; to supplant, bite and devour one another. And Constantine himself
favored the Cause of Arius. But when Constantius espoused and made it the
established Religion, then, like Jonas Gourd, Arianism and Donatism sprung up
in a night, and over-topt the whole Church: Totus mundus miratur se factum
Arianum. Then it was that Christ was crucified afresh indeed, when his Deity
was openly denied and disputed, and those few Christians that with Athanasius,
Basil, Apollinaris, and some others, defended it, were banished, and accounted
Impostors, and Seducers of the people, and dealt with accordingly.

And from hence most probably it was, that Julian first learnt the Principles
of his Apostacy, which were improved by the Pagan Philosophers that were his
Tutors, who could disprove the Divinity of Christ from the Doctrine of the
Arians, that were the greatest part of Professing Christians; and Julian made
use of some of their Arguments against Christianity, concluding, that if he
were not God, he ought not to be worshipped. And that Apostate often expressed
a greater favor to Arius, and particularly to George an Arian Bishop of
Alexandria, whose writings he made use of against the Christians, ut Ecclesiam
suis configeret telis, than to any of the most pious and learned Catholics.

Moreover, Julian perceived that the hatred and contention of Christians was so
implacable, that his giving them the reins would be a means to destroy them,
without his use of the Sword or Whip to drive them on (as when the dogs and
wolves had declared war, the wolves sent a spy to discover their numbers, who
brought word their number was great, but their colors were diverse, and they
did so snarl and quarrel with each other, that they were not to be feared at
all.) But though the truth of the Matter appears, yet we are not come to the
root of the Matter, (for that is not grounded on Truth) and the bitter root
lies deep under the ground; and this it is: (says our Author) The first
Christians suffered according to the Laws of their Country, whereas these under
Julian were persecuted contrary to Law. Against which though I have said
enough already to convince impartial men, yet I shall now add this further: I
wonder how such men can plead the Laws of the Country against Persecution, who
every day persecute those Laws, and live in open defiance and opposition of
them; contriving and practicing how to overthrow the Religion and Government
established by those Laws. If the Julian Christians did (as you say) pray for
the Destruction of their Emperors, reproach and brave them to their very
beards, and threaten to kick them; I wonder what Law of the Land did maintain
such practices: or if they could have found out some such Law, yet the Law of
God being violated by such practices, God might justly punish them for the
breach of his Laws: for no Law of man, that is temporary and mutable, can
indemnifie us against the Laws of God. This is a Maxim with Lawyers (as Lelius
de privilegiis Eccl.) Nulla lex valeat contra jus Divinum.

But, p. 68. Julian found their Religion in quiet possession. What Religion I
pray was then in full and quiet possession? If any, it was the Arian, which
your self cannot call Christian, except you add dissenting. And if, as it has
been said, it were as bad as Popery, it was worse than Paganism. Perhaps this
is the Religion of our Author: for no man likely can deride the Doctrine, but
he that denies the Deity of Christ. But I have so far a good opinion of you,
that you considered this; and do not therefore give it the Appellative of
Christian Religion, but the proper name of their Religion, viz. the Arians, or
dissenting Christians.

If this were not the Religion that was in full and quiet possession, what was
it? to revile, and threaten, and pray for the destruction of the Emperor, and
to contend earnestly against the Divinity of Christ, as Constantius Julian's
predecessor did? who, as Bishop Usher observes, promoted that damnable error
with all his might. Was this that which you call the reigning Religion? So was
that in Cromwels days, when Iniquity was established by a Law, (such as that
lawless Usurper could procure.) Can you produce any Universal Laws made by
Constantine, that the Christian Religion should obtain throughout all his
Dominions? Licinius and Maximian cruelly oppressed them long after Constantine
came to the Throne. And his Senate consisted of unconverted Romans for a great
part. Eusebius, chap. 55. of the Life of Constantine, says, he compelled none
to turn Christians; and chap. 59. forbid any one to molest another for his
Religion. Our Author might have gone for one of the Godly party in those days.

I do not read that there was one Law extended throughout the whole Roman
Empire, which was almost Universal, but that several Kingdoms and Cities were
governed by their own Laws. So were the Jews and Heathen, as well as Christian
Subjects, in their several Cities and remote Provinces. As Julian told the
Bishops that were of several Persuasions, that they should not disturb the
public peace of the Empire, and then they might enjoy their own Liberties and
Religion. Constantine seemed to be almost of a like persuasion: for why else
did he not suppress the Arian Heresy, which from Alexandria infected the whole
Empire? He did take care to prevent Schism and Sedition among Christians, that
the administration of the Government might be more easy: But this great man
banished Athanasius into France, where he remained till Constantine his Son
recalled him, as Eusebius in his Chronology.

But what if there were some Edicts for the establishment of Christian Religion
in Constantine's days, nothing was confirmed by the Senate; that was accounted
then a needless thing. Nor did the Edicts of one Emperor bind another: by the
same Authority as Constantine might have settled the Orthodox Religion,
Constantius settled the Arian, and after him Julian the Pagan Religion; I mean,
by his own Imperial power and Edicts. For the Roman Emperor was an Absolute
Monarch; their Will was a Law, as Gregory Nazianzen, quoted by you, p. 13. The
Will and Pleasure of the Emperor is an unwritten Law, backed with Power, and
much stronger than written ones which were not supported by Authority. So that
though he did not, as you term it, fairly enact Sanguinary Laws, yet had he the
Law of the Sword in his hands. And I think it was a great mercy of God to the
Christians under him, that he did not by public Edicts put the Sword out of
his own hands, into the hands of his Heathen Magistrates, who would have
written them all in blood. Therefore Mr. Baxter says, p. 20. of 4th part of
his Direct. Julian was a protector of the Church from Popular Rage in
comparison of other Persecutors, though in other respects he was a Plague.

Valentinian was a right Christian Emperor, and when he was chosen, the
Soldiers were importunate that he should assume another as an Associate in the
Empire: he tells them, It lay in you to choose me your Emperor; but being
chosen, what you desire is not in your power but mine; it belongs to you as
Subjects to be quiet, and rest contented, and to me as your King to consider
what is fit to be done. Zozomen, l. 6.86.

Justinian was another good Emperor, and he assumed the sole administration of
the Empire to himself; and demands in his Novels, Quis tantae authoritatis, ut
nolentem Principem possit ad convocandos Patres caetorosque Proceres coarctare?
Who can claim so great Authority, as to constrain the Prince to assemble the
Senate against his will? And Justinian ( Novel 105.) excepts the Emperor from
the coercive power of the Law, to whom, says he, God has subjected the Laws
themselves, sending him as a(...), living Law unto men; And the Gloss notes,
That the Emperor is the Father of the Law; whereupon the Laws also are subject
to him. When Vespasian was Emperor, it was declared by the Senate, That he
might make Leagues with whom he pleased: And though Tiberius, Claudius or
Germanicus had made certain Laws, yet Vespasian was not obliged by them. And
Pliny in his Panegyric to Trajan, tells him, how happy he was that he was
obliged to nothing. So that the Christians had no more pretense of having the
Laws on their side under Julian, than under Dioclesian, Maximus, or
Constantius; nor did they ever plead them to justify a Rebellion against him,
for want of such an Advocate or Leader as our Author.

Gregory Nyssene tells us also what the power of the King or Emperor was: he
defines him to be (...), one that has Absolute power in himself, no Master nor
Equal: Cont. Eunomium, l. 1.

So that our Author's great Babel is fallen, viz. that the Julian Christians
had their Religion established by Law, and that they were long possessed of it:
For, Laws or no Laws, by the Lex Regia the Emperor could reverse the old, and
establish new as it pleased him: and for want of Laws, where the word of the
Emperor was, there was power, and none might say to him, What do thou? Thus
it was with Constantine and Constantius, and why not with Julian? And now I
hope the good Christians of our Age will no longer trust to such broken Reeds
as our Author puts into their hands, much less that they should take up the
Sword (which will be no other than a broken Reed also, not only to fail them,
but to pierce through their sides).

Now if we should turn the Tables, and ask our Author, Whether when Jovian and
Valentinian were Emperors, and had made some new Edicts for the Orthodox
Christians, as well as against the Arians and Pagans, it had been lawful for
the Arians or Pagans to rebel in defense of their Religion? Or, to come nearer
home, Whether when Queen Mary had established Popery by Law in this Nation, it
had been lawful for the Papists to have rebelled against Queen Elizabeth, they
having the Laws on their side, yea and questioning her Right of Succession too:
yet we do not read that they did contrive a General Rebellion; though, for
ought I see, our Author would have justified them, when he tells us from
Zozomen, what men may do for the Religion whereof they are well persuaded.

Or nearer yet: when the Long, too Long Parliament, pretended against the King,
that their Religion was in danger by Popery and Superstition, their Laws and
Liberties invaded by an Arbitrary Power; did they well or ill from these
pretenses to raise that War against the King, that turned the Nation to an
Aceldama? Were the Laws such as could justify that Rebellion, or no? If they
could not, then I am sure they cannot now, since the late Act for Treason, in
the 13th of our King, and a Declaration of Parliament, That it is not lawful on
any pretense whatsoever, etc And by several Statutes it is declared, That the
King is the Only Supreme Governor of his Dominions, over all Persons and
Causes whatsoever. And the power of the Sword or Militia is put into his hands,
as well by the Law of the Nation, as of God; and I trust he will not bear it in
vain.

Having thus stripped this full-fac'd Bird of a few borrowed and painted
Feathers, how justly is he exposed to be hooted at by every boy, or dealt with
as in the Apologue of such another bird, that seeing the Pigeons to be well
meated and live securely, he would get himself to be colored and arrayed like
one of them, and feed among them, that he might no longer be forced to prey
abroad for his livelihood: but having fed with the Pigeons a while, they
perceived that neither head, nor beak, nor claws, were like theirs; and
therefore they expel him out of their society; and then thinking to return to
his old manner of life, the rest fall on him, and banish him from them also; so
that he was forced to remain alone as one in the Desert. The Moral is only
this: Though some men may for their own concerns, and for a little time, love
the Treason, yet generally all men hate the Traitor.

For my part, I cannot see any one particular that did so justly render Julian
odious to the Primitive Christians, as that he had been (an Apostate) Lecturer
in an Assembly of Christians. And if any such shall (for ambitious, covetous,
or vainglorious ends) seek Protection and Encouragement from some Great men in
this our Age; I shall earnestly beseech them to consider, that as some have
entertained good Angels unawares. so others have evil ones to be their
Familiars, who usually drive them over Precipices to perish in the deep: and by
their fruits you may know them. For as our Savior said, ( Joh. 8.44.) Ye are
of your father the devil, because they did the works of the devil; so they,
certainly, that by lies and falsehood provoke to Envy, Contention, and
Bloodshed; they that falsely accuse innocent and pious persons, and bring
railing Accusations against their Governors, such as Michael the Archangel
durst not bring against Satan himself: however they may pass for Angels of
light with some deluded people, will appear to sober and discerning persons,
not as an evil Spirit under a Prophets Mantle, but in his proper colors and
terrors, breathing out Flames of fire, raising Storms and Earthquakes; and at
last vanish, leaving an infectious and noisome stench behind them.

If this Reflection savours too much of an Invective, it is what our Author's
two great Leaders have suggested. So Bracton says of a wicked King, that he is
Minister Diaboli dum declinat ad injuriam; he is the Devils Minister that acts
injuriously: and Gregory says it not only of Julian, That the Devil was in
him, but even of Constantius, That some Devil (he knows not of what kind) stole
in with him to his Consultations, p. 25. And when our Author calls the Prayers
and Tears of the Primitive Christians, Mountebank-prescriptions. And p. 74.
Much wonders at those who trouble the Nation at this time of the day with the
unseasonable prescriptions of Prayers and Tears, and the Passive Obedience of
the Thebaean Legion. And p. 75. That they throw away their lives, and are
certainly weary of them, who practice any such Passive Obedience. And p. 77.
That he is a felo de se, and guilty of his own Murder. And thereupon prepares
men for resistance of a lawful Power (though it be exercised unlawfully) with
an Ei qui vult viribus uti, erit viriliter resistendum; applying what was
spoken by Bracton against the violent attempts of one private person against
another, to the actions of lawful Princes; and so does teach the Doctrine of
Devils: for, as St. James says, Such wisdom comes not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, and devilish.

Though this might excuse the sharpness of my Reflections on the Author, yet
when I shall show the provocation I had thereunto, I think every truly
Christian Reader will justify me. And this it was. When I had read that
passage in our Author, quoted by him (out of Zozomen) p. 60. it came to my
remembrance that Milton ( Cromwell's Secretary) in his Defense of the People of
England for murdering King Charles the First of blessed memory, made use of
the same quotation, totidem verbis, p. 44. From him also he took the Theme on
which he declaims in so many Chapters. For thus Milton: Quid Antiocheni homines
apprime Christiani? What did the Antiochians, who were the chiefest Christians?
did they pray for Julian the Apostate, to whom they came publicly, and rent
him (or, as our Author interprets it, vexed every vein in his Royal heart) with
their reproaches, and scoffing at his long Beard, bid him make Ropes of it? And
when they heard of his death, appointed public Supplications, Feastings, and
Mirth, can you think that they ever prayed for his life and safety? What? when
it is also reported that he was slain by a Christian Soldier?

These are the Pillars on which our English Solomon has raised to himself that
Temple of Honor; which yet may prove but as so many Pillars of Smoke to the
eyes of all that shall inspect them; and perhaps may have a worse effect (which
smoke that has so much fire under it is wont to have) upon the Author. But,
let us observe what worthy Lectures our Author reads us on these Texts of
Milton. Chap. 3. They reproached him in words. This Chapter consists of 7
pages. Chap. 4. Of their Actions. This has about 7 more. Chap. 5. and 6. Of
their Prayers and their other Devotions, makes 11 pages. Chap. 7. His Death by
a Christian Soldier; where you have the passage at large out of Zozomen,
commending such as kill Tyrants, 6 pages. Chap. 8. How they used his memory,
by joy and feasting at his death, by calling him Persecutor, Traitor, Killer of
Christ, etc. with other Reflections on their Behavior. Chap. 9. Ad finem.

He quotes also the same passages out of Bracton which Milton made use of, p.
81. Non est Rex, ubi dominatur voluntas, and non Lex: exercere debet Rex
potestatem Juris, ut Vicarius and Minister Dei; potestas autem injuriae Diobali
est, non Dei: cum declinat ad injuriam Rex, Diaboli Minister est. And as if
these Arguments which that Mercenarie man made use of to justify the death of
Charles the first, were not enough, our Author adds more to them; to what end,
he best knows. But certainly, if that Execrable Book deserved to be burnt by
the common Hangman in France, this book deserves to be used so by every Loyal
Subject in England; it being of much worse consequence than that of Milton:
Milton's book being written when the Father was in his Grave, and this when the
Son by many miracles of mercy is settled and preserved in the Throne: where God
long preserve and prosper him.

And this I suppose is the reason that our Author and Mr. Hunt cannot endure
the mention of 48, no more than that of the Thebaean Legion; because these men
are the very Marshals and Miltons, the Contrivers and Justifiers of whatever
shall be done according to that pattern in the Mount, as the old Phrase was: A
Mount like that which is described Heb. 12.18. So full of terrors, as made
Moses himself to tremble exceedingly. Perhaps they finding no Preferment in the
Established Government, hope to get a Booty by fishing in troubled waters; and
like the two Sons of Zebedee (for they were Fishermen also) to sit the one at
the right, and the other at the left hand of some Great person, when he shall
come into his Kingdom. Or if the hopes of the translation of the Kingdom should
fail, and degenerate into a Commonwealth, one of them may be, as Milton was, a
mercenarie Historian, or under-Secretarie of State. But now I think on it, they
will never be so fit as Milton was, of whom they come as short in accuracie of
Style, as they may in time exceed him in other of his Virtues and Preferments.

I would advise our Divine Lecturer to take a Doctor's degree at Salamanca (for
he may despair of it here in England) and then he may be the fitter to be a
Casuist and Confessor to the States General, to resolve their Cases of
Conscience. And for our Lawyer, if he do but read one Lecture more on Doleman,
and pursue his Argument as he has begun, he that is yet esteemed of but as the
Pick-lock of the Law, and speaks things doubtfully and mysteriously, as the
Devils Oracles were wont, may come to that Top of Preferment which Mr. Br. a
Quondam Brother attained: And though he never sit in Judgment, as he did; yet
he shall, if his Friends will be at the cost, have that Inscription on his
Tomb, which was provided for the other.

Mr. Hunt speaking of his Adversary, says, p. 152. he observes for our
imitation, that the Orthodox did not depose the Arian Emperors. And answers,
We ought undoubtedly to imitate them therein, for that no man, much less a
Prince, ought to lose any right for a Speculative error, or mere misbelief:
But only for wicked practices, and opinions that promote, excite, and
encourage them. As if Opinions that overthrow the Doctrine of Christ's Divinity,
did not directly tend to wicked practices! Has not this Lawyer been fee'd by
the Socinians to become their Advocate? But might not an Arian Emperor be
resisted, and One who is truly Christian, and a Defender of the Apostolic
Faith, be opposed? And does our Author know of any more than a Speculative
error (if so much) in him whom he prosecutes so violently? Or was not
Constantius his being of the Arian persuasion, the cause of many actual
cruelties practiced against the Orthodox, not in remote places only, but
chiefly at Constantinople, where he mostly resided? and were not many of those
Cruelties acted by the authority of his Edicts? as I have noted concerning
Macedonius his Cruelties.

And so for the Sitting of Parliaments till all Grievances are redressed.
Milton, p. 80. Si Rex Parliamentum prius dimiserit quam ea omnia transigantur
quorum causa Concilium indictum erat, perjuris reus erit. Mr. Hunt resembles
him in this, as well as if there had been a transmigration of Souls. Let his
Majesty satisfy his people never so well by Reason and Authority, and
serious promises of frequent Parliaments; yet this man insinuates, that he acts
as if there were no intent to call a Parliament any more; And that the design
of the Addressers was for discontinuance of Parliaments, and for a Popish
Successor: though he himself observes, that in thanking his Majesty for his
promise of frequent Parliaments, they do desire them. See his Preface.

P. 152. He says, as our Author does after him, That the behavior of the
Church toward the Roman Pagan Emperors was much different from that which
they bore to Julian, who succeeded to Christian Emperors, was educated a
Christian, and sometime bore a place in the Church: for whereas the Apostles
had enjoined the Christians to pray for the Pagan Emperors, though actual
persecutors of the Church; yet THE WHOLE CHVRCH did curse and Anathematize
Julian with an Anathema, Quo Deus rogatur ut aliquem e medio tollat. In
Julianum, cum defectioni adderet Machinationes evertendi Christianismi, usa est
Ecclesia isto extremae necessitatis telo, and a Deo est audita. Grotius on Luke
c. 6. v. 22. The whole of Grotius his Note to this purpose, is in these words:
Sunt quaedam delicta tam atriocia, ut si contumacia accedat; nemo non videat
esse(...). pro talibus, dum tales manent, Ecclesia non intercedit precum
suffragio, quod solis poenitentibus patet: Generaliter tamen his, ut and
infidelibus, mentem optat meliorem.

Chrysostomus, ubi anathema pronunciandum, ait, adversus facta, non adversus
homines, intelligit districtum illud anathema, quo Deus rogatur ut aliquem e
medio tollat. Hujus sane rarior est usus; non tamen Nullus: nam in Julianum,
cum defectioni adderet machinationes evertendi Christianismi, usa est Ecclesia
isto extremae necessitatis telo, and a Deo est exaudita.

If our Author had not been afraid to discover from what Writers he collected
his Posie of Daisies, as he calls it, p. 95. he would have repeated this of Mr.
Hunt, which seems to carry more of Reason and Authority than any thing else in
all his Treatise of Julian. And because I suspect that he may keep this for a
Reserve (for I have heard that he intends to pursue his design against all
Opposers) if he bring no other weapons but such as these of the
Church Censures, we shall not fear: for these are Spiritual weapons which the
Church makes use of, (and that only against incorrigible offenders that had
committed a sin to death) as their last refuge in extreme necessity: yet of
these he only says, the Church does not intercede by supplications proper to
the penitents; yet, generally, even to these, as also to Infidels, it prays for
a better mind. St. Chrysostom (says Grotius) speaking of the Anathema that is
to be pronounced against the Actions, not the Persons, understands this severe
Anathema whereby God is entreated to take away the offender from the midst of
the people, etc.

So that Grotius and Chrysostom having delivered their Judgments clearly in
other places concerning Prayers for Heathenish and Persecuting Emperors, they
cannot be understood here to write against their own, and the judgment of all
those other Christians aforementioned. To which I add this of Tertull, ad
Scapulam: Christianus Nullius est hostis nedum Imperatoris, quem sciens a Deo
suo constitui, NECESSE EST ut eum diligat, revereatur, and salvum velit. And in
his Apol. We reverence in our Emperors Gods judgment that made them
Governors; for we know that to be in them which God would have; and of this we
make account as of a great Oath. And the Oath of Christian Soldiers (as
Vegetius de re Militari, l. 2. c. 5.) was; Per Deum, and per Christum, and per
Spiritum Sanctum, and per Majestatem Imperatoris, etc. By God, and Christ, and
by the Holy Ghost, and by the Majesty of the Emperor, who next to God was to
be loved and reverenced -- they swore to yield him faithful Devotion, and
vigilant Service, etc. And he gives this reason for it: For a man, whether
private or military, does serve God, when he faithfully loves him who reigns by
Gods authority.

P. 151. Mr. Hunt has another Observation that deserves a special remark:
Neither will we (says he) make use in our defense of the Papists excluding the
King of Navarre, a Protestant King in France, no more than we will allow the
French to murder a Protestant Minister, because we execute a seditious,
traitorous Roman Priest.

Ans. It is well known, the Romish Priests are not executed in England upon the
account of their Religion, but for such crimes as are made Treason by the Laws
of our Land. And if the Protestants were not executed but upon the breach of
such Laws, the cause of Complaint would be less than now it is. But why, on
your Principles, a Protestant Prince may not be excluded by Papists, who
perhaps are as fully persuaded of the truth of their Religion as we are of
ours, and do aver that Salvation is not to be attained in any Communion but
that of their own Church, I see no sufficient reason. For they may as well
plead that Dominion is founded in Grace, as you do; and that may equally
justisie both parties in case of Resistance: (i. e.) it can justify neither.
And the consequences of that Act of Exclusion may dread us from doing the like:
For when the Guises, and other contrivers of the Holy League (as they called
it) had by great importunity prevailed with the present King Henry the Third
to agree to the Exclusion of Henry the Fourth, the dreadful slaughters of the
Subjects on both sides were not the only evil consequences that ensued; but
the Guisian Faction grew so insolent, as to affront and distress the King
himself, so far, that fearing his own destruction, he was constrained to join
his Party to that of the King of Navarre, (to whose Exclusion he had
consented) that he might preserve himself from being excluded by the prevailing
Faction. So that your Quere, p. 153. Whether if the Crown should devolve upon a
Roman Successor we could justify the dethroning of him, (which the Author of
Julian resolves we may not) though the French Papists could not be justified in
rejecting the King of Navarre, requires no long consideration.

Tum tua Res agitur parts cum proximus Ardet. I cannot omit another bold
attempt of Mr. Hunt in his Preface, where he conjures up the old Smectymnuan
Monster of Curse ye Meroz, to affright all men from an accursed Nutralitie, to
bring them into the blessed Association. It was a wise Law of Solon (says he)
that if the Commonwealth at any time should be divided into Factions, that the
Neuters should be noted with infamy. And that you may know what he means, he
adds, If all that are TRVE PROTESTANTS and TRVE LOVERS OF OUR GOVERNMENT would
declare themselves on the behalf of our Religion and Government in such terms
as befit honestmen, and as the exigencie of our present state shall require, we
shall find the numbers of Addressers reduced to the Dukes Pensioners and
Creatures. And again: Our Traitors would disappear, if we had no Neuters. And
to slur the proceedings of his Majesty against E. S. he says, that the name of
E. S. in the Abhorrences of the Nation, were but like the name of John-a-Styles
and John-an-Oakes, in putting a fictitious Case. So that it is most evident
that he invites, and threatens all men that refuse, to join in an Association:
and to what that tends, the Nation is indisserently well satisfied already.

If not the Comments which these men make upon that Text, the Authors and
Instruments which they make use of, such as were the most notorious
Incendiaries in our late War, some Jesuits and eminent Factors for Rome, some
Regicides that died in their impenitencie; these, and the present endeavors to
act over all the Tragedies that were plotted by them a second time, may fully
convince us that there is Mors in Olla, some deadly Colloquintida that has so
imbittered and poisoned such sort of Writings.

I must beg the Readers pardon that I have not been more particular in my
Remarks on Mr. Hunt: his Book came but lately to my hands; a part of mine being
first in the Press, and the rest called for, so that I made it only an Essay
to provoke some more eminent persons of his own Gown to chastise him according
to his demerit, who have more health and help, more time and advantages than I
have. And all that love their Religion and Peace, will abhor such persons, as
by the same Methods, the same Libels, and pretenses of Arbitrarie Government
and Popery, the same Arguments as were used to defend the War, and the Murder
of Charles the First, seek to involve us in another such; and rather than not
effect it, will employ and associate with any sort of Fanatics, Jesuits, and
Regicides, such as Doleman, White, and Milton their great Exemplar and Tutor.

I cannot stand to give this Age a character of that Pest of the former; I mean
this Milton, whose very Sores and Impostumes these Authors suck, and spit them
out to poison the People. He was one that wrote against the whole Ministry and
their Maintenance; that would have Divorces practiced on every slight occasion.
And when I shall say, that against his knowledge and Conscience he maliciously
opposed the best of Kings, I need say no more to prove him the worst of men.

That Mercenarie wretch was, I confess, a man of more than ordinary parts: and
when he came in his Chap. 4. to defend the Doctrine of Resistance and Regicide
against that Argument of Salmasius, which proved that none of the Christians
before St. Augustine's time did practice or allow of resisting the lawful
Magistrate, though a Heathen or an Arian; he stretched his Wit and his Reading
so far, as to bankrupt the reputation of them both; as will evidently appear in
my Answer to the same Arguments, which both Mr. Hunt and our Author have
borrowed from him.

And because it has been creditably reported that Milton died a Papist, and it
is certain that he had been at Rome, and was there caressed by some great men,
(Cardinals and others) I shall desire the Reader to consider with me, whether
that defense which he makes of the Popish Doctrine for deposing of Kings, in
the same Chapter, be not a probable Argument of the truth of that Report. For
thus says Milton, chap. 4. p. 47. As to what concerns the Pope, against whom
you DECLAIME MANY THINGS TO NO PVRPOSE, I give you liberty to talk till you
are hoarse: yet that which you assert so largely, to take with the vulgar and
unlearned, That every Christian was subject to their Kings, whether they were
just, or whether they were Tyrants, until the power of the Pope was
acknowledged to be greater than that of the King, and till be absolved Subjects
from their Oaths of Fidelity; I have shown that to be most false by many
examples. Nor does that seem more true which you say in the last place, that
Pope Zachary did abselve the French from their Oath of Allegiance; (his reason
is) for Hottoman, a Frenchman and a Lawyer, denies that Chilperick was
deposed by the Popes authority, or that his Kingdom was given to Pepin; but
that all this was transacted by the authority of the great Council of that
Nation, as appears by ancient Annals, which show that there was no need of
absolving the Subjects from that Oath; which also Pope Zachary utterly denied:
for in the French Histories it is recorded, as Hottoman and Girardus witness,
That the French did from the beginning reserve to themselves a power as of
choosing, so of deposing their Kings; and that they were not wont to swear any
other Fidelity to the Kings whom they created, than that they would yield them
Faith and Allegiance, if their Kings did perform that which they also swore to
do. So that if the King by maladministration first broke his Oath, there was
no need of the Pope, the perfidiousness of the King having absolved the
subjects from their Oath.

Yet lest this Invention of Milton's own should not be of weight to clear his
Holiness, he brings the Popes infallible testimony for himself: Pope Zachary
(says he) who you say did arrogate that authority to himself, excuses it, and
lays it on the People: for the Popes words are these; If the Prince be
obnoxious to the People by whose beneficence he possesses his Kingdom, the
People that make the King may depose him. So that the result of all is, the
Pope and Fanatic are agreed in this Principle, The Majestas realis is in the
People; as Bellarmine with Buchanan do assert; and, They that create the King,
may destroy him with the same breath.

How industrious this Mercenarie man is to vindicate the Pope, whenas his own
Creatures acknowledge that he was the Dux Gregis, the grand Instrument of
dethroning that King, and sharing his Inheritance!

In a Dialogue between Theophilus a Christian, and Philander a Jesuit, Bishop
Bilson (p. 418. of Christian Subjection) brings in Theophilus saying: Your Law
does not stick to boast that Zacharias deposed Childerick King of France, and
placed Pepin in his room. Philander answers, And so he did. Theoph. Who says so
besides you? Philand. Platina says, Ejus authoritate regnum Franciae Pipino
adjudicatur; By Zachary 's authority the Kingdom of France was adjudged to
Pepin. And Frisingensis affirms that Pepin was absolved from the Oath of
Allegiance ( by Pope Steven) which he had given to Childerick, and so were the
rest of the Nobles of France; and then the King being shaven, and thrust into a
Monastery, Pepin was anointed King: which you think much the Pope should do in
our days. Theoph. Zachary was consulted with whether it might lawfully be done
or no: he did not openly intermeddle with the matter, whatever his privy
practices were; though many of your Bishops and Monks, to grace the Pope, make
it his only act. -- But hear Zachary 's own words, when Volorade and Burchard
were sent to understand his judgment: I find (says he) in the sacred story of
Divine Scripture, that the people fell away from their wretchless and
lascivious King that despised the Counsel of the Wise men of his Realm, and
created a sufficient man of themselves King, ( This was likely the case of
Jeroboam, who had a special Warrant from God.) God himself allowing their
doings. All power and rule belongs to God; Princes are his Ministers, and
therefore chosen for the people, that they should follow the Will of God, and
not do what they list. -- All that he has, as Power, Glory, Riches, Honor,
and Dignity, he receives of the People: the People create the King, and may
when the cause requires, forsake the King: It is therefore lawful for the
Franks, refusing this Monster Childerick, to choose one able in War and Peace,
by his wisdom to protect and keep in safety their Wives, Children, Parents,
Goods, and Lives. This is the Popes Divinity, says Bishop Bilson, that Kings
have their power of the People, which the Scripture says they have from God.

Now as to the Annals of France, it is true that the Pope had not entirely
grasped the power of deposing Princes in those days, but made use of other
Instruments; yet this was done, say the Annals, Pontifice prius consulto, as
Sabellicus, and the Gloss in verb. Deposuit, (i. e.) deponentibus, consensit.
The true reason was this: Pepin was a man on whom the Pope relied to quell the
Lombards, and defeat the Grecians, that he and Pepin might divide the Spoils of
the West, as it came to pass: for the Emperor was turned out of Italy.

Now let the Reader judge how diligent an Advocate Milton is for the Pope; that
notwithstanding his own words advising it, and the testimony of his own
creatures affirming it, and the matter of fact and the event demonstrating it,
would yet excuse him from having a hand in deposing of that French King. And is
this a fit Guide for our Modern Writers? Is it not possible (as our Author
says) but to take many things from Doleman in the case of Succession? and many
more from Milton, when you would irritate or defend the People of England in
case of Resistance and Regicide?

Have the Boutefeus of this Age nothing to set the Nation into a flame, but
those Firebrands which were raked up in the Ashes of that prosligate Villain
Milton, who pleaded the Cause of the Pope Gratis, and for money that of -- Good
God! what a Spirit of Rebellion is spread over the Land! when, as it was
observed by Dr. Heylen at the beginning of the last unnatural War, No times
were more full of Odious Pamphlets, no Pamphlets more aplauded, nor more dearly
bought, than such as do most deeply wound those Powers and Dignities to which
the Law has made us subject. Methinks we are like the man in the Gospel,
Matthew. 12.44. out of whom the unclean Spirit being cast out, it walked up and
down through dry places, seeking rest and finding none: then said he, I will
return to my house from whence I came out; and finding it empty, swept, and
garnished, he takes with him seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, and
they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse than the
first. Deus avertat Omen!

I beg my Readers pardon that I may animadvert a little on these Libellers, and
acquaint them, that to their Progenitors we owed the kindling, fomenting, and
inflaming those late Wars, that made us a confusion at home, a scorn and a
reproach abroad. Prynne, Burton, and Bastwick, were like so many Foxes let
loose and encouraged, like the Priests and Preco's of Mars, to scatter
Firebrarnds through the Nation. Nor would the times permit a little water to be
sprinkled for the quenching of them, but fed them with oil. The Laws were
silenced and outlawed then, as they are now, as if indeed we were inter Arma:
there wanted not scourges to punish them, but an arm to inflict the legal
Sanctions.

Then it was, first, That Burton in a seditious Sermon compared that excellent
Prince to Julian, and his Chapel to Julian's Altar: And tells the same story
of Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, who called Julian Atheist and Apostate to his
face, as our Author has done in print. That Malcontent having been admitted
to the Kings Chapel for a while, and defeated of a Bishopric to which he
aspired, turned Apostate, and defamed the whole Order as Antichristian. He had
served that excellent Prince in his Closer; and missing of the Preferment in
the Court, for his turbulency, being banished thence, he began to court the
People, and sought it in the Camp; not being ashamed to profess himself an old
outcast Courtier, worn our of favor and Friends there; which was the reason
that he became a Professed enemy both to King and Court.

Then it was that he made his Pulpit a Drum, to beat up for Sedition and War.
Prynne, Bastwick, Leyton, and many others, took the Alarm; and dipping their
Pens in Gall, made way for the Sword, that glutted it self with so much blood.
He presumes to dedicate his Seditious Harangues, as so many Firebrarnds, to the
Houses of Parliament; where finding too much combustible matter, he made such a
flame, as warmed him a little, but made a general conflagration through the
three Kingdoms.

Had it not been much better that two or three such Boutefeus had suffered
according to their deserts, than that the whole Nation should fall a Sacrifice
to those Idols of a Seditious party?

There wanted not then good Laws against such disturbers of the public peace.
The Statute of Westminster. the first provided, That no man should publish or tell
any false News whereby discord or occasion of discord or slander may grow
between the King and his People or Nobles. And a Statute was made the second of
Richard 2. chapter 5, for punishing counterfeiters of false news, and lies, of
Prelates, Earls, Dukes, etc. of things which by them were never spoken, to the
slander of the Prelates, etc. And the punishment was left to the discretion of
the King and Council. And old Bracton records this ancient usage: Si quis
Machinatus fuerit, vel aliquid fecerit, etc. If any one shall contrive or do
any thing against the life of the King, or to make Sedition in his Army, or
shall give consent or counsel thereto, although they effect not the mischief
which they designed; he shall be guilty of Treason. And accordingly one John
Bonnet a Wool-man was drawn and hanged for scattering seditious Libels in
London. In the 4th year of Hen. 5. as Stow relates, Sir William Stanly, a
person of great valor, was condemned and executed as a Traitor, for saying
(less than our Author does) That if he thought Perkin Warbeck to be the
undoubted Son of Edward the 4th, he would never bear Arms against him. And in
the 9th year of H. 7. Bagnal, Scot, Heath, and Kennington, who had taken
Sanctuary in St. Martins le grand, were taken out, and three of them executed,
for forging Seditious Bills to the slander of the King and Council. The like
proceedings were made against Barrow, Greenwood, Penry, Vdal, and many others,
who were condemned, and some of them executed for the like Seditious Writings
against Queen Eliz. and her Government: concerning which I shall present to our
Authors Her Majesty's Proclamation.

By the QUEEN A Proclamation against certain Seditious and Schismatical Books
and Libels, etc.
THE Queens most Excellent Majesty, considering how within these few years
past, and now of late, certain seditious and evil-disposed persons toward her
Majesty, and the Government established for causes Ecclesiastical within her
Majesty's Dominions, have devised, written, printed, or caused to be
seditiously and secretly published and dispersed, sundry schismatical and
seditious Books, diffamatory Libels, and other phanatical Writings amongst her
Majesty's Subjects, containing in them Doctrine very erroneous, and other
matters notoriously untrue, and slanderous to the State, and against the godly
reformation of Religion and Government Ecclesiastical established by Law, and
so quietly of long time continued, and also against the persons of Bishops, and
others placed in authority Ecclesiastical under her Highness by her authority,
in railing sort, and beyond the bounds of all good humanity: All which Books,
Libels, and Writings, tend by their scope to persuade and bring in a monstrous
and apparent dangerous Innovation within her Dominions and Countries, of all
manner of Ecclesiastical Government now in use, and to the abridging, or rather
to the overthrow of her Highness lawful Prerogative, allowed by Gods Law, and
established by the Laws of the Realm, and consequently to reverse, dissolve,
and set at liberty the present Government of the Church, and to make a
dangerous change of the form of Doctrine, and use of Divine Service of God, and
the Ministration of the Sacraments now also in use, with a rash and malicious
purpose also to dissolve the Estate of the Prelacy, being one of the three
ancient Estates of this Realm under her Highness, whereof her Majesty minds
to have such a reverend regard, as to their places in the Church and
Commonwealth appertains. All which said lewd and seditious practices, do
directly tend to the manifest wilful breach of great number of good Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, inconveniences nothing regarded by such Innovations.

In consideration whereof, her Highness graciously minding to provide some good
and speedy Remedy to withstand such notable, dangerous, and ungodly Attempts,
and for that purpose to have such enormous Malefactors discovered and condignly
punished, does signify this her Highness misliking and indignation of such
dangerous and wicked Enterprises; and for that purpose does hereby will and
also straightly charge and command, that all persons whatsoever, within any her
Majesty's Realms and Dominions, who have or hereafter shall have any of the
said seditious Books, Pamphlets, Libels, or Writings, or any of like nature
already published, or hereafter to be published, in his or their custody,
containing such matters as above are mentioned, against the present Order and
Government of the Church of England, or the lawful Ministers thereof, or
against the Rites and Ceremonies used in the Church, and allowed by the Laws of
the Realm: That they and every of them do presently after, with convenient
speed, bring in, and deliver up the same unto the Ordinary of the Diocese, or
of the place where they inhabit, to the intent they may be utterly defaced by
the said Ordinary, or otherwise used by them. And that from henceforth no
person or persons whatsoever be so hardy as to write, contrive, print, or cause
to be published or distributed, or to keep any of the same, or any other Books,
Libels, or Writings of like nature and quality, contrary to the true meaning
and intent of this her Majesty's Proclamation. And likewise, that no man
hereafter give any instruction, direction, favor, or assistance to the
contriving, writing, printing, publishing, or dispersing of the same, or such
like Books, Libels, or Writings whatsoever, as they tender her Majesty's good
favor, will avoid her high displeasure, and as they will answer the contrary
at their uttermost perils: and upon such pains and penalties, as by the Law any
way may be inflicted upon the offenders, in any of these behalfs, as persons
maintaining such seditious actions, which her Majesty minds to have severely
executed. And if any person have had knowledge of the Authors, Writers,
Printers, or Dispersers thereof, which shall within one month after the
publication hereof, discover the same to the Ordinary of the place where he had
such knowledge, or to any of her Majesty's Privy Council: the same person shall
not for his former concealment be hereafter molested or troubled. Given at her
Majesty's Palace at Westminster, the thirteenth of February, 1588. In the One
and thirtieth year of her Highness Reign.

God Save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most Excellent Majesty. 1588.

Now, either our Authors knew these things, or no: if not, they may give me
thanks for minding them of these Laws, some of which are still in force, which
ought to bind up their hands from the like practices, lest they meet with the
like punishment. Sure I am, they are obliged in Conscience, if not in Interest,
timely to beg pardon, and make* their Recantations as public as their Crimes.
But if they did know these things, and yet act so considently and industriously
against them, Miror admodum ut quorum facta imitantur, eorum exitus non
pertimescunt. Certainly these men think themselves in some Vtopian
Commonwealth, ubi sentire quoe velis, and quoe sentias loqui licet; where they
think according to their own lusts, and talk as lavishly. as they think: In
magna fortuna, minima licentia. Every action of our Superiors, every word,
yea, the very thoughts and intentions of their hearts, are arraigned, censured,
and condemned, as if they only were to be accountable: But as for the Mobile,
Nos numerus summus, and magno dominamur Atridi. The confidence of their numbers
makes them confident of impunity; and the Privileges of the People far exceed
the Prerogative of the Prince. Quidvis impune facere, hoc Regium est.

Though other Restraints have proved ineffectual, all the wholesome Laws of the
Land, all the sad experiences of the national plagues of the Sword, Fire, and
Pestilence, which have fallen; or rather have been drawn down on our own heads
by our Ingratitude and Rebellion against God and our Superiors, have been
baffled: yet those stronger ties of Gods Commandments, so plainly, so
frequently, and under such intolerable penalties bound upon our very Souls and
Consciences, should yet constrain us to live more piously and peaceably than
hitherto we have done: Or at least the Mercies of God, who saved and redeemed
us with an outstretched Arm, and has set over us the meekest and most
merciful Prince on the Earth. His patience and long-suffering toward us after
so long and heinous provocations, his defeating the hellish Plots of our
Adversaries, who unweariedly watch for an opportunity to devour us, should at
last lead us to Repentance, and cause us to consider and do, in this our day,
the things that belong to our peace, before they are hid from our eyes.

Against the Sophistry of such unreasonable men for Resistance, I shall oppose
the Doctrine of the Apostle for Obedience and Subjection, which he delivers,
Romans 13. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no
power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation. v. 5. Wherefore we must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

OF OBEDIENCE ACTIVE and PASSIVE Due to our SUPERIORS.
THose few directions of the Apostle, Romans 13.1, 2, etc. are so full and plain,
that there needs no Comment on them, if men were not resolved against their
duty, and employed their wits to palliate their sins, and destroy their Souls.
For from that Text we are taught,

1. That all lawful Government, the (...) is from God; The powers that be are
ordained of God. 2. That God often gives this Power to wicked men. The Powers
that were in being when the Apostles wrote, were such as Nero and Claudius,
Heathen Persecutors. 3. That in every Government there is a Supreme or higher
Power, that judges all, and can be judged of none; for without such a Power no
Government can subsist. 4. That such Powers must be cheerfully obeyed in all
things not contrary to the Will of God; paying them Custom, Tribute, Honor,
and Fear, as to Gods Ministers. 5. That in things contrary to the Will of God,
as we ought not to obey, so we ought not to resist. 6. That the penalty of
Resistance is the Wrath of God, eternal Damnation. 7. That we are obliged as
well not to resist in things contrary to God's Will, as cheerfully to obey in
things agreeable thereunto, for conscience sake; that is, in consideration of
the Command of God, which lays an Obligation on our Conscience.
1. That all Government is originally from God. This seems to be granted by our
Author, and therefore I shall say the less concerning it; Mr. Hunt also
asserting, p. 38. that it is impossible any thing can be of man's appointment,
which is of Gods ordination: There can be no such thing as a Co-legislative
power of men with their Maker. Government therefore (says he) is of God, but
the Specification thereof is of men: and the best definition that can be made
of Government, is in the words of both the Apostles,(...) it is Gods Ordinance,
but a Humane Creature: Wherein he contradicts himself as it were even in the
same breath, having said immediately before, It is impossible any thing can be
of man's appointment which is of Gods ordination, understanding it as he does,
not of the Species, but of the Original Right and Authority of Government: For
p. 36. he demands, Where is the Charter of Kings from God Almighty to be found?
for nothing but the declared Will of God can warrant us -- to give up the
Rights and Liberties of the people. If they are lawful, I am sure it is
villainy to betray them. Here you plainly see the people are encouraged to
resist their Prince, on pretense of defending their Rights and Liberties, or
else they are declared Villains and Traitors.

But let us examine the ground of this Assertion: He quotes 1 Pet. 2.13. Where
(he says) the Apostle styles Kings, as well as Governors under them, the
Ordinance of man: which cannot have any other sense, but that men make them,
and give them their power; and therefore (says he) when the Apostle calls the
power of Government Gods Ordinance, it is because in general God approves of
Governments; as if there were any Governors which were advanced if not Gratia
Dei, as our style has it, yet Decreto ac Dono Divino; when Pilate himself, who
condemned Christ, had his power given him from above.

I wondered to read this, in a man that had showed much diligence and reading
(as to matters of Law) in his Treatise concerning the Bishops Right, thus to
faulter and prevaricate, in asserting (p. 36.) that Kings have no Charter from
God. And my wonder is yet increased, when I read his confident conclusion. That
these two places could not be reconciled by any other interpretation but his
own. I am much inclined to think that Mr. Hunt knew a better way of reconciling
these Scriptures; only, finding no other offering themselves willingly to
serve his Hypothesis, he thought to press this of St. Peter to it. Now the
design that he drives is against the Succession, p. 42. which (says he) is of
a Civil nature, not established by any Divine Right; -- and the several
limitations of the Descent of the Crown, must be made by the People in
conferring the Royal Dignity and Power. Had Mr. Hunt talked at this rate in
Cromwell's days, when he was about to make himself a King, it had been
tolerable; but to talk thus in a Kingdom so long continued in a Legal
Succession, and so well constituted, that nothing but such new suggestions are
like to disturb it, needs Pardon, though he expects Praise for it.

In other things I thought Mr. Hunt an ingenuous and bold man, that spoke his
own Sentiments, as if he were in Civitate libera; and I would willingly have
excused him upon that account here, or as a man laboring under the common fate
of such as meddle with matters out of their Spheres: for seldom meet we with
such Blunderers as Divines, when they attempt the work of Lawyers and
Statesmen; or Lawyers, when they invade the Office of the Divine. But none of
these things can be pleaded in Mr. Hunt's excuse: for no doubt he had consulted
with such Divines as wrote in the time of the Late War, at least such as had a
hand in that War, and yet survived.

The Assemblies Annotations were at his hand; and I suppose he would have
consulted them, or such as they were, (i. e.) no great friends to Kingly
Government. Hear then what they say on the words Ordinance of man. By Ordinance
is meant the framing and ordering of Civil Government; called the Ordinance of
man, not because it is invented by, or has its original from men; for all
power is from God, Romans 13.1, 2. though sometime he uses men as means to
derive Power or Government to such or such a person or persons, that so they
might be the more willing to yield Obedience: but because it is proper to men,
or because it is discharged by men. And on the word Supreme they note: There is
therefore no other Supreme on Earth above the King in his Dominions.

Pareus is another common Author, and one whom Mr. Hunt probably would have
consulted about this Opinion above others, he having written such things
against the power of Kings as deserved to be committed publicly to the flames.
(...) apellatio ad Deum primum autorem nos revocat; The word Creature recalleth
us to the consideration of God, who is the Prime Author of Magistracy: for
though Magistrates are said to be created, that is, ordained by men, yet their
first Creator properly is God alone. Thus he, in the Appendix to his Comment on
Romans 13. Dubio 3.

And there he teaches you plainly how to reconcile St. Peter with St. Paul,
whom you make to contradict each other. The Apostle (says he) calls Magistracy
a humane Ordinance, not causally, as it is devised by men, and set up at their
pleasure; but subjectively, as it is administered by men; and objectively, as
exercised about the government of humane Societies; or lastly, in respect of
the end, as constituted of God for the benefit of men.

Calvin and Beza, and generally all the Modern Expositors, say the same: and
whoever reads the words following, where this Ordinance of man is divided, to
the King as Supreme, and to Governors sent by him, must needs acknowledge,
that the Apostle speaks not of the thing, but the persons. Omni personae, omni
principatui, cui nos divina dispositio subdi voluit, says Bid on that place.

Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase I think is beyond all exception, because it perfectly
reconciles the sense of St. Peter with that of St. Paul: for by every Ordinance
of man, he understands every Heathen Governor, every mortal Prince. And his
learned Notes do evince the truth of his interpretation; which being too long
to insert, I refer the Reader to them, and shall only give you his Reason,
which is this: That the Gnostics, who had so early troubled the Church,
taught, that Christian Servants and Subjects were not bound to obey their
Heathen Masters and Magistrates; whereas the Apostle enjoins them to obey both,
not only if they be good and gentle, but also if they be froward, if they be
unbelievers.

We may not make our Liberty a cloak for Ambition or Rebellion; and pretend to
vindicate our Country, when we intend to enslave it: As Antiochus, who brought
a great Army into Greece, pretending to deliver it, when it was in a condition
of Freedom and Prosperity: And thus the Lacedaemonians endeavoring to free
themselves from one Tyrant, made way for Thirty to domineer over them.

But Mr. Hunt's demand is, what Scripture we have for the Kings Charter. I
answer, That Saul had a Charter, 1 Samuel 8. for God chose him: and how far it
extended, read there, and Skiccard de Jure Regum apud Hebraeos. And after God
had rejected Saul, who had first rebelled against God, yet he has the Title
and the Reverence of the Lords Anointed given him by David still. And God
himself calls Cyrus his Anointed (though a Heathen). And Daniel acknowledged of
Nebuchadnezzar, The God of heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, strength,
and glory, Dan. 2.27. These then had it not from the People.

Pilate himself, though an Inferior Magistrate, had his Charter owned and
submitted to by Christ himself. And when it is said in the Old Testament, By me
Kings reign, Prove. 8.15. and in the New, even of the Roman Emperors, such as
Nero and Claudius, that they are ordained by God, and that our Obedience is due
to them for the Lords sake, and for Conscience sake; He must be an Ignoramus,
or worse, that can see in Scripture a Charter for the Peoples rights and power
even to resist their Prince, and none for the Prince to vindicate his
Authority over the People.

It would be irksome to the Reader to relate what is obvious in Heathen Writers
concerning the Original of Kingly power. Nature did at first find out a King,
says Seneca: And Aristotle says, That by nature not only the Father has rule
over his Children, but also the King over those that are within his Kingdom.
This is the Government that God himself erected from the beginning, giving to
Adam a Patriarchal, which is tantamount to a Monarchal power. This he granted
to Israel, and continued to the coming of Christ. To this power in the Romans,
Christ and his Apostles submit themselves, and command every Soul to follow
their examples: and all the Primitive Christians did so, till the Pope of Rome,
to the great scandal of Christianity, invaded the Thrones, and usurped the
power of their lawful Emperors. Gregory the Seventh, Pope Vrbane, and Paschal
were the first that stirred up Subjects against their Princes, and the Son
against his Father.

We are taught (says Polycarp) to yield Obedience to all Principalities under
God, except in things destructive to our Souls. Therefore do as you please;
cast me to wild beasts or the fire, which is not to be compared to that eternal
fire prepared for the ungodly. In the Constitutions of Clemens, it is declared
a heinous sin to resist the Prince: and the Councils for 1200 years taught no
other Doctrine. And when those Popes first turned Rebels, and proceeded so
imperiously as to Excommunicate the Bishop and Churchmen of Liege for adhering
to the Emperor, and stirred up Robert Earl of Flanders to destroy all that
Clergy; they wrote a most excellent Epistle, declaring, That they never had
heard of any such Doctrine or Practice from any of the Fathers, and that they
had observed fearful Judgments of God falling on such as did rebel against
their Princes. And so it fell out: for all the Popes great Instruments,
Radolphus, and Herman, and Egbert, were cut off; and gave the World magnum
Documentum, a severe Caution not to rise up against their Princes, no not for
the sake of an Infallible Pope.

This was the sense of the Primitive Fathers. Irenaeus proves it by Scripture,
and concludes, By whose command they are born men, by his command they are made
Princes. So Tertul. Inde Imperator, unde homo; inde potestas, unde Spiritus. It
is God (says Origin) who sets up Kings, and removes them; and in his own
time raises up such a one as is useful to the State: Contra Celsum. Theophilus
Bishop of Antioch; I will honor the King, not adoring him, but praying for
him; knowing that by God the King is ordained. So Athenagoras, of Aurelius and
his Son Commodus, says, They had received the Kingdom from above. St. Basil
also on Psalm. 32. The Lord sets up Kings, and removes them; and there is no
power but what is ordained of God. And to conclude with Greg. Nazianzen,
concerning the Power of the Governor of his Province, Orat. 17. to the Citizens
of Antioch, That together with Christ he did rule the people committed to his
charge; that from him he had received the Sword, and was to be accounted as the
Image of God. So S. Chrysostom: And if we reverence those Officers that are
chosen by the King, though they be wicked, though they be Thieves and Robbers,
not despising them for their wickedness, but standing in awe of them for the
dignity of him that elected them; much more ought we thus to do in the case of
God, and the King chosen by him. Sermon. 1. of David and Saul.

So that even wicked Princes have a Charter from God. So, our Savior said of
Pilate, Joh. 19.11. Thou could have no(...) authority or power against me,
except it were given thee from above. And St. Paul of the Roman Emperors, There
is no power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God; and he that
resists, resists the Ordinance of God. And that St. Peter says the same,
though in other words, has been made evident: Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether to the King as supreme: for so is
the will of God, 1 Pet. 2.13-15.

St. Augustine, de Civitate Dei, l. 5. c. 21. Regnum terrenum dat Deus piis and
impiis: Qui Mario, ipse Caio Caesari; qui Augusto, ipse and Neroni, etc. God
gives an Earthly Kingdom both to good and evil Princes: He that gave it to
Marius, gave it to Caius Caesar; he that gave it to Augustus, gave it to Nero;
he who gave it to the Vespasians, Father and Son, most mild and loving
Emperors, gave it likewise to that most cruel man Domitian: And not to recount
them all, he that gave it to that Christian Prince Constantine, gave it to that
Apostate Julian. These things, without doubt, that one and true God does rule
and govern as he pleases, although for secret causes, yet not for unjust. So
the Prophet, Dan. 2.37. Thou, O King, art a King of kings: for the God of
heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, strength, and glory. And chap. 5.21.
The most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will, chap. 4.

And as God sets them in the Throne, so he rules by them, and overrules
them, guiding all their actions to his own just and wise ends. If all the
Princes of the World should conspire, they can do no more than what Gods hand
and counsel have determined before to be done, Acts 4.28. God knows how to
effect good and gracious ends, even by wicked Kings. He made Cyrus an
Instrument to build him a House in Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 36.23. and calls
Nebuchadnezzar his Servant, Jer. 25.9. The heart of the King is in the hands of
the Lord as the rivers of water; he turns it whithersoever he pleases. He
can restrain the spirits of Princes, as he did Abimelech, and not suffer them
to touch his People. He can cause the wrath of man to turn to his praise. He
stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to deliver the Jews from the Captivity of
Babylon, Ezra 1.1. He made Darius and Artaxerxes instrumental in building and
beautifying the House of the Lord, Ezra 6.22. and chap. 7.27.

Wherefore, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 97.1. The Lord reigns, let the earth
rejoice: let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof. For though Clouds and
Darkness are round about him, and we cannot see the reason or end of his
Providence; yet Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his Throne,
v. 2. Were the Almighty like the Epicureans God, that could not intend the
affairs of the world without great trouble, and therefore retired himself, and
left all to Chance, we might then think it fit to choose for our selves: but
when every Choice and every Chance is ordered by the Almighty and wise God;
when it is said, Sam. 18.18. The people had chosen Saul, chap. 10.24. it is
said, The Lord had chosen him. And if the Magistrate be chosen by Lot, yet, as
Solomon says, Prove. 16.33. The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposition thereof is of the Lord. We may not say therefore as that Prince
did, 2 King. 6.33. when God had sent a Famine in Samaria, This evil is from the
Lord, why should I wait on him any longer? much less should we resist the
established Ordinance of Heaven: for, if it be of God, ye connot overthrow it,
lest happily ye be found even to fight against God, Acts 5.39. in whose all-wise
dispensations we ought to acquiesce, and patiently to submit to them.

When Jeroboam rebelled against Rehoboam a wicked Prince, you may find what a
black character he and his Confederates have in the Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 13.5.
Ought you not to know that the Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel
to David and to his sons for ever, by a covenant of salt? yet Jeroboam the
servant of Solomon the son of David is risen up, and has rebelled against his
Lord. And there are gathered to him VAIN MEN THE CHILDREN OF BELIAL, and have
strengthened themselves-against Rehoboam when he was young and tenderhearted,
and could not withstand them. And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the
Lord in the hands of the sons of David. -- v. 12. O ye children of Israel,
fight ye not against the Lord God of your fathers: for ye shall not prosper.
From this Scripture these Observations are obvious.

1. That a Succession to the Crown, Jure Divino, is no new thing, v. 5. 2. That
it is no Excuse for breaking Gods Command, to plead we followed Providence. 3.
That to rebel against an evil Prince, such as Rehoboam was, is to rebel against
the Lord, v. 8. 4. That such as strengthen such a Rebellion, are Sons of
Belial, v. 7. 5. That the Kings harkening to evil Counselors, is no sufficient
Plea to warrant a Rebellion. 6. Nor his oppressing the People. 7. That
notwithstanding their great numbers ( Jeroboam having eight hundred-thousand
chosen men of valor) they shall not prosper, v. 12. and v. 17. there fell with
Jeroboam five hundred thousand men of valor. 8. That Rehoboam was not so bad,
but Jeroboam was much worse: for he made all Israel to sin, setting up Calves
as Gods, for the People to worship; whereas under Rehoboam the Worship of God
was preserved (though the People were oppressed) v. 10. The Lord is our God,
and we have not forsaken him; and the Priests which minister to the Lord, are
the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business. 9. That after that
bad King, God sent other, good ones, to establish his Worship: and therefore we
must wait the Lords leisure, and not murmur against, nor resist his Ordinance
and Decrees, but submit to the hand of God, who often punishes a wicked People
by an unrighteous Prince.
HOW FAR Wicked Princes Ought to be obeyed.
1. NEgatively: not in any thing contrary to the revealed Will of God: to all
Gods Laws they are bound themselves, Deuteronomy. 17.18. And God will call them to a
more severe account than others, there being greater obligations laid on them,
and their evil Examples like to do more hurt. And much more are we bound to
obey those Laws of God which oblige the greatest Potentates, above any Laws of
men. It Is St. Augustine's Gradation, De Verbis Dom. Ser. 6. If thy Curator
command thee any thing, must it not be done? yet if the Proconsul countermand
it, thou despisest not thy Curator, but servest a greater. And if the Emperor
command one thing, and God another, what do you judge fit to be done? And it is
resolved thus: Da veniam Imperator; tu carcerem, ille Gehennam minatur: We
ought to obey God rather than man.

2. Positively: In all things that are not contrary to Gods Will, we ought
cheerfully to obey: So St. Basil(...), Regula Ethic. 79. Where the Command of
God does not hinder or interpose. For otherwise they have no power at all.
Whatever is really good, God has commanded us already, and forbidden whatever
is evil; but has left the command of things indifferent to his Vicegegerents,
to judge of the expediencie and usefulness of them: And if we obey them not in
this, we obey them in nothing. Which is well expressed by Aulus Gellius a
Heathen, in the person of a Father commanding either what is right or what is
wrong. If it be right, it is to be done, not because he commands it, but
justice requires it: If it be wrong, it ought not to be done, because it is
unjust; and therefore the Father is not to be obeyed in any thing. To this
Aules Gellius answers, that the division is imperfect, because there are things
of a middle nature, wherein the Father is to be obeyed with a filial ingenuity
and readiness: which is much more strong in behalf of the Prince.

The word used by the Apostle is (...) a military word, signifying to be under
command: and as the Centurion said of his Soldiers, Matthew. 8.9. If I say to
this man, Go, he goes; to another, Come, and he comes; and to my Servant, Do
this, and he does it. And thus the Centurion did himself: for he was (...)
under Authority. And such obedience we must yield, as St. Paul requires by
Titus 3.1. where to the (...) he adds, (...), (i. e.) dicto obedire, and to be
ready to every good work.

We ought to obey even a Popish Prince, says Mr. Baxter. And there can be no
question but we ought to obey them in what God has commanded: We ought to pay
them Tribute and Custom, as Tertullian testifies of the Primitive Christians:
we ought to show them Reverence, Honor, and Fear: we ought, as good and
profitable Members of the Commonwealth, diligently to follow our Callings, and
advance the Trade and happiness of the Nation: We ought to defend their
Persons, and fight their Battles against their Enemies; and in extraordinary
cases, to give them extraordinary assistance. We bring unto you, said Justine
Martyr to Antonius, more help and Tribute than all others, being taught by our
Lord to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: We ought to pray for the
welfare of them and their people, that with and under them we may lead quiet
and peaceable lives. So Tertullian prayed for Domitian a great Tyrant, for his
long Life, secure Empire, stout Armies, faithful Senators, and quaecunque
hominis and Caesaris vota sunt. We ought to bless God for the good things we
enjoy under them; we ought not to envy at their prosperity, to murmur and
repine at every severe Dispensation; but to our Prayers join Intercessions and
Thanksgivings: for though there be some Evils in their Government, yet there
would be more, if that Government should be turned into Anarchy and Confusion.

Si ubi jubeantur (Milites) quaerere singulis liceat, pereunte obsequio, etiam
Imperium intercidit, as Tacitus, l. 1. If Soldiers be permitted to dispute the
Commands of their General, the whole Empire may fail on the neglect of
obedience. It was a severe Counsel given by St. Augustine (Epist. 73.) to
Possidonius: Rather think what course you ought to take with them that will not
obey, than to convince them that what they do is unlawful. And in truth, there
would be endless Dissentions, if every Subject should be permitted to dispute
the lawfulness of such Commands as are enjoined him, not by his Prince alone,
but by the mature deliberation of his Council; especially when, as it is with
us, every one has his vote in choosing those Counselor, that in our names
consent to the Laws. This were to do what is foretold by Solomon, Prove. 20.25.
After vows to make enquiry.

It is a pernicious Opinion, that has infected too many of this Age, That
though we do not actively obey the Princes Commands, yet if we submit to the
Penalty, the Law is satisfied, and we are free from guilt. In answer to which,
I say:

1. That Obedience is more than Non-resistance; it must be active and cheerful,
as in paying Tribute and Custom, so in other parts of obedience; to go and
come, and do what is commanded.

2. Suffering, or paying the penalty, is not the chief intention of the Law;
but the duty of Obedience, without which the ends of Government will be
frustrated, viz. Peace and good Order.

3. The Law of God enjoins us to obey the Laws of men that are not contrary to
his Law. Now though we satisfy the Law of our Country by bearing the penalty,
yet the Law of God is not thereby satisfied; that Law requires Repentance and
Amendment, (i. e.) that we do so no more. As in that instance of frequenting
Divine Service, we do not think a Papist has satisfied the Law when he pays
Twelve pence; neither indeed do others: For it is Gods Law that is broken, who
commands us not to forsake the public Assemblies; and to obey them that have
the rule over us: For we are to obey for Conscience sake, ( i. e. because of
the obligation which the Command of God has laid upon us). And when the
Magistrate calls for our obedience in this or that particular which is not
against Gods Word, God commands our obedience to him, he having Gods Authority
in such cases; and to disobey, is not only to disobey man, but God: Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, and for Conscience
sake: and the penalty of disobedience is damnation.

So that it is an Atheistical Suggestion, that Rulers and Tyrants did first
invent Religion, to keep men in awe. For although no other Terrors are
sufficient to keep men in obedience but those of Hell and eternal Damnation,
because men may carry on their mischievous designs so secretly, or with such a
high hand, as to escape punishment in this life; yet it is not man but God that
requires obedience even to humane Laws, under the Severest Sanctions of
Eternal Death..

Object. But what if the thing commanded be not good? then we owe no Obedience:
for the Magistrate is no longer Gods Minister than he commands for God: When he
commands against God, he commands without Authority, and so we may disobey him
without sin.

Answ. There are but two Rules whereby we are to judge whether the Commands of
our Superiors are good or not.

The first is the Law of God; and when we make that our Rule, we must be as
sure that the Word of God condemns what the Magistrates command, as we are sure
that God commands us to obey our Magistrate: And in all reason we should choose
what is our most plain and indispensable duty, before that which is doubtful;
especially when the penalty of not obeying is no less than Damnation: for that
is the wages of sin, or disobedience to Gods Law.

2. A second Rule is the Laws of men, which do bind the Conscience when the
Command is not contrary to Gods Word. So that the Case to be resolved is only
this: What we must do when the Magistrate commands things which we judge not
expedient. In which case, considering especially our circumstances, the Laws
established being such as we our selves have consented to, it is too late for
us to dispute the inexpediency of them; for so there can never be an
establishment, it being impossible to make such Laws as may not be excepted
against by some, especially such as transgress the Laws. In such cases
therefore, the Magistrate, not the Subject, is to expound the Law.

It is sufficient that the Laws have a tendencie to the public and more
general good, though some private men may suffer in the Execution of them: And
when resisting those Laws which are made, will do more hurt than good, we ought
to obey them, though we suffer unjustly in so doing. As Dr. Sanderson gives an
instance in Soldiers who for their Cowardice, or some other crime, are
adjudged to be punished in a way of Decimation, ( i. e. every tenth man): now
although some of those that suffer may be guiltless and valiant men, yet the
private inconvenience must be endured, rather than a public mischief should be
tolerated. Of this the Learned Casuist speaks so largely and satisfactorily,
that I shall refer my Reader to his last Praelection, p. 356. De Obligatione
Conscientiae.

When we are commanded to do what we apprehend not to be for our good, we must
have a double consideration: First, to the person commanding, who is Gods
Minister, and therefore may not be resisted, though, in the second place, he
abuse his power in commanding what is not good or lawful: For if in this case
we resist, we usurp the Power, and invade and destroy the Order and Government
that God has set over us. If we might resist when we apprehend that we are
commanded things against our Religion, our Laws, or Liberties, then there could
be no such thing as Rebellion; and then there would not long be any such thing
as Religion, Liberty, or Government in the world. Doubtless the Apostle was
sensible what kind of Governors were in Rome when he wrote his Epistle,
namely, such as commanded for the most part things that were impious; yet we
read not of any resistance: and doubtless those Primitive Christians best knew
the Apostles mind, and practiced accordingly.

THE REASONS For not resisting Wicked Princes.
BEcause, 1. He is Gods Minister. For the Lords sake, we must submit, says St.
Peter, and for Conscience sake (i. e.) for the Obligation that God has laid
upon us as he is Gods Minister. This swayed with David: He was the Lords
Anointed, and therefore, he could not lift up a hand against him: nor would St.
Paul speak evil of any of the Rulers of the People. For, to speak evil of them,
is accounted as Blasphemy, and Disobedience is as Sacrilege: And, as St. Paul,
A resisting of the Ordinance of God.

Obj. As he is Gods Minister for good, we are ready to obey him* but when he
commands what is evil, he is no longer Gods Minister, but the Devils, and we
ought not to obey him.

Ans. He is Gods Minister still as to his Office, though in respect of the
abuse of it by unrighteous Actions, he do the work of the Devil. And many times
God places cruel and unrighteous Kings, (as a just Judgment) over an
unrighteous people; according to the Imprecation of David against those that
were enemies to so good a King, Set thou an ungodly man to have rule over them.

Regis quando boni sunt, muneris est Dei; quando mali, sceleris est populi.
When good Kings bear rule, it is a token of Gods Favor; when wicked ones, it
is the effect of the peoples Iniquity. As Job says, Chap. 34.30. juxta Septuag.
Regnare facit Hypocritam, propter peccata populi. God takes away good Kings in
his anger, and sets evil ones in their rooms: yea, many times, for the sins of
the people, he permits good Princes to fall, as he did David in numbering the
people, that they and their King might suffer under a common Calamity. It is an
observation of Aeneas Sylvius, de Ortu Imperij, c. 16. Deus saepe propter
peccata Subditorum deprivari permittit vitam Rectorum. When Rehoboam hearkened
to evil Counselors, 1 Kin. 12.15. The Cause was from the Lord, that he might
bring to pass his saying, etc.

Now who shall judge whether the thing commanded be for our good or not? We
have very plain precepts which require our Obedience to Princes in all things
that are not against the word of God: And we ought to have as plain precepts
Affirmative or Negative for the things that we resolve to do or not to do
according to the Kings command: i. e. Nothing can justify our disobedience to
our Prince, except there be as plain Scripture-proofs for the intrinsecal evil
of the action commanded, as there are for the necessity of Christian Obedience.
Where is it said, Ye must needs disobey your Prince when he commands you to
worship God in the public assemblies, or to pray uncovered, or to receive the
Sacrament on your knees; as it is said, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers; and, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man; and, Obey
Magistrates and them that have the rule over you?

In this one Common Good of Order and Government, many good things are
included: for, as Cicero said, de Legibus 3. Without Government, neither House,
City, or Nation, nor Mankind, nor Nature, nor the World it self could subsist.
And St. Chrysostom on Romans Hom. 23. Take away the higher Power, and all goes to
wrack; neither City, nor Family, nor Assembly, or any thing else can stand; the
stronger will devour the weaker, and all things be turned upside down. It is
therefore concluded by all Wise men, That a bad Prince is better than none. For
a demonstration whereof, the Persians after their Kings death permitted the
people to live in a Lawless manner for five days together, that after the
experience of the outrages and violences committed in the interregnum, they
might be the more endeared to their Prince. Consonant to which is that in
Judges, chap. 21.16. when there was no King in Israel, every one did that which
was right in his own eyes: which made them on any terms to desire a King.

2. We are to obey them, that we may silence the ignorance of foolish men, that
think and speak evil of Christianity, as if it set up Christ's Kingdom against
Caesar's, and a good Christian could not be a good Subject; which slanders we
should confute by our peaceable conversations: and this will gain us favor at
home, by mitigating the Princes displeasure; or toleration abroad, if we be put
to fly for our lives, when it shall be known that we are of peaceable and
patient Conversations.

The Christian Religion was from the beginning reproached as a disturber of the
Secular powers; and therefore it was the Care of Christ to clear his Disciples
from this Crime, by paying tribute, and living in subjection to the Rulers of
this world, that he might give them no offense. And the Apostles knowing that
they were reported to be Seditious, and such as would turn the world upside
down, have taken all possible care to undeceive the enemies of the Gospel, by
obliging the professors thereof to obey their Rulers, under the greatest
obligations that the wit of men could invent.

So that in case the King do command such things as are evidently forbidden by
God, we see what is then to be done: we must peacebly acquiesce in the
providence of God; as Tacitus said, we may bonos Imperatores voto expetere
quoscunq: tolerare, l. 4. Submit to them as Instruments and Rods in the hand of
God, correcting or punishing us for our sins. God has the devil himself in a
Chain, and has set bounds unto him: as in the case of Job, whose life he could
not take away, nor go beyond Gods Commission. Commit your selves therefore to
God in well doing* who has said, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. And
as David to Saul, 1 Samuel 24.12. The Lord judge between thee and me, and the
Lord avenge me of thee; but my hand shall not be upon thee: or, as in 1 Samuel
26.10. The Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall
descend into the battle and perish: the Lord forbid that I should stretch forth
my hand against the Lords Anointed.

We may not impute all that we suffer to our enemies; the hand of God is in it,
and we must (as David did) acknowledge it to be the Lords doing. We must
receive evil at the hands of God, as well as good; and bless him when he takes
away, as well as when he continues his Mercy to us. Jer. 29.7. The Jews were
commanded to seek the peace of that City (though it were Babylon) wherein they
were Captives, and to pray to the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof ye
shall have peace: and doubtless in the disturbance of it, they were like to be
the first and greatest sufferers.

Obj. But may we not resist wicked Princes when they unjusty seek our
destruction?

Ans. This (says our Author) is the Mohammedan Doctrine of the Bow-string: which
I think is a most scandalous, if not blasphemous expression. For this example
our Savior has set us, who though most innocent and most afflicted, yet was
most patient under all his sufferings: and we must look to Jesus the Author and
Finisher of our Faith. And it is directly contrary to 1 Pet. 2.19. where, in
the judgment of all Expositors, we are in the same manner to obey Magistrates
as Masters, (i. e.) though we suffer wrongfully, to take it patiently, as our
Savior has given example, who when he suffered he threatened not, etc. Read
chap. 4.12, 13. and chap. 3.14, 15, etc.

Those Christians who wrote their Apologies to the Emperors and Governors
that were then persecuting of them, would not dare to speak any thing but what
was an apparent truth; yet they all disclaim the practice of Resistance, as
contrary to the Doctrine that they had received, viz. to be Subject to the
Higher Powers, etc. Thus Justine Martyr, Lactantius, Athenagoras, Cyprian, etc.
I shall name one for all. We are defamed (says Tertull. ad Scapulam) touching
the Imperial Majesty; yet never were Christians found to be Albinians,
Nigrians, or Cassians: (i. e.) they never sided with any Factions against the
Emperors; though if they had so done, their numbers were so great, that they
might have overthrown his Forces: They might in one night with a few
Firebrarnds avenge themselves, if they held it lawful to revenge evil with
evil. Had we been minded to profess open Hostility, could we want numbers of
men, or force of Arms? we have filled your Islands, Castles, Towns, Tents,
Tribes, and Wards, yea even the Palace, Senate, and place of Judgment. For
what War were not we able, though fewer in number than you, who go so willingly
to our Martyrdom, if it were not more lawful in our Religion to be slain than
to slay? And yet under all their Persecutions they multiplied: Ligabantur,
includebantur, torquebantur, urebantur, laniebantur; and tamen
multiplicabantur, says St. Augustine, de Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 6.

Grotius, l. 1. c. 4. de Jure Belli, etc. speaking of that Sacred Maxim of the
Apostles, Acts 4. It is better to obey God than man, discourses thus: If
either for this ( i. e. our obedience to God) or for any other cause, he that
has the Sovereign power offer us an injury, it ought rather to be patiently
tolerated, than forcibly resisted: for although we do not owe an Active
Obedience to such Commands of Princes, yet we do owe a Passive: we may not
transgress the Laws of God or Nature for the pleasure of the greatest Monarch,
yet ought we rather patiently to submit to what shall be inflicted on us for
disobeying, than by resistance to disturb our Countries peace. The best and
safest course, in such a case, is either to preserve our selves by flight, or
resolutely to undergo whatever shall be imposed on us. His Reason is cogent:
Because Civil Societies being instituted for the preservation of Peace, there
accrues to that Commonwealth a greater Right over us and ours, so far as is
necessary for that end. -- And if a promiscuous Right of forcible Resistance
should be tolerated, it would be no longer a Commonwealth, (i. e.) a Sanctuary
against Oppression, but a confused Rabble.

For this, among other things, he quotes that noted Saying, Principi Summum
rerum arbitrium dii dederunt, subditis obsequii gloria relicta est. God has
given to Princes the Sovereign power, leaving to us the glory of Obedience. If
a Soldier resist his Captain, striking him, and but lays hold of his Weapon,
he is casheered; if he break it, or strike again, he shall be put to death.
That this was the Hebrew Law, he proves from Josh. 1.18. 1 Samuel 8.11. Deuteronomy.
17.14. which he so expounds,

That the Governors may not be resisted, though they command what is not
right. And therefore it is added in that place of Samuel, v. 18. that when the
people are so oppressed by their King, that there is no remedy, they are to
invoke his help who is the Supreme Judge of Heaven and Earth. And when our
Savior commands in the New Testament to give Caesar his due, he intended
doubtless that they should yield as great, if not greater Obedience, both
Active and Passive, unto the Higher Power, than what was due from the Jews;
which St. Paul ( Romans 13.) expounds more largely, and charge those that
resist the power of Kings with no less Crime than rebellion against Gods
Ordinance, and with a Judgment as great as their sin. So that as there is a
necessity for our Subjection, there is also for our Not Resisting: Wherefore
the Powers set over us are to be obeyed, not servilely, superstitiously, or out
of fear; but with free, rational, and generous Spirits, tanquam a diis dati, as
being Gods Ordinance; and being commissioned by him, cannot do more or less
than he orders and permits them to do.

Another reason is drawn from our benefit, the Government being constituted for
our good, and therefore in conscience not to be resisted: for the Apostles
Argument respects that universal good for which Government, was first
instituted, (i. e.) the public Peace, wherein every one is concerned more than
in his private. -- Now he that resists, does as much as in him lies dissolve
his Countries Peace, and so will bury himself in the Ruins of it at the end;
and were it not for Governmens, a Kingdom would be but like a great Pond,
wherein the bigger Fishes devour the lesser. Omnia erit fortiorum.

Object. The Commands of Princes do not always tend to the public good; and
when they decline from that end, they are not to be obeyed.

Answ. Though the Supreme Magistrate does sometime, through fear, anger, lust,
or other passions, swerve from the path of Justice and Equity; yet these
happening but seldom, are to be past by as personal blemishes: which, as Tacitus
observes, are abundantly recompensed by the benefit of better Princes. -- Laws
may be called good, though they fit not every man's case, if they obviate such
disorders as are frequently practiced, and so do good to the generality of the
People. Thus Grotius.

If the People may resist their Prince, I would know in what Cases it may be
done. It may be done (say some) in case of Religion, when that is in danger; in
case of Liberty, when that is invaded; in case of Oppression, when that is
heavy; in case of the King's exercising an Arbitrarie power; in case of his
denying his Peoples Privileges and Immunities. Nay, we have known that mere
Fears and Jealousies, which were fancied only to promote a Rebellion, have
been used as an Argument to justify it.

But will any of these things justify the resistance of a Son against his
Father, or a Servant against his Master? Or if we may make the People Judges of
the lawfulness of resisting in one or more of these Cases, why may they not in
all, and in as many more as they shall please to be sufficient?

But if any cause can justify Resistance, it must be that of Religion; and, if
any Religion, that which is the true Religion. Now if we admit the Christian
Religion to be the truest Religion, that condemns Resistance above any other,
as has been demonstrated by its Precepts, and the practice of those Primitive
Christians, who best knew the sense and the mind of our Savior in those
Precepts: and if any Christians should maintain the contrary, it would give
the Princes of the World a just occasion to be jealous of it, and root it out
of their Dominions: for what Prince would permit any such number of men to
abide and multiply in their Dominions, that profess it to be lawful to make
resistance against them?

Besides, there are few men bred up in any Religion, but they think their own
to be the true Religion: and then they may resist their Prince, how false and
destructive soever it be; and so a Papist or Anabaptist, a Jew or a Pagan, may
think it lawful for them to resist; and so no Prince can be secure of the
Obedience of his People. Therefore we must take away all pretenses of the
lawfulness of Resistance, or we must grant All pretenses to be lawful that the
People shall judge so to be. Therefore the Scripture has forbidden resistance
in any case, as our Law, grounded on Scripture and Reason, has also done, on
any pretense whatsoever.

It had been enough to oppose Bishop Usher's sole Judgment against our
Author's. Bishop Usher, of the power of Princes, p. 214. The patience of the
Saints was not only seen in the Primitive Persecutions, but continued as well
under the Arian Emperors, who retaining the name of Christians, did endeavor
with all their power to advance that damnable Heresy; but also under Julian
himself, who utterly revolted from the very profession of the Name of Christ.
Sr. Augustine observed the same, on Psalm. 124. Julian was an Infidel, an
Apostate, and Idolater; yet, Milites Christiani servierunt Imperatori Insideli;
Christian Soldiers served this Heathen Emperor. When they came to the Cause
of Christ, they would acknowledge no Lord but him in Heaven; but when he said,
Go forth to fight, Invade such a Nation, they presently obeyed: They were
subject to their Temporal Lord, for his sake that was their Eternal Lord.

The Arian Persecution by Constantius (who had also Apostatized from the true
Faith) was as violent, and of much longer continuance than that of Julian; yet
though the Christians had then (as you pretend) the Laws on their side, they
made no resistance. I am constrained to repeat this again, because I meet with
a contrary Assertion in Mr. Hunt, p. 153. I must remember him (says he) out of
Socrates, Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 38. when the Soldiers of the Arian Emperor
Constantius were by his command sent to enforce them to become Arians, they
took Arms in defense of their Religion. Where I perceive, as great a Lawyer as
Mr. Hunt is, he has taken honest John Milton into his Consult; who says, Chap.
44. of the Primitive Christians (Idem bellum Constantio indixerunt, and quantum
in se erat, Imperio and vita spoliarunt) That they waged War with Constantius,
and as much as in them lay, spoiled him of his Life and Empire. This being said
by Milton, how notoriously false soever, Mr. Hunt is ready to assert the truth
of it, and makes an offer of as good Authority for it, as ever Milton did for
the Kings Condemnation; as will appear by the History.

This passage refers us to a horrible Relation of the Arian Persecution acted
by Macedonius, who procured Edicts from that Emperor to force the Christians
to the Arian infidelity. The History begins chap. 27. Macedonius after the
death of Paul Bishop of Constantinople (who was banished first, and then slain
in exile by the Arians, Athanasius hardly escaping them) enters on those
Churches, who having great power with the Emperor, stirred up as great Wars
and Cruelties between the Christians themselves, as any that were acted by the
Tyrants; and he got his impious actings to be confirmed by the Emperors
Edicts. Presently he proclaims the Edicts in all the Cities, and the Soldiers
are enjoined to assist him: The Orthodox are banished not only from their
Churches, but their Cities -- Then they constrain the people against their
wills to communicate with the Arians, and used as great violence as ever any of
those used that forced the Christians to the worshipping of Idols, applying
Whips, Tortures, and all kind of Cruelties. Some were Sequestered of all their
Goods; others Banished; many died under their Torments; and those that were to
be Banished, were slain in the way. These Cruelties were practiced throughout
all the Cities of the East-part of the Empire, especially at Constantinople.

This Persecution when Macedonius was made Bishop, was increased more than
before; of which Socrates, in chap. 38, gives a fuller relation, p. 142, Edit.
Valesii: That he then persecuted not only Catholics, but the Novatians also,
who agreed with the Catholics in the Consubstantiality. Both were oppressed
with intolerable mischiefs. Agellius the Bishop of the Novatians is forced to
flee; but many, eminent for their piety, were apprehended and tormented for
refusing to communicate with them; and after other Tortures, they gagged their
Moueths with Wood, and forced their Sacrament into them: which was to those
good men the greatest torment of all. They also forced the Women and Children
to receive their Baptism. If any resisted, they used Whips, Bonds,
Imprisonment, and other cruelties; of which it shall suffice to relate one or
two instances, leaving the Auditors to judge by them, of the inhumane actings
of Macedonius and his Party. Such Women as would not communicate with them,
they first squeezed their Breasts in a Box, and then cut them off; some with
Iron, and others with Causticks of scalding Eggs. A new kind of torment, never
used by the Heathen against us Christians, was invented by these who professed
Christianity. These things I am informed of, says Socrates, by Auxanontes a
very old man, a Presbyter of the Novatian Church; who before he was made
Presbyter, endured many indignities, being cast into Prison with one Alexander
a Paphlagonian, and beaten with many stripes, whereof this Alexander died in
prison, but Auxanontes lived to endure more torments.

I have not time to translate the entire History, which may be read in that
Chapter; I shall therefore come to that part of it related to by Mr. Hunt:
which is thus:

Macedonius, hearing that in the Province of Paphlagonia, especially at
Mantinium, there were such a multitude of Novatians as could not be expelled by
the Arian Ecclesiastics, procures four Companies of Soldiers to force them to
turn Arians. They, in defense of their Sect, armed themselves with despair, as
with Weapons; and gathering together in a Body, with Hooks, and Hatchets, and
what Weapons were at hand, met the Soldiers; in which scuffle many of the
Paphlagonians, and near all the Soldiers, were slain. This I heard (says
Socrates) from a Paphlagonian that was in the Fight: And he adds, that the
Emperor himself was offended with Macedonius for this action.

I should indeed have wondered at the confidence of Mr. Hunt in accusing from
this story the Orthodox for arming themselves in defense of their Profession,
when it was only a rout of Novatians that were by the Arian cruelty driven to
despair, that defended themselves against them. But I am so transported at
another saying of his, that I have no admiration of any thing else, how false
or pernicious soever: You shall find it, p. 192. of his Treatise concerning the
Succession, where having suggested, that if the D. be not excluded, he does
certainly make us miserable; and mincing the matter a little, saying, We
exclude only his Person, not his Posterity: he is not afraid to add -- And we
will not entail a War upon the Nation, though for the Sake and Interest of the
glorious Family of the STVARTS. The speech is so heinous, that it cannot admit
any aggravation. Well may such men as he and his Plagiary seek to justify
resistance of lawful Powers, having in effect not only drawn the Sword, but
cast away the Scabbard. We are told of one that was ready to kick an Emperor,
and of others that played with his Beard; but this is little less than kicking
at the Crown, and striking a blow at the root, to render the whole Family as
glorious as they made the Father of it: Unless he can give some other sense of
it than this: Rather than not exclude the D. we will exclude the glorious
Family of the Stuarts. And in what sense he calls it a glorious Family, needs
his explication.

But will the Exclusion of the D. as certainly prevent our misery, as his
Succession effect it? Did you never read how zealous some Priests and Pharisees
were for a Bill of Exclusion against a far better person? John 11.47, 48. What
do we? for this man does many Miracles: if we let him thus alone, all men will
believe on him, and the Romans will come, and take away both our place and
nation And did not the passing that Bill, make way for the Romans to bring all
their fears on their own heads? And was not our late dear King excluded from
Crown, Kingdom, and life, upon such fears; and was that a means of our Peace
and Happiness? I wish I could say our fears now, are as false as they were
then. We have his R. H. Declaration for our Security, viz. That the Members of
the Church of England are the best supporters of the Crown. Insomuch that if it
fall to him to be concerned, he will ever countenance and preserve them and it.
And p. 225. Why may we not suppose that a Popish Successor will defend his
Regalia against the Pope? Our Ancient Kings did so in the Reign of Rich. 2.16.
c. 5. In a Statute of Praemunire the Parliament declares. That the Crown of
England, (against the Encroachments of the Pope, has been so free at all
times, that so has been in no earthly subjection, but immediately subject to
God in all things touching the Regalty of the same Crown, and to none other.
And God defend (say they) that it should be submitted to the Pope, and the Laws
and Statutes of the Realm be by him defeated and avoided at his will, in
perpetual destruction of the Sovereignty of the King our Lord, his Crown,
Regalty and of all his Realm. And I hope his Royal Highness will say as they
did, God defend. Moreover, the Commons say, That the things so attempted (viz.
purchasing Bulls from Rome, executing Judgments given in the Court of Rome,
translating of Prelates out of the Realm, or from one Preferment to another) be
clearly against the Kings Crown and Regalty used and approved of the time of
all his Progenitors: Wherefore they and all the siege Commons of the same Realm
will stand with our said Lord the King, and his Crown and Regalty in the Cases
aforesaid, and in all other cases attempted against him and his Crown and
Regalty in all points, to live and to dye. And moreover they pray the king, and
him require by way of Justice, that he would examine all the Lords in the
Parliament, as well Spiritual as Temporal, severally, and all the Estates of
the Parliament, how they think of the Cases aforesaid, which be so openly
against the Kings Crown, and in derogation of his Regalty, how they will stand
in the same cases with our Lord the King in upholding the rights of the said
Crown and Regalty.

The like promises were made by the Lords Temporal and Spiritual, and the
default was to be punished by a Praemunire, which is, To be put out of the King
protection, and their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels forfeited to the
King; and that they be attached by their body, if they may be found, and
brought before the King and his Council, there to answer to the Cases
aforesaid, etc.

Now if these professed Papists did so resolutely and unanimously contest the
Regalia against the Pope, what greater zeal and resolution may we justly expect
from a Protestant Parliament (for such we may have, if it be not our own fault)
if the Pope or any Agents of his should attempt to destroy the foundations of
our established Religion and Laws!

Moreover, in the days of Queen Mary, we read how much time, and what
contrivances and largesses it cost that Queen to form a Parliament to lier
liking, though then the Nation were mostly Papists; and how much they contended
still for the Regalia against the Pope, and reserving of Abby-lands, etc. to
the Purchasers: nor, when all was done, did any man suffer without public
process in form of Law: there were no throats cut, nor bloodshed by private
Messengers or Assassinates, as we are taught to expect from every Justice of
Peace and Tything man, p. 85. and by I know not what Janissaries; and that we
shall be slain to see what Grimaces we make, p. 89. Besides, the number that
suffered in her five years, were not comparable to the number that have been
slain in one hours fight during the Rebellion; nor indeed to those that were
Martyred for their Religion and Loyalty by illegal proceedings in the
Mock-Courts of Justice, during that Usurpation: the number of the Marian
Martyrs being not above three or four hundred (though they were too many.).

Now a Wise man should look back upon the mischiefs that have befallen the
Nation by resisting the lawful Prince, and the endeavors to alter the
Succession from the right Heir; as well as forward upon the mischiefs that may
never be, and which upon a supposition of a Popish Successor are aggravated
almost beyond a possibility of being effected. Remember what it cost the
Nation when the Succession to the Crown was disputed between the Houses of York
and Lancaster: There perished in that War, as Historians do account, two Kings,
one Prince, ten Dukes, two Marquesses, twenty one Earls, twenty seven Lords,
two Viscounts, one Lord Prior, one Judge, one hundred thirty nine Knights,
four hundred twenty one Esquires; and of the Gentry and Commons an incredible
number. So that in such cases, the Remedy is generally worse than the Disease.

I have not said this (God is my witness) to abate the just and honest care of
the Nation to keep out Popery, by such timely provision as his Majesty and
his great Council shall see most probable; but to allay the inordinate Hearts
which may set the whole Kingdom in a sudden flame, only to prevent the fear of
the suffering a Trial of our Faith, if God should call us to it. And I cannot
consider, without some horror, what sore and long Wars and Devastations may
follow upon a Bill of Exclusion, as well as on a Popish Successor. And if of
two evils the least is to be chosen, I should rather (if the Will of God so be)
submit to my lot, how hard soever, under such a One, than that the whole Nation
should be rent in pieces again, either by a Rebellion at home, or Invasions
from abroad; which may happen upon such an Exclusion: for, Regum afflictae
fortunae facile multorum Opem alliciant ad misericordiam, maximeque eorum qui
aut Reges sunt, aut vivunt in Regno quod Regale iis nomen magnum and sanctum
esse videatur: The oppressed estate of Kings easily moves many to pity,
especially them who are either Kings themselves, or do live in a Kingdom to
whom the name of a King is August and Sacred; Says the great Orator, Pro lege
Manil.

Let us therefore leave the King and his Great Council to their free
Determinations, and acquiesce in the sage advice of Gamaliel, St. Paul's
Master, Acts 5.39. Let us refrain from these things: for if this counsel or
this work be of men, it will come to naught: but if it be of God, ye cannot
overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God. And I shall
conclude the business of Exclusion with the Determination of Bishop Sanderson,
whose single Judgment will outweigh in an equal balance all the Opinions of the
Opposers: You have it, p. 350. of his book de Obligatione Conscientiae. I think
(says he) that an Hereditarie Kingdom may not lawfully be changed for an
Elective (as in and by the Exclusion it is like to be), nor for any other form
of Government, either by the People alone, nor by the People and Nobles
jointly, nor by the whole body of the People in their greatest latitude, that
is, the People, Nobles, and the King, consenting together: unless perhaps the
Royal Progeny should so totally fail, that there is not one surviving, who may
claim it as his due by Right of Inheritance. And let it be considered, that he
wrote this before the Bill of Exclusion was ever dreamt of.

And now I cannot but reflect upon the Prognosticators and Wizards of our Time,
that amuse the people with the fancies and fears which their own guilt has
created, as if we should be all swallowed up in a moment, and there were a
fatal necessity of endless miseries attending us: such as Mr. Baxter in his
Prognostication, and our Author, who, p. 89. tells us of such a dismal prospect
as makes every honest man's heart to shake. I remember, some years since, upon
the great Eclipse of the Sun, Lilly and some others made such a dismal
representation of it, as struck a terror into a great part of the Country, and
made them take home their Cattle to their houses, and seek Sanctuary themselves
in the Churches, as if Doomsday were come; when the cause was natural, and
nothing fell out but according to that course which God had appointed for the
Motion of the Heavenly bodies. Though wise men are not moved at such bugbears,
yet they have an ill Aspect on the people, to dispose them for such Commotions
as may promote the interest of discontented and designing men.

For my part, I shall continue to pray for his Royal Highness, as our Liturgy
directs; and if it be the will of God to send us a Popish Successor to punish
us for our resistance of a Protestant King, whose blood still cries for
Vengeance; I had rather die for not resisting him, than to be as instrumental
in procuring a Bill of Exclusion, as this man would be, and as successful as he
can hope to be, and at my death to have it written on my Tomb, Here lies the
first Author of this Sentence: RATHER THAN THE DVKE OF Y. SHOULD NOT BE
EXCLVDED, WE WILL EXCLVDE THE GLORIOUS FAMILY OF THE STVARTS. And I will yet
pray against the wickedness of these men: Lord cloth all such his enemies with
shame; but upon his head, and the heads of his seed, let the Crown flourish,

I perceive Mr. Hunt to be a great devoto to some kind of Parliaments; and that
which was convened in the first of King James, was one that consisted of Wise,
Loyal, and Pious persons; I entreat him therefore to consider what was Enacted
by them in their Recognition, 1o. Jacobi; where after the Preamble it is thus
declared: We therefore your most humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do from the
bottom of our hearts yield to the Divine Majesty all humble thanks and praises,
not only for the said unspeakeable and inestimable benefits and blessings
abovementioned, but also that he has further enriched your Highness with a
most Royal Progeny of most rare and excellent gifts and forwardness, and in his
goodness is like to increase the happy number of them. And in most humble and
lowly manner do beseech your most excellent Majesty, that (as a memorial to all
Posterities amongst the records of your High Court of Parliament for ever to
endure, of our Loyalty, Obedience and hearty and humble Affection) it may be
published and declared in this High Court of Parliament, and enacted by the
authority of the same, That we being bounden thereunto (N. B.) by the Laws of
God and man, do recognize and acknowledge, and thereby express our unspeakable
Joys, that immediately upon the dissolution and decease of Elizabeth sat
Queen of England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and of all the
Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same, and by inherent
Birthright (N. B.) and lawful and undoubted Succession, descend and come to
your most Excellent Majesty, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next and
sole Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm, as is aforesaid. And that by the
goodness of God Almighty, and lawful right of Descent under one Imperial Crown,
your Majesty is of the Realms and Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, the most potent and mighty King, and by Gods goodness more able to
protect and govern us your loving Subjects in all peace and plenty, than any of
your noble Progenitors: and thereunto we most humbly and faithfully submit and
oblige our selves, our heirs and posterities for ever, until the last drop of
our bloods be spent. And we beseech your Majesty to accept the same as the
first fruits in this High Court of Parliament of our Loyalty and Faith to your
Majesty and your Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever.

Now, as Grotius says, a People may be presumed to be the same that they
formerly were, till some public act show that their judgments are altered. How
dares Mr. Hunt then to say, p. 47. If any man is so vain as to say that an
unalterable course of Succession is established among us by Divine Right; I say
he is a man fitted to believe Transubstantiation, and the Infallibility of the
Pope? etc. And if any man shall add, that this is the Doctrine of the
Reformation, and adventure to tell the people so; they are the most impudent
falsaries that ever any Age produced; when there is scarce a Child but has
heard what was done and maintained by the Clergy in the Case of Mary Queen of
Scots.

How can this man, (who doubtless is an Ignor^mus if he never knew this
Recognition) declare so often as he does, particularly in p. 198. that the
Succession of the Crown is the right of the whole Community, their appointment,
their constitution, and creature in Parliament? Did he never read what is said
by Grotius de Jure belli? He says, If a Kingdom descend by Succession, an Act
of Alienation is in itself null, l. 1. c. 4. s. 9. Which agrees with what
Bishop Sanderson delivered before. And Mr. Hunt himself says, Grotius is more
than ten witnesses: and if you add the Bishops, I think them of more value than
a hundred.

In qua tandem Civitate Catilina arbitraris te vivere, says Cicero: you that
make Hue and cry after such as write for Religion and Loyalty, as if they were
ready to banish themselves, or prove felo's de se; consider, I pray, under what
Government you are: and though you may escape the Magistrates wrath, yet you
ought to be solicitous (...) you may escape the wrath of God, to which you have
made your self obnoxious.

I have but one Remark more on Mr. Hunt, which is, that he has consulted
another famous Author, one Mr. Thomas White, who, being a Romish Emissary, made
it his business to continue our distractions. This man wrote a Book entitled,
The Grounds of Obedience and Government: And his Motto is, Salus Populi Suprema
Lex esto; whereof I have given you the genuine sense already.

Now among many other Notes transcribed by Mr. Hunt from this Jesuitical
Writer, p. 158. he comes to answer the Objections of Divines concerning the
Authority of Princes, and non-resistance. Up steps the Divine (says he) to
preach us out of Scripture the Duty we owe to Kings, no less than Death and
Damnation being the guerdons of Disobedience and Rebellion. And p. 159. They
will speak Reason too, telling us, that God by nature is high Lord and Master
of all: That whoever is in power receives his right from him: That Obedience
consists in doing the Will of him that commands; and conclude, that his Will
ought to be obeyed till God takes away the Obligation, (i. e.) till he who is
to be obeyed himself releaseth the Right. Besides, p. 160. They allege that
God by his special command transferred the Kingdom from Saul to David, from
Rehoboam to Jeroboam. So that in fine, all that is brought out of Scripture
falls short of proving that no time can make void the right of a King once
given him by the hand of God. Now mark what Mr. White says to overthrow the
sense of these Scriptures. The reason (says he) of THIS WEAK WAY OF ALLEGING
SCRIPTVRE is, that when they read that God commands or does this, they look
not into Nature to know what this Commanding or Doing is, but presently imagine
God commands it by express and direct words, and does it by an immediate
position of the things said to be done; whereas in Nature the Commands are
nothing but the natural Light God has bestowed on Mankind, and which is
therefore frequently called the Law of Nature. Likewise Gods doing a thing is
many times only the course of natural second Causes; to which because God
gives the Direction and Motion, he both does, and is said to do all that is
done by them.

Now to the same end ( viz. to prove that Kingly Government is not from God but
the People, and therefore may be altered and resisted) and in the same words
for the most part, does Mr. Hunt deliver this black invention of Mr. White, p.
144. The nature of Government and its Original has been prejudiced -- by men
that understand nothing but words: and Grammar-divines, that without
contemplating Gods Attributes, or the Nature of man, or the reasonableness of
moral Precepts, have undertaken to declare the sense of Scripture; and infer,
that Sovereign Power is not of Humane Institution, but of Divine Appointment,
because they find it there written, That by him Kings reign: Imagining, that
when the Scripture says God commands or does this, that God commanded it by
express words, or does it by an immediate position of the thing done; whereas
in nature his Commands are nothing but the natural Light God has bestowed on
Mankind: Likewise Gods doing a thing is only the course of natural and second
Causes, to which because God gives Direction and Motion, he does both, and is
said to do all that is done.

Likewise Gods doing a thing, is only the course of natural and second Causes,
to which; because God gives the Direction or Motion, he does both, and is said
to do all that is done. All this is verbatim Mr. White: So is his Raillerie in
the same Phrase, to bring an Odium on Divines that would prove Government out
of the Scripture: White calls them Grammar-Divines, Verbal and wind-blown
Divines, p. 162. And Mr. Hunt calls them Men that understand nothing but Words,
and Grammar-divines. Who (says Mr. White) without Logic, Philosophy, or
Morality, undertake to be Interpreters of the Sacred Bible: Who (says Mr.
Hunt) without contemplating Gods Attributes, or the Nature of man, or the
Reasonableness of Moral Precepts, have undertaken to declare the sense of the
Scripture.

It is not strange to me, having read a Defiance to the Royal Family, to read
the like against the Clergy. But that the Scripture also should suffer, and
the uncertain and mutable Traditions and Effects of natural Causes be made
equivalent with the immediate Commands of God in the Scripture, though it be no
new thing among Jesuits, yet a true Protestant should abhor it. The man is so
angry that he has done the ungrateful Bishops any right, that he will have
satisfaction right or wrong from the rest of the Clergy: And though he call
the younger sort only Coxcombs, yet his design is to bring the whole Clergy
into contempt. But any young Divine may draw such Conclusions out of the
Premises, as might exclude him out of the Society of all good and learned men.

1. That to conclude from the sense of Scripture, is a weak way of Arguing. In
this Mr. White and Mr. Hunt consent. 2. That non obstante what the Scripture
says of Divine Right of Sovereign Power, it is not of Divine, but Humane
Institution. 3. That Providence, and the Effects of second Causes, being
influenced by God, are of equal Authority with the Precepts enjoined by the
Word of God. 4. That the Sovereign Power being but of Humane Institution, may
be resisted, and is alterable. 5. That they who mock the Messengers of God, do
go on to despise the Word of God, and abuse his Prophets; a sin which often
stirs up the Wrath of God, so as there is NO REMEDY. And this I observe in the
behalf of the abused Clergy. 6. That having cast off our Loyalty to our
Governors and their Laws, puts us in a fair way to cast off the Sovereignty of
God and his Laws. 7. That the worst of Papists, and their most Atheistical
Arguments, are made use of by some that call themselves true Protestants,
against the express Commands of God for obedience to the Higher Powers.
From all which Premises I shall only conclude as to my self, That it is much
more desirable to perish by the hands of a known Enemy to God and the true
Religion, than to outlive that Religion, and by a successful resistance against
the Ordinance of God, to live in the enjoyment of Temporal wealth and Honors,
and to deserve this Epitaph to be engraved on my Tomb.

Plorate quotquot estis
Pacis vitaeque placidae Pertaesi:
Conservator optimi Populi, pessimus
Legum, Libertatis, Religionis Protector:
Post Oliverum Primus, nulli Secundus:
Deperditae Respublicae Instaurator:
Regum timendorum tremendus Judex,
Regiae Stirpis Extirpator Perfidus,
Juris Consultorum Doctor Ignoramus.
Qui Consentientibus dissentit ab omnibus
Orthodoxis, Antiquis and Modernis:
Qui Dissentientibus consentit omnibus
Papistis, Anabaptistis, Regicidis:
Scrutator Majestatis oppressus a Gloria,
Inglorius obiit.
OF Passive Obedience.
IT is a very hard Case, that when the Scripture injoyns such as are of the
Ministry in this Nation to put the people in mind to be subject to
Principalities and powers; and the Canons of the Church to which we have
subscribed, oblige us four times in the year at least, to manifest, open, and
declare, in our Sermons and Lectures, That the Kings power within his Majesty's
Realms, etc. is the highest power under God, to whom all men born within the
same, do by Gods Laws owe most Loyalty and Obedience, before and above all
Powers and Potentates on Earth; that for so doing, we should be reproached as
Time-servers, and such as advance an Arbitrarie power; and that such Doctrine
is calculated and fitted on purpose for the use of a Popish Successor, and to
make us an easier prey to the bloody Papists, p. 89. And all this, by those
men who are equally obliged by Oaths and Subscriptions to do the same as we.

Of these things the Author accuses a learned Doctor, who had affirmed (in a
Sermon I suppose, and he quotes p. 8.) That the Gospel does not prescribe any
remedy but flight against the Persecutions of the lawful Magistrate; allowing
no other means, when we cannot escape, between denying and dying for the Faith.
This is in p. 80. and p. 85. for saying, That the Gospel by its own confession
is a suffering Doctrine, and so far from being prejudicial to Caesar's
authority, that it makes him the Minister of God, and commands all its
Professors to give him and all that are in authority under him their dues, and
rather die than resist them by force.

Now to remove the prejudice of such as are of our Author's Judgment, I shall
first propose the Judgment of Mr. Baxter, (as a preparative to the more candid
entertainment of what I shall propound concerning Passive Obedience.) P. 24: of
the 4th part of Christian Directorie, Direct. 31. Resist not where you cannot
obey; and let no appearance of probable good that may come to your selves or to
the Church, by any unlawful means, as Treason, Sedition, or Rebellion, ever
tempt you to it: for, evil must not be done, that good may come by it.

But, Sect. 61. it is objected, If we must let Rulers destroy us at their
pleasure, the Gospel will be rooted out of the Earth: When they know we hold it
unlawful to resist them, they will be emboldened to destroy us, and sport
themselves in our blood, as the Papists did by the poor Albigenses. Answ. All
this were something, if there were no God that can easilier restrain and
destroy them at pleasure, than they can injure or destroy you. If God be
engaged to protect you, and has told you that the hairs of your head are
numbered, and more regards his Honor, Gospel, and Church, than you do, and
accounts his Servants as the Apple of his eye, and has promised to hear
them, and avenge them speedily; then it is but Atheistical distrust of God, to
save your self by sinful means, as if God could not or would not do it. Thus he
that saves his life shall lose it.

This Mr. Baxter speaks against Rebellion and unlawful Arms and Acts. To this
purpose he quotes Grotius de Imperio, p. 210. answering the like Objection,
(viz.) Mutato Regis Animo, Religio Mutabitur; That if the King change his mind,
the Religion will be changed also. Answ. In this case the only remedy is in
the providence of God* who has the hearts of all men in his hand, but
especially the Kings, God works his ends both by good and evil Kings:
sometime a calm, sometime a storm is most profitable to the Church. If the King
be of a perverse and corrupt Judgment, it will be worse for him than for the
Church. But all this, you will say, is against unlawful acts and means, which
they that have the Laws on their side cannot be said to use. To this Mr. Baxter
answers, p. 26. What power the Laws have* they have it by the Kings Consent and
Act. And it is strange impudency, to pretend that his own Laws are against
him. If any misinterpret them, he may be confuted. I suppose Mr. Baxter means,
by some other method than that of arguing, as St. Augustine advised in the like
case.

The Law and Ordinance of Government, and especially of Monarchy, is founded
on the Law of God and Nature; and no positive Laws, or condescentions of
Governors, can make void the Law of God. For though a righteous Prince will
not violate those Laws which he has consented to, yet if he should, it will
not justify those Subjects that shall violate the Law of God and Nature, in
resisting and rising up against him in Rebellion; which would as it were argue
great ingratitude to them who by Acts of Grace have obliged themselves: (for,
as St. Augustine observes, our Prince, like God himself, becomes a Debtor to
man, Non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed omnia nobis largiendo; Not by
receiving any thing from us, but by promising all good things to us.) So it is
a certain way to bring us all to Confusion, if the King should be judged as a
Criminal upon every transgression of the Law.

And I would ask those who would bind their Kings in such Fetters, By what
authority they would proceed against him and judge him: would they erect
another High Court of Justice, or bring him from his Throne to the Block? Would
they arm the people again, on pretense of fighting for their Laws and
Liberties? The end of those things we have seen to be the death of a most
righteous Prince, and the general destruction of the Subjects. Wherefore I
commend to you that of your Bracton: Omnem esse sub Rege, and ipsum sub nullo
fed tantum sub Deo. And if he contradict himself in this, the suffrage of
Nature, and the Laws of all well-governed Nations, will condemn him; which
agree in this, That Principi non est Lex posita, there is no Law above the
Prince that makes the Law, and by whose Authority alone the Laws are executed:
for it is he that bears the Sword. And Plutarch says of him, that he
does(...), not only govern according to the Laws, but has a power above them.
He has so indeed for the good of his Subjects, to whom the rigorous execution
of the Laws, in many cases, would be an insupportable burden, if by the Kings
Authority they might not be moderated, and interpreted by Rules of Equity;
against which our Dissenters have the least reason of any men alive to object.
And if we grant him this power for our good, how can we deny it to him for his
own?

That Learned Casuist, Bishop Sanderson, whose modesty in other Resolutions is
eminent, in resolving this Question, Whether it be lawful for the Prince in
cases extraordinary to do any thing besides or against Law, undertakes to prove
the Affirmative, with an extraordinary confidence; and, which is more, to prove
it by that abused Maxim which some would invert against the King, Salus Populi
Suprema Lex, That the Peoples Safety is the highest Law. And if I prove not
this, as your selves shall confess, from that very Maxim (says he) then say,
that I cannot see at noonday; and censure me to have been not a Defender of
this good Cause, but a Betrayer and Praevaricator. Which thus he does: First,
he tells us the Original of that Sentence, viz. from Cicero de Legibus, in
these words, l. 3. Regio Imperio duo sunto, iique praeeundo, judicando,
consulendo, Praetores, Judices, Consules appellantur: Militiae Summum Jus
habento nemini parento, Ollis Salus Populi Suprema Lex esto. Now to whom does
this power belong? to them (says the very Letter of those Laws) to whom the
Imperial power was committed, that is, to the two Consuls for the time being.
Come now. (says the Bishop) all you that are the Patrons of Popular confidence,
read, weigh, and examine every Word, Syllable, and Comma, and show where you
can find the least hint of any power granted to Subjects against their Princes
will, either to judge concerning the safety of the people, or to determine and
do any thing against the Laws. Does not the whole series both of Things and
Words loudly proclaim, that the Supreme Authority which is above all Law, and
that the care of the Public safety properly belongs to him alone to whom the
Imperial power, the right of the Militia, and that Supreme Authority which is
subject to none, is granted?

When the Law commands one thing. ( says Aeneas Sylvius, de Ortu Imperii, c.
20.) and Equity another, it is fit the Emperor should temper the rigor of the
Law with the bridle of Equity. Seeing no Decree of the Law, though made by
never so deliberate advice, can sufficiently answer the various and
unthought-of plottings of man's nature -- and it is manifest that the Laws which
aforetime were just, in aftertimes may prove unjust, harsh, and unprofitable;
to moderate which, it is needful that the Prince, who is Lord of the Laws,
interpose his Authority. And where it is said, that a Law, though it be severe,
should be observed; this respects inseriour Magistrates, not the Emperor, to
whom the power of moderating the Laws is so connexed, that by no decrees of man
it can be pulled from him.

Bishop Sanderson gives a pertinent instance to this purpose, in his Book de
Oblig. Consc. p. 384. That when upon discovery of the Gunpowder-plot the
Traitors fled, some of them were pursued by the High Sheriff of
Worcestershire, who having hunted them from place to place, came to the
Confines of his County, beyond which he was not to pass with his Soldiers by
the Law: yet fearing that they might otherwise escape, he pursues them into
another County, takes them, and brings them Prisoners. Yet knowing he had
transgressed the Law, and lest others in matters of less moment should be
encouraged to do the like, or himself be exposed to future trouble, he
presently goes to the King and obtains his Pardon.

What excellent Chemists were they, who out of those golden Laws should draw
out so many Swords and Axes against their Sovereign and Fellow Subjects, on
such a vile pretense! And is not our young Empyrick near of kin to them, who by
his Mountebank-Receipts would poison the People with a conceit that they may by
the Laws arm themselves against the King, if they shall judge that he does
transgress those Laws? that then he is no longer a Minister of God, but of the
Devil, and may be persecuted as a Midnight-Thief, or Highway-Robber, or in the
words of Gregory, as a common Cutthroat, page 25. And that he is hardly to be
blamed, who shows himself so courageous for God, and for that Religion which he
approves, as to assassinate his Prince.

To conclude, it is the judgment both of Divines, Civilians, and Statesmen,
that there must be in Kings and Governors a Supreme Power to mitigate the
rigor of the Laws, and to suspend the execution of them; to pardon some
Delinquents, and in case of necessity to provide for the safety of the People,
besides, and against the Laws: and that to arm the People, and teach them on
pretense of the Law to resist their Prince, is a pernicious Tenet, destructive
to Government.

It is Criminal, ( says Mr. Hunt p. 41.) and no less dangerous to the being of
any Polity, to restrain the Legislative Authority, and to entertain principles
that disable it to provide remedy against the greatest mischiefs that can
happen to any Community. No Government can support it self without an unlimited
Power in providing for the happiness of the people. No civil Establishment but
is controlable and alterable to the Public Weal: Whatever is not of Divine
Institution, ought to yield and submit to this Power and Authority. And this is
all that I, or any of my Brethren that I know of, ever intended to say of the
extent of the Kings Power: That such distempers as are incurable by common and
prescribed Remedies, such as the Kings Evil usually is, must have extraordinary
applications, such as the Kings hand, and none but his, may successfully
administer.

Nor does any among us plead that the King is above the Directive power of the
Laws, but only that he is not under the Coercive power of them. For which
cause Antonie would not permit that Herod should be called to an account of
what he did as a King, for then he should in effect be no King at all: for what
power can judge him who is the Supreme power on Earth? The Emperor ( says
Tertull.) is solo Deo minor, inferior to God only, and under the power of God
only; In cujus solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi. And
St. Ambrose spreaking of David, applies it to other Kings: He was a King, and
obnoxious to no humane Laws, because Kings are free from punishment for their
offenses, being secured by the power of their Empire. If the People have power
to call the King to an account, the Estate is Democratical: if the Peers, it is
Aristocratical; but if indeed it be Monarchical, neither, nor both, can judge
their Prince.

In the first Homily against Rebellion, p. 1. our Church says, that in reading
of the Holy Scriptures we shall find in very many places, as well of the Old
Testament as the New, That Kings and Princes, as well the evil as the good, do
reign by Gods Ordinance; and that Subjects are bound to obey them.

The Augustan Confession, Article 16. Christians must necessarily obey the
present Magistrates and Laws, except when they command to sin.

French Confession, Article 11. We ought to obey Laws and Statures, pay
Tribute, and bear other burdens of Subjection, and undergo the Yoke with a good
will, although the Magistrates should be Infidels; so that Gods sovereign
Authority remains inviolate.

The Belgic Confession. All men, of what dignity; quality, or state soever
they be, must subject themselves unto the lawful Magistrates, pay them Imposts
and Tributes, and please and obey them in all things not repugnant to the Word
of God: Also pray for them, that God would be pleased to direct them in all
their actions, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life under them in all
piety and honesty.

The Helvetick Confession. Let all Subjects honor and reverence the Magistrate
as the Minister of God: Let them love and assist him, and pray for him as their
Father; let them obey him in all his just and equitable Commands, and pay all
Imposts. Tributes, and other Dues faithfully and willingly: And in case of War,
let them also lay down their lives, and spill their blood for the good of the
Public, and of the Magistrate; willingly, vailiantly, and cheerfully. For he
that opposes himself to the Magistrate, provokes the heavy wrath of God upon
himself.

The Bohemian Confession. Let every one yield subjection in all things not
contrary to God, to the Higher Powers and their Officers, whether good or bad.

The Saxonick Confession. The more a Christian is sincere in Faith, the more he
ought to subject himself to the public Laws.

But I shall end where I began, with the Doctrine of our Martyrs and
Confessors, who sealed with their blood the Truths that they published with
their Pens; for whom in vain do we build and garnish Monuments of Fame to their
memories, while we are Apostates from their Doctrine and Practice.

The first Reformers of our Religion, in the Institution of a Christian man, on
the Fifth Commandment, say, That Subjects be bound not to withdraw their
Fealty, Truth, Love, and Obedience from their prince FOR ANY CAUSE WHATSOEVER
IT BE; ne for any cause may they conspire against his person, ne do any thing
toward the hinderance or hurt thereof, or of his estate: And by his
Commandment they are bound to obey all the Laws, Proclamations, Precepts, and
Commandments made by their Princes and Governors, except they be against the
Commandment of God. And likewise they be bound to obey all such as are in
Authority under their Prince, as far as he will have them obeyed. They must
also give unto their Prince aid, help, and assistance, whenever he shall
require the same, either for surety, preservation, or maintenance of his
Person and Estate, or of the Realm, or of the defense of any of the same
against all persons. And there be many examples in Scripture of the vengeance
of God that has fallen upon RVLERS and such as have been disobedient to their
Princes. But one principal example to be noted, is of the Rebellion of Core,
Dathan, and Abiram, made against their Governors Moses and Aaron: For
punishment of which Rebels, God not only caused the Earth to open, and to
swallow them down, and a great number of other people with them, with their
houses, and all their substance; but caused also a fire to descend from Heaven,
and to burn up two hundred and fifty Captains which conspired with them in the
Rebellion.

And again, on the Sixth Commandment: No Subjects may draw their Sword against
their Prince, for what cause soever it be, nor against any others (saving for
lawful defense) without their Princes license. And it is their duty to draw
their Swords for the defense of their Prince and Realm, whenever the Prince
shall command. And although Princes which be the chief and supreme Heads of
Realms, do otherwise than they ought, yet God has assigned no Judges over them
in this world, but will have the judgment of them reserved to himself.

Sir John Cheek, who was Tutor to King Edword the Sixth, and a person of great
Learning and Integrity, in his Book called, The true Subject to the Rebel,
speaks to this purpose: If you were offered persecution for Religion, you ought
to fly for it; and yet you intend to fight. If you would stand in the truth,
you ought to suffer like Martyrs; and you would slay like Tyrants. Thus for
Religion you keep no Religion, and neither will follow the Council of Christ,
nor the Constancy of Martyrs. And then asking the people why they should not
like that Religion which Gods word established, the Primitive Church
authorized, and the whole consent of the Parliament confirmed, and his Majesty
had set forth; he says, Dare you Commons take upon you more Learning than the
Chosen Bishops and Clerks of this Realm have?

I suppose that the Author of Julians Life might transcribe that Act of Queen
Mary abovementioned, out of Mr. Prynnes second part of the Loyalty of pious
Christians, etc. where we have it printed at large, p. 65. from whence he might
very honestly have told us Mr. Prynnes Judgment of such Prayers as were made
against the Queen; who, (p. 64.) says, That Queen Mary's zealous Protestant
Bishops, Ministers, and Subjects likewise, made constant prayers for her: But
some over-zealous Anabaptistical Fanatics using some unchristian expressions
in their prayers against her, That God would cut her off, and shorten her
days, occasioned this special Act against such prayers. And having repeated
the Act, he adds, p. 66. These prayers were much against, and direstly contrary
to the Judgment of Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Farrer, Bishop Hooper, Rowland
Tailor, John Philpot, John Bradford, Edward Crome, John Rogers, Laurence
Sanders, Edward Laurence, Miles Coverdale Bishop of Exon, and others of our
Godly Protestant Bishops and Ministers, who soon after suffered as Martyrs.
They in their Letter (May 8. 1554.) professing, that as Obedient Subjects we
shall behave our selves toward Queen Mary, and all that be in authority, and
not cease to pray to God for them, that he would govern them all generally and
particularly with the Spirit of Wisdom and Grace: and so we heartily desire and
humbly pray all men to do, in no point consenting to any kind of Rebellion or
Sedition against our Sovereign Lady the Queens Highness; but where they cannot
obey, but they must disobey God, there to submit themselves with all patience
and humility, to suffer as well what the will and pleasure of the higher Powers
shall adjudge, as we are ready through the goodness of the Lord to suffer
whatsoever they shall judge us unto. And Bishop Hooper wrote an Apology
against the Slanderous report made of him, that he should encourage and
maintain such as cursed Queen Mary: printed 1552. wherein his Innocence and
Loyalty to the Queen, in praying for her, are vindicated at large, So far Mr.
Prynne.

Take the sense of one Marian Martyr more, Mr. William Tindal, in a Book de
Christiani hominis Obedientia, saying, In every Kingdom, the King, which has
no Superior, judges of all things; and therefore he that endeavors or
intends any mischief or calmity against the Prince that is a Tyrant, or a
Persecutor, or whosoever with a forward hand does touch the Lords Anointed, he
is a Rebel against God, and resists the Ordinance of God. And as it is not
lawful upon any pretense to resist the King, so it is not lawful to rise up
against the Kings Officer or Magistrate that is sent by the King for the
execution of those things that are commanded by the King.

And Mr. Barus in Tract. de Humanis Constitut. says, That the Servants of
Chrict rather than commit any evil, or resist any Magistrate, ought patiently
to suffer the loss of their goods, and the tearing of their members: Nay, the
Christian, after the example of Christ his Master, ought to suffer the
bitterest death for Truth and Righteousness sake: and therefore who ever shall
rebel under pretense of Religion, aeternae damnationis erit reus.

Now these men gave their Opinions for Passive Obedience, even before Queen
Mary had altered the Laws, (i. e.) their Religion was by the established Laws
of the Land, the only allowed Religion; yet they were far from defending it by
resistance and Rebellion.

It is a difficult matter to persuade them to suffer, that never knew what it
was to obey: such as were educated in a time of Rebellion, and instead of being
catechized in the Principles of the Gospel, were from their childhood taught
how to stand on their guard, and defy their Governors; and being become
wealthy by the Spoils wrested by themselves or their Ancestors from the King,
the Church, or their more Religious and Loyal Brethren, think that Providence
will justify them in all their Seditious attempts, and that the Millennium of
Christ's reign upon Earth is begun; and that all Laws now must be subservient to
the support of that Persuasion of theirs; and that their Religion has been in
full and quiet possession ever since 42 at least; and therefore to teach men
now, that they ought to suffer rather than resist their lawful Princes, is the
Mohammedan Doctrine of the Bow-string; which is indeed the whole Oeconomie of
the Gospel, as will appear by what follows.

If we compare Deuteronomy. 28. with Matthew. 15. it will appear, that as Prosperity
was the Blessing of the Old Testament, so Persecution is of the New And there
is no Robbery in the Exchange: for though we are called to forsake house,
friends, and lands for Christ's sake, we shall receive in this time a hundred
fold, though with persecution, Mark. 10.40. besides the Aureola, or double
Crown, in the life to come. How comes it then to pass, that the Doctrine of the
Cross is become Foolishness, and a Stumbling Block to us Christians, as it was
to the Jews and Greeks? That which was the Glory of the Apostles, and esteemed
above earthly Kingdoms by the Primitive Christians, even the Crown of
Martyrdom, is now trampled on, despised, and discredited, as the reward of
Fools, and men weary of their lives.

The Gnostics drew tears from the Apostles eyes, when he considered how they
both taught and practiced the lawfulness of denying Christ in times of
persecution: (Phil. 3.18.) Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now
tell you with weeping, that they are enemies to the Cross of Christ. Such were
crept in among the Galatians, who by all art and industry increased their
numbers, that they might not suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ, Gal.
6.12. But God forbid (says the Apostle) that I should rejoice save in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified to me, and I
unto the world.

The Scars that Soldiers receive in the service of their Prince, are esteemed
Marks of Honor: and every petty Prince can lead forth Legions to look Death
in the face at his command: Every new Sect can boast of their Dipticks and
Martyrologies; and there is scarce a good man in the world, but some or other
would even dare to die for him: And what difficulties do affright men of
resolution, when they contend but for a Garland of Flowers or Laurel, fading
and unsatisfactorie rewards! And has our blessed Redeemer only so ill
deserved of us for all the great things that he has done both for our Souls
and Bodies? or is he only so unable to requite our service and labor of love,
that we should forsake him, when a small Storm threatens us, or falls upon our
heads? When Henry the Fourth of France was engaged in fight against his
Enemies, and his Friends began to give ground; he minds them what a Reproach it
would be to the Nobility and Gentry of France, that of all their numbers,
there were not fifty that stood by him in the Camp, that had thousands waiting
on him in his Court. Pudet haec opprobria, etc.

It is no rash, fruitless, or desperate design that our Savior calls us to:
He forewarned us at our first entrance to our Holy Profession, that we could
not be his Disciples except we deny our selves, and take up the Cross and
follow him: and he that does not so, says our Savior, is not worthy of me,
Matthew. 10.38. Matthew. 16.24. Luke 14.27. Nor is it fruitless: he has wise and
great ends, not only for the glory of his Father, but the good of his Church,
in every affliction: that Vine, as well as the common ones, spreads and
prospers the more, when it is at the wisdom of the Vine-dresser watered with
blood. As in lesser afflictions God chastises us for our good, that we may be
partakers of his Holiness; so does he with greater, that he may bring us to
glory.

Many a man might have perished eternally, if they had not perished temporally;
God by his Righteous judgments calling their sins to remembrance, and working
in them repentance unto life. Behold, says St. James, we count them happy that
endure. You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. Jobs Graces had not
given so great a light and ground of Consolation to the world, if they had not
been tried in the fire of affliction; which is so needful for the purging out
our Corruption, that we are told* All that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution; and that we must through Many tribulations enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Afflictions which God sends do often bear an Inscription of those sins
that procured them: as when Joseph's brethren were under apprehension of great
fear, they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in
that we saw him in the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would
not hear him. If we are oppressed and persecuted by our own Countrymen and false
brethren, let us consider whether we have not been such, and dealt so with our
Brethren. If God permit us to be persecuted by a Christian Prince, consider
what guilt yet lies on the Nation for the Persecution and Murder of a most
Christian King; and learn to improve the Judgment into a Mercy, by repentance
and patience under Gods afflicting hand. If no such guilt lies upon us, then
think that God calls us forth as Combatants, to show examples of Christian
Faith, Love, and Resolution, in an Age that is corrupted by long prosperity,
and become effeminate and delicate, through plenty and luxury: and a Plethory
is to be cured by Phlebotomy.

How the Church thrived under Persecution, we have many instances. The first
Persecution scattering the Disciples, caused the Gospel to be planted through
the world; and being planted, the blood of those that dyed made it so fruitful,
that the President of Palestine wrote to Tiberius, that they were weary of
slaying them; who never so much as fled or hid themselves, and yet multiplied
the more for being put to death. Pliny also writing to Trajan, complains, prope
jam desolata templa, and sacra Solennia diu intermissa. It was otherwise when
the Church flourished outwardly in the days of Constantius: the Christians
drove one another from the Altars, and by their ambitious and popular Contests,
made the Sacrifices of God to be abominated by the heathen.

Whatever the punishment be, we must accept it as the demerit of our Sins, and
as inflicted by a most righteous and glorious God. And if because, as in the
days of Constantius, we deny the power of godliness, and exercise of Charity
to one another, it is just with God to deprive us of the very form of it, and
commit us to be Chastised by a common Enemy, as they were by Julian; We must
bear the Indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned against him.

Consider what Christ suffered for us; he endured the Cross, despising the
shame; and being now at the right hand of God, calls on us to follow his
Example, promising, that if we suffer, we shall also reign with him. And shall
our Savior be forsaken as soon as he is apprehended, and be again called on to
come down from the Cross, that we may believe in him? shall we draw back, as
the beasts were wont, from that Altar which our Savior has sanctified and
made our surest Sanctuary against Evils? Think it not strange, says St. Peter,
1.4.12.) concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as if some strange
thing had happened to you; but rejoice, in as much as you are made partakers of
Christ's sufferings; that when his Glory shall appear ye may be glad with
exceeding joy. Would our Savior have bid us to rejoice and be exceeding glad
when we suffer persecution for his sake, if it were a thing impossible, that as
Afflictions do abound so our Consolations shall also?

With what an Emphasis does the Spirit of God describe the blessedness of them
that suffer or die for the sake of Christ! 1 Pet. 4.14. the Spirit of God and
of Glory (i. e. the glorious Spirit of God) rests on you: and verse. 15. If
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God
on this behalf. And so St. John, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord for
they rest from their labors, and their works follow them, Revel. 14.13. Be
thou faithful unto death (to the suffering of death) and I will give thee a
Crown of life, Revel. 2.10.

If we did indeed believe all that to be true which our Savior has told us,
we would not be offended at the Cross. The growth of our fears, is from the
decay of our Faith: Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith! Abraham, who was
strong in Faith, was also persuaded that what God had promised, he was able to
perform, and therefore offered up his only Son, who was dearer than his own
life; and left his Country and Kindred at the Command of God. This was the
Victory whereby the ancient Worthies overcame a world of Persecutors, even
their Faith, that Faith that gave a subsistence to things to come, and
apprehended them as present: that Faith that made them look through things
Temporal to things Eternal. They could, as the Proto-martyr St. Stephen, see
the heavens opened, and Christ standing at the right hand of God; Et quid
pulchrius Deo spectaculum, quam Christianus cum dolor congressus, quum
adversum minas, supplicia, and tormenta, componitur! No spectacle is more
pleasing to God, than a well-composed Christian conflicting with punishments
and torments.

Christ as it were leaves his seat, and stands up, not only to behold, but to
encourage and assist such Combatants. Non enim nos spectat tantum, sed in nobis
ipse luctatur. And when Christ takes all that is done to his Members as done to
himself; when in all their afflictions he is afflicted; when he assures us as
by his Word and Oath, that he will never leave us nor forsake us; And that all
things shall cooperate to our good: If the love of Christ were indeed shed
abroad in our hearts, it would constrain us to do and suffer any thing that he
shall call or command us to do or suffer. For there is no fear in love: perfect
love will cast out all base fears. Love would so unite us to him whom we love,
that as nothing could on Christ's part separate us from his love; so neither
would any thing on our part work a separation, Romans 8.38.

And what is there in the world, or in our selves, of such weight, as the full
enjoyment of our Savior may not outweigh! here is nothing but sin and misery,
infirmities and temptations daily assaulting us, and leading us Captives. The
very Heathen, that had no hopes of a better life, saw cause to be weary of
this, and esteemed it the greatest blessing, not to be born; but the next to
it, to die speedily. But to us Christians, to whom Cita mors est victoria
laeta, death should be esteemed a gain; it is a passage from a vale of tears,
to a Crown and Kingdom, where we shall be ever with the Lord. Wherefore lift up
the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, and make your selves ready for
your last journey to your everlasting Rest. And let them that are called to
suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls to him in well doing,
as to a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19.

AN APPENDIX, Containing A more full and particular Answer to Mr. Hunt's
Preface and Postscript.
THe Author of the life of Julian having taken his Measures and chief Materials
from the late Libels of Mr. Hunt, and both of them their whole Scheme from John
Milton's Defense of that most execrable Murder committed on the Royal Martyr,
by those whom he calls the People of England, who were indeed the very scum and
offscouring, the reproach and pests of the Nation; I shall make my way to the
Confutation of the first, by some Remarks on the Writings of the other. And
whereas I did only occasionally reflect on some passages of the Postscript of
Mr. Hunt, in my Answer to the Life of Julian; I shall now more particularly
examine those other seditious and treasonable Writings of Mr. Hunt. which since
came to my hand.

The first Pamphlet which I have answered in the precedent Papers, is, the Life
of Julian. He begins his Preface to the Reader with a story of Mahomets Horns,
half Fire and half Snow; which by altering the phrase he borrowed from a
parallel expression of Mr. Hunt's upon the like occasion: for he compares the
Addressers to those pleasant Knaves that cry with one side of the face, and
laugh with the other, Postscr. p. 13. And to him that acted a grave Spaniard
with one side of his body, and a brisk Frenchman with the other. This drew on
his conceit of Guelphs and Gibellines; and it was very easy by so strong a
Chain of thoughts as our Author has, to pass from Spain and France into Turkey;
with the Religion and Manners of which Country he seems better acquainted, than
with that of Christendom, or else he would never have compared the Doctrine of
the Cross with the Mohammedan Doctrine of the Bow-string, p. 8. of his Preface.

But sure he stretched his Chain very much, when from the Address of the men of
Rippon, thanking his Majesty for his Declaration to govern by Laws, and to
maintain the established Religion, and to call frequent Parliaments, and
desiring that the Crown might descend in the right Line; he concludes, that
they prayed against all these, and made it their humble request that they might
be sure of a Popish Successor, and were weary of their Religion, p. 5, 6.

But he broke every link of this Chain, when (though he put on his
considering-Cap) he could not find any Precedent or Example for such an
Address. But presently had an imperfect remembrance (for such indeed it was) of
the contrary Carriage of tho Primitive Christians toward Julian: whereas our
Author might more easily and fitter to his purpose, have remembered the
Behavior of some other Christians (as they professed themselves) toward King
Charles the First; and then he might have deserved the Office of a
City-Remembrancer.

But he wickedly, and (I hope by what I shall discover) in vain endeavors to
impose his Seditious Doctrine on the Nation. For this Notorious Plagiary has
taken his whole design (as Mr. Hunt had done before him) from an Argument of
that profligate Villain, John Milton, whereby he attempted to defend the
Murder of our Royal Martyr: and that some passages in the Life of Julian have
the same malignant aspect and influence, I have shown in my Observations on a
passage quoted by our Author out of Sozomen, in commendation of Regicide. So
that his Chain of Thoughts will hang no more together than a Rope of Sand: for
he runs so far from the Loyal Addressers, as to fall in with Rebels and
Regicides. His whole design is to justify Resistance of Lawful Powers in
defense of that Religion which we profess and allow of, especially when we are
in possession of that Religion, and it is established by Law: (though by the
way, both the established Religion and Christianity it self, as well as the
Laws of the Land, are ipso facto destroyed by resistance.)

This Leviathan fancying to himself a wide difference between the Case of those
Christians that lived under Julian, and the Case of the first Christians,
sports himself in the depth of this great Invention, and scoffs at all the
Arguments brought for Obedience and Subjection from the Primitive Christians
before Constantine, as the Leviathan in Job 41. who esteemed Iron as Straw, and
Brass as rotten wood, and laugheth at the shaking of the Spear. Their case
(says he of the Christians in Julians time) and that of the Primitive
Christians, was as widely different, as Laws for men and against men can
possibly make them: Yet for ought I see, be the Laws for or against his
Doctrine of Resistance, it must be swallowed; for though he tells us that our
Laws do not admit of such thoughts as his Julian Christians did put in
practice, yet the design must on, or the whole labor of our Author must perish.

And who can help it? when men will build on the Sand, and daub with untempered
Mortar, such as blood and slime, whatever cost or time is bestowed on such a
Fabric, is cast away, and the fall of it will be great. On this false
supposition these two Master Builders, with whom I am now accounting, do with
an unaccountable Confidence lay the stress of all their Discourses. And though
I have said enough to destroy this false Hypothesis in the Answer, yet because
they think to supersede the Arguments brought for Obedience, from the practice
of the first Christians for three hundred years, and persuade the present Age
that they do not at all concern us, but that we may rather do as the Julian
Christians did, that is, rail at and resist our Superiors, having our Religion
established by Law, though both our Religion and Law declare precisely that we
may not resist, for any pretense whatsoever; I shall add somewhat here to
prevent that prejudice and preoccupation which our Authors have falsely and
maliciously insinuated, And to this end, I shall prove, that the Christians in
Julians time were under the same Government and circumstances (abstracted from
the Christian Religion) with those of the first three hundred years; and if
they had resisted, it was altogether as unjustifiable as that of those
Primitive Christians would have been, or ours now can be.

Cicero acquaints us wherein the Imperial Power did consist when it was first
founded among the Romans, l. 3. de Legibus, in these words: Regio Imperio duo
sunto, iique praeeundo, judicando, consulendo, Praetores, Judices, Consules
appellantor: Militiae Summum jus habento, nemini parento: Ollis salus Populi
Suprema Lex esto. (i. e.) Let there be two persons in the Royal Empire, and let
them be called from their precedence Praetors, from their Judicature Judges,
from their Consultations Consuls: Let them have the highest command of the
Militia: Let them obey no man: Let the safety of the people be to them the
Supreme Law. How this latter Clause is to be understood, is fully resolved in
the preceding Discourse. But all these do certainly amount to an Absolute
uncontrolable power, which being first settled in the two Consuls, was afterward
by the Senate conferred on Augustus, and called the Lex Regia; by which it was
declared, that (Quicquid per Epistolam statuit, cognoscens decrevit, aut per
Edictum propalavit, Lex esto) Whatever he should determine by his Epistle,
whatever he should decree upon Cognizance, or declare by his Edict, should be a
Law.

This very power of the Empire was in being when our Savior and his Apostles
lived on the Earth; who, though they were far remote from Rome, yet precisely
submitted to the Roman Emperors, and did indispensibly oblige his Disciples in
all times to come to do the same; because the powers that then were, though an
Augustus, Nero, or Claudian, Heathen and Persecutors, were ordained of God, to
be his Ministers, to bear the Sword, to receive Tribute and Custom, Fear and
Honor, etc. And that therefore they must needs be subject, not only for fear
of wrath, but for the Lords sake, and for Conscience sake. And the obedience
which was to be given them is expressed by (...), to be at their Command as
Soldiers are to their General, and (...), to obey them at a word, Titus 3.1.
Hence it was (I mean from the Roman Laws, not from the Scripture) that Dion
says of Augustus, that he was (...), Free, and of absolute Authority, both
over himself, and over the Laws: for, Rex est Lex viva, and reipsa praecipit ut
Lex per scriptum: That the Emperor is a living Law, and commands as much by
word, as the Law does by writing: and the S.P.Q.R. by their own abbreviation,
became an unintelligible Cipher.

Thus the Roman Empire continued until the Reign of Constantine, or else he
could not have propagated the Christian Religion so much as he did by his
Edicts; there being, as is supposed, many strict Laws against it. And it is not
to be credited by Christians, that the Imperial power should be disanulled by
their becoming Christians. If it be said that they themselves did consent to
the abridgment of it, let the Records be produced, and let the Donation of
Constantine in this respect be more probable than that fictitious one which the
Pope produces for the Western Empire, of which I have spoken in another place.
See the History of the Donatists. What was done by Constantine, who was not
baptized till the latter end of his Reign, and made many Edicts for the
toleration of all Religions, as is shown in the foregoing Papers, will scarce
amount to an Establishment of the Christian Religion.

But granting that he had to the utmost of his power established the Christian
Religion, yet his Successor thought himself not at all obliged by his Edicts:
for, by the same Reason that Constantius should be bound by the Edicts of
Constantine, Constantine should be bound by the Edicts of Dioclesian for the
persecution of Christians. But, as our Author has observed from Gregory
Nazianzen, who speaking of Julian's Soldiers, who (were most of them
Christians, and yet besides the Law of God) knew no other Law than the Will of
their Prince. Invective 1. p. 75. And in truth, if the Christian Emperors had
been explicitly and absolutely bound up to their Subjects to maintain their
Religion and Privileges which by the favor and grace of those Emperors were
granted to them, and the Subjects left at liberty to defend and obey their
Emperors, the Emperors had been in a worse condition than their Subjects: for
upon the Peoples changing of their Religion, as we know they did when almost
the whole World became Arians. they might have resisted their most Orthodox
Emperors; as Mr. Hunt affirms they actually did in the Reign of Constantius.

But what Religion could the Christians plead that they were long in possession
of, and was established by Laws! When Constantius nothing regarding the
Constitutions of his Predecessor, did with all his might, and frequent Edicts,
establish the Arian Religion, and suppress the Orthodox, has been already
shown. Besides, there were Vrbes liberae, not only free Cities, but free
Nations under the Romans, who were governed by their own Laws and
Magistrates,(...) and (...), which they held inviolable. Of this nature
Josephus, l. 16. c. 4. of his Antiquities, observes the Asian Churches
mentioned in the Revelations to be, who had jus(...), a right of Liberty, and
legal Privileges, yet did none of those Churches ever plead their Privileges,
or plead exemption from the Emperors Edicts. Yea, Christ himself, who might
have pleaded exemption from paying tribute unto Caesar, (the Children as he
says being free) yet to avoid scandal, he works a Miracle for the payment of
it, and enjoins his Disciples to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's.

The weight of these and those other Arguments which follow, will I doubt not
sink that Triumphant Arch which our Author has raised, into those Quicksands
on which he grounded it. And I shall now proceed to erect a lasting Pillar to
the perpetual Infamy of this Author, upon such firm and impregnable grounds, as
shall continue against all the impetuous but impotent blasts of this Boreas.

It has been accounted a good method for refuting of Errors, to reduce them
to their first Principles and Originals. Be it known then to all men, that our
Author has bid defiance to the Laws of God and Man, in teaching the Doctrine
of Resistance, which was never taught among any Christians until Popery was
come to its perfection. That he has as much as in him lierh, scandalized and
even condemned the Primitive Christians, as allowing of and practicing that
intolerable Doctrine of Resistance. That both he and Mr. Hunt, have defended
this Doctrine by the same Arguments as the Jesuits, John Milton, and other
Regicides have done. That John Milton, etc. received the same Principles from
Mr. Burton, Mr. Buroughs, Bridge, Marshal, and others, in defense of the late
Unnatural War against Charles the First. That their design is to raise another
War, on the same grounds, against their present Prince. And though they seem to
blind their designs by preparing only to exclude a Popish Successor, yet it is
beyond denial, that all the Arguments of the Author of Julian are levelled
against the Prince that is in possession, and that he does with the show of
Authority recommend the assassination of such a Prince, and that Mr. Hunt's
Original far exceeds the Transcript in such impious designs.

If this Character be not black enough, let him that reads and understands,
only subscribe the name of the Author of the Life of Julian with that of Mr.
Hunt, In perpetuam Rei memoriam; and you have all in two words.

As for Mr. Hunt, if this passage which I shall name do not amount to more
direct Treason, than those for which he says he would indite a great person (no
less than a Secretary of State) of -- Treason in a plea for the Succession; I
think there can be no such thing. The Paragraph, p. 193. as it is marked in my
Copy, is verbatim this: Speaking of the Duke -- Let him attempt the Crown
notwithstanding an Act of Parliament for his Exclusion, he is all that while
but attempting to make us miserable: if he be not excluded, he does it
certainly, (we exclude only his Person, not his Posterity). And WE WILL NOT
ENTAIL A WAR UPON THE NATION, THOUGH FOR THE SAKE AND INTEREST OF THE GLORIOUS
FAMILY OF THE STVARTS.

Is not this spoken Dictator-like? Did Cromwell say more when he bragged that he
had the Parliament in his pocket? Then, We will have this, and we will not have
that; We will proclaim the Family of the Stuarts Traitors, and we will have our
own will. His premise is this -- If the Duke be not excluded, he does certainly
make us miserable, by entailing a War upon the Nation: (which may be false, if
the ancient Proverb be true ( Genesis 22.12.) In the mount of the Lord it shall be
seen: it was spoken when the knife was lifted up to make Isaac a Scrifice, (and
we know that the burning bush was not consumed.) But the Conclusion is
certainly most impious, We will not entail a War up-the Nation, though for the
sake and interest of the glorious Family of the Stuarts. To let pass that Irony
of THE GLORIOUS FAMILY OF THE STVARTS; The plain sense of the words to a
Logician is this: Rather than not exclude the Duke of York, who will certainly
make us miserable, we will exclude the glorious Family of the Stuarts. This is
as much as need to be said at present, to cure the prejudice of a deluded and
unthinking people, as Mr. Hunt calls them

Had. Mr. Hunt's Preface and Postscript come to my hands before I had well-nigh
finished my Answer, and sent some sheets to the Press (the rest being called
for with all expedition) that the Printer might not be prejudiced by the
edition of other Tracts on this subject; I should have taken a more particular
view of all that is contained in them: whereas I can now only cursorily make a
few Remarks, and leave the Reader to judge Ex ungue leonem.

We live (says he, p. 150.) in an Age of mystery and prodigy, producing
things monstrous and unnatural; and our language must be agreeable to the
things we speak. And so it is very obscure, and yet unnatural, But I shall
endeavor to drag this Author to the light, and present him with his three
heads.

The first is his Invective against the Clergy. This pours forth floods of
Contempt upon the whole Order.

The second is his Justification of the late Unnatural War: and this Head
breaths out an horrible and infectious stink.

The third, his endeavor to promote another such War as that was: And this
Head casts out Firebrands and Swords, to alarm and arm all the Malcontents
in the Nation, for a resistance of their Governors.

I know he does not want his lurking holes and Subterfuges to hide these
monstrous deformities: but all in vain, Treason will out; and Magna est
veritas* and prevalebit.

The first Head breaths out a contempt of the Clergy; to which he makes way by
a Preamble that will rather aggravate than excuse the Crime.

1. Our Author complains that his honest design (as he calls it) to serve the
Church has been by many perverted, p. 1. of the Preface: and p. 5. that some
have endeavored to set his two Discourses (viz. his Argument for Bishops, and
his Postscript) at variance; that the first was written to set off the latter
with some advantage, and that the Author designed to get from the Argument, a
more pardonable liberty of inveighing against the Churchmen in the
Postscript. Habetis consitentem Reum.

Doubtless the Argument did not effect that grateful Acknowledgement from the
Bishops which he expected. They knew him perhaps to be a mercenary man, one
that had or would write as much falsely against them, as he had done truly for
them, if it might tend to his better advantage; and therefore he was resolved
to pull down what he had built up, and to seek more beneficiary Patrons.

Let us therefore consider who they were that thus resented and complained of
Mr. Hunt, p. 5. If it had been (says he) the conceit of the Popish Faction
only, and not also of those Gentlemen whom I principally designed to serve,
and in them the Church of England, etc. Here it is as plain, as if it had been
written with a Sunbeam, that he means the Bishops, who were mostly, if not
only, concerned in that Argument.

But how maliciously does he suggest, that they were influenced by the Popish
Faction! who, p. 6. (he says) had corrupted some of our Churchmen with
Principles that subvert our Government, and betray the Rights of our people:
They have debauched the manners of our Churchmen, and lessened their Athoritie
and Esteem with the people: The Order is inslaved, by collation of Preferments
upon less worthy men. Qui beneficium accepit, libertatem amisit.

Is not this a stout Advocate for Bishops, that tells the world, that those of
that Order (indefinitely) are contemptible slaves, that have sold their
Liberty for Preferment; that they are corrupted in their Principles, to the
subverting of our Government, and betraying the Rights of the people; and so
debauched in their manners, as that they have lessened their esteem and
authority with the people? Is not this the old Censor Morum, or Cato
Redivivus? And is it possible that a learned man should thus prevaricate and
contradict himself so grossly, as it were in the same breath?

Let not Mr. Hunt think to evade this, and say he speaks this of our younger
Divines, (of which we shall hear enough by and by, to make all good men's ears
tingle at the horrid falsehood of it): he speaks this of the Order, and
particularly of the dignified men of that Order; of these it is that he speaks,
p. 7. (for he is not yet come to his distinction of young and old Divines;
those that are inslaved by the Preferment they have, and those that seek
Preferment by other arts, of which anon) That they lick up the Vomit of Popish
Priests; and whatever is said maliciously by them against the first Reformers,
is daily repeated by (now come in) our young Clerks out of the Pulpit, with
advantages of immodestie and indiscretion.

Now for our young Divines, whom (p. 50. of the Postscript) he calls
good-natured Gentlemen of the Clergy, Tom Triplet is the only young man that
I knew, who was so lasht after he came from the University; Old Gill never laid
on so unmercifully, as this Demagogue does, p. 9. We have a sort of young men
that have left nothing behind them in the University but the taint of a bad
example, and brought no more Learning with them thence, than what serves to
make them more assured and more remarkable Coxcombs; who will undertake to
discourse continually of the Interest of Religion, of which they have no manner
of sense; and of the Constitution of our Government, of which they are utterly
ignorant. P. 8. These, like Dotterels, Apes, and Parrets, who have no more
understanding than those Animals, are perpetually repeating any thing, though
never so destructive to Church and State, that is suggested by any Popish
Mercenarie Writer; if he has but the cunning to bestow an idle Complement upon
the Church, or calls Rogue or Villain seemingly, or in pretense, for their
sakes, (I hope our Bishops have not hired any for such purposes) especially if
he can furnish to their young Invention any Topics of Raillerie against an
Imaginary Presbytery, and against the Parliaments, etc. a very fair Capacity
and Recommendation this, as they imagine, to Preferment: These are the men I
confess for whose sake I writ the Postscript. The Preface then it seems was
writ for the Bishops.

But this unmerciful man has not yet done lashing our young Divines. P. 10.
Too many of the young Clergy (says our Aristarchus) do assist the Gentry in
their Loyal Debauches most scandalously, for the service of the Church, and
maintaining the honor of their Order. These degenerate Levites are magnifying
perpetually the privileges of their Tribe, extolling their Order, yet in terms
that disgrace it; and by their lives they vilify it. And now, like the old
Persecutors, he has wearied himself, to torment poor Innocents.

I hope our young Divines have yet so much of their Grammar-learning, (for the
Subject is scarce capable of the more serious Stelliteuticks of the
Vniversity-studies) as to return some Reflections on the laborious Travels of
this infamous Tom Coriat, and make him feel what it is, Ludere cum Sanctis, in
our Lawyers Latin, (i. e.) to play with Edge-tools. In the mean time, his own
folly and impiety will chastise him, it being evident that Mr. Hunt deals with
the Bishops, not only as men use their Dogs, who feed them with a bit and a
knock; but as Butchers are wont to use their Hogs, who claw them and scrape
them a little, that they may with more conveniencie cut their Throats: He
advances them as it were on a Pinnacle of the Temple, that he may cast them
down the more irrecoverably.

He tells us, p. 15. that Calvin, Beza, and P. du Moulin, Monsieur Moyne,
Claude, and de l'Angle highly approved of the Order and Office of Bishops: And
from Grotius, that Non debent res bonae damnari, quia sunt qui iis abutuntur:
That good things ought not to be condemned, because there are some that do
abuse them. Yet p. 11. he tells them also, the Apostolicalness of their Order
will not secure it, if they do not fill up the duty of their Office, ( i. e.
if they do not fully comply with his design:) And p. 12. he remembers them
that there are Churches of Christ that do make a shift without their Order, and
Religion need not perish though the Order fail. So that it is plain, that by
the word Order he means Episcopacy; and insinuates, that it is a needless
thing, it may be grub'd up root and branch. And is not this a fair Apology for
his real intention to serve the Bishops?

P. 23. He complains that too many eminent men in our Church are brought to a
dead Neutralitie; and thereby we are brought to this pass, That Religion it
self must be the devoted thing to the rage and folly of the Priests of that
Religion: (As if they had all conspired to be felo's de se). And on this ground
he proclaims his Curse ye Meroz against them as execrable Neuters. P. 6. he
says, They have raised a bitter Zeal against that Separation which themselves
have contrived, fomented, and promoted: and it is brought to that pass, that
those are accounted Church-Fanaticks, though Conformists, that cannot
contentedly see and endure the nearer approaches of ruin both of Church and
State: These are their fear and their hate, the Sons of Anak, the Giants of the
Land, that they imagine so insuperable, that they are for making themselves a
Captain, and returning back into Egypt, p. 7. This he repeats, p. 46. where he
endeavors to lay the sin of Corah. etc. upon those who in our days do most
faithfully adhere to Moses and Aaron; and would excuse those, who having lost
their Corah and other renowned Leaders, by an exemplary Divine Judgment, did
the very next day murmur again against Moses and Aaron, falsely accusing them,
who were the meekest men upon Earth, of taking too much upon them, (i. e.) of
ruling by an Arbitrary power, and making themselves absolute: For so, v. 13. of
that 16th Chapter, they accuse Moses of seeking to make himself altogether a
Prince: and v. 14. he is accused of seeking to put out the eyes of the People,
as Mr. Hunt also does, p. 13. Postscr. We are used (says he) as Sampson,
bound, and our eyes put out, and made sport for the Philistimes. I fear Mr.
Hunt will hardly have his eyes opened, till (as the mole) he comes to die. With
such murmurings as these they so provoked Moses, that the Lord was angry with
him for their sakes; and, as the Author of Julian's life observed of the
Prayers of the Christians in Julians time, they contrived and effected his
death: for he dyed in the Land of Moab, and was not to enter into Canaan.

Who they are that murmur at the Conduct of Moses and Aaron, is too visible to
be denied (viz.) they that accuse them of Arbitrary Government, that proclaim
themselves the Holy People; they who hearken to those false Spies that
discourage the people with stories of Insuperable evils, of being certainly
miserable, and having a War entailed on the Nation, fire and faggot, and an
Inquisition, etc. For my part, I think these murmuring Prognosticators are they
who are for making another Captain in the room of Corah, and going back again
to Egypt. And though we do not look on these as the Sons of Anak, invincible
Giants; yet are they as the Canaanites were to Israel, thorns in our sides.

They are still troubling us with their wiles and their lies, their
Associations and Consults, their Seditious Libels and Pamphlets, such as these
of our two Authors; their Doleman, and the Rights of the Kingdom; Their Plato
Redivivus, their No Plot, and Sermons of Persecution, and Daniel in the Den;
which, like the Frogs and Plagues of Egypt, are croaking in every corner, and
infecting every part of the three Nations. They which cry up those for the
godly Party, and devout Men, that are inspired with Scruples from God himself,
on purpose to put a bar against the proceedings of Moses and Aaron.

By such men and means (the truth is) we are brought into a great strait; we
have a deep Sea before us, and a howling Wilderness behind us. And yet we
murmur not; our Sins have deserved these things: Nor do we think of making any
other Captains to our selves, than those whom God in great mercy, and by many
Miracles, has preserved and continued unto us. We are not for Egypt in your
sense, nor for being reduced to a State of Bondage through the Wilderness of a
new War: We are for standing still, keeping our places, and doing our duties,
and wait for the Salvation of God. Though we were by the wickedness of
unreasonable and cruel men deprived of our Moses, yet God has sent us a Josua,
and with him are the Priests of the Lord, and the Ark of his Covenant, to
which, we doubt not, the swelling streams of Jordan will give way, and we shall
yet pass to Canaan on dry land. Now let the Reader judge who do abuse the
Scripture to serve their turn, as Mr. Hunt does advise, p. 46.

P. 35. Mr. Hunt becomes an Advocate for a sort of Gibeonites, that they may
have an act of Comprehension; and represents them as a very harmless and
friendly people. The Dissenters (says he) have neither power nor will to
destroy our RELIGION or Government; they are already of our Church, and it is
expected that they should be Petitioners to the Bishops for their intercession
toward the obtaining some indulgence in some little matters, that they may
bring them into an entire communion with us. And again, That they are in
profession as Loyal as any that boast themselves true Sons of the Church of
England, p. 19. But though some profess an irreconcilable hatred, even in
their pleas for Peace; the great question is, what their practice is and has
been.

Postscr. p. 89. Can any man imagine (says he) that any prejudice can accrue to
the Church of England, if she did enlarge her Communion by making the
Conditions of it more easy? And p. 90. Is it fit that the Peace should be
hazarded, or the Nation put with reason or without in fear of it; or a Kingdom
turned into a Shambles, for a Ceremony or a Ritual in our public Worship? etc.
What is it the Advocate of these men pleads for? has he full instructions from
his Clients? does he know their minds, and what will give them satisfaction?
What he contends for, has by several men of the Church been granted to them.

Why may not (say you) standing at the Sacrament be granted -- And the signing
with the Cross in Baptism be dispensed with when desired? When the Dean of St.
Paul's and the Bishop of Cork have made some overtures for conceding these
things, Mr. Baxter answers the first, that he made them sibi and suis, for the
advantage of himself and others of his own Persuasion; and without taking any
notice of them in the latter, answers his Discourse with scorn and contempt.

But our Liturgy must also be altered for their sakes: p. 91. you would have
more Offices, and those we have, not so long: though some complain they are too
many and too short already. And for the Rubric, that must be altered, (not for
the present only) as general scruples shall arise; and that may be to the
worlds end.

But to answer more particularly: you say the Dissenters have neither power nor
will to destroy our Religion and Government.

Answ. When they were less considerable for their numbers than now, being (as
you say) four fifths of the Nation, they had both power and will to effect
both. What has been done, may be done; and Mr. Baxter justly feared that they
were Nati ad bis perdendam Remp. Anglicanam. That they are the trading and
wealthy part of the Nation, is generally boasted by themselves.

We know Mr. Baxter urges in the name of his Brethren, that there are many
heinous sins in our present Constitution that hinder their Conformity; the
taking off of which will be an acknowledgement of our guilt, and their
justification. As for the prejudice that may accrue by altering the conditions
of our Communion, you give us a fair warning, p. 93. telling us of the Church
of Rome, that their Doctrine of Comprehension is so large, that they destroy
their Religion to increase the number of their Professors: by granting the
demands of some, we shall but encourage others, and make them presume to be
Judges in their case and quarrels. And we have found by sad experience the
inconvenience of admitting such as the Country-conformist and the Author of the
Life of Julian into our Communion.

And you say, p. 35 and 36 of the Preface, That the King and States of the
Realm will never suffer so excellent an Ecclesiastical Constitution as we
enjoy, to be subverted: Yet the Dissenters project in Mr. Humphrey's
Half-sheet, intended to be presented to the Parliament, does certainly tend to
her destruction, as has been showed elsewhere.

And if the King and States will not admit an alteration, you know the Bishops
cannot: and if the States will not, and the Bishops cannot, ought not they that
would make themselves wiser than their Rulers to submit, (notwithstanding their
scruples against a Ceremony) rather than to hazard or disturb the peace of the
Kingdom? And is it not an unjust complaint of yours, of turning it into a
Shambles for a Ceremony or a Ritual? And to conlude, if (as you observe, p.
92.) a discourse managed with almost irresistible Reason, Candor, Temper, and
Address, be matter of exasperation, and they turn again, and be more confirmed
in their separating way, what condescentions will reclaim them?

P. 36. It is added -- That absurd Opinion that Dominium fundatur in gratia, is
charged on those that are for the Exclusion of the Duke: And they think that by
pronouncing that absurd piece of Latin, they have at once put to silence and
shame all reasons of Nature, Religion, and State that urge and require it.

How we can maintain the Negative against the Papists, if we should practice
the same as they do, on this Position, I cannot perceive: and therefore we must
charge it impartially on all that deserve it. Bishop Davenant admits it for
good Latin; and I think that you quarrel at the words, to avoid the sense of
the Thesis which that learned Bishop maintained against the Papists,
concluding, that the Pope could not challenge the power of Deposing Kings by
any Title but that of Antichrist, whose Founder was Hildebrand, who like Satan,
claimed a power to dispose of all the Kingdoms of the World: And you your self
think that our Saints ought not to do so.

We come now to the Postscript, which he has told us was written for the sake
of our young Divines, those good-natured Gentlemen, who doubtless will return
his Civilities. His pretense is to answer some Objections that were made
against them; but in truth, they are his own accusations of them, which he
prosecutes with all the might and malice he can, upon this ground, because the
Bishops must be made out of them; and being so bad already, he has foretold
how much worse it will be, when they sell their Liberty for that Preferment.

It is said then, p. 1. (our Author knows by whom) That they affirm it to be in
the power of a Prince by Divine Right to govern as he pleases: That the power
of the Laws is solely in him: That he may, if he please, use the consent of
Parliaments to assist the Reason of his Laws, when he shall give any; but it is
a great condescension in Kings to give a Reason for what they do, and a
diminution to their most unaccountable Prerogative: That they are for a Popish
Successor and no Parliament, and do as much as in them lies, give up our
ancient Government and the Protestant Religion, the true Christian Faith, to
the absolute Will of a Popish Successor, giving him a Divine Right to extirpate
Gods true Religion established among us by Law, and to evacuate our Government
by his absolute pleasure.

Then, after a little pause, having almost run himself out of breath to tell
the Nation these Falsehoods, he thus inlargeth himself, p. 2. That just now,
when we are under the dread of a Popish Successor, some of our Clergy are
illuminated into a Mystery, That any Authority in the Government, not derived
from the King, and that is not to yield to his absolute Will, was rebellious,
and against the Divine Right and Authority of Kings in the establishment,
against which no Usage or Prescription to the contrary, or in abatement of it,
is to be allowed. That all Rights are ambulatorie, and depend for their
continuance on his pleasure: So that though the Reformation was made here by
the Government established by Law, and has acquired Civil Rights not to be
altered but by the King and the three Estates, these men yet speak (says our
Lawyer) as if they envied the Rights of their own Religion, and had a mind to
reduce the Church back again into a state and condition of being persecuted,
and designed that she should be stripped of her legal Immunities and
Defensatives, and brought back to the deplorable helpless condition of Prayers
and Tears, do utterly abandon and neglect all the provisions that Gods
providence has made for their protection: Nay, by this their new Hypothesis
they put it by Divine Right in the power of a Popish Successor, when he
pleases, at once, by a single indisputable and irresistible decree to destroy
our Religion and Government. -- That they believe no Plot but a Presbyterian
Plot; for, of them they believe all ill, and call whom they please by that
hated name, and boldly avow that Popery is more eligible than Presbytery, for
by that they shall have greater Revenues, and more authority and rule over the
Laymen,

A heavy Charge this, (says Mr. Hunt, p. 4.) if true: but he is sure it is
imputable but to a few, though he had told us in the Preface, that many, too
many were so corrupted: and in many places he speaks indefinitely of the whole
Order. Now our Lawyer cannot but know, that it lies on him who has divulged
these slanders, to make proof of them, though he pretends they were objected by
others. And all the Conforming Clergy are cast under the suspicion of these
unsufferable Crimes. If Mr. Hunt had any regard to the welfare of the Church,
he would have singled out such Criminals, and brought them to shame and condign
punishment, there being sufficient Laws for the punishment of them: and it
being the interest of the Magistrates to free the Church and State from such
pests. A Judas may creep in among Christ's own Disciples, and a Jonah hide
himself in the bottom of the Ship: But doubtless it is the interest of all that
are in such a Ship, to have them discovered and cast out, that the storms which
threaten their common destruction may be allayed; especially when (as Mr. Hunt
says) they come often under observation, frequent public houses, and talk
loud. He that does not according to his power seek to prevent these evils, is
consenting to, and contracts the guilt of them. Qui non vetat cum potest, jubet.

But it consists not with Mr. Hunts design to do the Church such a real Service
as to free her from such miscreants, but to involve the whole Clergy under the
same defamation, that they may fall under the same condemnation. To this end,
instead of extenuating the number of such, he aggravates their faults; as,

1. Being such as may choke the Constancy, Resolution and Zeal of the most
addicted to the Service of the Churchmen. 2. That they are acted by the
Papists. 3. That they are agreeable to, and indeed make up the most modern
Project and Scheme of the Popish Plot. And 4. That They deserve to suffer as
the betrayers of their Country, and to be prosecuted with greater shame and
ignominy than the Traditores were by the Ancient Christians. And thus having
breathed a while, he this ill-natured Lawyer begins to lash our good-natured
Divines again.
Upon such scandalous and false Suggestions as these it is (says he) that the
generality of the Clergy, who any way appear for a Christian Subjection to the
King, and a defense of the established Government of the Church, are
represented as Popishly affected, and betrayers of the True Protestant Religion
and the Laws, etc. I would have Mr. Hunt to answer his own Question, p. 101.
What Fines and Imprisonments, Pillories and Scourgings do they deserve, that
persecute the Church with revilings, when they themselves are tolerated?

It must be some large Bribe, or promise of the public Faith, that thus
ingageth our Lawyer to support a dying Cause, and to take part as well with
Papists as Fanatics, to bring the English Reformation into contempt. For what
nearer way is there to effect it, than first to represent those who he says
established our Religion in Queen Elizabeth's days, to be assertors and
promoters of the Doctrine of King-killing?

Secondly to affirm, That in the days of King Charles the first, by preaching
up the Divinity of Kings, and their Absolute power, that unnatural War was
begun?

And Thirdly, p. 7. That at his Majesty's return, Fanaticism had expired, if
some peevish old and stiff Churchmen had not studied obstacles, and some
crafty Statesmen had not projected that the continuance of the Schism would
be of great service to destroy the Church.

And for the present Age, the Clergy great and small are all under the same
condemnation; Great Friends to Popery and Arbitrary Government; such as have no
sense of Reason or Religion; such as will not when it is in their power prevent
the ruin of their Nation, but are either accursed Neuters, or else wilful
Actors in drawing down the Judgments of God upon us. And we are like to have no
other; the Fountains being corrupted, can send forth nothing but unclean
streams. I pray God preserve the Honorable Inns of Court from such Impostors
as Mr. Hunt!

Let not Mr. Hunt think to hide his Malice against the Clergy, by a seeming
commendation of their Offices as Apostolical, when he adds, that Religion may
subsist without it, and when by all manner of evil arts he seeks to inrage the
multitude against them: Nor that he is to be taken as a Friend to their persons
or maintenance, who labors so much to take away their good names, which, like
precious Ointment, I hope will send forth the better savor, for being thus
Chafed.

Alas! we are not so very Dolts, but that we know such little Arts to be the
daily practice of every Sycophant and Talebearer, who being minded to disgrace
a person, uses the same method as Mr. Hunt does toward the Clergy; first to
invent, then to spread abroad and aggravate their supposed faults or personal
infirmities, as pretended Friends. For thus they insinuate: Do you know such a
person, and do you hear nothing concerning him? There is a strong Report that
he has done such and such evil things, as will ruin him and all his Family. I
am heartily sorry to hear such things of him; but they cannot be hid or
denied. I am much troubled to hear of such gross miscarriages. He was in a very
good Way, and had many advantages of benefitting himself and others; but he
has abused them, and outlived them all; and his high Place and Calling does
but discover his nakedness the more, and will precipitate his ruin. It could
hardly enter into my belief, that a person that knows and professes better
things, could ever have been guilty of such Crimes. And perhaps you will be as
incredulous as I was; but they are too true. I perceive it is not all gold that
glisters. How a man may be deceived by an outward form and fucus of Honesty
and Religion! I thank God I am undeceived my self, and hope others will be so
too. He is a very Wolf in Sheeps clothing, a Persecutor of the Righteous, who
seemed a Preacher of Righteousness, etc. Have no fellowship or communion with
him: he is in the very gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity.

If such Insinuations are vile and odious in a vulgar mouth against a single
person, how much more vile are they in the printed Harangues of a man of
understanding, against the whole Order of the Clergy, with a malicious design
first to disgrace, and then to destroy them!

Either this Gentleman is well acquainted with the Universities, and the
generality of those that from thence are admitted to the Priesthood, or not. If
he be not, he is inexcusable for printing such Scandals against them: if he be,
he cannot but know that there was never better Discipline in the University,
never greater Circumspection used concerning such as are admitted to Holy
Orders, than now there is: and that if ever (Clerus Anglicanus est stupor
Mundi) it was true that the English Clergy were the admiration of the world,
it is so now. And therefore the Author of these oblique Reflections strikes at
all the Heads of the Universities, and at all the Bishops in their several
Diocesses, as if they were the Causers and Promoters of all these Disorders.

I do therefore appeal first to his own Conscience, whether the far greater
number, both in the University and in the Clergy, be not men of Learning,
Integrity, Piety, and Loyalty; and then he should in justice have given them
such a character as the major part does deserve: Denominatio sumitur a majore.
And then I appeal to the testimony of more equal and indifferent men: And such
a one I take Dr. Burnet to be, who for his late Writings had the Thanks of the
Nation in a Parliament-way: and he deserved it, if he had written nothing else
but the Testimony which he gives of the present Clergy.

God has not so left this Age and Church, but there is in it a great number in
both the Holy Functions, who are perhaps as eminent in the exemplariness of
their lives, and as diligent in their labors, as has been in any one Church
in any Age since Miracles ceased. The humility and strictness of life in many
of our Prelates, and some that were highly born, and yet have far outgone some
others from whom more might have been expected, raises them far above censure,
though perhaps not above envy. And when such think not the daily instructing
their Neighbors a thing below them, but do it with as constant a care as if
they were to earn their Bread by it: when they are so affable to the meanest
Clergymen that come to them; when they are nicely scrupulous about those whom
they admit into Holy Orders, and so large in their Charities, that one would
think they were furnished with some unseen ways; these things must needs raise
great esteem for such Bishops, and seem to give some hopes of better times. Of
all this I may be allowed to speak the more freely, since I am led to it by
none of those Bribes either of Gratitude, or Fear, or Hope, which are wont to
corrupt men to say what they do not think. But I were much to blame, if in a
Work that may perhaps live some time in the world, I should only find fault
with what is amiss, and not also acknowledge what is so very commendable and
praiseworthy. And when I look into the inferior Clergy, there are, chiefly
about this great City of London, so many so eminent, both for the strictness of
their Lives, the constancy of their Labors, and plain way of Preaching, which
is now perhaps brought to as great a perfection as ever was since men spoke as
they received it immediately from the Holy Ghost; the great gentleness of their
Deportment to such as differ from them, their mutual love and charity, and in a
word, for all the qualities that can adorn Ministers or Christians; that if
such a number of such men cannot prevail with this debauched Age, this one
thing to me looks more dismally than all the other affrighting symptoms of our
condition, That God having sent so many faithful Teachers, their labors are
still so ineffectual.

If any man think the Doctor speaks partially, let him hear Mr. Hunt's own
Testimony, p. 48. of the Postscript: Our Age is blessed with a Clergy
renownedly learned and prudent. And p. 105. he commends our Church for the
purity of her Doctrine, prudence of her Discipline, and her commendable,
decent, and intelligible Devotion. This Testimony is true, and therefore they
who contradict it cannot be too sharply rebuked. But what reason can be
conceived for these contradictory proceedings?

This Gentleman (I conceive) might fancy himself to be Chairman of the
Committee for Trial of Ministers, and has taken his Measures for proceeding in
that case, from the practice of his Predecessors, who formed Articles of the
like nature against the Clergy of that Age.

Imprimis, For adhering to the King against his Parliament.

Item, For preaching a necessity of obedience to the King as Supreme, and
thereby endeavoring to introduce an Arbitrary Power.

Item, For disobeying the Votes and Ordinances of Parliament for demolishing of
Superstition, and keeping out of Popery.

Item, For defending Episcopacie and Liturgy; for not keeping the days of
Fasting and Humiliation appointed to crave a blessing on the Parliaments
Forces, and the days of Thanksgiving for defeating the Kings designs.

Item, For preaching up Passive Obedience, when the Laws do allow us to make
resistance in defense of our Religion, our Liberties, and Lives.

Item, For insufficiency, not being able to pray ex tempore, or to preach
without book. Witness Dr. Pocock, Bishop Sanderson, etc.

Item, For administering the Sacrament to all that desired it, and for using the
Lords Prayer as a Charm.

Such were the Articles by which a great part of that Clergy was destroyed, of
whom the world was not worthy. With such our Gentleman is still in travel; but
I hope his labor will be in vain.

Read some of those Sermons and Treatises which of late years have been
published by such as you call young Coxcombs. Consider the strains of Piety and
Moderation, of Reason and Judgment, of Industry and acquired Knowledge; and I
am confident you will find so little hopes to be believed by others, that you
will see reason enough not to believe your self.

Let him talk of the persecution of Julian, and other Pagans; this which our
Author promotes, exceeds them all. Others did but Occidere Episcopos, this man
seeks Occidere Episcopatum; and under a pretense of pleading and praying for
them, he contrives how to prey upon them. What else means that insinuation
which he quotes from Grotius, to gain it some Authority, having bankrupted his
own? Verso in morem abusu intermitti res ipsas non est infrequens, p. 13. of
Preface: which he applies to the Episcopal Office. Nomen and eminentia
Episcopalis eorum culpa quibus obtigerat, omnem sui perdiderat reverentiam, and
in odium venerat plebis.

I greatly wondered to hear that Prayer of his against Sacrilege, p. 103. He
that designs, contrives, or consents to spoil the Church of any of her
Endowments, may a secret Curse waste his substance; let his Children be
Vagabonds, and beg their bread in desolate places. But when I call to mind Mr.
Humphries project for increasing the number of our Bishops, whom he would have
to be chosen by the several Factions, Presbyterian, Independent, etc. and
these, whether Laymen, or Clergymen, to preside over those Parties, it
remembered me of a passage of Mr. Hunt's, p. 90. of his Postscript, where he
demands thus -- Will it be any prejudice that the number of her Bishops be
increased, and that Suffragans be appointed and approved by the present
Bishops? etc. So that when other Trades fail, Mr. Hunt as well as Mr. Humphries
may have some hopes of being made Suffragans at least. For the Order of
Episcopacie may be laid by, as he intimates, and then some Lay-superintendents
may succeed, and enjoy their Honors and Revenues. Therefore to his Curse I
shall add my Prayer for a blessing on Levi, Deuteronomy. 33.11. Bless, Lord, his
substance, and accept the work of his hands: smite through the Loins of them
that rise up against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again.

The second Head contains a justification of the late unnatural War, p. 6. It
is difficult (he says) to tell how that late unhappie War began, or how it
came to issue so tragically in the death of the late King. And being to speak
in so difficult a case, he enters his caution, p. 50. I would not be perversely
understood by any man, as if I went about to justify our late Wars. But it
will appear to be Protestatio contra factum.

P. 102. He says, That War would have been impossible, if the Churchmen had not
maintained the Doctrine that Monarchy was Jure Divino, in such a sense that
made the King Absolute. This was a fiction of Mr. Baxters; and through the
Loins of the Clergy, they strike at the King, as if that glorious Prince
intended Tyranny. But that good Prince was far from any design of ruling by an
Arbitrarie power: he had no Army, nor Money to raise one; but by the contrivance
of some men, his Father was engaged in an expensive War for the recoverie of
the Palatinate, which exhausted all the Exchequer, and reduced the Royal Family
to great necessities; and then they failed in their promised Supplies, and left
him to a precarious way of subsisting, and to stretch his Prerogative for the
preservation of himself and Family. He would have parted with the half of his
Power and Prerogative, as he often offered, to have preserved or restored peace
to his Subjects. But when he spoke to them of Peace, they made themselves ready
for Battle.

But were there not some other Doctrines preached in those days, which
contributed more to the beginning of that War, than that of the Divinity of
Kings? What think you of the Doctrine of the lawfulness of Resistance then
preached and printed, under the same Arguments as now it is, by Mr. Marshal,
Burton? etc. What think you of that Doctrine which (according to the Jesuits)
taught, That the rise and Original of Government is in the People; and that as
they gave, so they might recall it as they saw cause? You know who lays down
the same Principle, in a certain Preface -- That Government is the perfect
creature of men in Society, made by pact and consent, and not othorwise; most
certainly not otherwise: and therefore most certainly ordainable by the whole
Community, for the safety and preservation of the whole: P. 38. of Preface.

To what tended this other Doctrine, That the Authority of the King was in the
two Houses, when they had frighted away his Person? That the King was Singulis
major, but Vniversis minor? That Episcopacy was an Antichristian Order, and to
be stub'd up root and branch? That the King, Court, and Bishops, were designing
to bring in Popery? That our Liturgy was but the Mass Book translated?

These Doctrines, with such Remonstrances, Votes and Ordinances, began that
unhappy War; The Associations made in City and Country, seizing the Forts and
Magazines and Royal Navy, and answering all his Messages of Peace with
reproaches of his Male-administrations; This is that which you call the English
Loyalty. When they sent out Armies to fight him, when they had him Prisoner,
and voted no more Addresses, they were, if you will believe them, or Mr. Hunt,
his Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subjects still. Such as these I could as
easily prove to be the Doctrines of those times, as that they are the Opinions
and Practices of too many in these our days, though most absurd and dangerous,
as they are now published by too many besides our two Authors.

P. 20. Pref. There is little reason to charge the guilt of the unexpiable
Murder of our late Excellent King -- upon Presbytery, which was not thought
of here in England till the War was begun. And p. 21. Sure this Gentleman has
read very little, or dissembleth very much. Mr. Cambden in the Life of Queen
Elizabeth is full of the Projects and Practices of such as planted the
Geneva-Discipline here in England; what troubles they occasioned to the
Government both in Church and State, and what deserved punishments some of them
received, as Penry and Vdal, etc. It is not possible but this Gentleman has
heard of, if not read the things controverted between Archbishop Whitgift and
T. C. between the judicious Hooker and Mr. Travers, and Bishop Bilsons
dangerous Positions. P. 21. He jumps with Mr. Baxter in his Opinion, That the
Parliament in the course of the War, which was managed (says he) by such means
and measures as were necessary and possible, in their distress prayed aid of
the Scottish Nation: They refused them any assistance, except they would enter
into their Covenant -- AND AFTER THE COVENANT WAS THVS IMPOSED, THEY STILL
RETAINED THE ENGLISH LOYALTY, remonstrated against the Kings feared Murder,
and declared out of their Pulpits against the Actors of that detestable
Tragedy. If they did preach against his Murder out of Loyalty and Conscience,
why had they not preached against Fighting, and pursuing him with fire and
sword, where he might have fallen as one of his Subjects? Why not against his
Imprisonment? there the Covenanters were the Loyal Party, the ROYALISTS were
the REBELS; and the guilt to be sure (says he) belongs to the Rebelside, p. 21.

And as it was in the beginning of that War, so it is now, and by our Authors
principles so it will be ever: they that with their lives and fortunes adhere
to their Prince, though he be neither Apostate or Tyrant, are pronounced
Rebels; And they who fight against him, on any pretense whatsoever, are the
true English Loyalists. I would not have them called the true Protestants, lest
the Papists should insult over them, and prove themselves more Loyal Subjects.
It is another very memorable speech of Mr. Hunt's, p. 171. Speaking of the Bill
of Exclusion: If this Bill do not pass, they will take him for a wicked King
too, and will say he has no lawful Issue to succeed him, for his own Sins; and
many other remarks of wickedness they will make upon him. What he means by the
word too, may be explained by the I, and we which he speaks of just before, and
now of others too, that will count the King wicked, etc.

It is somewhat obscure also to guess what he means, when he says, the passing
of the Bill is the only means of the Kings Salvation from their traitorous
designs; and again, p. 172. If he will follow the Counsel of that excellent
Bill, he may live long, and see good days. As if he could not be safe without
it. Of such obscure places, we may conjecture by those other plain ones,
wherein he has manifested how great respect he has for his Majesty and the
Royal Family. Nor indeed can we expect better things from a Republican, who
speaking of our Kings Father as he calls him ( sans Ceremony) makes him and his
Party the Delinquents, and upbraids him with all the Calamities which a
Rebellious people brought upon him: and adds, p. 55. If there were twenty
Trojans derived from one Stock, that had reigned in an uninterrupted
Succession, Two immediate Successors that should have their Reigns successively
attended with civil Wars, were enough to efface their own, and the glories and
merits of such Ancestors. And so if another Rebellion should succeed, (which
God forbid) farewell to the glorious Family of the Stuarts. For notwithstanding
the glories of that great Prince, his unhappy death, and the admired devotions
of the(...), the stories of the Calamities of his people (all his three
Kingdoms involved in War during his Reign) (which is a lie by thirteen years)
and the remembrance of them will be with some men, (of the same bran with Mr.
Hunt, i.e. not very loyal) a stain and a diminution of the glories of the Royal
Family, p. 53. Although others, more loyal, do think that it added another
Crown to them, more glorious than the other three, (i. e.) the Crown of
Martyrdom. In Princes (says Mr. Hunt) their Calamities are reckoned among the
abatements of their Honor; and mere Misfortunes are Disgraces, and have the
same influence on the minds of the common people (as they have on Mr. Hunt's)
as real faults, and male administrations.

So that the Royal Martyr, who suffered so many barbarous Indignities with
invincible patience and Christian fortitude, must suffer another Martyrdom in
his Reputation; and the Regicides be renowned (because of their success) as men
of real Virtues, and Patriots of their Country.

Careat successibus Opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta nefanda putat.
I cannot perceive any instance of the least respect to the Royal Family,
except that deference which he bestows on Dr. Titus Oats and Captain Bedlow,
the Kings Evidence; on whom he writes a full Panegery, p. 24, 25. which he thus
concludes: The undoubted truth of their Evidence has given them the civil
respect of all honest men, and will give the Doctor the public honors of the
Nation in due time. For my part, I live at too great a distance from such men,
to ken them aright; and I would commend Mr. Hunt's own Rule to them that know
their conversation, whereby to judge of them, p. 52. of the Preface: That their
virtue of Loyalty will bear the same proportion as their other virtues do to
the Canon of Morality.

To this Head of justifying the former War, belongs his Apology for such as
were then called Presbyterians; which he (as a faithful Advocate and Orator)
still prosecutes.

P. 13. Pref. Our old Puritans and late Dissenters (he excepts only the Fools
and Knaves sent among them, and spirited by the Roman Priests) have not
disliked the Episcopal Government. If all the Covenanters and others that
disliked the Episcopal Government were Fools and Knaves spirited by the Romish
Priests, we have great reason to be jealous of the present Dissenters as such;
and the rather, because you tell us, p. 19. of a vile sort of Presbyterians in
Scotland, (with whom some in England do conspire) who have deservedly put that
name under eternal infamy by their turbulent and contumacious carriage against
the Kingly Authority.

Yet even for these, this Gentleman makes an Apology. First, in respect of
their scrupulositie, p. 86. Though the scruples of Nonconformists be as he
thinks groundless and unreasonable, and often moves his passion against them,
yet upon consideration he thinks their scrupulosity may be of God, and that
some men are by him framed to it. Take courage then, all you men of Scruples,
the Good Old Cause is still Gods Cause: he has provided this your scrupulosity
(says this Stoic) as a bar and obstacle in the natures and complexions of.
DEVOVT MEN against any Innovations whatsoever, that dangerous ones may not
steal upon the Church, for the better maintaining the simplicity and purity of
the Christian Religion and Worship. Been dixisti, Thoma.

But thus the Predestined Thief could plead for himself, that he was born
under the thievish Planet Mercury, and could not resist his fate: Steal he
must, and repent of it he could not, nor be sorry for his fault, though he were
to be hanged for it: This pilfering humor was in his nature from the God of
Nature, and who has resisted his Will? The same Argument will the lascivious
man, who was born under the Planet of Venus, and the Rebel and Murderer, who
was born under Mars, use in their defense, as the scrupulous and obstinate, who
were born under Saturn. And so any vice may be defended, and the whole blame
transferred on God, who sent them into the world with such inclinations.

But on second considerations, our Author might have told them that these
wicked dispositions were the effects of the corruption of their natures,
contracted and propagated by original sin; and that there is yet so much light
from Nature, but much more from the Grace of God, as to discover, and assist
them in the correction of these unreasonable and ground: less affections and
passions: and not to encourage them in them, by telling them they are from God,
and infused into devout men, that they may put a bar to such dangerous
Innovations that are stealing on the Church, and for the maintenance of the
simplicity and purity of the Christian Religion and Worship. This is a New Plea
to encourage them to a New Rebellion, as well as to justify the Old. And we
know what slender pretenses scrupulous and obstinate persons are wont to lay
hold on, to defend themselves in very unlawful practices, in such cases as are
confessedly unreasonable and dangerous, and to which they have a natural
inclination. The Vulgar need a Curb to restrain them, and not a Spur to provoke
and haste them on.

When therefore you ask (p. 86.) What affrightment all this while, either to
Church or State, from this weak and pitiful scrupulosity? Where lies the
Treason or Sacrilege? Let our Author consult the History of the late War, and
Experience (which some say is) the Mistress of Fools, may resolve him. It is no
more agreeable to a scrupulous man about a Ceremony of the Church, to depose
and murder his lawful Prince, than for a man of a nice Conscience to be
impiously wicked, p. 33. Pref. Yet Mr. Baxter and others will tell you, that
the greatest Impieties and Outrages have been committed by such men as
pretended niceness and scruples of Conscience for their justification. And who
they were that would strain at Gnats and swallow Camels, our Savior told us
long since.

But to return. Upon this very Ground of a natural complexion, etc. p. 19. of
the Preface, he would excuse a vile sort of Presbyterians in Scotland (as he
calls them) who have deservedly put that name under eternal infamy, by their
turbulent and contumacious carriage against the Kingly Authority. Which yet (he
there says) is not imputable so much to Presbytery, as to the barbarous Manners
and rough Genius of that Nation. And is it not strange, that neither the
Learning and Knowledge of that Nation, which afforded some men, of all Ages, of
great excellency, and which usually ( emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros) does
correct the brutish dispositions of men; nor the power of Godliness and purity
of Doctrine and Worship, to which, especially in latter times, they pretended
beyond all other Nations, and was proposed by them, and accepted by some of our
own Nation, as the great Rule next to (if not above) the Word of God, for our
Reformation; could so far reform them, as to teach them Obedience to their
lawful Princes, but they must still remain infamous, (as our Author observes)
for Disloyalty and a barbarous Treatment of their Kings? And is it not yet more
strange, that we, who are of a better Genius, should learn of them, who (as you
note) do boast of one hundred and fifty Kings in succession in that Kingdom
(and you certainly aver) that they really imprisoned, deposed, and murdered
fifty at least, before the time of Mary Queen of Scots, that such an Original
should be proposed to the English Nation, that their Chronicles may also be
defiled with the blood of their Kings?

As for what you say ( p. 20. Pref.) concerning the Queen of Scots, that her
prosecution was promoted by the English Bishops; which putrid Vomit the Author
of Julian's Life licked up, and has disgorged again, to make the whole Nation
stink: I have said enough to vindicate the Bishops from that foul Aspersion. It
being designed by the Wisdom of the Parliament, and by them justified, for many
Treasonable actions and Insurrections by her practiced and contrived; for which
she was legally condemned, not as a Queen, nor as a Popish Successor, much
less as our Queen; but as a professed Enemy to her Majesty that then happily
reigned over us; from whom she actually claimed the Crown, and endeavored by
force to usurp it. And she having first resigned her Crown, and came hither for
protection, which she forfeited by her frequent practices of Treason, was tried
and condemned as the Wife of a Subject of this Land. And happy had it been for
this Nation, if they had never learnt any other Regicide than this Fictitious
one wherewith the Bishops are chiefly charged, for no other reason that I can
divine, but because they will not give consent to another more unexcusable
action now.

This rash Assertion of yours destroys all that laudible endeavor which you
have worthily attempted for the vindication of our Bishops: in other matters,
this is a Scandalum Magnatum with a witness; and I hope you have yet so much
ingenuity, as to put your self to the voluntary Penance of a Recantation, the
slander being so notoriously false. And I am persuaded that the convictions of
your Conscience will not give you any rest, till you have made them as public
satisfaction as the injury you have done them is.

I proceed now to the third Head of his Discourse, which leads me to show the
endeavors used to engage the Nation in a second unnatural War: And I shall
begin with that Speech of this Author, p. 52. of Postscript. The panick fear of
the change of the Government that this Doctrine (of the Divinity of Kings)
occasioned, and the divisions it made among us, was the principal cause of the
late War. And p. 102. That War would have been impossible, if the Churchmen
had not maintained the Doctrine, that Monarchy was Jure Divino in such a sense
as made the King absolute: and they and the Church in consequence perished by
it.

Now you have heard already how loudly the young Divines are accused for
preaching this Doctrine. And how false soever the Accusation be, the Nation is
called to stand upon her guard, and the Royal Standard is feigned to be set up;
and perhaps the Seditious party are really listed and associated. And every
man is called on to declare for what Party he will engage: The Neuters are
accursed; the Associators declared to be, such as retain the old English
Loyalty, after the taking of the Covenant; and all that oppose these,
betrayers of their Religion, their Country, and the Laws; yea, they are told,
p. 149. that they ought not to subject the Professors of the true Religion
again, (as if they had once done it already) to Slaughters, Fire, Faggots,
Tortures, Inquisitions, and Massacres: When the Bishops and Loyal party were
they who suffered these, or as great tortures as these, for their Religion and
Loyalty, from the irreligious and Rebelpartie.

But to undeceive the multitude, let them consider by what arts a new War is
contrived. As,

1. By slandering all such as oppose the Association, and popular torrent of
Sedition and Rebellion: as, p. 27. of Preface, that the number of Addressers
may be reduced to the Duke's Pensioners and Creatures. That the Addresses have
been obtained by application; and the design was to make voices for the
discontinuance of Parliaments, and for a Popish Successor. That such as write
for the established Government and Religion, are a hired sort of Scaramouchy
Zanies, Merry Andrews, and Jack Puddings. P. 12. and impeacheth a Secretary of
State as a Traitor; not considering that one such as John Milton, is the chief
Engineer and encourager of all Rebellion and Treason. 2. By divulging abroad,
p. 22. That the Nation begins to grow impatient by the delays of public
justice against the Popish Plot: though it be well known at whose door that
lies. That the dissolution of Parliaments gives us cause to fear that the King
has no more business for Parliaments, ibid. and p. 17. 3. By animating the
multitude to perplex his Majesty with new Addresses; telling them, p. 30. of
Preface, So strong is the tie of duty upon him from his Office, to prevent
public Calamities, as no respect whatsoever, no not of the Right Line, can
discharge: nor will he himself ever think, if DVLY ADDRESSED, that it can. And
p. 34. At this time, if ever, the APPLICATIONS of an Active Prudence are
required from all honest men. And he himself has given them a Precedent, in
that Application which he intended it seems for the Seditious rabble -- We will
not entail a War upon the Nation, no not for the sake and interest of the
Glorious Family of the STUARTS. 4. By acquainting the Malcontents that their
number is four fifths of the Nation, who are such as love and adhere to our
Government and Religion; though they are rendered suspected of destroying again
the English Monarch and the Protestant Religion, p. 10. of Postscript. And
therefore he does but profane the Name of God, p. 95. when he says, God be
thanked they (the Dissenters, who are imagined very numerous) neither make our
Grand-Jury-men, nor the Common-halls of the City for choosing the Lord Mayors
or Sheriffs. 5. By Reprinting such Books as were written in defense of the late
War, and improving the Arguments for that Rebellion. 6. By his pleading for
Comprehension and Indulgence, which p. 98. he says about ten years since was
designed to slight the Churches Works, and demolish her by a general Indulgence
and Toleration; and now they intend to destroy her Garrison, those that can and
will defend her against Popery. 7. By publishing it as an undoubted truth, and
evident in it self, That the Succession to the Crown is the people Rights, p.
201. 8. By making large Apologies in behalf of those men of whom he speaks, p.
96. What animations did their people receive, to defy the Church and her
Authority, when their Preachers despised Fines and Imprisonment, to their
seeming out of pure zeal against her Order! And yet he adds, -- It is well
know, several of them were in Pension, and no men have been better received by
the Duke than J. J. J. O. E. B. and W. P. etc. Ringleaders of the Separation.
And again, p. 98. Consider how the Church of England is used, which is truly
the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion.
And it is a pitiful evasion, to say that these Fanatics are acted by the
Papists; or if it were true, they were much more intolerable for that reason:
and therefore I do with all my heart agree to your Method for rooting out the
Popish Plot, prescribed p. 99. By suppressing that contumacie that is grown so
rife in the Dissenters against the Church of England, by putting the revilers
of her Establishment and Order under the severest penalties. But then, Caveat
Author.

To conclude, we are certainly, as Mr. Hunt calls us, a foolish people and
unwise, a stupid and perverse Generation, if we shall reject that gracious and
gentle Government whereby God has hitherto led and preserved us a flock, by
the hands of Moses and Aaron; and exchange for a Saturn, or a Moloch, that will
devour their own Children, and make them pass through the fire at their
pleasure. But,

From all such Men-monsters; from all Sedition, Perjurie, Conspiracy, and
Rebellion; from all false Doctrine, Heresy, and Schism; from hardness of
Heart, and contempt of thy Word and Commandments,

Good Lord deliver us.
THE Life of Julian ENLARGED.
His Birth and Parentage.
JVLIAN was Born at Bizantium, now called Constantinople. His Fathers Name was
Constantius, Brother to Constantine the Great. His Mothers Name was Basilina,
of a very ancient and Noble Family among the Romans. Now although the Empire
was entirely devolved on Constantius (the Second Son of Constantine) his two
Brothers Constantine and Constans being dead; yet for securing the Empire to
himself, having a jealous Spirit, he contrived the death of his nearest
Kindred, viz. Constantius Father of our Julian, Anniballianus, and Dalmatius
Caesar: which our Author would impute to the outrages of the Soldiery;
forgetting what he tells his Reader, p. 29. That the slaughter of his Kindred
was one of those three things whereof Constantius repented him at his death.
For which he rightly quoteth Naz. Orat. in laudem Athanasii, p. 389.

How Julian and Gallus his Elder Brother escaped that Massacre, our Author
leaves uncertain: for having said that Gallus being very sick, the Soldiers
concluded that the disease would kill him, and save them the labor; and that
they thought not Julian dangerous, being but five years old: yet he would have
it attributed to Constantius the Emperor, who, for ought we read, gave no
Commission to spare them; and had they then dyed, would doubtless have found
cause to repent of their deaths, as well as of the rest of his Kindred.

That Constantius showed kindness to his two Cousins after the Death of their
Father and Uncles, was no more than Nature, and especially the Religion he
professed, required of him: nor could all his kindness to the Children, expiate
his Cruelty to their Father* But that he should cause Gallus to be slain, who
is noted, p. 3. to have been sincerely pious, and that after he had given him
his Constantina.
Sister in Marriage, and declared him Caesar, and found him a Man of Personal
valor and good Conduct and Success, (I may say of it as our Author does) it
was a rash act: and yet if it be true that he designed to Invade the Empire,
not content with the Title and Authority of Caesar, it was more excusable than
the Death of his other Kindred, who were never reported to design any such
thing.

It had been most commendable in Constantius, if, as he provided a Royal Palace
for the Education of his Kinsmen, so being himself a Christian Emperor, he had
more carefully provided for their Christian Education. That Age had as many
Learned Bishops, well skilled in all Humane Literature, as any one before or
since; and yet Constantius permitted the Seeds of Superstition and Paganism to
be sown in that rank Soil, as soon as those of Christianity: and it is no wonder
if our corrupt nature, being left at liberty, prefer that Religion which is
accommodated to its lusts, to that which especially tends to the suppressing
and extirpation of them. And if Corn and Weeds be permitted to grow together in
a fertile ground, it is no wonder to see the weeds to outgrow the Corn.

His Education.
AS soon as he was Seven years old, he was committed to the Tuition of
Mardonius an Eunuch, by whom he was put to learn Grammar and Rhetoric, in the
public Schools of Constantinople. Nicocles a Lacedemonian taught him Grammar;
and the famous Turn-coat Ecebolius taught him Rhetoric. Libanius the Heathen
Philosopher had a famous School at that time in Constantinople, whose Works
Julian procured, and read with great delight: and in a little time becomes
familiarly acquainted with him, often frequenting his School; and, as the
manner of the Grecian Scholars was, he adventured to declaim publicly against
the Christians, and ( p. 4.) our Author says he would dispute hard with his
Brother in favor of the Heathen, pretending that he only tried how he could
hold the weaker side of a Question.

He profited much in that sort of Philosophy which Iamblicus taught, being a
mixture of the Opinions of Plato and Aristotle, (...).
of which he calls himself a zealot; and showed great honor and kindness to
Iamblicus. These were the Masters which Mardonius his Tutor procured for him,
and were the Corruptors of his Youth: for being of a light and desultory Wit,
and withal very industrious and inquisitive after knowledge, he hastily imbibed
such Principles as his Tutors instilled.

He tells us himself in his Misopogon what he learnt under this Mardonius;
which he relates to the Athenians. The Names of Plato, Socrates, Aristotle, and
Theophrastus, are much talked of with derision. This old Man (Mardonius) having
foolishly (he speaks by Irony) observed their dictates, persuaded me, being a
Boy desirous to learn, that if I would tread in their paths, I should be
better, not only than other men, but than my self: And I (for what could I do
else?) obeying my old Tutor, cannot change any thing, though I desire it never
so much. And I accuse my self that I did open a more free admission to all the
Vices of that old Man. For thus he taught me out of Plato: That Man is worthy
of Honor who offends not; but he that deters others from offending, is worthy
of more than double Honor: The first is profitable to himself alone, the
others to many: that brings the Delinquent before the Magistrates; and if he
also join in punishing the injurious, this is a noble and complete Citizen, and
may be called a Conqueror in the conflict of Virtue. This and some other Moral
Virtues wherein Julian perceived the generality of Christians to be defective
as to their practice, raised in him a great opinion of his Pagan Tutors; and
from Lectures of Morality, he proceeds to learn more curious Arts. For,

After this, Maximus an Ephesian Philosopher (who was by Valentinian put to
death for his Impostures and Magical Arts) taught Julian to cast Nativities,
and make Divinations; and initiated him to the Mysteries of Magic. And as if
he had not enough of those devilisbs Arts, he sollicites a Journey to Athens,
pretending to see Greece, and to be acquainted with their Schools: where he
grew into a familiar acquaintance with the best of the Heathen Philosophers of
that Age, which abounded with many that were excellent Moralists. A Heathen
Writer ( Ammianus Marcell. l. 22. c. 3.) says, that Julian from the very first
instructions of his childhood was given to the Worship of the Heathen Gods and
Idols. It is no wonder, if having such Tutors, he became zealously affected to
the same.

This was his study while his Brother Gallus was living: and as soon as he
understood of his death, which was an unnatural, barbarous action, and raised
great prejudices against the Christian Religion, he was greatly discontented,
and diligently inquired by those who were skilled in Curious arts what would
become of him. Twenty years together he dissembled himself to be a Christian,
and attained to great knowledge in that Religion; but rather, that he might
know how to oppose it: for, as St. Augustine observes, (l. 5. c. 21. De Civ.
Dei) Cujus egregiam indolem decipit amore dominandi sacrilega and detestanda
curiositas; A sacrilegious and accursed Curiosity perverted his excellent wit.
However, his proficiency in Christianity preferred him to be a Reader of the
Holy Scriptures to the people; and those Arguments of his which were learnedly
and satisfactorily answered by St. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, do demonstrate
his Knowledge both of the Old and New Testament, for which he was admitted into
Holy Orders. Now how could Constantius expect but that Julian being put to such
Nurses, he should suck in such milk as they yielded? Neglectis urenda silex
innascitur agris.

His Apostacy is imputed to these three causes.

First, To the levitie of his Nature. Secondly, To his love of Magical Arts.
Thirdly, To his ambition of the Empire.
When Gallus was put to death, the Emperor had such informations that Julian
conspired also against him, that he resolved to put him to death also: but by
the intercession of Eusebia the Empress, he was sent for to appear at Court,
and by her intercession and favor, was not only preserved, but within a short
time declared Caesar: and the Emperor, to ingratiate him the more, gave him his
Sister Helena to Wise.

Before we give an account of his Actions while he was Caesar, it will be
convenient to give the Reader

A Character of his Person and Disposition.
HE was of a middle Stature, his Hair soft, and hanged down; his Beard long and
sharp; a full and rolling Eye; comely Eyebrows, and a straight Nose; his Mouth
somewhat large; his Under-lip seemed divided; his Neck fat; his Shoulders broad
and large; and from the Head to the Foot, his Members were proportionable and
well joined: so that he was made both for Strength and Activitie.

Gregory Nazianzene, who knew him at Athens, gives this description of him:
That his Neck inclined forward, his Shoulders often in motion; that he had a
wandering Eye, and furious Aspect* his Feet unstable; his Nose and Lineaments of
his Face were ridiculous, and signified scornfulness; in his Apparel sordid;
his Laughter was loud and frequent; his Grants and Denials were without reason;
his Speech slow and interrupted; his Questions hasty and imprudent, and his
Answers no better; one following upon another without Gavitie, good Order, or
Method. Upon consideration of this Physiognomie, the Bishop thus exclaims: What
a mischief does the Roman Empire nourish! for the inconsistencie both of his
Manners and Behavior, and the great commotion of his Mind, made me to give
this prediction of him; and as I foretold of him to those that were with me
before he had acted any thing, so I found him to be by his Actions afterward:
and I wish I had been in this a false Prophet, for that were better than that
such a Monster should exist, and fill the World with such evils as never were
in any other Age, though there were many Deluges, Conflagrations, Earthquakes,
and Cruel men, and prodigious Beasts of diverse kinds.

Some Writers give him a different Character from others: That in Courtesy and
Clemency he was comparable with Titus; and as much exceeded his Brother Gallus
in those virtues, as Titus exceeded Domitian: in fortunate successes against
the Germans, they equal him with Trajan; in Temperance and Modesty, to Marcus
Aurelius; in Justice, with Antoninus; and in Knowledge, with the ancient
Philosophers. Vir egregius (says Eutropius) and Rempublicam insigniter
Moderaturus: A person of excellent parts, and like to rule the Empire with
excellent Moderation.

His Actions while he was Caesar.
WHen he was about the age of 23, Constantius declared him Caesar, at such time
as the Barbarians had spoiled Gaul; the Emperor being doubtful to carry on the
War himself. Marcellinus (l. 15.) says, that daily Messengers brought him
tidings of the deplored condition of the Gauls, whose Country was overrun with
the Armies of the Barbarians without any resistance. For remedy whereof, he
residing in Italy, and not willing to expose himself to the hazards of that
War, having made Julian CAESAR, sends him to relieve that Country. But Julian
being ignorant of Martial Affairs, and considering what dangers he was sent to
encounter, looks on himself as one designed for Death rather than Honor.

Neither of us (says Julian) were pleased with this Honor: not Constantius,
who gave it unwillingly; nor he that received it against his will: for which he
calls the Gods to witness. And at that very time when the Purple Robes were put
on him, he uttered this verse: (...) and told his Friends that he should gain
nothing more by his Honor, than to die in a great Enterprise; and that he was
sent to the Gauls, Germans, and Hercynian Wood, to fight as a Hunter with wild
Beasts.

Marcellinus says the same, that it was a common report that Julian was chosen
not so much to relieve the distresses of the Gauls, as that he might perish in
those cruel Wars; he being then unskilful, and scarce enduring the noise of
Arms. As he marched before his Army in Military Accountrements, This (says
he) is right as the Proverb speaks, A Pack-saddle on a Cows back. It happened
that as he was exercising in the Fields at Paris, the Pins that joined his
Buckler fell out, and the pieces flew about his ears: which some taking for an
ill Omen, he holds up the handle, and bid them not be dismayed; for what he
laid his hands on, he held fast.

Yet did this young man not only defend that part of the Country which was yet
free, but expelled the Barbarians from those parts which they had possessed,
and in a short time regained many ancient Cities; and in one battle at
Strasburg, overthrew Seven of the most potent Princes of Germany, and sent
Chodonomarius the chief of them to Constantius at Rome: He also subdued the
Almains, took their King Badomarius, and cleared the bounds of the Empire from
all its Enemies: and this he did (says Aurelius Victor) with a few Soldiers,
against infinite Armies of the Enemies.

But these Victories of his did so exalt him, that he believed that the Soul of
Alexander was infused into his Body (as Socrates relates). His Soldiers also
had so great an opinion of his Valor and Conduct, that they all resolved to
proclaim him Emperor: which though in an Apology to Constantius he says was
done against his consent; yet as well his ambitious Spirit, as his future
Actions, demonstrate it to have been his design. Which Constantius being
informed of, commands him to return: And this he willingly obeyed; but carries
with him his whole Army, to secure him from the rage of the Emperor. The
Emperor also prepared all the Force he possibly could, to give Julian battle.
To which Julian was encouraged by his Southsayers, especially by Aprunculus an
Orator in Gaul, who had instructed him in the knowledge of the Intrails of
Beasts, and flying of Birds; and from the Liver of a Beast enclosed in a double
Caul, foretold Success and Victory to him. When he came to Vienna, an old Woman
that had lost her sight, hearing that Julian was come, cried out, that it was
he that should repair the Temples of the Gods. About this time he sent to the
Senate an Apology for himself, accusing Constantius of many faults and
miscarriages; which notwithstanding, the Senate by Tertullius their Prefect
answered his Messenger, Autori tuo Reverentiam Rogamus; We have a great respect
for your Master.

It happened that Julian being about to take horse, the Soldier that lifted him
up fell to the ground. At which accident he said, in the hearing of many, that
he was fallen who had raised him to his Dignity. And this (says Marcellinus,
p. 189.) was done at the same instant when Constantius died in Cilicia. Of
whose death, Theolaiphus and Alligildus brought him speedy Notice, declaring
that Constantius by his last words named him his Successor. Am. Marcell. l.
22. c. 1. Though the contrary be not only affirmed by Gregory Nazianzen, but
confirmed by the battle that was intended between them; of which Julian gives
this account to his Uncle, Epist. 13. calling his Gods to witness, that he
never intended the death of Constantius, but rather wished for his life; and
that he came with his Army against him, only to obtain the easier terms of
Peace: or, because he was condemned as an Enemy, he came prepared to decide the
quarrel by a battle, if he could not otherwise make his peace.

Of his Actions while he was Emperor.
JVLIAN being without any opposition settled in the Imperial Throne, sought to
gain the affections of all sorts of people by acts of Clemency and Justice:
And though he had been long since an Apostate from the Christian Religion, yet
did not appear so, till after some time: in his Epistle to the Alexandrians, he
says, he had lived Twenty years in the Christian, and Twelve years in the Pagan
Religion, p. 200 of his Works.

He entered on the Government as a Lamb, however he had the Appetite of a Lion,
to devour the Church of Christ: but he kept on the sheeps clothing, that he
might with more subtilty worry that innocent flock. He frequented the public
Assemblies of the Christians, and re-called those Orthodox Bishops from Exile,
which Constantius, being himself of the Arian Persuasion, had banished; thereby
to lay an Odium on Constantius. And it has been observed, That not long after
Constantius declared against the Deity of the Son of God, the Empire was taken
from him, and given to Julian.

Julian professed it to be his Opinion, That no man ought to force another to
be of his Opinion; and charged the people not to injure the Christians, or
reproach them, or draw them to sacrifice against their wills. Sozom. l. 5. c.
4. And many Outrages committed by the Heathen upon the Christians, were done
without his order. Theodoret. l. 3. c. 6. But as it is known that he did not
persecute the Christians with fire and Sword, as Dioclesian did; yet he
contrived more mischievous ways to destroy Christianity it self, than others
did to destroy the professors of it: and as one probable means to accomplish
it, he summons the Bishops of the several Factions, enjoining them to do
nothing to the prejudice of the Empire; and on those terms permits them to
enjoy their own Opinions, and different Modes of Worship. Eo modo (says St.
Aug. Epist. 166.) nomen Christi de terris perire putavit, si Sacrilegas
dissentiones liberas esse permisit; Thereby to keep them in a balance till he
had settled his affairs, or to permit them to destroy one another, as in
Constantius time the Arians had begun, and to save him the labor.

He seemed averse from putting any to death for their Religion, not so much
perhaps through any innate clemency, as through a devilish Polity: for he had
observed, that the Church multiplied under the greatest Persecutions; and the
Faith, Fortitude, and invincible patience of Christians, appeared admirable to
their Enemies: so that he envyed them the glory of Martyrdom. To this purpose
he wrote an Epistle to Ecebolius, declaring his mind concerning the Galilaeans,
as he called the Christians; That none of them should have any force offered
them, or be compelled into the Temples, nor be reproached by the Pagans: and p.
213. writing to the Bostrians, he minds them How he had re-called such as were
banished, and by an Edict restored their Goods which were forfeited. And though
he practiced the ruin of the Christians, yet he seemed to have a reverence of
their Religion: for when he assumed the Title of Pontifex Maximus, he wrote to
his Idol-Priests, and tells them, That the reason why the Temples of their Gods
were so much forsaken, and the Christians frequented, was their different
behaviors: The Christians delighting in works of mercy, providing their
Hospitals for the Poor, the Widows and Fatherless,(...). but his Priests were
barbarous and cruel, inhospitable to strangers or their own poor. And to his
reproof adds an exhortation, that they would imitate the Christians. And to the
people he writes, That they should learn of the Christians to reverence their
Priests, and obey their Magistrates and Governors. And he persuades the
Priests not to gad abroad without leave of their Superiors, and communicatory
Letters; and such as did notoriously offend, he would have them suspended for a
time from their Communion in things sacred, and partaking of their Sacrifices.
Of this he speaks at large, in his 49 Epistle, p. 202.

And although he were a bitter Enemy to Athanasius, concerning whom he by an
express Edict to Edicius, Prefect of Egypt, gives command to banish him, not
only out of the City of Alexandria, where he had won over many Noble persons to
the Christian Religion, and caused the Pagan Temples to be quite deserted; but
also out of all Egypt: yet did he hold a good correspondence by Letters with
diverse Christian Bishops, particularly with George an Arian Bishop, whose
Library after his death he charged Porphyry to preserve entirely for his use,
p. 176. As also with Aetius another Bishop, exhorting him to come and live with
him, p. 164. But he had still a hatred to their Religion, though he loved them
for their Learning and peaceableness; to which he endeavored to oblige them by
kindness, being yet afraid to exercise cruelty toward them. And that he might
avoid the Name of a Persecutor himself, he gave countenance and encouragement
to the Jews in their opposition of the Christians; and gave them leave to
rebuild Jerusalem, of which Amm. Marcell. l. 23. c. 1. and Eusebius, l. 3. chapter
17. write thus.

Julian, desiring to propagate the memorial of his Empire by some great work,
intended the reedifying of the Temple at Jerusalem, committing the work to
Alipius of Antioch, who was assisted by the Prefect of Judea. But when they
began to dig the foundations, terrible Fireballs issued out of the Earth,
destroyed many Workmen, forcing them to desert the work. With this Heathen
Writer Eusebius agrees, and relates more at large, That by an Earthquake the
old foundations were cast up, which many came from far to behold; and that
there came down fire from Heaven, which consumed all their Tools and working
Instruments, for a whole day together. And that the night following, the forms
of Crosses were visible in their Garments, shining like the Sunbeams. Yet
those hardened Jews, notwithstanding these three Miracles which forced many of
them to confess that Christ was an Omnipotent God, believed not.

He had indeed so invincible a prejudice against the Christian Religion, that
though he were convinced of the learning and peaceableness of the Christians,
yet could not his heart be moved to embrace it. When that excellent Apology of
Apollinaris was presented him in behalf of the Christians, he returned to them
with contempt: I have read, I have considered, and rejected it. Yet although he
did connive at and tolerate many indignities and violences against the
Christians, and made some Edicts against them, they did multiply and increase
under him; as Titus Bishop of Bostria remonstrated to him, that their number
was nothing inferior to that of the Gentiles; and in Antioch, in Alexandria,
and in his very Army, the greater part were Christians.

And although his designs were as bad as wit and malice could make them, I do
not find that he wrote any of his Laws in blood, nor in a Judiciary manner did
execute any upon the account of their Christianity: which we must ascribe
wholly to the Providence of God, who though he set this wicked Prince over
them, as a punishment for their revolt from the true Faith into Arianism, and
for their Divisions and Cruelties practiced among themselves; this common Enemy
being a probable means to unite them both in faith and love: yet the Divine
Clemency, who has the hearts of all kings in his hands, permitted him not to
make that havoc of the Church which he intended. And Athanasius was a true
Prophet, when he told the Suffering Christians that Julian was Nubecula cito
transitura, a cloud that threatened a Storm, but would be soon blown over.

And ought not we also, who as yet conflict only with our own fears, acquiesce
in the Goodness of God, who may yet prevent not only those distant evils which
we fear, but those real mischiefs also which we are presently and desperately
running into? Either the evils we fear may not come; or if they do, they may be
speedily removed; and by the blessing of God, may be Sanctified by our
amendment, in a greater love of the Truth and of one another.

While Julian was meditating against Christians, his vainglory spurred him on
to a War against the Persians, intending to have added one Title more to
himself, (viz.) Parthicus. And although he were dissuaded from it by Salustius,
and other his best Soldiers, ( Amn. Marcell. l. 23. c. 4.) as also by those
Southsayers in whom he placed most confidence; yet would he by no means be
diverted from that War; which he carried on with such rashness and wilfulness,
that we may justly number him with those of whom it is said, Quos perdere vult
Jupiter, dementat prius.

He was in his March presented by a Company of Soldiers with a great Lion
wounded to death; which portended the death of some great King, says
Marcellinus: but he took no notice of it. A Soldier also as he had watered his
two Horses, was struck dead, together with them, by Lightning; which was
interpreted as an ill Omen: yet on he goes toward Persia; and as soon as he
had landed his Army in Persia, he caused his Ships to be burnt, reserving only
a few of the least of them to serve as a Bridge over the Rivers that might
hinder his March: which much offended his Souldierie, as arguing a distrust of
their valor, and cutting off all hopes of retreat in their greatest
necessity. It happened that in the first. Onset which was made by the Persians,
Julian had the better, and thereupon appointed a solemn Sacrifice to Mars; for
which ten white Bulls are prepared; but nine of them died before they could be
brought to the Altar, and the other ran away; but being brought back, was
sacrificed; but revenged his death by such ominous signs as highly incensed
Julian, and made him resolve and swear by Jupiter never to sacrifice to Mars
again. So that here was another Apostacy of Julian's from one of his chief
Gods, the God of War.

The grand Battalia of the Persians being at hand, Julian prepares for it; and
in the preceding night he told some of his friends, that the public Genius
which he saw when he was saluted Emperor in Gaul, appeared to him in a sad
posture, and sorry habit, passing by. He saw also an Exhalation in the form of
a Torch falling to the ground; which he was afraid had been the Star Mars which
threatened him. His Aruspices being consulted upon this, dissuaded him from that
Battle, at least for some hours: But he refused; and as soon as it was day, put
his Army in order for a fight. The Persians were as early as he; and falling on
the Rear of the Roman Army, put them to some distress: which Julian hearing
of, made such haste to succor them, that he took only his Target, neglecting
any other Armor; and by his seasonable assistance recovered the fault, and
repulsed the Persians; and with hands lifted up, urged his men to pursue them,
he himself being at the head of them, and on the very heels of his Enemies. In
this Conflict he received his mortal Wound; a Javelin slightly wounding his
Arm, pierced into his Side, and stuck in his Liver. From what hand it came, we
have had occasion to enquire already; and as for the report that he plucked it
out, and threw it in the Air, with a Vicisti Galilaee, I find no great
authority for it among the Writers of that Age. His wound being searched and
dressed, the pain abated; and calling for his Arms and Horse, resolved to enter
again into the fight: but his strength failed him; and hearing that the place
where he was wounded was called Phrygia, he remembering that it was foretold
that he should die in Phrygia, despaired of life, and about Midnight calling
for a draught of cold Water, he drank it, and shortly after died.

His dying Speech.
THe time of departing this life is (my Companions) now at hand; which as an
honest and well-meaning Debtor, I gladly repay to Nature; not, as some
believed, with reluctancie and sorrow; for by the common Opinion of
Philosophers I am sufficiently instructed in how much more blessed condition
the Soul is than the Body; and am satisfied, that when one passes out of a
worse into a better estate, he ought to rejoice, rather than to be troubled:
considering also, that the Celestial Gods reward the most pious men with death,
as the greatest reward of all others. I also am assured that it happens to me
after the same manner; lest I should fall under some heavy burdens, as I
undergo, or do any thing unworthie of my self: having yet ever found by
experience, that sorrows and pains as they domineer over Cowards, so are easily
overcome by Valiant persons. Neither does it repent me of my Actions, nor the
remembrance of any Wickedness afflict me, either committed at such time as I
lay in the shade and in corners as I could, and studied virtue; or since I came
to the Government. I think I have kept my self blameless and without blemish,
as one descended from the Gods above. -- In times of Peace governing with
moderation, not without good consideration making either Offensive or Defensive
Wars, though the issue were not always answerable: For the Celestial Powers
alone have the Sovereignty of Events; concluding with my self, that the end of
Government is the advantage and safety of good Subjects. I have ever been (as
you know) more inclined to Peace and Tranquillity by the whole course of my
actions; opposing Lasciviousness, as that which corrupts both things and
manners; and whithersoever my Mother the Commonwealth, how imperiously soever,
called me, though to never so dangerous a Post, there have I stood immovable,
being accustomed to despise all fortuitous events. I will not be ashamed to
confess, that I have heretofore understood that I should die in War: and
therefore I adore and praise the eternal Divinity, that I perish not by any
Conspiracy, nor languish through the pain of a Disease; nor am I condemned to
death, (he thought it might have been upon his Brother's death) but in the
middle course of my flourishing Glory, I have deserved so renowned a passage
out of this world. He is equally to be esteemed a Coward, who desires to die
when he ought to live, as he who shuns death when it comes conveniently. Thus
much may suffice to have spoken, my strength now failing me. Concerning my
Successor I wittingly say nothing, lest through imprudence I should pass by a
worthy person, or by naming one I conceive fitly qualified, if another should
chance to be preferred, bring him into imminent danger; but as a dutiful Son of
the Commonwealth, I wish her a good Governor in my room.

Having spoken this, he perceived his Attendants to weep, whom he gravely
rebuked, affirming it a pitiful mean thing to bemoan a Prince that was a friend
to Heaven and the Stars. And they being silent, he entered into a subtle
discourse with Maximus and Priscus, two Philosophers; concerning the sublimitie
of Souls; till such time as the Wound gaping, and the Tumor of the Vessels
intercepting his Breath, having called for a draught of cold Water, he died the
more easily, about Midnight, in the 32d year of his Age, and the second of his
Empire; having been Caesar Six years. He left no Child behind him; his Wife
being dead in France before he came from thence. He was buried in the Suburbs
of Tarsus by Procopius, to whom he gave order for it: and Zosimus says his
Tomb has this Epitaph:

(...),
(...).
Of his Virtues.
I Shall comprise these under the Heads mentioned by Marcellinus, l. 25. c. 5.
(viz.) Temperance, Prudence, Fortitude, and Justice: all which (says that
Author) he so studied and attained, as if they had been but One. As to his
Temperance in respect of Chastity, he was so unspotted, that after the death of
his Wife in France, he never meddled with any woman; nor was he accused of the
least immodesty while he was young, and in his full strength, by those that
were of his Bedchamber. To which virtue his spare diet and short sleep very
much contributed. His diet was always so slender, as if he intended to return
again to his Books. His Supper was usually a little Gruel, such as a common
Soldier would refuse, l. 24. c. 2. which he took standing, and presently went
to view his Guards and Sentinels, and then returned to his Study, scarce
allowing himself so much solace as might content the necessities of Nature.
What was provided for him as an Emperor, he seldom tasted of, but distributed
it amongst his poor Soldiers.

He says in his Misopogon, that he had been taught from his youth to wage war
with his belly. And never frequented Theaters or Games; which he never beheld
but with as much uneasiness as others did with delight. He usually lay only on
a Palate spread on the ground, and would scarce eat enough to satisfy Hunger;
abstaining from Feasts and public Meetings, saying, No man ought to be
esteemed as temperate at home, who was dissolute abroad, and took pleasure in
the Threatres. His garments and manner of dress was very plain and neglected,
and far from curious or courtly fashions. Do thou (says he) desire to see
the Circensian Games? you shall find them most elegantly described by Homer;
take the Book, and read. Such instructions he says he had from his Tutors, and
them he followed with great pleasure, p. 79.

He was extremely delighted in the society of learned Men and good Books, for
which he often professed he could willingly leave his Empire. What intercourse
he had with the chief Philosophers of his time, appears by his Epistles to
Libanius, Iamblicus, Eumenius, Themistius, Elpidius, and Maximus. This last,
though one of the worst of them, coming to visit him, of which he was informed
while he sat in Judicature, he speedily laid aside his business and his Robes,
and went forth in a familiar manner to meet him and embrace him. To the rest,
in his Epistles he desired their presence or their Books; and styled himself,
Their most dear Brother.

For his Prudence. This was a Maxim with him, That it was a shame for a wise
man, having a Soul, to seek for commendation from any thing belonging to the
Body. His proficiency in all manner of learning, gave him great insight as well
to Martial as Civil Affairs; which he so managed, that though he adventured on
many great and hazardous attempts, yet he mostly came off with good success. He
could by his Eloquence, as by a Mercury-Rod, appease the Tumults and Seditions
of his Soldiers; and would threaten them, that if they continued their
Mutinies, he would betake himself to a private life.

Again, he showed another instance of his Prudence in remitting many Taxes,
rather than to extort them from the poorer sort of people: nor did he exact on
the Rich, affirming, that his treasure was safest in the custody of his good
Subjects.

One instance of his Prudence was this, that he would suffer himself to be
reproved for any indiscreet action; being conscious to himself of rashness and
precipitancy in many particulars. Marcell. l. 25. c. 6. Praefectis proximisque
permittebat ut sidenter impetus suos aliorsum tendentes, atque decebat Monitu
opportuno fraenarent monstrabatque subinde se dolere delictis, and gaudere
correctione.

He professes that he used deliberation in all his affairs, especially of
Judicature: You know (says he to Ecdicius Prefect of Egypt) how slow I am to
condemn any one; and when I have condemned him, how much slower I am to pardon
him. P. 120. And of his prudent conduct in all his affairs, this is a
convincing Argument, that during his Reign he was neither disturbed by Sedition
at home, nor invaded by any of the barbarous Nations from abroad.

His Justice appeared also in many notable instances: for he rather shook the
Sword than struck with it: and though he made himself terrible, yet was he
never cruel; but sought by the punishment of a few, to restrain the vices of
many. He pardoned many that had sought to take away his life. Thalassius an
enemy to him and his Brother Gallus was forbid the Court, which encouraged his
enemies to accuse him; but Julian perceiving it to be of Malice, told them,
that Thalassius had injured him, and he must have satisfaction before them: and
upon hearing he was reconciled to him, and he discharged him from his
Adversaries.

When one accused a great Citizen for a Traitor, hoping to be rewarded out of
his Estate, Julian asked him what the condition of the man was: he answered, he
was a rich Burger, and had made him purple Cloths against the Insurrection. If
that be all (says Julian) you shall carry him a pair of purple Shoes too; and
let him know, how little success he can hope for from such things, without
greater power.

He would say of himself, That Justice which in former times had left the
earth, was returned again, l. 25. c. 6. And if we believe Marcellinus, although
he would sometimes inquire of what Religion the parties litigant were, yet he
would do nothing partially against any for their Religion.

As for his Fortitude, besides his patient enduring of extreme cold and heat,
he would encounter his Enemies hand to hand; and by exposing his own Person,
would keep his Soldiers from giving ground to the Enemy; which he often did
both in Germany and Persia, slaying diverse Enemies with his own hand.

But he had a better kind of Fortitude than this; namely, that which more
becomes a Man, to conquer his own Passions, to bear with Reproaches, to endure
cross events with patience. As for me (says he) I resolve to bear whatever
falls on me from above with a stout mind; for this is the property of good men,
to do their duty, and to be of a good hope, and to accommodate themselves to
what ever fatal necessity shall impose, p. 218. And as men of true valor and
magnanimity are seldom cruel, he expressed a natural clemency in all his
actions; those against the Christians, toward his later end, only excepted;
which yet I cannot perceive to be executed, but upon some great provocations by
the rash and ungovernable among the vulgar sort of Christians. Of which the
Historians of that time given many instances.

But all these virtues were sullyed with that one vile act of his, in becoming
an Apostate from the best Religion, after that he had professed it for Twenty
years together, and attained a competent knowledge therein.

His Vices.
AS his Virtues were great, so were his Vices; and that which was most
predominant, was his levity and unsetledness of mind. For having been false to
his Redeemer, he was never true to any of his false Gods. He was so displeased
with Mars, the God of War, that he solemnly vowed never to sacrifice to him
more.

He was talkative to excess, and boasted of his own Achievements; Popularity
and vainglory being that which he especially aimed at. Marcellinus, who was a
Heathen, a great friend and observer of his actions, says, l. 25. c. 6. That he
was rather Superstitious, than a devout observer of any Religion. He offered
costly Sacrifice, rather to honor himself than his Gods; and though given to
Divinations, yet contemned such as boded ill. So resolute and self-willed he
was in the business of Persia, that against all good advice, and ill presages,
he cast himself away.

He showed himself unmerciful in this one Edict, that he forbad the Professors
in Rhetoric and Grammar to teach Christians, lest they should wound the
Heathen by their own darts. Among his Edicts, those are especially noted which
he set forth against the Christians; As first, his forbidding the Children of
Christians to be brought up in the knowledge of Philosophy, lest, as is noted
by Socrates, they might be better enabled to confute the Heathen Sophisters. 2.
His forbidding Christians to bear any Office in his Guards, or Government in
his Provinces. 3. His Edicts for seizing the Christian Churches, and imposing
Mulcts on such as would not Sacrifice to his Pagan Gods.
As for Sanguinary Laws, our Author observes that he enacted none.

Greg. Nazianzen, who knew Julian, has sufficiently recorded his Vices in his
Stelliteuticks; from whence our Author has taken his History. But as I would
not believe all as truth, which some deliver in Panegyricks of their Heroes; so
neither all that is said in such Orations against Professed Enemies.

Of his Works.
ALthough we might wish that Julian had never known Letters, because of those
virulent Satyrs which he wrote against Christianity; yet the Poison wherewith
his Writings do abound, having excellent Remedies prepared against the venom
of them, by the Learned Fathers of that Age, such as Greg. Naz. and St. Cyril;
there being also some remarkable passages concerning History and Christianity
interspersed, they may be read with some benefit by Learned Men.

He says of himself, in an Epistle to Ecdicius Prefect of Egypt, in which he
desired him to send the Books of George an Arian Bishop of Alexandria; Some
delight in Horses, others in Birds, others in wild Beasts; but I from my
Childhood have been a great lover of Books. His proficiency in variety of
Learning will appear by what is now extant, although it is supposed that he
wrote many things before he was Caesar, that are now lost, as several Orations
sent to Iamblicus, the loss, whereof he bewayls in an Epistle to him yet
extant. My opinion is, that Julians Vices were real and deep rooted, that he
had but the umbrage and appearance of Virtue; which he therefore retained, that
he might make them serve his Pride, Popularity, and vainglory.

After he came to be Caesar, he redeemed what time he could for his study,
dividing the night into three parts: one for sleep, another for his Books, and
the third for his Military Affairs; and usually he would pen one of his
Orations in that part of the night.

Suidas gives this account of his Writings. First, his Book called the Caesar's,
containing a short and sharp account of them all, from Augustus to his own
time. Secondly, his Saturnalia, and discourse of Three figures. Thirdly, his
Misopogon, written against the Antiochians; and another Tract showing the
original of Evils: another against Heroclitus, showing how to live Cynically;
and many Epistles of several sorts, of which 63 are now extant.

He wrote his Misopogon to revenge himself upon the Antiochians, who had abused
him in words, calling him Monkie, Goats-beard, and Butcher, for killing so many
Bulls for Sacrifices: and that which most provoked him, was the Impress upon
some Coin, viz. A Bull lying upon his Back upon the Altar; which the
Antiochians interpreted to signify that the World was turned up-side-down by
Julian: For these reasons, he upbraids them with their Intemperance, and their
fondness of Plays and Theaters; Secondly, for their Religion, which he calls
Impiety, though they worshipped God and Christ instead of Jupiter and Apollo:
Thirdly, the iniquity of their Magistrates, who countenanced the avarice of the
Rich, to the impoverishing of the People. For these things he blames them,
speaking as of himself: And when he comes to apologize for himself, he
confesses that his life was void of all Pleasure; that he was too religious and
severe in Judicature, for which he prays their pardon; imputing these faults to
his Master, by whom he was taught from his youth to live temperately,
religiously, and justly: and that he had spent his youth amongst the Gauls, a
rough and warlike people, ignorant of delicacies. The sum of this accusation we
have in this Syllagism.

He that lives contrary to the manners of other men, is deservedly accused by
them.

Julian lives contrary to the manners of the Antiochians, in contemning
Pleasures, and restraining Impiety and Injustice, which they allow and defend.

Therefore he is justly accused by them.

To which if we add one Syllogism more, you have the sum of that whole Book,
viz.

He that bestows benefits upon ungrateful men, is a Fool.

Julian has bestowed benefits on ungrateful men, in commending, cherishing and
increasing the Antiochians,

Therefore he is a Fool.

Concerning his account of the Caesar's, Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History,
lib. 3. c. 1. says, That he blamed every one of them, not sparing Marcus the
Philosopher: And Zonaras in his third Tome, observes his ingratitude to
Constantius, blaming him for his prodigality; feigning that Mercury asking him
what was the property of a good King, he should answer; To have and to consume
much.

The Books now extant are these: 1. His Orations in praise of Constantius the
Emperor, and of Eusebia his wife. 2. In praise of the Sun, and of the Mother
of the Gods: Against unlearned Dogs: To Heraclius concerning the Sect of the
Cynicks; and a Consolatory Oration at the departure of Salust.
His Caesar's: his Misopogon, and sixty three Epistles besides that to
Themistius and the Athenians. But the most pestilent of all his Works were
those which he wrote against the Christian Religion, which are mentioned and
answered by St. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, in Ten Books, consisting of 362
Pages, in the sixth Tome of his Works, set forth in Greek and Latin by
Johannes Aubertus; printed at Paris 1638. to which, for his full satisfaction,
I refer the Reader

THE CONCLUSION.
IT appears by what has been said, That Julian was a perfidious and detestable
Apostate: A malicious and subtle Persecutor; who designed much more against
the Christians, than God permitted him to practice. But as there is an open and
declared Apostacy and Opposition of the Truth by professed Enemies: so is
there a secret and real revolt from the Truth, and persecution of its
Disciples, by some that profess themselves Friends to the same. And in our own
Age we have known some, not only of the Roman, but other Persuasions, who may
be paralleled with, and in some circumstances exceed Julian.

For Julian, being a Great Prince, had the unhappiness of being bred in foreign
Countries among subtle Pagans, who tempted him to their impieties in his
youth: There are some who have had their whole Education among learned and
sincere Professors of the Christian Faith, and yet revolt from it. Julian for
Six years together faithfully served the Emperor in his Wars, to the great
hazard of his Life; Others, even in times of peace, study to involve their
Prince in unnatural Wars, to the endangering of his and their own Lives. Julian
had a power to have executed his malicious designs, but was restrained: Others
live under a just power, and enjoy Protection and Peace; yet their perverse
Wills admit of no restraint. Julian employed his Wit in writing against his
Christian Subjects; Others employ theirs in writing against their Christian
Governors. He wrote Panegyricks of a Constantius, who had contrived his death:
Others write Satyrs and Libels against their Princes to whom they owe their
Lives. In a word, the greatest aggravation of Julian's Apostacy, was, that he
had been a Lecturer of the Holy Scriptures, the truths of which he renounced,
and wrote against them: And there are some who have been long in the Order of
Priesthood, that have so far revolted from their Profession, as to write
point blank against the plain and most necessary practical duties of the Holy
Scriptures, And whether Julian or such as these be the greater Apostates, I
leave to the Judgment of the Impartial Reader.

FINIS.

