THE Character of the True Church. IN A SERMON Preached at the French Church in
the Savoy, Upon these Words, How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy
Tabernacles, O Israel, Numb. XXIV. v. 5. By A. D'Astor de Laussac, formerly a
Prior and an Archdeacon of the Church of Rome.

LONDON, Printed for Matt. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet, and
sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick-lame. 1700.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Person who is deeply touched with the miseries which poor French Protestants
suffer while there, and more rigorously for but attempting to get away (tho
with the loss of their Estates) was mightily pleased to find, by reading the
Original of this discourse, that a Romish Priest of their Nation had been so
far from acting in those Cruelties, that he had quitted his Preferments, to
become of himself a Refugee, being forced only by the power of Truth to yield
at last to the Conviction of his Conscience (which he owns he had long
resisted) and that in their chiefest Church, the Savoy, he had made a free and
open Abjuration of all the errors of Popery, giving very many weighty Reasons
whereby he was moved to Renounce it; which, uttered with concern by such a New
Convert, could not but draw great attention, and thereby (as also by his
example) (...) ^lent to work that (...) Faith, which he (...) and confirm in
hi^ (...)

An earnest desire; and hope of good effects by those motives, if more known
amongst us, made the said Person wish they were in English. This the Author
hearing, got the Sermon Translated, and brought it to him, by whose
encouragement he has now Printed it. for a second and more public Abjuring of
all Popish Superstitions, with the methods still used in France, (and now more
severely than ever) to make Proselytes by Persecution.

England (not many years ago) was in manifest danger of the like, and several
large steps had hastily been made here to that end; but the King of Kings
suddenly overturned that confidence, when at the highest, and by his mighty
hand, the Religion of this Church, and the Laws of this Kingdom, were strangely
rescued from the violence of Arbitrary Power, and are now peaceably
re-established; which amazing mercies should by this Nation with most hearty
thankfulness be for ever remembered, to the Glory of God, and Honor of the
King, his Instrument in that Wonderful Revolution.

NUMB. XXIV. 5. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O
Israel.
THese words spoke Balaam, and blessed Israel, not so much in reference to any
greatness or magnificence he saw in that people, as by reason of some
extraordinary and miraculous influence he felt within himself. This false
Prophet, drawn away by the motion of his own heart, which God suffered him to
be led by, followed the second Messengers of the King of Moab; and tho he
appeared sensible of his fault, when frightened by the Angel of the Lord, yet
all his ways, and all the subtle contrivances of his hypocrisy easily persuade
us, that in order to prosecute the pressing instances of Balak, and satisfy
his own desire, his real intention was to curse Israel. But no sooner does he
think himself at liberty again, and just ready to execute his pernicious
design, but he feels within himself an inward power that stops him, a secret
and incomprehensible motion, which in an instant turns his heart in the behalf
of Israel, and forces him to cry out in spite of Balak, nay, and in spite of
himself, How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel.

No doubt but you are beforehand with me in applying this accident to my
present circumstance. You have here before you a Minister of error and
falsehood, who comes to join with you in the profession of a truth he has but
too long withstood. One, who though engaged by his Birth, Education and
Ministry, to persecute your holy Religion, yet is now thoroughly convinced of
his past blindness, ready to turn into blessings the curses he formerly
pronounced against you. How should I curse, whom God has not cursed!

It Is not expected I should pretend any way to extenuate or lessen my errors
and mistakes. I have, I own it to my shame and confusion, I have for many years
stifled the saving impulses of Grace; and at the very time it pleased Almighty
God to enlighten me in his ways, and to open my eyes to the purity of the
Evangelical Doctrine; I did but too long defer my conversion, and was at a
stand between God and the World. God alone, from whom nothing can be hid, knows
what struggles and agonies I underwent. But at last his efficacious Grace
triumphed over the hardness of my heart. He drew me over to him by the ties of
meekness and gentleness. I am the least of Christ's Disciples, unworthy to be
called a Minister of the Gospel, since I persecuted the Church of God: but by
the grace of God, I am what I am. Clouds of error and ignorance, sentiments of
flesh and blood, prejudices of birth and education, groundless shame, which
force so many to withold the truth in unrighteousness, all your illusions are
now dissipated, you have given way to the bright and shining light of the
Gospel, which alone is able to enlighten our minds, and to that victorious
grace, that can in a moment destroy all our ill habits, and change the
affections of our hearts. Since then it has pleased God in his infinite
compassion, to open my eyes, and loose my tongue, since it has pleased him to
put these words in my mouth, why should not I cry out with Balaam, How goodly
are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel!

The following discourse being more particularly designed for your edification
than instruction, I shall pass by the different acceptations these words may
admit of. I thought it therefore most proper to gather from thence the
principal motives that prompted me to embrace the doctrine of the Reformed
Churches, by showing that therein I find the distinguishing characters of the
true Church of Christ. I discover in your Communion the Church of Christ,
because it is the authority of the word of God that has preserved in it the
purity of the Faith. This is the first character; the second is, that the
purity of the Faith draws upon it the persecutions which the world does
exercise against it.

It Is the Church of Christ, since it goes by no other rule than that of his
Gospel.

It Is the Church of Christ, since it suffers persecution for his name, and for
his truth. These shall be the two heads of the discourse.

The Christian World is particularly divided into two different Communions:
they agree in many effential points of Religion, but differ in the principle
that occasioned their separation, and gives each of them a particular
Character. The Church of Rome uses the Holy Scripture, to attribute a supreme
Authority to its Ministry, which makes it head not only to be as the oracle of
God, but the sole Interpreter of the truths therein contained, and the
infallible judge of controversies on that occasion.

The Religion that protests against the authority which the Romish Ministry has
assumed over the Scripture, looks upon the Word of God as the only rule of the
Christian Faith, and gives the Scripture so great an authority over the
Ministry, that Christianity is no longer liable to its decisions, than as they
are conformable to Divine Revelation.

The authority which this Supreme Minister has assumed over the world of God,
has by degrees altered the purity of the Faith, by adding to, or taking from
what Christ had established; whereas the authority which the word of God has
re-assum'd over the Ministry, has reestablished the purity of that Faith which
Christianity enjoyed in the golden days of the Church. Hence arises the
diversity of Communions, one of which pulls up out of the field of the Lord
what the other had sown: from this opposition proceeded the animosities of the
Church of Rome against the Protestants. But Christ has taken care to comfort
his Church in this distress it labors under, telling it withal, that he had
been hated first: Reformation is for no other reason odious, but because it
roots up those plants our Heavenly Father had not planted, and pulls down from
the heavenly edifice what had been built with wood, hay, and stubble. 1 Cor. 3.
12.


If the Ministry, using the authority assumed, had only set up some new curious
doctrine interwoven with human opinions, I own it won'd have been hard for the
purity of says to have born with it; but yet rather than break unity it would
have been necessary to have waited till the Lord had tried every man's work,
Ibid. v. 13
as St Paul has expressed it.

But no less than the Church it self was aimed at. No other foundation, says St
Paul, can any man lay but that which has been laid, viz. Jesus Christ: It Is not
only the death of Christ, his resurrection, his ascension, and sitting at the
right hand of God, that are the foundation of the Church; all these mysteries
would have been needless, had they been unknown; and they had been unknown,
that not God spoke by his Prophets, by Jesus Christ, and his Apostles. Now the
word of God, wherein are set forth all these mysteries, has been the seed of
the Faith, and Faith having subjected Reason to its authority, has been the
foundation of the Church. And this is its character set forth by Christ
himself, when he said, Mat. 7.24.
Whosoever hears my sayings, and does them; I will liken him to a wise man, who
built his house upon a rock; whereas he that hears and does them not, (...). v.
26.
shall be like a foolish man who built his house upon the sand. Whence it
clearly appears, that the true and only foundation of Christian Religion, was
the subjecting of human understanding to the word of God.

Now to establish a Church merely upon the authority of a Ministry, that sets
us for a rule of Faith, what is rather grounded upon tradition, than upon
revelation, is building a house upon the sand, because it is no more than to
hear the word of God, and not to be conformable to its anthority, to lay
another foundation than what has been laid. 'Twas then necessary to find out
another principle, to return to the original foundation of the Church, that is,
to look upon Holy Writ, as the only rule of Faith, and the only foundation of
the authority of that Ministry Christians are to be led by.

Nay, it seems evident, that Faith coming from hearing, and hearing from the
Word, there is so great an affinity between the word of God and Faith, that the
faithful's submission to the authority of the Scripture is one of those truths,
which Reason and Revelation do not more clearly prove than every Christians
natural suggestion. The being of a God is a truth resulting from a natural
instinct. It Is a natural instinct in Christianity that there is a Church; and
in that Church, generally taken, it is a natural notion that the faithful must
be ruled by the word of God. What occasioned that numberless train of false
Gods among the Pagans, but that natural notion man always carried along with
him, of some true Divinity, from whom he derived his being, life, and motion?
Whence comes it in Christianity, that all Heretics have been seen to give
their Sect the name of a Church, but because there never was any Christian that
owned Christ for the Savior of the world, but was sensible there was a Church,
wherein the faithful might attain Salvation? and why was there never any
Heretic in all these supposed Churches, but what endeavored to authorize his
opinions by the Scripture? This is such a natural notion, as cannot but
convince any reasonable mind, that Christians must have the word of God for the
rule of their faith, since by that same word they have faith conveyed to them:
And if in Morals, Hypocrisy is a homage Vice pays to Virtue, it may be said in
Religion, that that affectation in Heretics of being grounded upon the
Scripture, is an homage Error pays to the Truth, whose original source, and
infallible witness is in that Holy Word, it being to the Church of Christ, what
the mercy-seat, whence were pronounced the oracles of God, was to Israel of
old. How could we judge better of the Church of Christ, than by the model
himself has left us, Thou art Peter, Mat. 1.18.
and upon this rock will I build my Church; he does not say upon thee, Peter,
but upon the rock, that is, upon that Christ Simon had but just confessed,
because the Church could neither be founded upon the person nor upon the
Ministry of St Peter, but upon the confession that Apostle had made of Christ,
who is the fundamental Stone of the Spiritual Building; Christ does not say
here, thou shall build my Church, for man is not able to build the Church of
God, but I will build my Church, because the character that distinguishes the
Church of Christ from all such as might usurp that name, is, that Christ is the
foundation of it, and the Master Builder; in this Spiritual Edifice no other
hand must be seen but that of Christ, that is, his will, his power, his spirit,
and the authority of his word. And tho St Peter, and the other Disciples have
been associated to that great work, yet it is Christ's hand alone that has
wrought all by them. They indeed preached, but Christ converted; they wrought
Miracles, but 'twas through his name; they baptized, but Christ performed the
regeneration; in a word, 'twas Christ edified his Church. How goodly are thy
tents, O Jacob! This is certainly the character of Christ's Church, since it
receives no other truth but that he brought upon earth, no other solemnities
but those he consecrated, no other Sacraments but those he constituted, no
other expiatory Sacrifice but that of his death, nor any other merit but that
of his blood. This is doubtless the Church of Christ, since all is founded upon
his word, all is edified by his doctrine, all is referred to his glory.

It Is not so with the Church which Papal authority has set up, which would
needs force Christianity to follow it as the Church of Christ. How many rules
of faith! how many acts of piety, which have no solid foundation in Holy Writ!
That Is a building wherein Christ's hand appears much less than those of the
builders, since in it the authority of the Scripture gives way to that of the
Ministry, as if that were become the original source of Divine Revelation.

One would think our Savior, who knew all things, had a mind to prevent the
errors whereinto men were like to fall, by taking a Church of men's setting up
insensibly upon Earth in the name of Christ, for that which he had founded
himself in the fullness of time; and indeed he does prevent it by the
precautions he takes in the establishment of the Apostolical Ministry, which he
associates to the building of his Church. He chooses for Apostles, men of the
lowest rank of the people, ignorant, unlearned, self-interested, fearful, in a
word, men who were no way proportionate to the work they were designed for. Why
did he leave them in this state of infirmity, till the coming down of the Holy
Ghost, but that the trial of their weakness might make them sensible, 'twas
Jesus Christ, who acted in them at the very time they were building up his
Church, that so they might not arrogate to themselves the success of it, tho
their hands were employed in the Structure? Why was our Savior pleased to
particularize the failings and infirmities of his Apostles, but as a precaution
to posterity, which might have attributed to them the glory of having edifyed
his Church. His wisdom having discovered to them their natural insufficiency,
leaves no room in them for presumption; by showing them they had no virtue but
what came from above: it characterizes the Church of God, by Christ's hand
alone that built it.

I am not ignorant how that the Evangelical Ministry must last to the end of
the world; how Christ promised his Apostles he would be always with them; and
how this promise is to be fulfilled in the Succession of the Ministry. But
divine wisdom uses the same caution in the succession as in the establishment
thereof. What character does he give to the succession of the Ministry? no
other than the succession of his doctrine; I send you, as my Father has sent
me, Go and teach all nations, Mat. 28
baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I
am with you always, even unto the end of the World. These last words include a
promise made to the Ministry, and a condition imposed in order to partake of
the promise, teaching them, as I have commanded you, that is the condition on
which he promises to be with them. They are sent by Christ, as Christ was by
the Father. Christ sent by his Heavenly Father, makes the truth of his mission
appear by the transcendency of his miracles, which are so many proofs of his
Divinity, by the apparition of the Holy Ghost, that declares him to men for the
beloved Son of God. But he does not impose the necessity of believing his
Doctrine, otherwise than as it is conformable to the Father that sent him.
Whence proceeds this admirable conduct? But from this reason, that the
Evangelical Ministry was to be excercis'd by men; the gifts of the Holy Ghost
were to longer to accompany the Ministry, than was requisite to establish the
Faith; after that, the Church was to be directed by the Holy Ghost. Jesus
Christ was to be with the Ministry, but after an invisible manner. If the
visible succession of the Ministry had been a sufficient proof of its mission,
then some hypocrite or other, sitting in the Apostolical Chair, might have
pretended to have acted by the spirit of God, when there was no such thing. The
faithful might have been imposed upon, unless Christ had promised his Apostles
to be with them, setting them this Law withal, to teach as he had commanded
them, and unless he had charactariz'd the ministry by the succession of his
doctrine, so that every ministry that teaches not what the Apostles have
taught, or that sets for a rule of says another thing than they taught, is not
looked upon as the Apostolical Ministry. Boast he never so much of having
succeeded St. Peter, unless he have the succession of the Doctrine, he has no
right to it, he must not impose. The truth Christian Religion obliges us to
believe came to us from the Father by the Son, from the Son of God by the Holy
Ghost, from the Holy Ghost by the Apostles by their Successors. Now, to know
whether they be the true Successors of the Apostles, is but to examine whether
the truth they profess, the Religion they propose, flow from the primitive
Spring. How goodly are the tents, O Jacob! How great must our happiness be, who
live in the bosom of a Church, which holds it for an axiom of faith to be
conformable to God's Holy Word, which is so happy as to be directed by a
Ministry, that may without controversy say, the Religion we preach comes not
from our selves, we are not the Authors of it, it is the very same the Apostles
left us in the Gospel, the Apostles received from the Holy Ghost, the Holy
Ghost derived it from the bosom of the word incarnate, the word incarnate from
the bosom of the Heavenly Father.

Thus by the Authority of the word of God, is the succession and purity of
Faith preserved in the Christian World. Such is the necessity of this grand
principle, that no sooner came the Church to forget it but it fell into a most
deplorable condition. Look back into those all at once happy, and unhappy days,
when Peace succeeding that persecution which the Church had so long groaned
under, corrupted Christianity, which all the subtilty of Heretics and cruelty
of Tyrants were not able to oppress. The Church became great in wealth and
dignity, but at the same time small in virtue; the salt of the earth vanished
away, all fell into corruption. Both Pastors and Flock had much at the same
time a general disgust for heavenly things; the sacred fire of the Altar went
out by degrees, whilst no other burnt thereon, but that of Lust and Ambition:
The Children of Eli made it their main business to increase the rights and
advantages of Priesthood; the Church, of a Heavenly Kingdom became a Temporal
Reign; the Apostolical Chair became a Throne, whereon the Apostles Successors
were not ashamed to exact those Divine Honors the Apostles themselves had
rejected; and the Holy Scripture, the authority whereof had till then governed
the Church, became itself Captive to the ambition of the Ministry; it violated
its natural sense, and so forced it to be establish an authority till then
unknown.

When faith was in its purity, the Scripture lodged the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven in the Hands of the whole Apostolical College, in whose name St Peter
had answered Jesus Christ. But when the faith was once corrupted, then the
Scripture was forced to allow none but Peter to be entrusted with them, and
such as flattered themselves to be his successors.

When faith was in its purity, the Scripture delivered up the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven as a patent whereby they were empowered to the preach the
Gospel, by which the gates of Heaven were open to believers, and shut to
unbelievers. But when the same faith was once corrupted, then the Scripture was
made to signify by those keys, the power not only of preaching the Gospel, but
even of interpreting it after an infallible manner, and of filling up with
their traditions what was deficient.

When faith was in its purity, this power of binding and loosing was received
by the Apostles, as a lawful power to explain in Religion what was legal or
illegal, what good, or what ill. But after the Corruption of the faith, this
power of binding and loosing erected a tribunal, where Christ's pretended
Ministers investing themselves with the Power of remitting sins, which is an
essential attribute of God, loosed sinners by their Absolution, or bound them
by the refusal of the same. Nay, this power had different degrees of
jurisdiction according to the different ministers in whom it was lodgged; and
being considered as in its center, there was a tribunal set up, whence
proceeded Indulgences, and Excommunications, which bound Christians according
as they were subject or rebellious to this new authority.

This authority, this Supreme degree of spiritual jurisdiction, was none indeed
of those truths Christianity most depended upon, but it so much favored the
spirit of ambition and power, that laying aside the thoughts of Christ's having
condemned it in the Apostolical College, they were easily seduced by this fair
outside. What endeavors were used, in order to back with arguments from the
Scripture, the authority of the Ministry that was just set up? But methinks
this was placing the Ark before Dagon's Idol, which fell before it. This
authority in judging arbitrarily, and excommunicating all such as would not
subscribe to what the word of God had not determined; this jurisdiction, I say,
fell before the moderation of Christ, that would not condemn unbelievers,
because his business was not to judge, but to save the world; (...). 12.^8.
they have one that shall judge them, said our Savior, making his word to be
the sole judge of controversies. This arbitrary power usurped over Consciences,
could not maintain itself, when so plainly contradicted by the Scripture in the
Apostles behavior, who had always refused it, referring the faithful to the
word of God: The Idol fell before the Ark. The Scripture overthrows the
authority the Ministry had assumed; but us Ministers being more cautious in
this than the Philistines, who did not send away the Ark till after the falling
of the Idol; the effects of their authority were felt, before any could examine
into the nature of it; the Shepherds Crook became a Scourge for all such as
would not condescend to their decrees.

Thus it was that the word of God lost by degrees the privilege of being the
Rule of our Faith. 'Twas by this means the authority of the Scripture became
tributary to the ambition of the Ministry; and if ancient Philosophers were
given over to the lust of their hearts, for having made the truth captive to
injustice, so God exercised the same punishment upon the Ministers of his
Gospel; they were given over to their own hearts desires, for deviating from
the rule Christ had set them, by which they should have preserved the purity of
faith; By this desire of the heart, I don't mean the ignominious passions, that
punished the pride of those ancient Heathens: No, there is in man's heart a more
refined and exalted desire, he is still more fond of, which is that he always
had of being the Arbiter of his Religion: 'Twas to satisfy that desire, that
the Gentiles made themselves Gods. For this the Jews made themselves a pleasing
idea of the Messiah they expected; 'twas by this same desire, which the Latin
Ministry so blindly followed, that they begun to edify their Church by the
authority of Christ, as Christ had edified his own by the Ministry of the
Apostles.

Hence arose the worship of images, connived at till then, as mere ornaments to
Churches; hence was renewed the use of Apotheosis, by that pompous way of
canonizing of Saints: Their Relics were exposed upon their Altars, their
Indulgences were used to set off the solemnities designed for them. What
strange alterations did Christ's Sacraments then receive? Nay, the very
ceremonies the Apostles had used, were erected into Sacraments; and the
Sacraments Christ had instituted were altered, either in their substance, or in
their exterior part. No longer was the Supper of the Lord a Sacrament of his
body, but his very individual body: 'Twas no longer a memorial of his passion,
but an expiatory Sacrifice. 'Twas no longer the use of the substance, that was
altered, but the very substance it self. 'Twas no longer a deep veneration, and
respect, due to the sacred sign of Christ's body, but a real adoration rendered
to the Sacrament as to Christ himself. In a word, Rome Christianiz'd had the
same fate with Pagan Rome, which lost that Religion their Ancestors professed,
by having adopted that of all those nations, they had a mind to bring under
their power. Modern Rome had the misfortune to change the image of an
incorruptible God into that of a corruptible man, and a spiritual and divine
worship into a carnal and superstitious one.

At the sight of so amazing a revolution that occasioned such woeful
distractions in the Church, I cannot forbear using the words of the Prophet
Jeremiah, bewailing the lamentable condition of Jerusalem. Lam. 3.
How is the Gold become dim! How comes the doctrine of Christ, formerly so pure
and so bright in the golden age of the Church, how comes it now to be wrapped up
in the clouds of tradition? How is the finest gold changed? How is that
Christian piety, so lively, so sublime of old, become now so lukewarm and so
despicable? It formerly raised Christian hearts to Jesus Christ sitting at the
right hand of the Father, but now it makes them stoop to the worshipping of him
in the Sacrament of his body, which is but a means to convey his graces to us.
How comes it to pass that so pure a worship, whereof the sole object was God,
and Christ as Mediator, is now divided between God and the creatures? How are
the precious sons of Zion, Ibid.
comparable to fine gold, esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands
of the potter! How comes it to pass that Christians, who in the golden days of
the Church were looked upon as so many Gods come down from Heaven, are now so
much altered, how comes their Religion to be so earthly? They formerly carried
Christ in their hearts; they expressed these mysteries in every action of their
lives, and now they think Christ can hardly be found but in Images of him; so
frail, so corrupt is their piety, that they would think themselves without any
Religion, were they once without their Images and Relics, were they once
deprived of the privledge of procuring themselves Patrons among the Saints.
Whence comes so deplorable a change! Can we look upon the Church in this
condition, as that new Jerusalem, St. John saw coming down from heaven,
paepared as a Bride adored for her Husband; Revil. 21.2.
Alas! if it be the same Jerusalem, it shares in the same fate with that, whose
sad condition Jeremiah bewailed, and we may say with him, how does the city sit
solitary, that was full of people. Lam. 1
How is she become as a widow. She that was great among the Nations, and
Princess among the Provinces, how is she become tributary! Such was the fate of
Christ's Church. It was formerly full of worshippers, who worshipped in spirit
and in truth; but after it was gone to decay, there were hardly seen any
Christians, but such as were carnal, idolatrous or superstitions. Christ her
Spouse had indeed promised to be with her till the end of the world, provided
she taught that Doctrine he had deposited with her; but her Ministers were
backward in performing the conditions imposed; they followed not so much the
Scripture, as the interpretations they gave it, according to their particular
interest and designs: therefore Christ abandoned them. They preached the
imaginations of their hearts, they set them forth as rules of faith, by means
of that authority they usurped over men's Consciences. Hence came the deplorable
state of the Church, which was found insensibly burdened with more precepts and
ceremonies than the Synagogue; hence it was that the Church which had triumphed
over the world, became herself tributary; in the flock, tributary to ambition;
in the ministry, tributary to those superstitions, which ignorance or slackness
of piety had introduced into the flock.

You need not wonder at the strangeness of this proceeding; God suffered it to
be so, the better to display his incomprehensible wisdom. By permitting
disorder and corruption to invade the Church, occasioned by the pretended
infallible authority the ministry had assumed over the word of God: He would
make Christianity sensible of the indispensable necessity of submitting the
Ministry to his Holy Word, as he had ordered it. The Church is represented to
us as terrible as an Army drawn up in battle array. For what makes an Army
terrible to the enemy, but good order and discipline? What made the primitive
Church so powerful and glorious? Terrible it was to the world, because the
truth and efficacy of its doctrine submitted the flesh to the spirit; terrible
to Tyrants, because it placed the pleasures of this present life far belew the
glorious advantages of a future state; it became terrible to error, because it
submitted reason to faith, tradition to revelation, the authority the Ministry
has over the people, to the authority the word of God ought to have over the
Ministry. God, says St Paul, has set some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Pastors and Teachers, for the edifying of the Church, that the faithful might
not be like Children tossed up and down with every wind of doctrine. Acts 20.
The Holy Ghost, says the same Apostle, has set some overseers to feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. We own this
ordination to be by God's appointment, we respect this Ministry upon that
account; but the Ministry is of the nature of relative beings, it is not set up
for it self, the Ministry has a relation to God who established it; and for
that reason, all that it teaches in Religion must be referred to the glory of
God. Now, that relation does not appear, and is not made good, when that faith
the Ministry would set up, has too great a relation to its own particular
interest; Acts 20.
the Holy Ghost has appointed Overseers and Pastors to govern the Church of
God; it is true their flock must listen to them, in order to be instructed, but
then they themselves must listen to the Holy Ghost, John. 16.13, 14.
who speaks by the word of God. When the spirit of truth is come, he will guide
you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, that shall he speak. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine,
and shall show it unto you. Here is, as it were, the finger of God pointing out
the subordination of the Ministry to the Holy Ghost, who guides it; the Holy
Ghost does not speak of himself, he glorifies the Savior that sent him, by
receiving from him what he teaches the Apostles. And must not this order last
for ever? Is it possible there should have been a time, when the Ministry had
power to decide by its own authority, when it might be dispensed from
glorifying the Holy Ghost, by taking out of those Sacred Writings he himself
dictated, those rules of faith it would impose upon the flock.

If this subordination had lasted, if the Ministry had been in every particular
ruled by the word of God, would the worship of Images have been set up, so
expressly contradicted therein; would not the hand of Ezekias, that broke down
the Brazen Serpent, whereby the people were led to Idolatry, have taken away
under the Gospel a worship, that proves so often a rock of offense to
Christians? Would not the Angel that took up the body of Moses, lest divine
honors should be paid him, have hid the relics of Saints in their Graves,
rather than have permitted them to be carried in pomp about their Churches, and
upon their Altars, there to receive such honors and adorations as are only due
to God? If the Gospel had been consulted, would Christians, that pretend to
works of supererogation, be otherwise thought of than unprofitable Servants?
Would the Supper of the Lord have been taken for the real and substantial body
of Christ, rather than for the virtue and efficacy thereof, if regard had been
had to the style of the Gospel, that always gives to the sign the name of the
thing signified, and oftentimes attributes to the effect the name of the cause
that produces it. If Christ has edified his Church by himself, or his Apostles,
how comes it that the Gospel makes no particular mention of Transubstantiation,
of the Sacrifice, and worshipping of the Sacrament? The first of these is a
continual Miracle, the Sacrifice of the Altar is one of the essential parts of
piety, the worshipping of the Sacrament is such, as must necessarily, if of
divine institution, make men that neglect it, guilty of the highest
Profanation; but if forbid, of an abominable Idolatry. How comes the Gospel to
be so silent in this matter? Why did the Holy Ghost, who inspired the Apostles
with all the fundamental truths, conceal such important ones from them? What!
is God so jealous under the Mosaical dispensation, of the methods the people of
Israel were to use in his worship, as to prescribe the very least ceremonies,
nay the smallest vessels they should use in their Sacrifices; and can it be
thought under the dispensation of the Gospel, that Christ, who came to teach
men how to worship in purity and in truth, and establish a Religion far more
excellent than that of the Law, should have left it to tradition alone, to set
rules for the most essential part of Christian worship? The Church then is not
of Christ's, not of his Apostles setting up, those that succeeded after the
establishment of the Faith, are they that laid the foundation or Christian
Religion. But how does this appear probable? Except the Lord build the house,
Psalm. 128.
they labor in vain that build it. Let them insist never so much upon the
antiquity, rank, and profound learning of their Doctors that taught these
particular opinions; in Christ's Religion, there must be seen at least Christ's
hand in those of the Gospel Ministers; that is, the will of Christ, and the
doctrine of the Gospel must be the foundation of faith and piety. 1 Pet. 1.
All flesh is as grass, says St Peter, and all the glory of man as the flower
of grass. The grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away, but the
word of the Lord endures for ever. And this is the word which is preached unto
you by the Gospel. It Is that holy word which has always been the foundation of
the Christian faith; it is the only rule of faith in the Church of Christ. When
Religion was upon its decline, tradition took place of the Gospel, it became
the foundation of faith, by means of the authority the Ministry had assumed
over the word of God; but when the purity of Christianity was reestablished,
the word of God was reinstated in all its prerogatives, which the Lord had
given it over the Ministry; and it may be said of the Reformation, what the
Prophet said of the establishment of the Church; The same stone which the
builders refused is become the head stone in the corner. Psalm. 118.
This is the Lords doings and it is mavelous in our eyes. This is the day
which the Lord has made: we will rejoice and be glad in it. The authority of
the word of God, is undoubtedly that corner stone of the spiritual building,
whereby you are reunited with the primitive Christians, since you believe
nothing but what they believed. It Is God Almighty himself that has purified
his Church, by restoring it to that order he had at first established. The Son
of God being sent into the world to enlighten all men, and the Holy Ghost which
Christ sent to his Apostles, have secretly reformed in the Christian Faith, all
that was not established by the Gospel. God has restored the purity of the
Gospel to its luster, and that ought to be the subject of your joy, since
persecution that attends it, serves to set off the glorious character of the
Church of Christ, and that is the second head of this discourse.

Balak thinks to compass his designs upon Israel, and rid himself more easily
of them, if he can but get Balaam to curse them; he makes him look on all
sides; but the more he strives to curse them, the more he finds himself
constrained to bless them. Thus the Church of Rome tries all ways to render the
Protestant Religion odious; they expose it in its Reformation, Reformers,
Temper, and in its forsaking, as they pretend, the ancient Ministry. But as
Balaam, withheld by the spirit of God, was proof against all the crafty
contrivances of Balak, so a Christian, who is enlightened by the Gospel, will
always look upon the Reformed Church, as Balaam did upon Israel; it is a people
that shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the Nations. Numb. 23.
The Lord their God is with them, and the shout of a King is among them. In a
word, he will cry out, notwithstanding all worldly designs and Polices, How
goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel! This is to be
understood of a Christian enlightened by the Spirit of God, thoroughly convinced
of the maxims of the Gospel, and that thinks seriously on his Salvation; for
among Christians, who only bear the name of such, and whose Religion is their
Interest, there are many, who know the truth to be in that Church Christ has
revived; but some forsake it, because it is forsaken in their native Country;
others persecute it, because it is persecuted by the world. But what matters it,
if Religion be obscure to worldly-minded-men, who shut up their eyes to the
truth, when they may be thereby exposed to misery and contempt? what matters
it, if it be opposed by such Christians as find it their particular interest
and advantage to be animated with a mistaken zeal? 'twould be very unjust to
judge of a Church by the opinion the world conceives of it; for whether we
consider the Church as exposed to the contempt and reproaches the world strives
to over-cloud it with, or raised to luster and splendor, in spite of the world
itself, those very clouds are as bright and glorious, as that glittering light
and purity it shines with in the eyes of true Christians; and herein do we see
the oracle of the Prophet David accomplished; there is a day that discovers to
us another day, and a night that discovers to us another night. The beauty of
the primitive Church, is a day, Psalm. 19.3.
that discovers to us the excellency of the revived Church; the motives of
hatred and persecutions, Christ and the primitive Church have undergone, form
as it were a night, that discovers to us the principle of disgraces and
oppositions, that overpower the Church wherein Christ has renewed the purity
of Faith, which was in primitive Christians. Who will not then admire the
beauty of that revived Church, so conspicuous for its uniformity with the
primitive Church? And who will forsake that Church, because it is reviled by
worldlings? because it is hated and persecuted in some parts of the world, as
Christ and the primitive Christians were.

This opposition the Church of Christ meets with in the world, is one of the
fairest strokes to set off its beauty; it is a Seal the Heavenly Father has
sealed it with, by a happy conformity with Christ. Behold this Child, said
Simeon, is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign
which shall be spoken against. Would not one think, (...).
he made a description of the reformed Church, that having brought again
Christianity to purity of Faith, revives piety in some, and stirs up envy and
animosity in others, who make it the scope of their contradictions. Let us
consider first the principle of oppositions the Church of Christ meets with in
the world, and then we will examine the different objections raised against it,
whereby it will appear, that all the methods the world takes to sully and
obscure its glory, do but advance it to a higher degree.

How comes it that reformation has always been attended with such hatred and
contempt, that nothing has been left unpracticed in order to suppress it in
Christianity? To find out the cause of this, we must search into the principle
of that hatred and envy the Synagogue and the Gentiles bore to Christ and his
Church; and this is that night which discovers to us another night; what shall
we do with this man, said the Synagogue, (...)
speaking of the Savior of the world. This man does many miracles, if we let
him thus alone, all men will believe on him.

From this jealousy which the Ministers of the Law conceived against him, arose
that envy and implacable hatred they bore him. He was no longer looked upon but
as a Seducer, who came with his new Doctrine to disturb Peace and Religion. His
miracles were attributed to the power of the Devil, and after that all
endeavors used to cry him down in the minds of people, proved fruitless, his
life was openly conspired against, choosing rather to sacrifice him, and put him
to death, than that the whole Nation (as they feared) should perish. What made
Christianity so odious to the Gentiles? nothing else but the pulling down of
Images, and abolishing of superstitions, the world had been buried in for so
considerable a time. The application is easy and plain: could that Religion
which protested against the authority usurped by the Ministry, have been
reformed, by taking the Scripture for the only rule of its Faith and Worship,
without enforcing the Christian world to the necessity of a reformation in
those Doctrines of the Church, and those practical parts of Piety, which Christ
and his Apostles had not established. It made the necessity of a Reformation so
apparent and manifest to the eyes of posterity, that those Ministers have made
it their business to stifle the thoughts of it, both in themselves and in their
Flock. Hence it is, that they being highly offended, have omitted nothing in
order to render this Church odious to the people, who were much more inclined
to receive this impression, because Reformation seemed to take away their Gods
from them, by suppressing some acts of devotion, that made up the fundamental
parts of their Piety. Hence part of Christendom has been seen to conspire the
ruin of the Church Christ had re-established, choosing rather to sacrifice it to
an indiscreet zeal, than that humane traditions, the use whereof so much
flattered the corruption and pride of the heart, should receive the least
prejudice. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob! How glorious it is for a Church
which Christ has revived, to be hated for the same reasons, that made him
odious to such as would not receive his Faith! And how shameful it is for a
Christian Society to fall into the same blindness, and injustice of the
Synagogue, by laboring to suppress a Church, for believing and professing what
the primitive Christians believed!

This is the principle of those oppositions, which the revived Church of Christ
meets with in the World; their nature and progress will appear in those, which
Christ himself underwent here on earth; the Son of man shall be mocked,
scourged, and put to Death. 'Twas endeavored at first to run down and ridicule
Reformation, upon the account of newness imputed to its doctrine and Ministry;
and when that would not do, to discredit it in the minds of Christians, 'twas
attacked with open force: Why did we murmur at it? 'Twas God permitted it so to
be, to set off more gloriously the antiquity of the Church he has
reestablished, by that very novelty imputed to it; it is God permits it to be
assaulted with open force, the better to manifest the spirit and constancy of
primitive Christians. The Church Christ has restored, is not different from
that he at first set up; it is the same mystical body, formed at one time, and
reformed in another. But yet it is the same Church, and the Divine Wisdom, that
would make this uniformity to appear, gives Reformation the same fate, which
his primitive Church had; it is loaded with reproaches, and oppressed by a
mistaken Zeal of Religion, as the primitive Church was. But all the oppositions
it meets with from the World, serve so much the more to increase its glory.

The Doctrine of Christ in the primitive Church was accused of novelty; the
Ministers of the Law objected the antiquity of the Law of Moses, as the Latin
Ministry objected to the Protestant Church, the antiquity of the Church of
Rome. The doctrine of Christ was indeed new, if compared with the traditions
the Law was clogged with; but compared with the Law itself, the Gospel was more
ancient than. Tradition, whereof the antiquity was objected. Such is the
newness wherewith they strive to disgrace the Reformation; it is new indeed, if
compared with human traditions, which that Ministry makes part of the doctrine
and worship of Christian Religion; but, if compared with divine revelation,
Reformation is as ancient as the Gospel itself, which is the only rule of that
faith and worship it professes: and if the Apostle St Paul faith, that Jesus
Christ was yesterday, to day, and for ever; we may reasonably say that that
Religion which leads Christians by the authority of the Scripture, is the same
which sanctified those that preceded the coming of the Messiah, those that
succeeded the establishment of Evangelical faith, and will sanctify those that
shall be saved till the end of all things. You are not then, Christians,
separated from the mystical body of Christ, strangers to the Covenant, as they
would impose upon you, since you profess a Religion founded only upon Holy,
Writ, you are Citizens of the Holy City, Servants of the house of God, built
upon the foundation of Prophets and Apostles, upon the Cornerstone, which is
Jesus Christ. That Is the new doctrine you profess.

But where was this Ministry before the Reformation? It was in the midst of
you, and you did not know it. The Evangelical Ministry was in the Latin one,
which still preserved the fundamental points of Religion, tho it were already
very much corrupted with traditional innovations. This Ministry imposed upon
Christianity, because that, notwithstanding, it preached what Christ had taught
in his Gospel, yet it did not seem to act by the spirit of God, in that they
thought their authority sufficient to alter Religion as they pleased; in this
last respect they were fallen away in the sight of God, tho they still remained
in their Apostolical functions in the sight of men, giving them sufficient food
for their Salvation, so long as their hearts were at liberty to sift the ore
from the dress. An instance of this we have in the old law; Eli a Priest of
Israel was cast off in the sight of God; the Priesthood was transferred upon
Samuel's head; and yet Eli and his Children exercised the functions of it, till
such time as God had prescribed Samuel to officiate in, who lived in the
Temple, tho neither Eli nor the people knew any thing of what God designed him
for. Thus he left the Scribes and Pharisees in Moses's Chair. Thus he left the
Arian Bishops in the Chair of Orthodox Christians; and if he has preserved the
true Israelites under the Ministry of the Law, faithful Christians under the
Arian Ministry, may not he have preserved the purity of Primitive Christians
under the corruption of the Roman Ministry? And if God permitted at last the
division of this Ministry, under which he had till then preserved his Church,
can any one doubt of the same individual Church being still in one of those two
Ministries, that has revived the purity of the Faith, which was in the
primitive Christians, without being drawn away by that Flood of human
traditions, wherein Ambition, Interest, and Superstition had a greater share
than Religion? Can any one doubt of Christ's Church's being in that Ministry,
whereof the particular character is the grounding of Christian Faith and
Worship, upon what Christ and his Apostles edified?

If God suffered Christianity for many ages to be buried in ignorance and
superstition, 'twas a just punishment which he was willing to inflict upon an
unfaithful Spouse, whom he had in a manner left to herself, for despising his
Laws. He had established his Church in the early days of Christianity, after
having left Mankind a long time involved in the clouds of Idolatry and Jewish
traditions; he reestablished it once more, by opening the eyes of the
Christian World, to see the a buses and vanities of human traditions, and made
it unexpectedly shine forth like the Morning Sun, rising all of a sudden from
the bosom of a dismal night, that so many ages of obscurity had been forming;
how great soever the corruption of Christianity had been, yet the Gates of Hell
did not prevail against it. But was it not enough for Almighty God to have
preserved a single Spark of that sacred Fire, that was almost extinguished upon
the Altar of the Church? Was it not enough for him to have kept some hidden
Fountain of that Water that springs forth into Life Eternal? But that great God
who can give life and take it away as he pleases, who leads to the chambers of
death, and is able to bring back, seemed to have suffered the Gates of Hell to
prevail a while against his Church, only to make that same Church more
gloriously to triumph over them. He suffered it so to be, that the strength of
his arm might be as conspicuous in the re-establishing of his Church, as in the
setting of it up. If the progress of Reformation be but considered, which all
of a sudden opened the eyes of the world to the vanities of human traditions;
who can doubt, but that it was the hand of God alone, that wrought it? That the
number of Gospel Ministers has been seen to multiply, whilst the Ministry was
laden with Riches, Honors, and Dignities, is not at all to be wondered at;
the spirit of the world alone is sufficient for that; but that the number of
Gospel Ministers has been seen to multiply, when the Ministry was destitute of
temporal advantages; nay, when to desire the Ministry, was to desire an
occasion of Martyrdom, this is not certainly the Spirit of the World, it is the
Spirit of God alone, who induces men to embrace such a party. That the
Christian people have been seen wholly addicted to the practice of human
Traditions and Superstitions, is the consequence of the corruption of so many
successive ages of ignorance; But that all of a sudden part of Christendom has
been seen to awake from a deep lethargy, to embrace a worship wholly spiritual,
destitute of all worldly pomp, closely pursued by envy and persecution; in a
word, to make up so numerous a Communion, tho it were by some accounted folly,
and to others proved a shunbling block, sure it must be the virtue of his
spirit, and the efficacy of his word, that ^ound the advancement of the new
revived Church, as it did that of the primitive one.

Who can sufficiently admire the conduct of divine wisdom, which has preserved
two Ministries, so directly opposite, in the bosom of the same Church, as it
formerly preserved Eli and Samuel in the same Temple: or rather, who can choose
but admire the wisdom of God, in preserving in the bosom of one and the same
Church these two Ministrys, as it formerly preserved Jacob and Esau, in the
bosom of one common Mother? This is like the two Nations that shared the World
between them. This is something very nearly resembling the division made
between these two Brothers, wherein the transferring the Birthright upon
Jacob, stirs up in Esau an implacable hatred against him. Herein appears the
wisdom of God, who having observed how the primitive Church was fallen into
corruption in the midst of Peace, exposes the revived Church to continual
persecutions, to keep up its purity, and distinguish the spirit that animates
it, from the spirit of the Ministry that uses all endeavors to oppress it.

In the Communion of Rome, I observe a Ministry that banishes Christians from
the Church of Christ, merely for being conformable to his word; a Ministry that
uses a temporal power to suppress Christians, whose only crime consists in
preferring the Scripture before Tradition. Is this the spirit of Christ, who
made his word the sole judge of controversies? Is this the spirit of St Paul,
who pronounces cursing against the Angels, and against himself, if he preach
any thing but the Gospel? Is this the spirit of St Peter, who meekly submits to
what remonstrances and oppositions St Paul used against him? Or is it not
rather generally indiscreet zeal of the Apostles, when they would have had fire
to come down from Heaven, not knowing what Spirit they were of?

Here I see Pastors dispersed, fallen Victims to the authority of the opposite
Ministry, who animated with the Spirit of St Paul, say after this great
Apostle: You think your selves wise in Christ, and we are accounted as fools
for the glory of Christ; you are strong, and we are weak: You are in pomp and
magnificence, and we, for preaching the Gospel, are forced to wander up and
down, exposed to hunger, thirst, and nakedness: You curse us, and we return
blessings: you excommunicate us, and we pray for you. Is it the spirit of the
world that makes this Pastor take up with so vile and despicable a condition?
No, that inspires nothing but vanity; it is not the spirit of the flesh, that
inspires nothing but softness; it is not the spirit of the Devil, it breathes
nothing but vengeance. Now, Christians, to which of these two Ministrys, think
ye, shall posterity attribute the spirit of God to?

Jesus Christ, after having put the Pastors to this trial, does not seem to
have wholly abandoned the flock to persecution, to show that his arm is not
shortened, and that, notwithstanding the corruption of the present age, the
strength and purity of faith had still been preserved in that very Communion,
Rome made such slight account of. 'Twas by faith Abraham left his Country,
obeying the voice of God, tho he knew not whether he was to go. By that same
faith it is this people have left their Country, to follow the voice of Christ,
tho they knew not how divine providence should dispose of 'em: 'Twas by faith
Abraham sacrificed his Son: It Is by faith that fathers expose their children to
death, by the hazards they run in a long Voyage, rather than let their children
imbibe so pernicious a doctrine: By faith Moses preferred the reproaches of
Christ before the pleasures of a great Kings Court: By faith, so many persons,
as remarkable for their birth as their piety, have been willing to forgo their
rank, estates, and hopes of advancement, to bear our Saviors Cross, in all the
hardships of a voluntary banishment. By and upon the account of Faith, so many
Christian Souls have suffered imprisonment, the Galleys, and submitted to the
rigor of a shameful death; they might have redeemed their lives and liberty,
but they would not, fully persuaded they shall sind a better in the
Resurrection, preferring the Cross of Christ before the enjoyment of those
temporal advantages they must have bought with the price of their Religion; How
goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel. How glorious is
it for Reformation to be at odds with the World, and yet so far above its
reach, by Jesus Christ, that encourages and fortifies it! But how shameful for
those of the Church of Rome, who think they may do any thing under the specious
pretense of extirpating Heresy, to have cast off the weapons of the Spirit,
that St Paul recommends, and to make use of an unheard of violence, which was
but an occasion for those very Christians Rome looked upon as Heretics, to
spread the good odor of Christ and his Doctrine; among those pretended
Heretics, some knew how to dye for the Faith, tho they knew not how to dispute
concerning the Faith, others knew how to sacrifice all to their Faith, because
they knew by the Gospel, they had no other Country but Heaven, no prize but
their Soul, nor any other treasure but their Religion. Does not that Invisible
and Almighty hand, that bears up these sufferers, by displaying in them the
spirit and virtue of the primitive Christians, make those of the Church of Rome
sensible, they were in open war with God, when they thought they were only
acting against rebellious children? Let them hide themselves under the bushel,
and expose upon the Candlestick a Christian Society, they in vain endeavor to
suppress. Do not they, who so much boasted of having triumphed over the
Reformation, perceive they bury their own Church under this pretended triumph?
How can they think a Christian and impartial posterity will look upon their
Religion as Christ's, so long as they fill the Christian world with so many
thousand barbarities they have used against them, contrary to the spirit of the
Gospel? Can they boast of having augmented the flock of Christ, with those whom
fear, interest, or hypocrisy has forced into their Communion, and not their
own choice? How shall they be able to justify before God and men the profane,
destribution of the Sacrament to so many timorous and unworthy Christians, whom
they know to have complied only with the time, and not with the truth?

But lastly, tho that Religion God so visibly protects, should still be for a
long time unknown to the Christian world, yet it will be never the less true:
What matters it, if that mysterious fiery pillar that guides Gods people in the
deserts of this life be darkness to the Egyptians, provided it give light to
the Israelites; tho the whose world should conspire the ruin of the Church,
wherein Christ has revived the purity of the faith, what can Israel fear, since
they are under the protection of the Almighty, that makes the blindness of men's
hearts instrumental to the designs of his providence; and stops the current of
men's passions when he pleases? Balak has no power over Balaam's heart, because
God had suspended his desires; Balaam, tho never so ill affected, could never
curse Israel, because God had not cursed him: and why should you, Christians,
fear the World? If you are the blessed of God, not all mankind together can
bring a curse upon you: Wherefore Sanctify your selves in that state, his
providence has placed you in: omit nothing, in order to be a holy people,
consecrated to the Lord; that same God, who made Balaam bless Israel, may one
day force blessings from those very persons, that now curse you; the Arm of the
Lord is not shortened. He is able to make your faith to Triumph; and have you
not many instances of this already, who daily see Proselytes come among you,
converted to the Faith, by having opposed the Faith; the very enemies of your
Religon become the Professors and Assertors of it; how unspeakable a joy it is!
What comfort for a Church, to derive so glorious a fertility from that state
flesh and blood looked upon as in its last agony, There is but one simple thing,
Christians, can stop the blessings God so abundantly showers upon your Church,
which is the being unfaithful to your vocation. It Is not you properly, who made
God your choice, by forsaking all for the faith; it is God himself has made
choice of you in the Christian World, to maintain the glory of his name, and
display the Spirit of Christianity in your Communion; but alas! how deplorable
would it be, if after having begun with the Spirit, you should now think of
ending with the flesh! How sad a thing would it be, if your heart, listening to
the suggestions of nature, should be led away toward that Earthly Country, you
have once sacrificed to your faith! St Paul says, those ancient Patriarchs I
mentioned to you, dwelt very contendedly under Tents, notwithstanding the
hardships attending that condition; opportunities of returning into their
Country were not wanting; but their minds did not run that way, because they
desired a far better, that is a heavenly one; therefore God was not ashamed to
be called their God. You have indeed opportunities, and are at liberty to
return into your Country; but is there any thing can possibly tempt you; your
dear Zion lies in the dust; the ways of Zion do mourn, her her Priests sigh,
her Virgins are affliected, and she is in bittenrness; would your hearts now be
less moved at this deplorable sight, which your eyes formerly could not bear?
Could you be so bold as to tempt the Lord, after you have been convine'd of
your weakness by your flight? could you promise your selves, he would support
you in those danges your slackness of piety would expose you to? so many
thousand Christians, who long to be in the same happy circumstances with you,
are now engaged with the enemies of your Salvation and theirs. Why would you
damp their courage by your inconstancy; Israel is fighting with Amaleck; let us
endeavor to lift up pure and undefiled hands to Heaven, to bring down upon him
blessings from above. A Christian Life is nothing but a Pilgrimage; there is no
place upon earth, proves a banishment to him; Heaven is the only Country we
ought to long after; purity of Faith and the liberty of professing it, is the
most solid, and only happiness a Christian can meet with in this World; could
you be forgerful of that excessive love, where with Christ has so highly
favored you? And who of us, ought not out of a deep sense for so singular a
favor, cry out with the Apostle, who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or famine, or persecution, or
nakedness? No sure, in all these calamities the elect always remain victorious
through the assistance of him that loves them. If the Lord be my light, if the
Lord be my strength, I may boldly say, I am sure neither life, nor death, nor
things present, nor things to come shall ever separate me from the love, which
is in Christ Jesus. One day within the Courts of his Church is better than a
thousand in the Tents of the ungodly. What can shake my faith in a Church.
where of Christ is the foundation, the master builder, and the head? Has the
World any thing that can strike me with terror, whilst I am in a Church,
wherein Christ turns all to the glory of his Children, and confusion of his
enemies? Christ is gain to me, whether I live or dye. But I shall not dye; I am
certain I shall live to sing the infinite mercies of that Almighty God, who
having made known to me the beauty of Israe upon earth, shall through his mercy
introduce me into the Heavenly Jerusalem; to which place God of his great mercy
bring us all for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with

(...)
