A THEOLOGICAL SYSTEME Upon that PRESVPPOSITION, That MEN were before ADAM.

The first PART:

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1655.

THE PROEME.
IT is a natural suspicion that the beginning of the world is not to be
received according to that common beginning which is pitched in Adam, inherent
in all men, who have but an ordinary knowledge in things: For that beginning
seems enquirable, at a ^ar greater distance, and from ages past very long
before; both by the most ancient accounts of the Chaldaeans, as also by the
most ancient Records of the Egyptians, Aethiopians and Scythians, and by parts
of the frame of the world newly discovered, as also from those unknown
Countries, to which the Hollande^s have sailed of late, the men of which, as is
probable, did not descend from Adam.

I had this suspicion also being a Child, when I heard or read the History of
Genesis: Where Cain goes forth: where he ki^ls his brother when they were in
the fields; doing it warily, like a thief, least it should be discovered by
any: Where he flies, where he fears punishment for the death of his Brother:
Lastly, where he marries a a wife far from his Ancestors, and builds a City.
Yet, although I had this doubt in my mind, yet durst I not speak any thing of
it, which did not relish of that received opinion, concerning Adam created
first of all men; till I met with the 12, 13, 14 verses of the 5 chapter of the
Epist of St. Paul to the Romans which I have in hand, and consider of now twenty
years, or thereabouts. And as he who goes upon Ice, goes warily where he cracks
it, being not well frozen, or tender; but where he finds it frozen, and well
hardened, wa^ks boldly: So I dreaded first, least this doubtful dispute might
either cu^ my soles, or throw me headlong into some deep Heresy, if I should
insist upon it. But so soon as I knew by these verses of the Apostle, that sin
was in the world before it was imputed; and when I knew, and that certainly,
that sin began from Adam to be imputed, I took heart, and found all this
dispute so solid, that I pas^'d through it with less fear. I found men, who
beyond that imputation of sin, which had its original from Adam, had indeed
sinned; but their sin was not imputed to them, according to the similitude of
Adam, to whom first of all sin was imputed, and so imputed, that it was ^eputed
a crime to him, and to all men, and turned to death.

But as the nature is of things that are firm in themselves, the firmness of
this Tenent appeared to me to be such, that the more questions of Divinity I
did turn it to, and those the greater and most difficult, so much the purer,
greater, and solid Christian Religion shined forth to me. -- Such as to Heaven,
So great as there she seems.
A trial of which I put forth in that Essay, which for that purpose I did
compose, for the clearing of those verses of the Apostle; Nor considering the
bulk of the work could I then make an end; Now I intend still by way of Essay
to open the body of Divinity it self, by which the Doctrine of the Gospel, upon
presupposition of men before Adam, may be laid open more at large, and that it
may appear that this Tenet is no ways disadvantagious to our faith, which is in
Christ; nay that it unrevelled it from a great many niceties, with which it is
entangled, and does almost in every place make it clearer to our eyes and
minds; Which I promise, without boasting: Whether I do it, and bring it to
pass, let the courteous Reader judge.

I do not doubt but a great many persons who shall see the title and the
intention of this book, not reading the work it self, with tongue and hand will
straight fall upon this work as a new thing, and straight draw their pens, to
fall upon that which they have not understood. To all whom I now answer; That
whatsoever they write, I shall not answer them: But if there be any more calm
and wise, as I hope there will be a great many such; who shall refrain
themselves; And if there be any thing in my writings which after diligent
perusal, shall offend them, and shall admonish me in a civil and Christian way,
I shall yield my self wholly to them, and affording them all respect, shall
endeavor to satisfy them. But this especially, and most exactly I promise; If
any man in a known case shall show me my error; that is to say, that I
contradict the History of Genesis in the least, or any other place of the holy
and Orthodox scripture, which are contained in both the Testaments, or step
aside from them a nails breadth, or from any head of Christian faith: First, I
shall thank him for his teaching of me; then I shall not be ashamed to set down
my name; nay I shall think it my greatest credit to fill it with capital
letter, in confessing my fault, which I detest, if any such I have committed;
For although I am my own greatest friend, yet truth's more dear to me, which I
only profess. My name I do not now mention, for modesties sake; not as
conscious of any evil action. For I fear lest I should abuse so noble a subject
by the slenderness of my Treatise; and lest all which I shall study or frame
upon such high matter should be far inferior. But let them account, which know
me, what and how great have been my tossings up and down these thirty years,
and what chances have drawn me in that time forward and backward. So that more
by meditation, than reading, and serious study, as was needful, I have at last
finished this ill composed and undigested work: Therefore I entreat my Reader he
will be pleased to take this beginning howsoever in good part.

The Contents of the Chapters in the first Book.
CHAP. I. THe verses of the Apostle. Original sin in them is chiefly handled.
The Law there meant, is the Law of Adam, not the Law of Moses. Of sin natural
and legal, imputed and not imputed; As also of Death natural and legal. Humane
Laws were appointed for the governing of right reason. They are bounded by men.
The Laws of God are above men. Page 1 II. The natural sins of men, are the very
defaults of humane nature: the causes of which are not to be ascribed to the
sins of Adam. Legal sin imputed to men by the sin of Adam, is additional.
Conceived spiritually, and not propagated naturally. 7 III. The natural death
of me^arises from the nature of man, which is mortal; nor is caused by the
condemnation of death decreed against Adam. Which is the legal death. And is
meant spiritually, not naturally. 12 IV. Men were in the beginning created
according to the Image of God, and very good. Of the Image of God in the first
creation. Of the Image of God in the second creation. Men were created upright
in the beginning, but of vicious matter, which could easily return to its own
disposition. 18 V. Of the matter of men subject to corruption. Of the upright
creation of men. Of the Return of man to the disposition of his own nature. And
of his matter given to corruption. 22 VI. God restored men* created upright,
and turned backward to the wickedness of their own nature, ^^to a better estate
by a second creation, and lifts them up from men to be Gods. Of that which is
produced, and of that which is made. Of mutable and immutable. Of mortal and
immortal. Of t^^e Spirit which is in God; and of the Spirit of the world. 28
VII. Of one God, and of one Spirit which is of God. Of diverse Gods and Spirits.
31 VIII. Men being misled by evil spirits fell from their right estate wherein
they were cre^^ed; into the wickedness of their own nature. Being restored by
the Spirit of Regeneration, who only proceeds from God* they know God, whom
flesh and blood knows not. They obtain h^liness, which they could not have in
their first creation; and recompense their natural death with a supernatural
immortality. 37 IX. The Regeneration o^ men is the grace and gift of God. It is
not granted to all men to be regenerated, but only to the Elect. Election is in
things natural. Divine Election is in Gods Elect. Who are elected. And who are
called Re^robates. 43 X. Divine election is considered two manner of wa^es, in
God, and in mystery. One is from eternity; The other only distributed according
to mystical occasions. The one admits of all men indifferently; The other first
chose the Jews, and in them all the Nations of the world.
The Contents of the Chapters in the second Book.
CHAP. I. OF the election of the Jews. The election of the Jews began from
Adam, the first father of the Jews. The fews the firstborn, because first
elected. They were not elected of their own deserving, but of the mere bounty
of God, who willed and chused them. Made of the same common earth of which
other men were created. God joined in marriage to the church of the Israelites.
Father of the Jews. The Jews esteem God, because the sons of God. God^^e Mother
of the Jews. Friend of the Jews. The Jews the friends of God, 55 II. God King
of the Jews. Jews the people of God. God the Lord of the Jews. Jews the
servants of God. The Jews called holy. Called just. The Jews elected for an
eternal people. Set apart from all the people of the earth, for the lot and
inheritance of the Lord. 65 III. To the elected Jews, an elected Land was
given. A holy Land, because the Land of the holy. And the land of Promise,
because it was promised with an Oath to the Fathers of the Jews. A description
of the Holy Land. That was a choice land, not of its own nature, but according
to the pleasure of God, who blessed and chus'd it. The land of the Jews. And
for the Jews only to dwell in. 73 IV. Jerusalem the holy City of the holy Land,
the Temple placed in Jerusalem, on the forked hill of Sion. Eternal hills. The
City of David. The City of the great King. Of the Kings of the Jews. 79 V. The
Gentiles elected in the Jews by a mystical election. Esteemed the sons of God,
because elected in the Jews. And grafted in the Jews. 83 VI. Gentiles different
from the Jews in Kindred and Original, in as much as they are ingrafted in them.
Gentiles called Atheists, because without a God: called simply men, and sons of
men, and foolish, wicked, etc. 88 VII. That the Gentiles are called Sinners. 94
VIII. Gentiles called children, little ones, and pure. 98 IX. The Gentiles
called the sons of wrath. The enemies of God. Beasts, and so esteemed by the
Jews, yea, unclean beasts. The opposite comparison betwixt the Jews and the
Gentiles. 107 X. The Jews formed by God in Adam. The Gentiles created by God.
And created by the word of God, as other creatures; as also on the same day
when other creatures were created. The Jews peculiarly formed by the hands of
God. God called the fashioner of the Jews. Adam first Father of the Jews. The
Jews are called the Sons of Adam. 112 XI. The Jews are called by Moses the sons
of Adam. The 32 Chap. of Deuteronomy. is explained. And Isaiah and Hoseas of Adam the
first Father of the Jews. The Gentiles called strangers, the Jews a kind of men
distinct in species from the Gentiles. The Gentiles earth-born. The Psalm 49 is
explained. Abraham had servants born in his house, and also bought, who were
not of his stook; that is, of Adam. Who are the sons of men. Who is the son of
man. The difference 'twixt the brethren of the Jews, and other strangers. 118
The Contents of the third Book.
CHAP. I. THe original of the Gentiles is proved to be different from the
original of the Jews, out of Genesis The Gentiles were created in that creation
which is mentioned, Chap. 1. All creatures, and all men male and female, were
created on the sixth day of the creation, as plants, trees, and flying fowls,
upon their own days, through all the woold. Why upon that day one man, and he
alone, from whom all should arise, was not created. 129 II. Adam was created
apart from other men in that creation which is mentioned, Genesis 2. Adam was the
first and father of the Jews not of all men. The framing of Adam was altogether
different from the creation of the first men. Eve could not be created the same
day as Adam was made. 135 III. Of the mavelous framing of Adam. Of the
mavelous conceptions of Isaac and Christ. Adam was made a type of Christ, in
all things like him, but his justice. Eve, the wife of Adam, was likewise a
figure of the Church, who was the spouse of Christ. 140 IV. Cain a tiller of
the ground. Abel a shepherd, and a keeper of sheep. Cain having killed his
brother Abel, is afraid. Flies the punishment of fratricide. Flies, like all
guilty men to the East of Eden. Marries a wife, begets a son, and in the same
East of Eden builds a City. Adam is said to have begotten sons and daughters,
from the birth of Seth, to the death of Adam himself. It is not written, that
he begat either sons or daughters from the death of Abel to the birth of Seth.
146 V. The Gen^tles proved different from the Jews, out of the monuments of the
Gentiles, and from the stock of Adam. The argument of eternity divided into two
classes by the ancients. Of time. Of the bundles of years which the Chaldaeans
had made up. Of the Periodical year. Of the returning and great year. Years
signified by Serpents, Of the cave of age deciphered by Claudian. Of the age of
ages. 153 VI. Men know not their first histories and originals. Of the
Chaldaeans. Of the stupendous number of years which the Chaldaeans are said to
have set down in the computation of their Astronomical Tables. Of the
Egyptians. And of the myriads of years that the Egyptian Kings are said to
have reigned. The Kings of the Egyptians Gods, Heroes, and men. 164 VII. Of
the Egyptian Kings, who were men. Plato in Timaeus concerning the warri^rs of
the Atlantic Islands, is cited. The sons of this age wiser than the sons of
light. Of the prodigious account of the Chinensians, according to Scaliger. 171
VIII. The most ancient creation of the world is proved, from the progress of
Astronomy, Theology; and Magic of the Gentiles. In this Chapter the fabric of
the sphere is handled. 177 IX. Of the antiquity of Astronomy. 182 X. Of the
antiquity of Astrology. 185 XI. Of the antiquity of the Divinity and Magic of
the Gentiles. 192
The Contents of the fourth Book.
CHAP. I. ADam, though framed perfect, could not that hour he was made,
understand the Sphere, Astronomy, and Astrology. But in progress of time might
gain the knowledge of them. Of holy Writ. Many things copied, not original. 200
II. God made himself obscurely known to men. God in a cloud. Of the Bible
copied out. There were writers before Moses. Genesis could not mention all. He
wrote not the history of the first men, but the first Jews. The Ark was not the
first of ships. The Vine planted by Noe was not the first Vine: How
Melchizedech is to be understood without father, mother, or original. 210 III.
Men err as often as they understand any thing more generally, which ought to be
more particularly taken. The darkness at the death of our Savior, was over the
whole Land of the Jews, not over all the world. The Starr which appeared to the
Wise men, was a stream of light in the air, not a Star in heaven. 219 IV. In
the miracle of Ezechiahs sickness, the Sun went not back in heaven, but in
the Dyal of Achaz. 222 V. How the Sun stood still in Gabaon in the miracle of
Joshua. That long day should not extend it self beyond the Country of Gabaon.
229 VI. Where the miracle is of the Jews garments not worn out in the
Wilderness, and the not wearing of their shoes. 235 VII. That the Flood of
Noah was not upon the whole earth, but only upon the Land of the Jews. Not to
destroy all men, but only the Jews. 239 VIII. The same which was proved in the
former Chapter, by the Dove sent out by Noah, and by the natural descent of
waters. 244 IX. This same is proved by the history of the sons and posterity of
Noah. By Eusebius in his Chronicle. There were particular deluges. Egypt never
drowned. Strabo of the Turdetanian Spaniards. Scaliger and Servius concerning
the Trojans, are cited: Solinus of the Indians. Sanchoniato, Jombal. 248 X. Of
Eternity before Eternity. Of Eternity from Eternity. 258 XI. Of eternity beyond
eternity. Of eternity to eternity. The Kingdom of Messiah, how eternal. 261
XII. Eternity uses to be understood in Scripture, by the duration of the Sun
and Moon. Of an age. Of eternal times. St. Paul expounded. Eternity indefinite.
265 XIII. Of the ages of creatures described by Hesiod and Ausonius. Why the
Histories of the first men were not known. Out of Plato. By the change of the
Epoche. The Aboriginal Nations of the world are not known, 271 XIV. They are
deceived, who deduce the Originals of men from the Grandchildren of Noah.
Grotius, concerning the original of the Nations in America, confuted. 276
The Contents of the Chapters in the fifth Book.
CHAP. I. MEn behooved to die, to become immortal. Men die in Christ. They
behooved first to sin, and be condemned in Adam. Men dye in Christ spiritually
and mystically. Of the fictions and mysteries of the Law. Of divine mysteries;
which were either fictions, or parables, or mystical similitudes. We die
spiritually, according to the similitude of Christ. We sinned spiritually,
according to the similitude of the sin of Adam. 282 II. Of Original sin. It is
inherent. It is imputed. What it is to impute. That is imputed, which is joined
in a kind of communion with that to which it is imputed. Of communions and
conjunctions of things, Physical, Political, and Mystical. Christ the end of
all mysteries. Adam ought to be referred to Christ, not Christ to Adam. Adam
ought to be imputed to men, as Christ is imputed to them spiritually and
mystically. 287 III. Of the two chief in the two mystical imputations Adam and
Christ. Abraham in the middle betwixt them. We pass from the sin of Adam to
the Justice of Christ, by the faith of Abraham. Punishments inflicted by
mystical imputations are mystically and spiritually to be understood. No man,
no not Adam himself died for Adams sin, Only Christ dyed for that sin. All men
are understood dead in Christ, spiritually and mystically. 294 IV. The
imputation of another man's sin is not conceivable, but by some supposition in
Law. Adams sin was imputed to all men in a spiritual manner, not by natural
propagation. Divines confuse nature and guilt, which ought to be understood
apart in original sin. Nature is before guilt. Guilt did not corrupt nature;
yea on the contrary corrupt nature caused guilt. Which is proved by the example
of Adam when he sinned. 303 V. Those who think that the imputation of Adams sin
was engendered by traduction from Adam, do gather it from thence, in that they
believe, that Adam was the Father of all men. The Apostle has distinguished,
and not joined sin naturally inherent, and that which is imputed. He has
distinguished and not joined natural death with that which is inflicted by the
Law. Death which was by the sin of Adam began with Adam, and ended with Moses
and Christ. Natural sin and natural death were before Adam; and shall be after
Moses and Christ to the end of all time. 308 VI. How the sin of Adam was cause
of men's salvation, not condemnation. Since the death of Christ, no man's sin is
imputed to another, but every one bears his own sin. 316 VII. Why Adam, who
sinned in the nature of a head, not was likewise punished in the nature of the
head. The sin of Adam was disobedience. Natural and Legal sin was the twofold
barricado against men, to shut them out of Paradise. Christ dying broke the
bar of the Law. Christ rising again, and sanctifying us, shall also break the
natural sin. 327 VII. All men have sinned according to the similitude of Adams
sin. Infants have sinned according to the same similitude. 335 IX. How the
imputation of the sin of Adam was imputed backward, and upon the predecessors
of Adam, by a mystery provided for their salvation. How the predecessors of
Adam could be saved. 342
A SYSTEME OF DIVINITY. Part I. Book I.
CHAP. I.
The verses of the Apostle. Original sin in them is chiefly handled. The Law
there meant is the Law of Adam, not the Law of Moses. Of sin natural and legal,
imputed and not imputed; As also of Death natural and legal. Humane Laws were
appointed for the governing of right reason. They are bounded by men. The Laws
of God are above men.
I Will present unto you again these same Verses of the Apostle, 5 to the
Romans; because they are boundaries of this Systeme.

12. As by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death: even it so
passed upon all men, because all men had sinned.

13. For until the Law sin was in the world; but sin was not imputed when there
was no Law.

14. But death reigned from Adam till Moses; likewise upon those who had not
sinned according to the similitude of the transgression of Adam, who is a type
of the future.

First we must observe, that this is a singular place, where he intends to
speak of that sin, commonly called original, which passed from Adam upon all
men; nor is there any other observed in the whole Bible, through the whole Old
and New Testament, where clearly and openly this sin of Adam is handled. Hence
it is proved, that Adam is meant by that man of whom the Apostle speaks, by
whom sin entered into the world, and by sin death; by whom also death passed
upon all men, as in him all men had sinned. But for the same reason that the
Apostle spoke of that sin of Adam, which brought guilt upon all men, it
follows, that he likewise meant that Law in this place, the transgression of
which caused the sin of Adam; as likewise that Law be understood to be the Law
of Adam, which is to be thought to be given to all men: just so as all men in
Adam are thought to have transgressed it. Therefore we will banish hence the
Mosaical Law, which had nothing to do with Original sin, because it was not
given to Adam, nor to all men in Adam; and therefore the transgression of it
could not be imputed to Adam, nor to all men in Adam. And certainly the
Mosaical Law was only given and published to the Jews, and not to other men, the
transgression of which, ought only to have been imputed to the Jews, and not to
the rest of the Nations which were not of the kindred and family of Jews, who
were not held nor tied by any bond or Covenant. He gave his words to Jacob, and
his testimonies to Israel; He did not so to all Nations, nor did he manifest
his judgments to them, as sung the Prophet in the 148 Psalm, and many such are
read in holy Authors, which for brevities sake I omit. If the Apostle meant
here the Law of Adam, not the Law of Moses, sin was in the world until the Law
of Adam by the same Apostle, and therefore before the Law of Adam; and it must
be, that these men come to my presupposition, which sinned before the Law of
Adam, or before Adam, which is the same.

Besides, it is clearer than clear fire, That the Apostle in this place sets
down two sorts of sins, in time and quality different. Different in time, where
he mentions sin after the Law, and sin before the Law. Different in quality,
where he meant, That sin before the Law was not imputed, sin following the Law
was imputed. For, says Paul, Sin until the Law was in the world, but sin was
not imputed (or is not imputed, as some translate it) when there was no Law.
But if sin was in the world until the Law, it was also before the Law. And that
sin which did violate the Law, was without doubt after the Law. You see here
sins designed before and after the Iav, different in time. Again, if sin be not
imputed when the Law is not, who will say that that sin was imputed which was
before the Law, or which was committed before the Law? But if on the other part
that was the transgression of the Law which caused imputation, we shall call
that sin imputable which broke the Law, and so was after the Law. You see here
sins distinct in quality.

Sin that was not imputed before the Law, we may call Natural, since it
depended upon no prohibition of the Law, but had its original from the mere ill
disposition of humane nature.

Sin which was imputed after the Law, because it had its original from the mere
transgression of the Law, let us call it Legal: And let us again call that
death, which upon my supposition ensued Natural sin, Natural death; and that
Legal death, which punished Legal sin.

Which that it may appear more clearly, we must first know, That humane nature
is considered two manner of ways, right, and perverse. Right, which had the
image of innocence and perfection, in so far as man could be created right and
perfect. Perverse, which turned away from the righteousness of that perfection,
which I call natural. We must know secondly, That the Law was appointed not to
make men perfect, but to reduce men to their perfection which were depraved and
corrupted; Not to make perfect, but to teach and prescribe perfection: And
those whom shame of transgression could not deter from misdemeanour, fear of
punishment might keep them within the rules of honesty. The Perfection of men
is directed by Law, and right reason. Right reason is natural, and born with
us. The Law is a stranger, and prescribed to us. But that was born before this
was written, and was constituted not by opinion, but by nature. The Law teaches
us that which we have forgotten, by the corruption of our Nature and Right
reason; for we should not know what were sin, if the Law had not taught us. And
hence it is, that the Law simply so called is styled a Schoolmaster by the
Apostle, and all other Laws are called Instructions, Commands, Precepts, in
both Authors, sacred and profane.

Men sinned only with a natural sin, before the Law, and till the Law, as often
as they fell from that perfection, to which by the nature of their creation
they were born, and as often as they erred from that right reason which guided
them to their perfection. All men sinned two manner of ways, after the Law, and
after the Law was given to them: For first, they sinned against that perfection
of their nature; They sinned secondly, against the prescript and ordination of
the Law, which called them back into the right way. And this is that which I
call legal sin, and which St. Paul, Romans 7. thinks to be the highest sin
against the Law; that is, to be a sin against the Law, a degree higher than the
sin against nature.

And whatsoever sin there is, be it natural or legal has its own natural or
legal punishment attending it. And death is the inseparable wages of every sin,
whether you ascribe it to Nature, or to the Law. Natural death, which is
begotten by natural corruption, never fails, sooner or later, to overtake
depraved nature, which is before it. Legal death sits behind the Law-breaker,
as an avenger. And Legal sin is as it were grafted into natural sin, and legal
death added to the natural: Legal death added to the natural, causes a civil
death, which in imagination and spirit is conceivable.

Humane laws have provided, that men should not stray without the limits of
right and perfectness; but that they might be restrained within them: Divine
law willed, that men should not only continue in their righteousness and
perfection; but that they should be advanced above their own righteousness and
perfection. Humane laws have provided, that men, like beasts, should not be
merely turned to pasture: The Divine law willed, that man should be carried
upward to the sight and glory of immortal God. Humane laws were within the
limits of men: Divine laws were above men. Humane laws restrained the nature
of men: Divine laws resolved to alter humane nature. Humane laws grafted in
nature, help nature, and savor of nature: Divine laws being placed above
nature, breath all Mystery and Divinity; help nature that it may purify it;
nay, that it may turn humane nature into divine.

Let us here leave Humane laws, and only talk of that which God gave to Adam;
And because by the mystical, not the natural dispensation of that Law, we
become more than men, and are transformed into gods, Which is the end of this
Systeme of Divinity and Christianity. Likewise we shall handle that legal sin,
which broke the Law of God: I say that first Law of God, which Adam the first
man did transgress; And which men were reputed to have violated in Adam.

CHAP. II.
The natural sins of men, are the very defaults of humane nature: the causes of
which are not to be ascribed to the sins of Adam. Legal sin imputed to men by
the sin of Adam, is additional. Conceived spiritually, and not propagated
naturally.
THere are some persons who believe, that Wars, Plagues, Fevers, and all the
troop of natural corruptions, invaded the Earth by that imputation of the sin
of Adam, which first transgressed the Law of God. And much they stand for this,
not taking notice of the difference betwixt natural and legal sin. For Wars,
Plagues, and Fevers, and whatsoever else of this sort troubles and afflicts
mankind, are the consequences of natural sin, which is the wickedness and
imperfection of Nature. This will easily appear to such, who will suffer that
ancient cloud of prepossession to be removed, which dulls their sight; for who
knows not that Wars had their original from such, whom either greedy desire of
prey, or cruel thirst after revenge, or sacred ambition of Rule stirred up to
take arms? Then, who has not had experience of the breeding and inflammation
of Plagues and Fevers, either by the natural corruption of the air, or by the
corruption of our natural bodies? We have as many witnesses of this observation
and truth, as we have Statesmen and Physicians, whose approbations, almost
innumerable, it is needless here to relate.

We shall therefore assert a double sin in Adam, a natural, and a legal. A
natural sin, naturally inherent in Adam, by the infirmity of his nature, and
that peccant matter whereof he was made: Legal, which happened and was imputed to
Adam, by violation of the Law of God. A natural sin, which infected the natural
sense, matter, and nature of Adam: A legal, mystical, and spiritual, which
broke the Law mystical and spiritual, which only in spirit and reason could be
conceived. For who can conceive a tree of good and evil? who can understand the
eating of knowledge, the eating of good and evil, unless he conceive it
intellectually and mystically? Likewise we conceive a twofold sin in all men,
as we assert a twofold sin in Adam, natural and legal. A natural sin, which
being innate in every person by reason of his peccant nature, is deeply and
naturally rooted in their very bowels, Which proceeds from the fat of them, as
is elegantly expressed in the 73 Psalm: A legal sin, which happened and was
imputed to all men by the transgression of that Law which Adam did violate. A
natural sin, which had an influence upon the natural sense and corporeal matter
of all men: Legal, which passed upon all men spiritually and mystically by the
legal sin of Adam.

We conceive that mystical and spiritual passing of legal sin upon all men, by
another sin which was Adams, to have been by imputation, by which we meant,
that it was imputed to all men that Adam had sinned.

With any else besides Divines, imputation of another trespass is a mere
supposition in Law, but with Divines it is the form of the mysteries: which I
shall clear to you by a very part example; Sedechias King of the Jews brake his
allegiance to the King of Assyria; That fault was imputed to all the Jews, who
were thought perjured in the perjury of the King, by that supposition of the
Law of Nations, by which people are thought to commit a fault in the faults of
their Kings. God had entered into a Covenant with Adam, and in him with all
men, as being the Governor, Defender, and Prince of all men: That Covenant
Adam broke, and that failing of Adam was ascribed to all men by that divine way
of mystery, by which all men are thought to be delinquents in the faults of
their Governors, Defenders, or Princes.

Therefore I think not that the imputation of Adams sin did overthrow man's
nature; nor do I again agree with those that will grant nothing to imputation.
I leave to things natural and mystical their own room: Natural things I would
have naturally taken; Things mystical I would have mystically understood.
Corruption contracted from that matter of all men, which is addicted to
corruption, was that which overthrew the nature of mankind. The mystical
imputation of the sin of Adam, is that which infected all men with the mystical
stain of condemnation. I assert imputations, without which the mysteries of
Christianity would be subverted; but these I restrain within their mystical
limits, lest they stray beyond their mystery, beyond conception and spirit.
Therefore I think not from thence, because the sin of Adam was imputed to all
men, that thence they came to be obnoxious to diseases; but by reason of their
corrupt and rotten nature. The innate infirmity of men, was the real and
natural calamity of men. And according to Ezekiel, Chap. 28. There came a fire
out of the midst of them, to consume them; than which there is nothing more
true; for it is a man's own nature which causes burnings in his heart: which
that I may the more evidently prove by examples, It is not known that Adam who
was the criminal, and (as they say) the first fountain of so great evils, was
ever so much as troubled with the least disease all the Nine hundred and thirty
years which he lived, unless you will believe him, who relates out of I do not
know what Author, that Adam dyed of the Gout, with which he was troubled, and
which he pretends that he had by succession from his Ancestors. Did Cain fall
sick when he slew his Brother? Nay, he was very strong and lusty, he fled to
the east of Eden, got a company of wicked persons about him, with whom he
robbed. He married a Wife, begot a Son, and built a City. And this is a
continual complaint of the Elect in the Scripture, as it were accusing God,
that he shows all his power to heap prosperity upon the wicked, that all things
go well with them, that things which they wish for come to pass, beyond their
hopes, and that no disasters blast their pleasures and their joys. Likewise
the most excellent Poet falls out with his gods, because his Mistress having
sworn by them, and being perjured, kept the same face which she had before;
that she being perjured, had as long hair as before; that she had the same
Roses in her cheeks, the same neat foot, the same fair and clear eyes after she
had injured the gods, as she had before she swore; Nay, after she had tied her
self by so many execrations, she became fairer and fairer. And certainly, the
supposition of the Roman Law granted a great many, who were prisoners with the
Enemy, dead in a civil sense, who were notwithstanding in good health.
Therefore it is apparent, that neither suppositions of Law, nor intentions of
mystery could any jot indammage nature; nor that the imputation of Adams sin,
which is altogether mystical and spiritual, was the cause of Plagues, Fevers,
and other diseases which Nature causes in men; but that they happen by reason
of vicious matter, and the frame of their creation, which is subject to
corruption.

CHAP. III.
The natural death of men arises from the nature of man, which is mortal; nor
is caused by the condemnation of death decreed against Adam, which is the legal
death, and is meant spiritually, not naturally.
ANd it is the fashion of all Inconveniences, that one draws another; there are
not those wanting, who affirm, That if Adam had not sinned, men should never
have dyed: as if immortality, which is aeternal life, and which only a new
Creation could beget, as only having the power of immortality in it, could have
been bestowed upon men, by the force and virtue of the first Creation, which by
its nature is subject to corruption and death, and that men should not have
dyed, who (as the Schools say) are naturally corruptible, and were created
mortal.

Nay, say they, God said to Adam, Eat not of the tree of good and evil: for on
that day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death. Therefore gather
they, If death was given as a punnishment to Adam on that day wherein he
transgressed the Law of God, Adam should have never dyed, if he had never
sinned. But that consequence is utterly denied; for although they die which
kill, therefore they which do not kill, are not immortal. Those that are guilty
and not guilty of blood come to a certain end by death: This is the difference
'twixt both their deaths, that those that are upright (...) of good life die
simply and naturally: those that dye by order of Law, are said to dye a
twofold death, naturally, and legally; a natural death, and that which is
can'd legal and civil by the condemnation of the Law. Truly, whether a man by
the sentence of the Judge be strangled, or be beheaded, or dye upon the rack,
he is first to be thought dead, a natural death, as being dead by natural
causes, as stopping or cutting the passages of his breath: Again, because to
this nature a condemnation by Law is added, he is said for the way of his
death, to have dyed a second and a civil death.

The same is to be thought to have happened to Adam, being condemned by the Law
of God, which happened to other men condemned by the Laws of men. Adam should
have dyed a natural death, and by a cause merely natural, since he was made up
of matter corruptible and mortal. Adam dyed likewise a legal death by the
condemnation of the Law, at which time he broke the Law of God. The natural
death of Adam followed the natural sin of Adam, and the infirmity of his
corruption, springing from the corruptible matter whereof he was made. Legal
sin made the legal death of Adam. There was a mystical cause of that mystical
effect, which only could be conceived by spirit and reason.

This shall be evidently proved by Adam himself; God had said to Adam,
Whatsoever day then eatest, thou shall die the death: Therefore Adam is thought
to have died the very same day, the very same minute wherein he transgressed
the Law of God: And yet Adam died neither naturally nor bodily that minute or
that day; For we know that he lived Nine hundred years after he sinned.
Therefore we shall understand that Adam dyed when he transgressed the Law of
God a legal and a spiritual death, which only could be conceived in thought.
Adam dyed a legal and spiritual death when he transgressed the Law of God. Adam
died a natural and a corporeal death when he had lived Nine hundred and thirty
years, and in that set hour where the natural bounds of his life was fixed.

But we shall more easily understand that Adam dyed the death, and that a
spiritual death was added to his natural, if we review other condemnations
decreed by God, both against Adam and against Eve, and against the Serpent,
after, and for the transgression of Adam. This punishment was decreed for Adam
after his sin, In labor shall thou eat of the earth all the days of thy life:
But God had placed Adam before he sinned in Paradise, that he might cultivate
it; Therefore that he might labor and manure the ground in Paradise before he
sinned, and that by his labor he might eat of it, as he did labor and manure
it, and by his labor did eat of it after his sin. Observe here labor both
before and after sin. Labors before sin, according to the nature of
agriculture natural: labors after sin, by a mystical condemnation, which only
could be conceived in thought.

Such is that which the Lord said to Eve, I will multiply thy sorrows, and thou
shall bring forth with pain, and shall be in the power of thy husband, and he
shall be Lord over thee. The Lord multiplied the sorrows of the woman, when
according to the condemnation he added spiritual and mystical griefs to those
which were natural, by which a woman is naturally torn when she brings forth.
God multiplied the subjection of the woman under the power of her husband, when
he added the condemnation by Law to that natural Law by which the nobler sex
has dominion over the inferior.

But chiefly its worth taking notice of what God decreed against the Serpent,
and what punishment he appointed for him for tempting Eve with eating of the
forbidden fruit; Because thou have done this, says the Lord to the Serpent,
thou shall go upon thy belly, and shall eat dust all the days of thy life;
but this was naturally in the Serpent at his creation to creep and crawl; that
the Serpent should go upon his belly, and eat the dust: for God before sin,
nay the fifth day of the Creation, created all manner of creeping things, of
which sort was the Serpent, and chief of them certainly. Therefore we must
understand the Serpent to have crept in two senses, before sin, and after sin:
that he crept before sin naturally, by the nature of his creation; that he
crept after sin according to the decree of God, and by that condemnation which
was only in spirit.

So may we understand Adam to have dyed two manner of ways. Naturally, that he
dyed naturally according to the first intention of his making before the Law.
Legally and after a spiritual manner after the Law, by that decree and Law of
condemnation which is spiritually conceived.

Therefore we shall think that there is a twofold death in all men, as we
conceive to be in Adam. Natural, which happens naturally to all men by their
own imbred nature, which is corruptible and mortal: A Legal one, which smote
all men that minute mystically when it was decreed against Adam. A natural
death; by which men dyed naturally before the Law: a Legal death, which passed
spiritually upon them after the Law, by transgression of the Law. A natural
death, which followed man's natural sin: a Legal death, caused by the legal sin
of men from the sin of Adam. A mystical cause of a mystical effect, which only
by way of spirit and mystery is conceivable. And truly, as the Law of creeping
ordained against Serpents in the Law of Adam, did add nothing to the reptile
nature of Serpents but a condemnation merely spiritual: so the Law of death
added nothing to the mortal nature of men, except that condemnation of death
which in thought and mystery is only conceived. Remember, says David, Psalm. 89.
what is my substance. And a little after, What man is he that lives, and shall
not see death? which the Kingly Prophet understood of natural death, the causes
of which he ascribed to the substance and matter of men, not to the sin of
Adam: add to this, what St. Paul has written Romans 8. Flesh savours of death;
and in the 6 Chap. of the same Epistle, The wages of sin is death. In which he
meant natural sin, and natural death, because natural death is incorporate with
natural sin, being the sauce of which the flesh rellishes, which is the nature
and matter of sin.

Moreover, by this distinction of natural and legal sin, and natural and legal
death, easily appears the interpretation of that place of Numbers Chap. 27.
where the daughters of Zelophe^ad speak unto Moses Our Father dyed in the
desert, and was not in that sedition which was stirred up against the Lord by
Core, but died in h^s sin. They say that their father was dead, not in that
Judgment wherein Core was swallowed up, who rebelled against the Lord, but by
the sin and fault of his nature, which is the seed of sin and corruption, and
by that fate of nature by which death is the last period of all things subject
to corruption. They do not say, that he was swallowed up in that just
Judgment, wherein the lowest earth opened to swallow up those Conspirators;
but that he dyed a single death in the desert, by that same natural Law by
which all men owe themselves to death, and by which simple natural death abides
natural sin.

CHAP. IV.
Men were in the beginning created according to the Image of God, and very
good. Of the Image of God in the first creation. Of the Image of God in the
second creation. Men were created upright in the beginning: but of v^tious
matter, which could easily return to its own disposition.
IT seems not to agree with that which is set down in the 1 of Genesis, That I
said the Creation of man was evil and corrupt: For there it is said, that God
did create man according to his own Image; and that all things which God
created were very good; whence Interpreters conclude, and rightly, that man
being created according to Gods own Image, was created perfect and upright. And
if all that God created was very good, that man then, who was the most
excellent of the Creatures, was exceeding good.

To this that I may answer; I would first have it granted, that the impression
of Gods Image in the first creation is different from that in the second
creation. God expressed in the first Creation that first Image and copy of his
wonderful art, by which he made the World, and all that therein is, and by
excellent wisdom composed and pondered them. In his renewing, which is the
second creation, God expressed the Image of his own nature, wherein he
communicated his love and bounty to the Wor'd. God in his first creation showed
the outside of his work: but in the second he opened the bowels of his love.
The first creation expressed the Image of God, which we may call the exterior:
the second creation presents us with the internal Image of God. There was
nothing besides, which God did not communicate in the Image of that platform,
and of his admirable art, which he exppress'd in all things which he created:
But he did not make all things partake of that Image of his nature, love, and
bounty, which be most worthily shewin men, when he did regenerate or when he
went about to regenerate them. Furthermore whatsoever material or corporeal
things ar created by the law of their own nature, they are created corruptible
and mortal; but whatsoever out of things corruptible and material, are created
a new by the Law of that second creation become incorruptible and immortal.

To say nothing of other material and corporeal things, it is certain, that men
in the beginning were created according to the Image of God, that Image of
their Creator, which we may call the Image of creation: yea, they were created
according to such an Image of creation, which above all other Images of
creation is the most excellent amongst all the frames of the creatures, which
more expressly and more highly represented the Creator. But we must confess,
that men were created at first according to the exterior Image of God, which
is called nighest to God at a greater distance, in comparison to the Image of
the second creation. It is true, that men were created in the beginning
perfect, right, and excellently good, in as far as men by force and virtue of
their creation could be created perfect, right, and excellently good. But no
man ought to be ignorant, that men were created from the beginning of
corruptible matter, which might easily be turned from perfect to imperfect,
from right to wrong, from good to evil, which the men which were first created
did evidence by a strong and approved example, since the nature of their
composition, and their own negligence carried them, being upright made, so far
aside.

Therefore, so often as I think of this, That men being created according to
the Image of God the Creator, and according to the Image of the first
platform, perfect, right, and very good, by a fault in them, ingrafted by
nature, did degenerare from righteousness to wickedness, from good to evil: So
often I fancy a Watch newly finished, by an exquisite artificer curiously
ordered, with all the parts of the jagged wheels, proportionab^y and
exquisitely weighed for the just minutes of the hours, with a Case curiously
enamelled with pictures set out to the life, or a purl'd lining curiously made,
as much as in gold, or Amber, the Craftsman was able to perform: For that Watch
will continue entire in all its parts, so long as it is not spoiled, either
because of the corruptibility of the matter whereof it is made, or the
carelessness of the Master that owes it: Such was the fate of men, who first
being created perfect, right, and very good, by the default of the matter
whereof they were made, and of their fiery natures, which set them on work,
they staid not in the posture of their creation, but departed from their
perfection, and turned from good to evil.

-- So all by fate
Run backward, and in goodness still abate.
Likewise, I could well compare men created in the beginning, according to the
Image of God, very good, to those houses of the Comedian, made with good and
exact work, well dressed and prepared for durance, into which came a base
Tenant, careless, slovenly, and idle, which took no care of that fair house:
For there came a storm, which broke the tyles and gutters, the shower washed the
walls, it rained through the seelings, the air rotted the work of the
Carpenter; then fell down the walls, and the whole house, to the very
foundation: and not by the fault of the Carpenter, as the Comedian says
expressly, but by the sluggishness of that lazy man who dwelt in it, who would
not lay other tyles for those that were broken, by which the habitation became
more inconvenient.

For such we will conceit men to have been at first created, as we conceive
these new buildings; I say created according to the Image of God, incorrupt,
right, and good, with excellent reason, excellent virtue, excellent truth, and
that there could be nothing added to that first creation of men. But when these
men removed into themselves and their own disposition, as their nature was,
their own clay, their own flesh, which was a matter earthly and corruptible,
which refrains not from sin, straight came negligence, which destroyed the work
of the Creator, which overthrew all manner of Reason, Virtue, and Truth in men,
and which changed the perfection of their Creation. And that, not by the
default of the Creator, which is specially to be observed, but by the
carelessness of men themselves, by which they became worse; and being created
good, had no better care of themselves. I say, that idleness was this storm to
men which brought upon them hail and showers, which discovered their shame, and
by which they were negligent to cover themselves. Therefore wicked desires
flowed into the Hearts of men, wicked thoughts moistened their Hearts; and
withal, Reason, Virtue and Truth forsook men. And lastly, they were putrified
with their sins. That which was good in them at their Creation departed; but
the malignity of their substance continued, as Esdras says, 4 Book Chap. 1.

CHAP. V.
Of the matter of men subject to Corruption. Of the upright Creation of men. Of
the Return of man to the disposition of his own nature. And of his matter given
to corruption.
THerefore three things offer themselves to be considered in the first Creation
of Men. The first is, The matter of which Men were created and made up.
Secondly, The Creation it self. Thirdly, The passing over, and return of men to
their own disposition planted in them by their nature.

That the matter of which men were made was subject to corruption, did appear
by the sequel: since they could not continue in their perfect creation, and did
return from uprightness to wickedness. For this cause called Flesh, which is
the matter of Man simply, and in it self unclean, polluted, a corruption, and
mere filthiness, in all sacred Authors. And this is enough concerning the
matter of men, subject to corruption, as being surrounded with such a Cloud of
Witnesses, that if we should pour them out would overwhelm us.

Let us come to the Creation of Men it self. God created Men in the beginning
according to his own Image, excellently good and perfect: but only in that
good and perfect Estate, as they are, and are created Men. He created them
perfect, who wanted in them nothing of perfect men: but such as by virtue and
force of their Creation, savoured only of that which was contained in men, not
which was above them. Such things as belonged to men, not such as belonged to
God. In this I see not why all ought not to agree without controversy.

Let us go to that turning of men to sin, in which they departed from the
perfection of their Creation, and went backward according to the disposition of
their corruptible matter, wherein they were to die, according to the intention
of their composition. And first let us see what God did, after he had created
men perfect, and placed them in earth, having prepared likewise all things
ready for their use. We shall know that by what is said in the 25 Chap. of
Mattew of the Master of the House, who going from home, left his Goods to be
used by his Servants. God went from home after he had created Men perfect, that
is to say, he left Men in the hand of their own counsel, in their own power and
free will, to do as they pleased. He suffered them to take their own wills and
ways, as it is written, Acts the fourth.

On the other side let us see what men did, being now at their own disposing,
and having now as I may say, the Law in their own hand. They did that which
they were most likely to do. They were inclinable to evil, and the leprosy of
sin stuck close to them. They had no restraint in their lives, but following
their own minds, and tied to their desires, they diminished the perfection of
their Creation. Their Liberty run out into Vice; and the free Nature of Man run
out at Liberty, without a reign. Their own flesh incensed them, and drove them
blinde-sold; freely, and not without their own consent, they run into evil
courses, and returned to the Nature of their matter which was inclinable to
evil. They went from their perfection to their own hearts desire, as the 78
Psalm. They were created upright, against their own disposition, and were
turned from their own wicked nature, being wicked, to be good. They were turned
back by the force and strength of their right Creation to be good: by their own
will and crooked nature, being wicked, they were turned back to wickedness. The
sinfulness of Man's nature, and his corruptible matter, drew upright men
backward from righteousness to wickedness. They did not strive against it, as
became them who were created upright. They did not wage War with their own,
genius. Their hands and their feet gave over: and then, according as the
corruption of fleshly nature carried them, they run headlong in their own
Chanel, and easily commanded themselves to be corrupted. Little they cared for
any right way of living, right or wrong, good or bad, they saw nothing but what
pleased their own fancies; and gave themselves the Liberty of all manner of
sin. Men fell through their own wickedness; and that I may speak with Jeremiah,
Chapter 28. They gave free reigns to their own disposition, as horses furiously
rushing to the battle.

Men returned for this reason to their own inclination, because in the first
Creation, it being only corrected and amended, and the vitiousness of it not
quite weeded out in the framing of man, and the nature of him, it was always
in possibility, not being quite taken away, to return into it self. But
whatsoever was good in man, by the correcting of his faultiness, or any
perfection which he had by his Creation, was quite lost in men, being enslaved
to their own wills; but what was evil in their clay and composition still
remained. The uprightness of men perished; and their sin defaced them, being so
well created. And the fault which was left in their creation, and not quite
rooted out in the first creation of man, was a leven in their hearts, more
powerful than their Creation, by which they were altogether swelled and
depraved. Besides, those things are stronger, which move us inwardly, than
those things which work upon us outwardly. The perfection of the Creation of
Men, flowed from God, and happened to man externally, as a thing different,
nay, quite contrary to the flesh and matter of men. On the contrary, the
faultiness of the clay and composition, cleaved to them more inwardly, as a
thing proper and natural to Men. Therefore men returned to their nature,
because they did, according to their own disposition, which was shown them from
within. As also, because the faultiness of their inward nature did more
strongly move them, than the perfection of their creation outwardly conferred
upon them; yea, because the flesh and matter of man was reprobate Earth, the
Mother of good seed, and the Mother of ill weeds. The stepmother of all
Virtues which God in his creation had sown in the hearts of men, and the mother
of all Vices, which naturally spring in them, as in their native soil, and,
which, like watered Herbs, grow most plentifully. The cursed stepmother hates
her Sons-in-Law, but like a very loving mother embraces and fosters her
Children. Hence it happened, that nature and the flesh of man refused that
tried and choice seed of perfection, with which they were created; and that, by
the same nature it returned again into it self, when it found liberty. And that
in this regard it was far easier to do evil than good. From thence the heart of
man was overrun with the briers and thorns of all manner of Vices proceeding
from their clay and composition.

This returning of man from the perfection of their creation, to the wickedness
of their nature and flesh, is that natural sin which we mean; whether we may
call it natural, because it is naturally inherent to us, or, as St. Paul says,
Because it dwells in us: Because there is a Law in the members of men, leading
men captive to the Law of sin, which is in their members. Where note, the Law
of natural sin, fixed in the members of men, or the natural Law of sin,
inherent in the flesh and nature of men. In which sense it is to be understood,
7 Chap. to the Romans. Or whether that may be called a natural sin, because it
was a declination from that nature and Law of perfection, in which men were
created in the beginning. For which cause, and most properly it might be called
a sin.

That there remains yet some footsteps of this perfection in the hearts of
men; yea, that men are struck with a natural and tacit conscience of it, is
manifest; because all those who are formed of a better and more perfect mould,
are naturally more averse from all sin, who seem by the sent to hunt and track
that perfection, to which they perceive themselves created, and from which they
are fallen, by the study of virtue. In which sense, the Apostle is chiefly to
be understood, in such places as he says, Men naturally accuse themselves, and
are to themselves a Law.

CHAP. VI.
God restored men, created upright, and turned backward to the wickedness of
their own nature, into a better estate by a second creation, and lifts them up
from men to be Gods. Of that which is produced, and of that which is made. Of
mutable and immutable. Of mortal and immortal. Of the Spirit which is in God;
and of the Spirit of the world.
BUt God neither despised nor relinquished men fallen off from their creation,
and bestain'd with their sins; Nor did he so far suffer them to be restored
into the former state of full perfection, as they had been perfect men in the
beginning, but decreed to new create them, and advance their perfection, above
the perfection of men. Men were fallen headlong from the splendour of their
perfection to their filthiness, which is also the loathsomness of Beasts. God
commanded men by a second creation to pass, as I may so say, from men to Gods,
to be carried from corruption to incorruption, from death to eternal life: And,
which was the chief blessing of God to man, he commanded them, of wicked, evil,
and bemyred creatures, to be exalted to the perfection of his holiness and
glory; to which they should, as with a fiery Chariot, be carried by the Spirit
of Regeneration: Nay, if we rightly weigh the council and decree of God, we
shall find it his second intention, to create men mortal and corruptible, but
his first to create them incorruptible and immortal. Creation was a thing
divine: Regeneration was a thing more excellent and divine, according to that
distance of proportion by which incorruptible is preferrible to corruptible,
and immortal preferrible to mortal.

But, that I may rehearse from the beginning all the business, as it concerns
Christian doctrine, we must know, that two things occur, in the creation and
framing things, worthy observation, which are not demonstrated by their causes,
but are aimed at in the Scriptures, and appear by their effects. One, which
immediately flowed from God: another, created by God but mediatly. One,
produced: another, made. One, spiritual: another, animal, material, carnal and
corporeal. One, permanent, stable, eternal: another mutable, subject to vanity.
One, incorruptible, which purifies: another, corruptible, which pollutes. One,
which favors of life: another, which savours of death. One, which is able to
endure that celestial Lightning with which God thunders, and which shines in
his sight, like gold in the fire: another, which God consumes with his
splendour, and which melting at his rays, departs into froth, smoke, and ashes.
One thing, which God loves: another, which he disdains. One, which he chooses:
another, which he rejects. One, which St. Paul, Cor. 1. chap. 2. calls The
Spirit which is of God: another, which the same Apostle calls in that very
place, The Spirit of this world. These two are at continual variance, and
eternal discord, since God made a mixture of all things, when he gave to all
things breath and life.

The Spirit which is of God, we shall call that Spirit of regeneration, which
flows immediately, and is produced from God, which is altogether spiritual,
stable, incorruptible, and eternal, which is fed with the fire of the vision of
God, which God only loves and chooses. We shall call the spirit of this world,
that spirit of creation with which the whole world was animated, and which was
infused into the whole frame in the creation, Then that is the Spirit, which by
interposition of a medium, being created by God, is animal, material, carnal,
and corporeal, which is changeable and subject to vanity, which is corruptible,
which savours of death, which faints and melts before the eyes of God, which
God disdains and rejects.

God, when he made the world, breathed upon all things created, and living in
the world, by that Spirit of the world and creation by which they live; but did
not likewise infuse into all things created and living in the world, his Spirit
of regeneration, by which things created and living, which are ancient, are
renewed, the corrupt refreshed, and the dead rise up into eternal li^e: Nay, he
did communicate that to a certain company of the Elect, to himself known, with
such resolution and decree, that whomsoever this Spirit should inspire unto
grace by his power, they should receive immortality, and through patience
become that holy fire, by which he shall try all things; On that day when all
the faultiness of the world shall be purged, on which all things which have
been framed, shall be removed and consumed, and all changeable, vain, ^ortal,
and corruptible things, which God abhors and rejects.

CHAP. VII.
Of one God, and of one Spirit which is of God. Of diverse Gods and Spirits.
THe Spirit of regeneration is the same Spirit which is the Spirit of Christ,
by whom comes regeneration; he is one neither enduring number nor consort. The
Apostle tells us, that there are several spirits of creation, both in the
heaven and in the earth, Cor. 1. chap. 8. which in that place he calls Gods,
and Lords. The words of St. Paul are these, For although there be those which
are called gods both in the heaven and in the earth, seeing there are many gods
and many lords, yet we have but one God. The same Apostle in the 8. to the
Romans, called those Gods and Lords in the heaven and in the earth, height and
depth: whom he makes mention of amongst the Spirits of the creation; for he
adds Nor any other creature. And certainly, as the same St. Paul sets down
wicked Spirits amongst the celestial, you may likewise imagine, that there are
evil Spirits likewise amongst the terrestrial. For seeing you read Sam. 1.
Chap. 28. That the Witch saw Gods, that is, Spirits, ascending out of the
Earth. The chief of those Spirits is he, whom the holy Writ commonly calls the
Devil, Satan, Belial, Mammon, Prince of the power of the air, of this world
and this life. That every one has their Angel and attendant, the books of both
the Old and New Testaments do witness. Jude the Apostle tells us, that the
chief of these Spirits, and all the Angels under his command were created in
the beginning good and upright, as also that they were made with a creation
changeable, and corruptible, in his Catholic Epistle, in which place he says
expressly, That those Spirits did not keep their Principality, but left their
habitation. Therefore it is to be presumed, that they had a good Principality,
which they kept not. Hence that of Job, Behold those which serve him are not
stable, and he finds wickedness in his Angels.

According as those spirits breathed upon those things which were subject to
the Laws of the creation, and as the Apostle speaks in the second to the
Ephesians, wrought upon them, it is credible, that all the created things of
the world degenerated from that perfect good and uprightness where in they were
created, when those Spirits fell from their Principality and habitation; And
hence it has come to pass, that the men of the first creation forgetting their
first Creator, and stirred up by those Spirits of the corrupted creation,
strayed from the uprightness of their first creation, and perished in their own
thoughts. Hence certainly was that foolishness of their darkened heart, by which
they thought God not to be their Creator by which they served the creature,
rather than the Creator; by which lastly, they changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into the similitude of a corruptible man, of fowls, beasts,
serpents. Romans 1.

The Priests and Philosophers amongst the Gentiles, who knew not God the
Father, and the Creator, observed several Spirits and Gods, whom they
determined governors of several ranks and degrees, and whom they placed either
in the heaven, or in the stars, or in the fi^^, or in the air, or in the water,
or in the earth, or under the earth, and whose shapes they did not deny might
be called up by several ways of sacrifice and enchantment; For certainly they
considered a certain affinity, and fellow-suffering of those Spirits with all
things created, on whom, by their sympathy and similitude they had an
influence. They thought that all animals and vegetables, from trees, to metals
and nones, were moved and led by those Spirits: Yea, that all things did pray,
and sing hymns to the leaders of their own order: Therefore, say they, the
Heliotrop moves toward the Sun, and if any one could observe her stamping,
that she makes in the air, in her wheeling about, he should observe a kind of a
sound composed toward her King, such a one as a Plant might be expected to
make. The Lotus opens and shuts her leaves turning toward the same Planet,
according as the Sun ascends or desc^ends by degrees, whom she seems to honor
with the motion of her leaves, as it were with the morion of her lips. They
have boasted the same things of Selenetropes, which turn to the Moon, as are
related of Heliotropes. The clapping and singing of the Cock at the Sunrising
are known, which I should interpret to be mourning at his departure. The Dogs
bark at the Moon, and inflamed with the Dog Star run mad. What shall I say of
the stone Helitis, which by its rays imitates those golden ones of the Sun? As
also of the stone Selenitis, which is shaped like a hornd Moon, and by its
change follows the motion of the Moon? What shall I say of the Helioselen,
which seems to present the conjunction of the Sun and Moon? Not to speak of the
seven metals, to every one of which there is a particular Planet assigned. Then
the Oaks dedicated to Jove, the Laurel to Phoebus, the Olive to Minerva, the
Poplar to Hercules, Horses to Neptune, Swine to Ceres, Goats to Bacchus, Black
sheep to infernal Juno, Serpents to Aesculapius: and many other such things, as
were able to tire one who would rehearse them.

These ancient Priests esteemed Man to be best composed of all creatures, and
therefore that he was called the Microcosm, as participating of the creation of
all things. And therefore, that some by Saturn become sullen, others by Jove
are mirthful; some are red-colour'd by Sol, others Iascivious by Venus; some
are cheaters by Mercury, some imperfect by Luna: Nay that some bray like Asses,
^ome like Dogs, others like Swine, others ravenous, like Lions; some like
Doves, others like Serpents, according to the various dispositions,
similitudes, and sympathies of participation, which men have been said to have
with all things created: But likewise the Scripture has taught us that Spirits
have professed the pleasures of men, have been given to men, to some lying
spirits, to some sleeping spirits, to others spirits of giddiness: then, that
there are cozening, seducing, and lying spirits, it appears, because Christ
warns his disciples, that they should trust no spirit; yea, and rebuked them,
because they knew not by what spirit they were led. And it is likewise
witnessed in the Gospel, that the mother-in-law of St. Peter was troubled with
a feverish spirit.

Who will wonder then, that men being left by God, after their creation, in
their own power, and turned over to so many Spirits, Gods, and Lords, who set
them a work, did appoint and worship so many several sorts of Gods, under so
many diverse shapes of things created, if he consider the almost innumerable
affinities and sympathies which men are found to have with these Spirits, Gods
and Lords; as also with all things created in heaven and in earth?

God abborr'd those Spirits and Gods, fallen off from the uprightness, and
perfection of their creation, to their own changeable condition, with such an
abomination, as the most upright and best must needs hate that which is evil
and wicked. Therefore you shall hear these Gods in Scripture, called wicked
Spirits, wickednesses, spirits of error, evil spirits, and very evil spirits;
as in that 9th Chapter of the Judges, God sent a very evil spirit betwixt
Sichem and Abimelech: called likewise vain and lying spirits, curses,
deceitful Idols, abominations, uncleanness, pollutions, whorings, dung, the
sleep, and the anger of the Lord; as is that in Samuel 1. chap. 26. The sleep
of the Lord had fallen upon Saul and his people. The sleep of the Lord is the
same in this place with the evil spirit from the Lord, in the 16 Chapter of the
same Book, where you shall read, that the Spirit of the Lord departed from
Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him. Such also is that Sam. 2.
Chap. 24. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, which the first
Book of the Chronicles speaking of the same thing, expresses in these words,
And Satan rose up against Israel; where Satan is the same with the anger of the
Lord, or anger from the Lord.

As also the holy Scriptures are clear witnesses, that those Spirits, Gods and
Lords, by the Law of their creation, which is changeable and corruptible, are
mortal, and that they are condemned to eternal death; where wicked and perverse
men are called The sons of Belial, Sam. 1. Chap. 2. As also Nabal, a perverse
man, is branded with that name in the same book, Chap. 25. As also the same son
of Belial is called The son of death, Sam. 2. Chap. 12. And in the same Book,
Cha. 23. the floods of death are called the floods of Belial, where David says
in his Song, The pangs of death compast me about, the floods of Belial made me
afraid. In which places Belial is not only called mortal, but mortality it
self, for being Prince of all Spirits, which were his ministers, both mortal,
and cond^mned to a death from whence there is no resurrection. Who will not
believe that those Spirits are destined to eternal death? since God himself
has said, that at that latter judgment of all corruptible things, they shall
be condemned, and cast with the Reprobates into eternal fire.

CHAP. VIII.
Men being misled by evil spirits, fell from their right estate wherein they
were created, into the wickedness of their own nature. Being restored by the
Spirit of Regeneratinn, who only proceeds from God, they know God, whom flesh
and blood knows not. They obtain holiness, which they could not have in their
first creation; and recompense their natural death with a supernatural
immortality.
THe Apostle deduces the stain of all sins which overthrew men, chiefly from
this Chap. 1 Epist. to the Romans, because they had left God the Creator, and
had given themselves over to those Gods, Lords, and unclean Spirits. Hence
their minds were blinded, and given over to their own lusts, were set on fire
with wicked and unlawful desires, contrary to nature, and so received in
themselves the rewards of their sin; and thence opened such a wide door to
wickedness and filthiness, that at last they fell into all manner of sin. And
as they preferred their own lust to the knowledge of God: so on the contrary,
he gave them up to a reprobate sense, that being men, they should do things
not beseeming men. Hence they became evil, wicked, fornicators, avaricious,
given to lewdness, full of envy and blood, brawlers, deceitful, despightfull,
whisperers, back-biters, hateful to God, contumelious, proud, arrogant,
inventers of wickedness, disobedient to Parents, foolish, madd, without
affection, truth or compassion.

Truly men being misled by those Spirits, and being thrust forward by the
violence of their own appetite, according to the affection and sympathy which
they have with those Spirits; I say, men oprest with the weight of their own
sin, and drowned in sticking clay, might have despaird of any salvation, nor
ever have plucked out their feet for thence, if God had not helped them, and
stretched out his powerful hands from heaven to draw the^ thence: But God was
not of that mind, as most men are, who rid an unhappy person from his present
calamity, and are never sollicitous afterward to advance their condition. God
dealt better and more freely with men: first, he washed them, drawn out of the
puddle, with his own living waters, then advanced them, being now clean and
white, by his own free merit; and lastly from their foul wallowings, received
them into the glory of heaven, and made them partakers of divine knowledge,
sanctity, and immortality, which is in his most happy vision. And this he did
by virtue and force of that Spirit which is of God, and who is God himself, by
a second and new creation, out of his own free will, largeness of his bounty,
abundance of his love, and mere grace, which therefore is called the gift of
God, and his only free grace.

Therefore let all those who desire to know themselves, here make a stand, and
endeavor to be free in their thanks to God; Let them taste and see how sweet
the Lord is; Let them remember, by how great mercies, beyond their desert, he
has obliged mankind: Let them consider that they are living souls, and that
such perceive not the things which are of God, nor can understand those things
which are pondered by the Spirit, Cor. 2.1. That worldly wisdom is called
Devilish by St. James, Chap. 3. and opposite to divine wisdom; that flesh and
blood cannot discover the mysteries of God, but God who is in heaven, Matthew.
16. Therefore let them consider with themselves how great their weakness is, in
knowing God, That they are clouds driven with winds, which as St. Peter says,
are carried about with the wind of every doctrine, and are not constant to one
God. That they cannot from themselves receive the spirit of truth, because they
neither see him, nor know him, in the Gospel according to St. John, Chap. 16.
Nay, they know not themselves, That they know not the ways of the the spirit,
nor know how their bones were set together in their mothers womb. Eccles. 11.
But if they understand not their own ways, how shall they understand the ways
of the Lord? Prove. 20. Therefore, the riches of the Lord are called
unsearchable by the Apostle, because a man cannot conceive them; Yea, because
he cannot comprehend them for their exceeding height and splendour. Therefore
let them think with themselves, that of themselves they are destitute of help
and means to find out God; that they are blind, and darkened in the knowledge of
him, for whom, according to their desert, and the words of St. Peter, the
obscurity of darkness should be reserved. Let them hence take occasion to bless
God, so goo and so merciful, who has prevented and assisted men that knew him
not, and has of his own accord offered himself to be known by them: yea, that
has taught them his ways, and has, as one friend speaks to another, spoken to
them plainly.

Let them again consider, how wicked the affections of their hearts are, All
men and all the world naturally wicked, S. John 1. cap. 5. settled in the dregs
of their own matter. Wisd. 1. That they drink fin as fishes drink water. That
their devices and thoughts are evil from their youth, Genesis 8. that it is by
their own nature and disposition. But as the Ethiopian changes not his skin,
nor the Leopatd his spots, because they are naturally born with him, no more
can men do good having learned evil, evil being likewise born in them, that by
the help of their nature they are perverse, and by their inbred wickedness;
that the will of the flesh is contrary to the will of God; and that therefore
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God, and is not subject, nor can be made
subject, to the Law of God, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 8. That they are
hard, and their necks a cord of iron, which despise the uprightness of their
creation, and could not submit to the harsh yoke of the Divine Law. Let them
again remember, that God is not only just and upright, as men were created in
the beginning just and upright, but, which is most high, above all men, that he
is most holy, to whom all sins are most odious, abominable, detestable. Let
them therefore extol the bounty and liberality of God, who notwithstanding has
so dealt with men that he has freely come to these wicked and reprobate
sinners, and has not disdained with the kiss of Justice and Peace to breath
upon them a part of his Sanctity.

At last, let them thus think, that man is rottenness, and the son of man but a
worm, and that God has made man in vanity: that they are grass, and fade like
the flowers of the field; yea, that like Hay, to which they are compared, they
are out down, from morn till night. That men are feeble, altogether nothing;
that they dwell in houses of clay, which have no foundation, and which are
consumed, as with a moth; that their substance is vain like stubble, which is
consumed with the breath of the fire, and that they at last, by the sin of
their corruptible nature, of necessity die; or, which is the same, that all of
them drink deep of death and necessity; And that their nature, being as it were
flax before God, who is a consuming fire, before whom the frame of humane
nature shakes, is changed by a miracle into that fiery nature of God himself,
by virtue of which they are fed with the most glorious contemplation of him.
And what is most glorious in men, that their mortality is changed into
immortality, that they may be eternally satisfied with glory.

Therefore, let them consider with themselves, that they were created in the
beginning right and perfect, but only with that righteousness and perfection,
which is contained within the circumference of men, and with such a corruptible
disposition, that from the top of their circle and their perfection they fell
headlong into the center of corruption and imperfection. But if they, being
created right and perfect, could not retain their righteousness and perfection,
how much less could they, being wicked, attain to those things which were above
their righteousness and perfection? I say above it, as far as heaven is from
the earth, the creation from the Creator, and God from man; yea, there was a
ladder given them to climb up to heaven, or swiftness of wings to fly up to
God. By what intellect of their own, or by what clear eye of the mind, could
ever they gain the knowledge of God, unto whom no man can find the way, and who
have not the least knowledge of themselves? by what disposition or nature of
their own, could they attain to the holiness of God, who do that evil which
they would not? Romans 7. By what confidence of their own, or conscience of
goodness, could they seize upon immortality, the causes of which are so far
distant from them, that they cannot lengthen the appointed bounds of their
lives one moment, or one scruple of time? Let them therefore confess themselves
utterly unable to compass great blessings, and placed at such a distance from
them; and therefore let them more submissly and fervently worship God, who has
so bountifully and liberally supplied their wants and their weakness.

CHAP. IX.
The Regeneration of men is the grace and gift of God. It is not granted to all
men to be regenerated, but only to the elect. Election is in things natural.
Divine Election is in God's elect. Who are elected. And who are called
Reprobates.
THerefore let us be assured of this, Divine Knowledge, Sanctity, and
Immortality, of which the salvation of Man consists, could never be procured
for mankind, by the force of the first Creation, in which men were created
perfect, as being placed above Humane perfection: But that these things are
bestowed upon men, by the mere liberality and bounty of God, and that they are
carried away to the possession of so great riches by the Spirit and power of
Regeneration, which is man's second Creation.

But although God, as I said before, did not breath that Spirit upon all things
created, but gave it particularly to men. Neither has he yet given that Spirit
to all men, by virtue of which they may know God, as he is, by the essicacies
of which all men may be holy as God is holy, by whose power, lastly, all men
may gain eternal life, which is Divine immortality. Yea, God has only imparted
that Spirit to elected men, whom he has advanced from the degree and rank of
men, to the highest rank and degree above all men, whom he had adorned with his
Divine Gifts, with his Knowledge and Holiness, and taken them into his
fellowship, as Gods: so that most truly and fitly we may say of this, that God
who is the Lord of all things, yet is the God of very few, and only of the
Elect.

Election is in all things created. Things that have a living soul are more
elect than those which have not; Then of things animated, sensitives. As also
in stones and metals, one stone in better than another: one metal better than
another. There is also elected earth, and reprobate earth. The choiceness is in
choicer flowers both for color and smell. The Cedar is more choice than the
shurb: the true than the wild vine, and the pleasant fruits of Trees are
sweeter than the wild ones. Among Creatures, Lions excel in strength; Hearts,
in swiftness; Lambs, in mildness. Amongst Birds, Nightingals excel for singing,
the Eagle for flight. As likewise of the flesh of beasts and birds, some make
choicer dishes than others. What shall I say of men? Some are more commendable
for the gallantry of their integrity: some higher spirited than others, fairer,
more noble, more fortunate in honor and riches: others more excellent in the
study of Virtue, in cleerness of wit, and knowledge of things. There is
likewise an election in life, and permanency of things. Some things quickly
grow and quickly fade. The Crow lives nine times the just age of a Man. The
Heart lives four times the life of the Crow. The Rook lives thrice the life of
the Heart. The Phoenix lives nine times the Rook's life. And if we believe the
most ancient Traditions before Hesiod's times, The Hamadryades lives ten times
longer than the Phoenix. To these add if you please, the life or duration of
Heaven and Earth, and that eviternal Marriage by which the Heaven descends into
the lap of the Earth, and by which the Earth fructifies with continual Buds
toward Heaven, and the order of the Stars surrounding the Heaven from
aeternity, as also the unwearied motions of the Sun and Moon by which they are
inceslantly moved, and by which eviternity it self is accounted.

But the Divine Election is not in all these created things. I say, that
Election by which God did elect to himself all men, which is not of kin or
blood with the first Creation, which surpasses all kind of things created, and
is infinitely above them: and which is the Election of Regeneration, that is of
the second Creation, not of the first. Certainly, if there be any thing in the
first Creation, either exquisite, precious or choice, delicate, strong, high,
or fair, or noble, or fortunate, or abstruse in wisdom, or long in continuance,
of permanency and life: That is in the second Creation, much more exquisite
beyond exquisitness, far more precious beyond preciousness, far more choice
beyond choiceness, far more delicate beyond dalicateness, far more strong
beyond strength, far more fair beyond fairness, far more noble beyond nobility,
far more fortunate beyond fortune, far more wise beyond wisdom, far more
permanent beyond permanency.

But of this we must hear Baruch, Chap. 3. of his Book, Where are, says he,
the Princes of the Nations that have Dominion over the Beasts of the Earth, who
treasure up silver and gold, wherein men trust? they are rooted out; the sons
of Agar have sought for wisdom, which is of the Earth, idle speakers and
seekers out of understanding. They were those which from the beginning were
called Giants, men of great stature, great warriors. Those the Lord has not
chosen. He says, The Election of God was not toward Kings and Princes of
Nations, not toward learned Men, and excellent in humane wisdom, not toward
the Rich and Noble, not toward the strong and the Renowned, those famous
Thunderbolts of War, because they fulfilled that Law of Nature and their first
Creation, by which all men are born and created to die, and attained not to
that Eternal Life, which consisted in the power of Divine Election, and the
virtue of the second Creation.

God is said to choose and to take to himself those whom he intends to frame
anew, and to new create them; to whom he made manifest and discovered himself,
whom he has gifted with his sanctity, whom he has made partakers of his
immortality and Life Eternal, and whom from Men he advanced to be Gods.
Moreover, God is said to reject those, and to cast them out, whom he is pleased
to create, but not to regenerate, into whose hearts he has not shined, whom he
suffers to live defiled with the pollution and wickedness of their flesh, whom
being subject to the power of Death, he has not redeemd from Death, and whom he
suffers not to savor any thing above man.

Not to elect, signifies, to reject and cast out, which is common in sacred
Authors. Samuel coming into the house of Jesse, that he might anoint one of
them, whom he knew not, King over Israel, as soon as he saw Eliab, Jesse's
firstborn, in whose countenance was a royal majesty, straight he believed that
he had been chosen by God; But God admonishes Samuel, Look not upon the
countenance of Eliab, for I have rejected him. Sam. 1. Chap. 16. I have
rejected him, is in that place directly, I have not chosen him. This will more
clearly appear by the Gospel of St. Matthew, Chap. 24. concerning the judgment
of the Elected and Reprobate, which shall be in the day of the Lord, Then,
says the Evangelist, one shall be taken, another left; shall be left, in that
place is clearly the same which is cast off and rejected. Thus prayed Solomon,
1 Kings 8. Let our God be with us, not leaving us, nor casting us off, but
enclining our hearts toward him: where observe first, to leave and reject,
with the most wise Prince, are the same. Mark secondly, That God enclines the
heart of man: which again when he does not incline, he is said to harden, as
also to hate when he does not love. As that is to be understood, I have loved
Jacob, and hated Esau. Lastly, that is a remarkable place in the Prophet
Jeremy, where he brings in God threatening destruction to the Jews, I will,
says the Lord, turn my back, and not my face to them in the day of their
destruction: There, to turn his back to the Jews, is to fight against them; to
leave, forsake, and fly from the Jews, is to overthrow, cast them down, and
destroy them.

Men therefore rejected and reprobate, are properly such who are left by God,
which is the same with not elected, or not received. Which way of expression is
familiar to Lawyers, with whom, to accrue, is not to decrease, and property of
increase is property of not decreasing: So it is amongst Divines, but
contrariwise; whatsoever glory and felicity is obtained by the Elect, by their
regeneration, besides the privilege of their creation, is said to be impaired
in other men, to whom it is granted to be men only, but nothing granted to them
extraordinary, or more than men.

St. Paul has given us a very good reason of this Election, in that exquisite
place of the Romans, in which he has put all things created in the hands of
God, as clay is in the hands of the Potter, when he makes of one lump one
vessel to honor, another to dishonor. And if we will lay our account well, we
shall never speak so highly of the goodness and mercy of God, but his bounty
and goodness will still exceed it toward all his creatures; whether he has
only imparted to them the honor of creation, or super-added the glory of
regeneration. Yea, there is nothing so abject in nature, which is not created
to the honor, and to the great honor of God. And as a Potter deals not
unworthily with that clay which he frames not to the gracing and adorning of
Cupboards, unless by way of comparison, when a vessel passes from the Wheel to
an use not disgraceful, but perchance less noble: So God intended no injury or
disgrace to those things which he created, though he made them less honorable,
unless that be thought a disgrace, which is rather a privation of honor: As
for example, to things without life it is an honor to have been created by
God. It is an honor to a vegetable to be animate, but to it likewise a
disgrace not to be animated with the honor of a sensitive: but it is likewise
an undervaluing to the sensitive, not to ri^e to the degree of a rational. It
is an honor to a rational man that by his reason he excels other creatures,
but to him likewise it is a disgrace not to be chosen to that second honor of
creation, by which the intellect exceeds reason, and one man exceeds another,
by a most high degree of glory. But thou, O man, what art thou, who complainest
of God, and expostulatest with him, who has been pleased to allow thee the
honor of creation, although he have not likewise chosen thee to the glory of
regeneration? Shall the work say to him that made it, Why have thou made me
thus?

CHAP. X.
Divine election is considered two manner of ways, in God, and in mystery. One
is from eternity; The other only distributed according to mystical occasions.
The one admits of all men indifferently; The other first chose the Jews, and in
them all the Nations of the world.
THat divine Election which is done by regeneration, and which is properly a
passing of men from men into gods, is considered two manner of ways, either in
God, or in the mystery. Election in God is from eternity, according to the
Apostle, in the Chap. 1. of the Epistle to the Ephesians, in which he says,
The Elect were before the creation of the world. Where there is no regard to
Nation or person, according to St Paul, Coloss. 3. That with God there is
neither Jew nor Gentile, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian nor
Scythian, bond nor free: To which likewise add that to the Romans, With God
there is no respect of persons.

Election in mystery is perfected in mystical dispensation of time, with a
mystical regard to the Nation, or with a mystical acception of the persons by
which God did first impart his mystical Election, to men peculiarly Elected:
from whom it pleased him to derive the same Election, and communicate it, as
from it is fountain, upon all men of all Nations, by a mystery and decree to us
unknown; which God has kept secret, and laid up in his treasury, as Moses says
in his Song. For which let us not go to find out his ways, which are
unsearchable, and speak nothing of him which rellishes not of the holy
Scripture, as far as it is granted to men to be wise in them.

But that for certain, and undoubtedly is set down in the Scriptures, that God
preferred the Nation of the Jews in his Election, before the men of all other
Nations. I say, in that Election which consisted in the true knowledge of God,
divine sanctity, regeneration, and resurrection to life eternal. Of the
testimonies of which thing, the Books of both Testaments are full, the chiefest
places of which in the progress of this Systeme, in their own places, and ever
one in their own order, I shall not slightly pass over. It appears likewise by
the Scriptures, that mystical rivers of mystical Election flowed from the Jews
and Jewish Nation, upon all Nations, and men of all Nations; which I shall make
appear by most clear arguments, when I shall come to handle the Election of the
Gentiles.

That Election which is in God from eternity, comes by Christ: as Christ is a
Spirit purely proceeding from God: a Spirit proceeding stable, incorruptible,
eternal; by whom indifferently the Jews and Gentiles were elected, regenerated,
and rise again. The Election in mystery, which is revealed in mystical
distribution of time, is accomplished by the same Christ, because that Spirit
was made man and flesh; Because, I say, that man of Judea, was born of the
choice seed of the Jews, from whom mystical Election did proceed; as also,
because he was rejected by the Jews, condemned, and crucified: he on the other
side rejected the Jews, and took in the Nations which had not been elected; and
because he shall fully take in both Jew and Gentile, when he shall return in
the Spirit; and because when his time is come, he shall raise both Jews and
Gentiles, being regenerate, with his perfect holiness, and crown them with
eternal life. God chose the Jews and the Gentiles in his eternal Election,
without making any difference betwixt Jew and Gentile. God preferred the Jews
before the Gentiles in that Election, which is imparted in the mystical
occasions of time: Yea, God again chose the Gentiles by a mystical Election,
whom he had chosen in the Jews before; inasmuch as he adopted straugers into
the Family of the Jews; or inasmuch as he grafted a wild Olive in the
Olive-stock of the Jews, which is St. Paul's comparison, Romans 11.

God chose those Jews and Gentiles by an eternal Election, into whom, without
any distinction of Nation, he from eternity infused that Spirit which is of
God, a Spitit proceeding, stable, incorruptible, eternal; by the virtue of
which they might be regenerate, and adorned with the glory of immortasity. The
Spirit of Christ is infused into the souls of the Elect, as the vegetative
faculty grows up with Trees and Plants: and as the rational faculty, being
joined to vegetative and sensitive is added to the faculties of men. That soul,
again, is more spiritly, which consists of most faculties. As for example, The
soul of a brute is more sprightly than the soul of a Plant; because a Brute
surpasses a Plant in its sensitive faculty. The soul of a Man is more sprightly
than the soul of a Brute, because he surpasses it by his reasonable faculty.
Therefore the souls of the Elect are most spiritly, above the souls of all other
men; because the Elect surpass all other men, by the Spirit of Christ, by the
Spirit of Regeneration, and that Spirit which proceeds from God: Which for that
cause the Kingly Prophet called the principal Spirit, Psalm 51. By virtue of
which, the Elect are called Spiritual; yea, spiritual in their bodies, by a
resurrection to a spiritual and eternal life.

The manner of composition of matter and conposition of Spirit is utterly
different; For that matter which has most materials cast upon it, swells to be
bigger, but that Spirit becomes more pure and clear which is composed of most
Spirits: And as in Arithmetic to multiply a minute is to to diminish it, and
divide it into subtiller parts: so that Spirit which is multiplied, and
rarefied by more Spirits, becomes more subtle. The Spirit of Christ is added,
yea multiplied and subtracted in the Elect, as it was multiplied in Elisha,
and as it was taken from Moses, and added to the sevent ^ men of the Elders of
Israel, Numb. 11. But these things are not belonging to the present discourse.
Truly I believe that Spirit of Christ which is infused into the Elect, to have
been that Leven laid up into three measures of meal, of which speaks the Gospel
according to St. Matthew, Chap. 14. I say that Leven, because it increases, and
is multiplied in the Elect; because it is mixed with those three faculties of
the soul, which are in men the rational, sensitive, and vegetative.

The Spirit of Christ, who from eternity is in the Elect by an eternal
election, without difference of Nations, is in them the strength and power of
regeneration, resurrection, and eternal life. That strength is showed forth,
and that power is brought unto act by a mystical election, and mystical
dispensations of time; by which the Jews were first elected, the Nations being
refused and rejected: which Jews by turn being ejected and neglected, the
Gentiles were taken into the place of the Jews, and by which afterward the
Jews and the Gentiles in one body shall be joined together in one Election, and
by whch at last the regeneration of both shall be perfected, that at the end of
time God may grant unto them both resurrection, and life eternal, without
difference of Jew or Gentile* which shall be the return from that mystical
Election, to eternal Election, the end and consummation of all mysteries.

The end then of this Systeme which I must handle and bring about, is set down
in that mystical Election which was first framed to the Jews, and into which
the Gentiles came, thrusting out the Jews, that both Jews and Gentiles, at
last, might come into one full salvation. I say, all this dispute shall be
concerning the Jews and the Gentiles. Of the Jews, who, without controversy,
sprung from Adam: and of the Gentiles, which, according to my supposition, I
hold to be created before Adam. Of the Adamite Jews, and of the Gentiles before
Adam.

The second Book of this SYSTEME OF DIVINITY.
CHAP. I.
Of the election of the Jews. The election of the Jews began from Adam the
first father of the Jews. The Jews the firstborn, because first elected. They
were not elected of their own deserving, but of the mere bounty of God, who
willed and chused them. Made of the same common earth of which other men were
created. God joined in marriage to the church of the Israelites. Father of the
Jews. The Jews esteem God, because the sons of God. God the Mother of the Jews.
Friend of the Jews. The Jews the friends of God.
WE shall understand, that the Gentiles are not sprung from the Lineage and
Kindred of the Jews, by that which shall be spoken of the Election of the Jews
and Gentiles, of both a part. We shall begin from the Election of the Jews.

The Election of the Jews is extolled in the 10 Chapter of Deuteronomy. above all things
where Moses spoke to the people of the Jews, Behold the heavens belong to the
Lord, and the heaven of heavens, the earth and all therein, yet the Lord was
joined to your fathers, and chused their seed after them. Deuteronomy agrees in
this with the Epistle of the Hebrews, where you may read this, That Christ no
where chose the Angels, but the seed of Abraham. For I placed the Foundation of
the mystical Election on Christ, inasmuch as he was made a Jew, and of the seed
of Abraham. But Adam is but a Type of Christ chief of the seed of Abraham, and
of the Jews, I say, a type going before his prototype in order and time. By
which, the mystery of Adam ^s finning is a presupposition of that mystery in
which Christ died for the sin of Adam, and in which the mystery of election is
perfected. Therefore we must review the Original of that mystical Election
according to the order and dispensation of time from Adam the first Father of
the Jews. And by the same argument, that salvation is from the Jews, salvation
will appear to come from Adam the first Father of the Jews. I say, from the
very same Adam from whom likewise came condemnation. Which salvation being
propounded to all men in Adam, men never had received it, if Adam had not lost
it. Certainly, Regeneration which is the second Creation, the Salvation of men:
and their Election took its Original from the Law which was given to Adam; and
from that death which from the transgression of that Law did arise. I say, from
the death of Christ, which is an abolition of the first Creation, and which
from Adam himself entered into force. But of this more exactly another time.

But by the same mystery, that the Original of Election flowed from Adam upon
all Men, it was propagated by the same Adam, as from his Offspring, upon his
Sons and Grandchildren, all the branches of the Jews. For, for that cause did
God choose the seed of the Jews, because he was before joined to their Fathers,
in the forementioned 10 Chap. of Deuteronomy; or, which is the same, because
God chose the Father of the Jews. For that Glue, by which God clave unto the
Fathers of the Jews, was their Election: for it is written in Exodus, The God
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob. This is my Name for ever, and
this my memorial from generation to generation. Yet take notice of what Laban
says to Jacob, Genesis 31. The God of Abraham, the God of Nachar, judge
betwixt us, and the God of their Fathers. Where observe, that God was not only
the God of Abraham, but the God of Nachar, Abraham's Brother, and the God of
Their, Abraham and Nachar's Father. Therefore the Election of the Jews must be
brought back to Adam, the first Father and the first head of the Jews. And
although the Jews are properly said to be the posterity of Judah, Jacob's
fourth Son, yet taking the denomination largely, we shall call those Jews
likewise who were begotten even from Adam unto Judah. Therefore God elected the
Jews, the Posterity of Adam and Abraham, because he was joynd to their Fathers
Adam and Abraham; that is, because he formed the Jews in Adam, and blessed them
in Abraham.

The promises of this mystical Election are found from Adam unto Moses, both
before and after the Flood, repeated often and many ways to the Fathers of the
Jews; but confirmed more peculiarly to the Jews, in Moses by a Covenant, as
Deuteronomy. 7. Where Moses speaking to the people of the Jews says, The Lord thy God
has chosen thee to be a peculiar people to himself, of all the Nations that
are upon Earth. God himself called that Nation his Firstborn, Exodus 4. Israel,
my firstborn, as also, the first fruits of the Harvest of the Lord, Jeremiah
Chap. 2. Both upon the same account, by which all the firstborn and first fruits
belong to God by property of Election, as also because the Jews first of all
received the mystery and grace of election. In which sense, I say, is to be
understood, Chapter 49. The Lord from the womb has called me: as also, the Kingly
Prophet, Psalm 22. Thou art he that took me from the womb, thou art my hope
from my mothers breasts. Upon thee was I cast from my mothers womb. From the
womb of my mother thou art my God. God called and chose Israel from the womb
of mystical Election; that is to say, the Jews were his firstborn natural
Children by mystical Election; nor did he think that they were to be esteemed
as the Gentiles, who were not called from the womb, nor chosen, nor esteemed,
as his natural Children, but adopted into this mystical Election, by a second
Election, and only esteemed the Sons of adoption. Hence it is that the Apostle,
Romans 2. ascribes first, Salvation, honor, and glory (which is Election) to
the Jews first, then to the Greeks, who are the Gentiles; for the Greek in that
place is the finer Gentile.

That the Jews had the first Election, not of their own desert, but of the mere
grace and mercy of God, from hence is apparent; because that mystical Election
proceeded from that eternal Election, by which the Jews were chosen from
eternity; that is, by which they were chosen before they were born, when they
had done neither good nor harm. Not for their works, as Paul says, but of the
mere bounty of God, who called and chose them. This eternal Election Isaiah
meant, Chapt. 63. Thou (says he) Lord art our Father, Abraham knew us not, and
Israel had no knowledge of us. The Prophet means, That God was the Father of
the Jews, when their Fathers were not born, at which time Abraham knew not the
Jews, and Israel had no knowledge of them, The Lord did choose thee, because he
loved thee; Abraham and Israel are here indifferently taken, Deuteronomy. 7. Not for
their righteousness, he chose them. To which add that place of 9 Deuteronomy. He
saved me, because he loved me. Psalm. 18. He has made us, and not we our
selves, sung David, King of the Jews, Psalm 100.

If you look upon the matter whereof the Jews were created, you will find
nothing that shall make them appear worthy of the Election; For they were made
up of the same flesh and blood as the Gentiles, and were tempered with the same
clay of which other men were framed; As is the clay in the hand of the Potter:
so art thou, O house of Israel, in the hand of the Lord. The Prophet alluded to
that very clay of which Adam the first Father of the Jews was made. That same
common and impure clay, which is observable. This we are taught, Genesis 3. In
which God is said to have cast Adam out of the Paradise of pleasure, which was
most choice Land, that he might till the ground of which he was made. Ground
not choice, but common, unclean, of which Adam and all other men were made; for
common, and not elect, and unclean, are the same, Act. 10. and many other
places of both Testaments. And for the same cause for which Adam was made of
common and impure clay, God is said to have found Israel, in a place of horror,
and wast wilderness, Deuteronom. 32.

Ezekiel likewise bears witness that the Jews were born unclean, as other men
were born unclean, Chapter 16. Where God speaks to the People of Israel his
Spouse, and the Jews, in these words, Thy root and thy lineage was from the land
of Canaan, thy Father was an Amorrhite, and thy Mother a Hittite; And when thou
wast born, thy navel was not cut, and thou wast not washed with water to
salvation, nor salted with salt, nor wrapped up in clouts. No eye spared thee,
to do any of these things for thee: but thou wast thrown out upon the face of
the earth, in the affliction of thy soul, in that day wherein thou wast born.
Passing by thee, I saw thee trampled in thy blood. And a little after. I spread
my garment upon thee, and covered thy shame; And I swore to thee, and entered
into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord, and thou were made mine, and I
washed thee with water, and clens'd thee from thy blood, and anointed thee with
oil. By which famous Text it appears, that the Jews sprung from the same root,
and were made of the same common earth as all the Gentiles were made of. For
the Amorrhites and the Hittites here are taken for any manner of Gentiles; as
likewise the Land of Canaan for a Land not yet chosen, an earth common and
unclean: I say God meant, that the Jews being born of a Father and Mother,
sprung from an unelected earth, were likewise themselves born unelected: that
they were born unclean, and defiled with the blood of their first creation,
naked and cast out: but by the bounty of God, passing by them, and pitying
them, they were washed, clothed, and received into the Covenant of mystical
Election.

By no better signification could the love of God to the Jews have been
expressed, or rather that holy love by which God in his mystical election was
joined to the Jews, than by that mystical Marriage, in which God is said to
have spread his garment over his Spouse, the people of Israel. Nor is there any
other more holy, or near knot, than that, by which two Lovers in the cement of
Matrimony make such a mixture of their souls, that two become one. Hence these
sweet Dialogues of Lovers, as it were equally matched, with which Solomon has
besprinkled his book of Loves, where God the Bridegroom, lover-like, speaks to
his Bride, the people of Israel. And where Israel his Spouse, likewise enflamed
with love, speaks to God her Husband with reverence and love. Hence those
mystical ornaments and gifts, with which God decks his Israelitish Bride, that
he might advance her from the clay of her creation, to the splendor of divine
glory, Ezechiel, Chap. 16, I clothed thee, says the Lord, with partie-coloured
garments, and shod thee with shoes of violet color, and girded thee with silk,
and put a fine garment upon thee, and decked thee with an ornament: and put
bracelets upon thine arms, and a chain about thy neck. And put a jewel upon thy
face, and rings into thine ears, and a crown of comeliness upon thy head, and
thou wast adorned with gold and silver, and thou wast clothed with silk, and
embroydery, of diverse colors. Thou did eat wheat and honey, and thou
becamest excellently fair, and rose up into a kingdom.

Again, God restified his paternal love to the Jews, when he chose them to be
his Sons, and did become their Father, nay, he graced his Election of them,
when he called them his honorable Sons. Ephraim is my honorable son, Jerem.
31. Whom he likewise named Gods, according to his own name. O Israel, I have
called thee by my name, Isai. 43. According to that solemn custom by which
children are called after the name of their Father. Of which see the 82 Psalm,
I have said ye are Gods, and all of you sons of the most High. Which Christ
himself interprets concerning the Jews, in the tenth Chapter of the Gospel
according to St. John. The Jews were there stoning Christ, because he called
himself a God; Christ reproving the Jews in that place, argues with them in
these words, Is it not written in your Law, I said you are Gods; If God said
that they were Gods to whom the word of God came, the Scripture cannot be
false. He whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world, you say
that he blasphemes, because I say I am the son of God. Which you may more more
easily and roundly polish thus, If the Scripture, O Jews called you Gods, to
whom the word of the Lord came, Why should not I be called the Son of God, who
am the Word of God? To this, that which is written in the beginning of the same
Psalm, God stood in the Congregation of Gods, and standing in the midst of the
Gods he gives Judgment, which are to be understood of the Jews: For that
assembly, in the midst of which God is said here to stand, was the Temple of
God, That place of the Throne of God, and the place of his fooostool, where he
dwelt in the midst of the sons of Israel, Ezechiel 43. In which Temple the
Assembly and Church of the Jews was kept. The Jews then were Gods, and the
Assembly of Gods was the Synagogue of the Jews, Moreover, God threatened in this
Psalm, those Gods and those Jews, that they should die like men; that is to
say, like the Gentiles, But you shall die like men; that is, like the Gentiles,
as afterward shall appear. David tells us the reason in the beginning of this
Psalm, why the Jews must needs dye as well as the Gentiles, because the Jews,
says he, would judge unrighteousness, and accept the face of a sinner; that is
to say, because the Jews, forgetting the Law of God, would imitate the iniquity
of the Gentiles, because they would turn themselves to the faces of the
Gentiles, and transform themselves from holy Jews, to be sinful Gentiles; for
the Gentiles were sinners, as after shall appear. The Jews are called gods
here, inasmuch as they are the Sons of God; and because Sons are said not only
to bear the names of their Parents, but likewise to represent their persons, I
say you are gods, and all of you the sons of the most high.

The Jews were Gods most dear and best beloved Children, whom God is said to
carry, as a man is said to carry his child, Deuteronomy. 1. As also, to instruct them,
as a man instructs his son, Deuteronomy. 8. To have carried them about, and to have
preserved them as the apple of his eye, Deuteronomy. 32. Which in Latin is translated,
to have carried them about in his eyes. Nor did God only love them as a Father
loves his children, but opened likewise the bowels of his mercy to the Jews,
like tender Mothers, who hugg their children close to their breasts. Whom he is
likewise said to have carried in his womb; And if the Mother would be
unmindfull of her Children, yet God would not be unmindful of the Jews; Isay
49. What shall I say more of that frienship, wherein God was pleased to join
himself to the Jews? God was joined to the Jews, and loved them. Deuteronomy. 10. The
seed of Abraham my friend, Isay 4. As also God calls Israel his darling, his
child of his household, his tender child, Jeremy 3. Which that I may more
nakedly and truly expound, God was tied to Israel in that bond of friendship,
by which the soul of Jonathan was tied to the soul of David, 1 Samuel chapter 18. and
by such a one as God himself loved his beloved Disciple. Therefore was Israel
called, the chiefest lover of the Lord, Deuteronom. 32.

God is also called the Shepherd of Israel, and the Jews are called the Sheep
of his Pasture: We are the people of the Lords pasture, and the sheep of his
hands, Psalm 95. Which was certainly a great sign of their Election: For a good
shepherd knows the number of his sheep, and calls them by their names: So God
knows the elect, and reckons their number: so God led the Jews with his rod and
his staff, and put them in a place of pasture, and brought them out by the
waters of comfort, Psalm 23. Lastly, there is no example of love, paternal
affection, motherly dearnesse, friendship and care; by which he chose, loved,
fed, cared for, and kept the Jews.

CHAP. II.
God King of the Jews. Jews the people of God. God the Lord of the Jews. Jews
the servants of God. The Jews called holy. Called just. The Jews elected for an
eternal people. Set apart from all the people of the earth, for the lot and
inheritance of the Lord.
THat love with which a good King is moved toward his people, comprehends the
affections of all other men. For a good King is Father, Pastor, and Friend to
his people; yea, head of his people, as the man is the head of the woman. And
in that regard Jerusalem, by which the people of the Jews is signified, and
which is called the City of the great King, is Queen and Princess, and Bride
to that King, in holy Authors: Therefore God is King of the Jewish people, and
the people of the Jews are the people of their own King. And not only King, but
God is the God of the Jews, in so far as as the Jews were Elected, and
themselves anointed to be Kings, and insomuch as God is above all Kings, as
Kings are above their Subjects.

But God became the God of the Jews, not only by Election and mind, but also by
Covenant and paction often confirmed and iterated: of which in another place we
shall speak more at large; as in Deuteronomy. 26. Thou have chosen the Lord to be thy
God, and the Lord has chosen thee to day to be to him a pecul^ar people; and
in the 27 Chapter, Thou art made this day the people of the Lord thy God.
Therefore God, as he is above Kings, and as he is a God not only good, but
exceeding good, was moved toward the people of the Jews, with all those
affections of love, compassion, and care above all the affections with which
good Kings are moved toward their people.

That love by which the Lord chose the Jews to be his people, was with command
and ^ower, inasmuch as he was made both their God and King; Inasmuch, I say, as
Kings govern their own people, and God go^erns and commands the Kings
themselves; by which right and title God is called King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. But the Lordship and Government of God over the Jews, was with majesty
and power; for their security and salvation, not of tyranny, to their ruin and
destruction. God said to Abraham, Do not fear. Genesis 15. I am thy defender, and
thy very great reward. As also Deuteronomy. 33. Blessed art thou Israel, who is like
to thee? a people who art saved by the Lord, who is the shield of thy help, and
the sword of thy glory. Therefore Gods chief rule and government was over the
Jews, for which reason he is called the Lord God of the Jews, and the Jews were
called the people of God, a peculiar people, and the Lords own Inheritance. A
people, in respect of God, by right of government, and Kingly power. A
property, in respect of the Lord, and by right of Lordship. By which
signification also the Jews are called the lot and inheritance of the Lord;
Israel my inheritance, Isay 19. To a part of which they come as servants, and
for which cause the Jews are called the servants of God. The seed of Israel my
servant. Chro. 1.16. I have said to thee Israel thou art my servant, Isa. 14.
And Psalm 123. Behold, as the eyes of the servants are in the hands of his
master, as the eyes of the handmaid in the hands of their mistresses: so are our
eyes toward the Lord our God. Where observe, that God is Lord and Mistress of
the Jews, as he was before their Father and Mother. It is so ordinary to call
the Jews the property, lot, and inheritance of the Lord, his servants, his
vineyard: as also his vessels, his household stuff, and whatsoever comes under
the compass of inheritance and Lordship. I say, all these things are so
frequent in holy Scripture, that if I should stay longer in rehearsal of them,
I should lose time.

God was bound to the Jews; and as it is in the 7. Chapter of Deuteronomy. God was
joined to them, he chus'd and loved them, that in requital the Jews might choose
God, be joined to God, and entirely love God. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, Deuteronomy. 6.
Yea, which was the greatest relation, symnathie, and tie of friendship betwixt
God and the Jews, God exalted the Jews to a name, to a praise, and to a glory,
that they might be honored by those, who were renowned, commended, and
glorious. Praise becomes the upright, Psalm. 33. As a girdle cleaves to the
loins of a man: so have I joined to my self all the house of Israel, that it
might be to me a people, a renown, a praise, and a glory.

But first of all, the Lord called the Jews unto holiness, that he might be
sanctified by those that were holy. Be ye holy, as I am holy. You shall be holy
unto me, because I the Lord am holy, Levit. 20. and Exodus 19. You shall be to
me a Kingly Priesthood, and a holy Nation. As you also may read every where the
Jews anointed and elected to be Kings, Priests, and Prophets; which are most
exquisite and choice names of holiness.

Because the Jews were elected unto holiness, they are commonly called a Holy
Nation, and a Holy People in the Bible; yea, and simply holy. In which St. Paul
is to be understood, Ephesians. 3. where, speaking of himself, he says, To me the
least of the Saints; that is, to me least of the Jews. For Paul, who was a
great example of Christian humility, was not such a one, as in regard of his
sanctity would boast himself a Saint. So must you likewise understand that,
Acts 16. That the nations may receive their lot amongst the Saints; that is to
say, that the Nations may become partakers of the blessing and election of the
Jews for the Saints in that place are the Jews. That lot, and those Saints, the
Apostle Peter has expounded in his 2 Epist. Chap. 1. Peter, says he, the
Apostle, to those who have their lot with us in the common faith which is in
Christ. But Peter wrote to the Gentiles, who had the same faith with the Jews,
the same blessing, the same election in Christ; for which cause, St. Peter's
Epistles are called General Epistles. To this add what Paul wrote to the
Gentiles the Colossians, chap: 1. Giving thanks to God, who makes us worthy of
a part of the lot of the Saints, in light. The Apostle makes himself a gentile
of gentiles, when he writes, who made us worthy. In the light, was meant, the
same Christ mentioned by St. Peter. Further, these things are cleared by St.
John, who was himself a Jew, in his general Epistle, or in his Epistle written
to all the Gentiles, Chap. 1. That you may likewise have fellowship of
blessedness with us. With us; that is, with the Jews. Therefore the Jews are
holy, and the Nation unholy, or the Gentiles. Psalm 33. Judge me, O Lord, and
judge my cause against the unholy Nation; That is Gentile, and not Israelitish.

For that holiness from which the Jews were called holy, the Lord taught his
people, as also for that he gave his word to Jacob, and his judgments to
Israel. And in that regard that the Jews were called to the justice of God,
they were called a just generation, Psalm. 14. The Lord is in the just
generation, that is, the Lord is in the nation and generation of the Jews. The
Jews were likewise called simply just, in which sense take those words of the
Wife of Pontius Pilate advising him not to meddle with Christ. Have nothing to
do with that just man, as likewise that of Luke; And the Jews observing, sent
deceiptfull men to take him in his speech, by pretending to be just, who should
feign themselves just, that is Jews, to whom, as the Priests and Scribes
believed, Christ would easilier discover his opinion of not paying tribute to
Caesar: As likewise the Histories of the Jews are called the Books of the just,
Josue 10. Is it not written in the books of the just, that is to say, in the
books wherein the acts of the Jews were written.

For that cause also was God so intimate with the Jews, that he entrusted them
with his laws and decrees, that they were admitted to the secrets of God, that
they were called a wise and understanding people. Deuteronomy. 4. Nor was there any
other Nation so honorable, which had those Ceremonies, just Judgments, and
the whole Law. In the same Chapter: What is all flesh that it should hear the
voice of the living God, which speaks out of the fire, and can live, cries out
Moses, Deuteronomy. 5. where observe the prerogative of the chosen Jews, and of the
second creation of men, which is not granted unto flesh, that is to say, to the
first creation; for flesh and the first creation consumes at the hearing and
sight of God, here the same Moses, in the same Chapter Behold the Lord our God
shows unto us his Majesty and his greatness, ye have heard his voice from the
middle of the fire, and we have found this day that a man can speak with God
and live. The holy Prophet could not be satisfied thinking upon the beginnings
and first fruits of the Jews regeneration, what should be their full election,
by force of which they received the fery words of God into their eyes and ears,
and by which they shone and did not burn with that holy lightning. Enquire of
the days of old which were before thee, from that day on which God created man
upon the earth, from the height of heaven to the foundation of it, if at any
time there was such a thing done, or was ever known, that a people should hear
the voice of God speaking out of the middle of the fire, as thou have heard,
and l^v'd.

Hence it is that they were the chief and choice in Gods esteem, that the Jews
were called a Nation drawing near unto God, that they were styled a great
Nation, nor that there was any other Nation so great, which had Gods drawing
near to it. Chapter 4. For this cause you shall read, That God carried them upon
Eagles wings. Exodus 9. and very often, that he freed them, and took them with a
strong hand, and stretched out arm. What Nation is like thy people Israel, for
whom thou have done so great and horrible things upon earth to redeem them.
Sam. 2. Chap. 7. And that was the matter that God appointed the Jews to be the
head, and not the rail of the Nations.

Nor did God only choose the Jews for a time according to the distiny of empires
and people, but God did choose his people for ever. Thou have confirmed Israel
to thy self for an eternal people. As David prophecies, Sam. 2. Chap. 7. And
many things to that sense we read in the Prophets, which I must handle another
time, and which was a special token of their election. The Lord would not have
the Jews defiled by? mixture of Nations, but set them apart for an inheritance
out of all the Nations of the earth, 1 Kings Chap. 8. I have set you aside from
all people, that you might be mine, Lev. 20. Hence it is that God is said to
have hedged, enclosed, and as it were with a wall of fence, surrounded Israel
his possession, his land, his vine. Hence it is, that the Church and the
Israelitish Spouse is called a fenced garden, and a sealed fountain in the
Canticles, least being placed in the highway, it might be trodden by
passengers; nor the South wind spoil her flowers, nor the Boar spoil her
waters. Because the Nations were not partakers of that mystical Election, by
which God had elected the Jews. Neither would God that the Jews should enter
into fellowship with the Nations, either in body or mind, either in Matrimony
or Religion, either in civil affairs, or in divine. Thou shall not enter into a
league with the Nations, or join thy self in marriage with them. Deuteronomy. 7. Thou
shall not give thy daughter to his son, nor take his daughter to thy son: that
the Jews might not be mingled with other Nations, who taught the worshipping of
Idols.

CHAP. III.
To the elected Jews, an elected Land was given. A holy Land, because the Land
of the holy. And the land of Promise, because it was promised with an Oath to
the Fathers of the Jews. A description of the Holy Land. That was a choice
Land, not of its own nature, but according to the pleasure of God, who blessed
and chus'd it. The land of the Jews. And for the Jews only to dwell in.
TO the elected Jews God gave elected ground, which was likewise called holy,
because the Land of the Holy. That there is elected and blessed earth; as
likewise rejected and cursed earth, is witnessed in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Chap. 6. A land, says he, drinking the shower that comes upon it, and bearing
seasonable fruit to them who tills it, receives a blessing from God; But that
which brings forth thorns and briars is rejected, and almost cursed, the end of
which is to be burnt. Which the Gospel according to St. Matthew expressed in
these words, Chap. 13. God loves not that earth which is in the way, (that is,
commune, trodden, and unclean) nor that which is full of briars: but he loves
good ground, in which the son of man may sow good seed. Nor am I ignorant, that
these things are allegorically spoken of the hearts of the Elect; but we must
likewise know, that Christ here meant literally the Holy Land, in which the
sanctified Jews (who are meant by good seed) shall be sown by Jesus Christ;
which sowing, we shall have occasion to set forth more at large.

That the Land of Canaan which the Jews inhabited, was that choice blessed
earth, and beloved of the Lord, is set down in the 8. of Deuteronomy, where
Moses called it, A Land of rivers, waters, and fountains: in the fields of
which, should break out pools of water. A Land of corn, barley, and vines, in
which grow olives and pomgranats. A Land of oil and honey, where the Jews
should eat their bread without want, and should enjoy abundance of all things.
A Land, which Ezechiel Chap. 20. calls, An excellent Land amongst all Lands,
and chief of all Lands. Which therefore God called a high land, Deuteronomy. Chapt.
32. God has placed Israel upon a high land, to eat the fruit of the field, to
suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the most hard rock, butter from the
heard, and milk from the sheep, with the fat of the Lambs and Rams of the sons
of Basan, with the marrow of wheat, and that he might drink the most choice
blood of the grape. Canaan was called a high land, not for the lying of it, for
it is a Valley according to that in Numb. 14. The Canaanite and Amalekite dwell
in the valleys; which he had said in the former and thirteenth Chapter, By the
Sea, and near the streams of Jordan. For which cause Esdras called that Land a
Furrow, Book 4. cha. 5. Thou have, says he, of all the world chosen one
furrow, that is, Canaan, which is a valley, Therefore it was called high, for
its fruitfulness, and the excellency of goodness, by which it was advanced
above other Lands.

The Land of Canaan, was likewise called The Land of Promise: because God by a
peculiar Covenant promised it to the Fathers of the Jews, It is written Genesis
12. That God appeard unto Abraham when he came into the Land of Canaan to which
he led them by the hand, and said to him, To thy seed will I give all this
Land. And in the 15 Chapter. In that day the Lord made a Covenant with Abraham,
saying, I Will give this Land to thy seed. This promise was confirmed to Isaac,
the son of Abraham, 26. Genesis in these words, Abide, says the Lord, in the Land
which I shall name to thee. That Land was Canaan, For to thee and to thy seed
will I give all these Lands, fulfilling my Oath, which I swear to thy Father.
Thirdly, this was likewise confirmed in Jacob, the son of Isaac. The Land
wherein thou sleep, says the Lord, I will give to thee and to thy seed.
Hence that 104. Psalm. Remember for ever the Covenant of his speech; which he
ordained for a thousand generations, which he promised to Abraham, and his Oath
unto Isaac, which he appointed Jacob for ever, and Israel for an everlasting
Covenant, saying, to thee will I give the Land of Canaan, the lot of thy
inheritance: God declared this Oath himself more openly, Exodus 4. I have made a
Covenant with the Israelites that I should give them the earth, over which I
lifted up my hand, that I might give it to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Psalm
104. Canaan is called The lot of Isreal's inheritance. According to which
signification, the people blessed God, Psalm. 16. Because their lot had fallen in
a fair ground.

That Land of Promise, Oath or Covenant, which commonly and improperly is
called Canaan, because Canaan was only a region or a Province of it. I say,
that Land God describes to Abraham in the 15 of Genesis, I will give thee this
land from the river of Egypt to the great River Euphrates. And of this God
spoke to Jacob in the Vision of the Ladder, Thou shall be stretched out in it
from the East to the West, from the South to the North. These degrees are
marked out in length and breadth, Exodus 23. By these words, I will put thy
bounds from the Red sea to the sea of Palestin, from the desert to the River.
To which, add that of the 89 Psalm. Understand also by this red Sea, not of
the Gulf of Arabia, but all that length of the Ocean which is saild about from
the Gulf of Arabia to the Gulf of Persia, which is either the red or Erythraean
sea, or more properly the Idumaean, from Esau or Edom, whose posterity
inhabited the borders of that Sea, which in the Hebrew is Edom, in the Greek
Erythraean, in the Latin Red, from whom this Sea took its name, not from the
color, but derived from the first Prince. Add likewise Psalm 89. I will put
his right hand in the Rivers. Understand those rivers Nilus and Euphrates,
according to Genesis before-cited, Chap. 15. I will give thee this Land from
the river of Egypt to the great River Euphrates. Nilus, by excellency, is the
River of Egypt; For although in the borders of Egypt and the Holy land there is
found a little stream, which is called The River of Egypt, and the River of
Nile. Yet understand the Nile it self, that the borders of the Holy Land may be
fair and large, from a very great river to a great river, from Nilus to
Euphrates. And take Nilus here, not as it divides Africa, but the mouth of the
Sea of Alexandria, into which Nilus flows. This mouth of the Sea of Alexandria,
is called Nile: because this Sea is said to be changed into Nile, and to
receive the color and taste of Nile it self, where the Sea here with seven
mouths disgorges it self into the Sea; so Lucan in the end of his first book.

Where by the famous Nile the sea is changed. The desert is stretched from the
border of the sea of Alexandria, and continued along by the border of the gulf
of Arabia, which by a name largely taken the Hebrews call the flood of Egypt,
where it disgorges it self into the Red Sea, and that is it which is meant in
Exodus 23. I will put the bounds from the desert to the River. That is to say,
from the Border of the Sea of Alexandria, which is Nile, and the Border of the
gulf of Arabia, to Euphrates, which is here simply called the River. These bounds
then were appointed to the Holy Land: the Red Sea, which is the Ocean and the
Sea of Palestine, which is the Mediterranean; on one hand, Nilus; and Euphrates
on the other. And here really was that fenced Garden of the Jews: nor could
there be one better fenced, then one environed with two Seas, and two great
Rivers. That you may not only imagine, but see plainly this description, I
will here insert the Map of it.

First you must take notice, That as the Jews were not chosen according to
their own desert, being made of that common clay, but of the mere grace of God.
So the Land of the Jews was good, and chosen not of its own nature, but of the
pleasure of God, who blessed and chose it, which Moses tells us in Deuteronomy
11. That Land, says he, is not like the Land of Egypt, where after the seed is
sown, they dig rivers to water it, but it is of hills and fields, expecting
rain from heaven to water it, which thy God visits always, and his eyes are
upon it from the beginning of the year to the end of it. Therefore that ground
was fertile not of its own nature and disposition, as the Land of Egypt, which
is accounted of all Nations the fertillest upon Earth: but because God had
blessed it, because he gave it rain in his own time, and opened to it his good
treasure, as it is Deuteronomy. 29. and Chapter 33. because the heaven mizled with
rain upon it: and that I may end in a word, because God descended most upon it.

God provided that elect earth for the elected Jews, Ezech. 20. That Israel
might dwell in it alone, and without fear, Deuteronomy. 33. That is, undefiled with
admiration of Nations, which ascribe to that chief right of election what we
handled in the former Chapter, in which God set aside the Jews for a peculiar
people and Nation, out of all the peoples and Nations of the earth; whom being
chosen for his portion and the lot of his Inheritance, he likewise placed in a
choice Land, that they might inhabit it alone without fear.

map of Terra Sancta TERRAE SANCTAE DELINEATIO.


CHAP. IV.
Jerusalem the holy City of the holy Land, the Temple placed in Jerusalem, on
the forked hill of Sion. Eternal hills. The City of David. The City of the
great King. Of the Kings of the Jews.
JErusalem, which was chief of the Cities of the Holy Land in greatness and
election, advanced its Head above the rest, and was called the Princess of the
Provinces, in the first of the Lamentations of Jeremiah, which God had
peculiarly chosen out of all the Provinces and Cities of Israel: it was called
Jebus, which is, a treading under foot, when it was numbered among the Cities of
the Nations: but being chosen, and made a City of the Jews, it was called by
God Jerusalem, that is, The sight of peace, Baruc. 5. Her foundations are in
the holy mountains, and glorious things are spoken of her, Psalm 87. For that
called the faithful City, a City holy and elected, and adorned with other great
Titles, well known in holy Writ.

The Temple placed in it, was adorned with an Elogy of most choice holiness, I
have chosen and sanctified that place, that my name may be there for ever; and
my eyes and my heart continue there always, 2 Chronicles. 7. That Temple was built
upon the Mount of Sion; God laid the foundation of the mount Sion for
everlasting, Psalm. 48. Hence those eternal Hills, Deuteronomy. 33. as also, Genesis
49. which are probably those two on the forked Hill of Sion; upon the which the
Temple of the Lord was built, as likewise the City of David, or of the King:
for which cause, Jerusalem is said to be built upon the holy Hills, Psalm. 87.
now cited.

It was called The Temple of the Lord, the rest of the Lord, and his
footstool, the place of the Throne of God, the place of his footsteps, where
he dwells in the midst of the sons of Israel, Ezech. 43. for which cause the
Hill of Sion is called the City of God, because God dwelt in it. God is great
and very highly to be praised in his City, in his holy hill: This God is our
God for ever, Psalm 48. Our God is only excellent in Sion, cries out Isaias,
in the ravishment of his Spirit, Chap. 3. only that is chiefly, by excellency
and beyond all others excellent. In which sense, that Hill is likewise called a
fat mountain, and curdled, Psalm 68. For all the rest of the Land of Canaan and
Jerusalem, flowed with the milk of election and sanctity of the Lord: but the
Hill of Sion was the cream of that milk, that milk thickened and curdled, a fat
cheese pressed out of the milk of the election and sanctity of the Lord: but
that City was likewise called, The city of the solemnity of the Jews, Isay 33.
Because all the Jews met there to pay their Vows and Sacrifices to God; as
also, for their solemn joy and festivals, according to the command of the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 12. In Sion you shall be joyful before your God, you and your families,
in all wherein the Lord shall bless you: there you shall feast before the Lord
your God, you, your sons, and daughters, and your Levites: there shall be the
rest of the Lord, and your rest.

The Temple and Jerusalem are for the most part joined, 2 King^ 12. In this
Temple and in Jerusalem, will I put my name for ever. And in Joel, In the hill
of Sion and in Jerusalem there shall be salvation, he that calls upon the Lord
there shall be s^ved. We must hear the Prayer of Solomon, wherein he attests
God in the behalf of Jerusalem and the Temple, Kings 1. Chap. 8. Wheresoever,
said he, thou shall send thy People, they shall pray to thee toward the City
which thou have chosen, and toward that house which I have built to thy Name,
and thou shall hear their prayer in heaven. More I will say of the holy and
chosen Land of Jerusalem, and of the Temple of God, when I shall speak of the
return of the Jews, which shall be their full Election.

In the top of the hill of Sion stood the Palace of the King, which was called
The City of David, and which the Lord himself called the City of the great
King. Of this David, and of this great King we shall afterward have a great
discourse. In the mean time, we must speak something of the Kings of the Jews,
who sat upon the high Throne of the City of David, of whom this was the
original. We said before that the Lord God was King of the Jews. A God, to help
them with heavenly assistance. A King, to stand for them in the battle, to
advance the shield, draw the sword, and put to flight the ^nemies of the Jews.
But because when the Jews began to be very stiff-necked it often came to pass,
that God turned from them, and going from home, as the Gospel speaks; con^inued
long absent; then the Jews, wthout a King and a Defender, were open to the
incursions of their enemies, who spoiled them, and most cruelly did destroy
them utterly. They fearing lest this might again befall them when Samuel their
Judge was deed, as also his Sons not walking in his ways, requested a King, who
might judge them according to the manner of other Nations, who might go out
before them, and fight their battles for them. Which troubled Samuel: Nor did
the Lord slight the Petition of the Jews. Hearken to them in all that they say
to thee; for they have not rejected thee, but me. Sam. 1. Chap. 8. Which open
thus, I was, says the Lord, God and King of the Jews by Covenant; And I
appointed thee, O Samuel, by that Kingly power which I had over the Jews, and
thy sons to be their Judges: Therefore, having rejected thee and thy sons from
being Judges, they have not rejected thee, but me, who appointed thee. And in
that wherein they trespass against thee, they more hainously and grievously
trespassed against me; For in this they plainly discovered their thoughts, how
little confidence they have in me, and how weakly their hopes are fixed upon
me. But because they are so unbeleeving, and hardened in the foolishness of
their hearts, Harken to them, and set a King over them. Yet truly God had
promised before in the desert, that he would set a King over the Jews Deuteronomy. 17.
Yea God had promised the Jews Kings, at what time he blessed Abraham, and the
Jews in Abraham, Kings shall come out of thee. And Jacob proph^cying, and in
his sons blessing all the Jews, The Scepter shall not depart from Juda.

CHAP. V.
The Gentiles elected in the Jews by a mystical ^lect^on. Esteemed the sons of
God, because elected in the Jews. And grafted in the Jews.
AFter we have spoken of the election of the Jews, it is fit that in order we
should speak of the election of the Gentiles, which sprang from the Jews, as
our Lord Jesus Christ himself most openly expresses to the Samaritan Woman, in
the fourth Chapter of the Gospel according to St. John, Salvation is by the
Jews. But that which God the Son told this Gentile woman, God the Father long
before promised the Fathers of the Jews, first to Abraham, Genesis Chapter 12.
All the kinreds of the earth shall be blessed in thee. Then in the following
Chapter, That all the Nations of the earth should be blessed in Abraham, The
Angel which was the Lord himself, did bear witness. Likewise this promise gave
God unto Isaac, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis
26. And to Jacob, Chap. 28. All the nations of the earth shall be blessed in
thee and thy seed. Therefore it appears, that in the Fathers of the Jews, and
in their seed, and in the Jews themselves, all the Kinreds, all the People, all
the Nations, and Tribes of the earth were to be blessed, but these Kinreds,
Nations, People and Tribes, we shall merely call those Gentiles, which are
without the Kindred, Nation, People, and Tribe of the Jews.

That blessing by which the Gentiles were blessed in the Jews, is, The election
of God in mystery: which was first proper to the Jews, and which by derivation
and participation was from the Jews powered upon the Gentiles. Therefore, if God
have preferred the Jews in a mystical election; let the Gentiles have next
place with him in the same election. But by no nearer title did the Jews cleave
to God, than by this; that they were the firstborn in this mystical Election.
That mystical begetting of the Jews, was a kind of a mystical nature, by which
the Jews were acknowledged as natural Sons. For which, God is said to have
carried them in his womb, Isa. 46. To which portion or degree of nature,
because the Gentiles were neither called nor chosen, adoption was granted to
them, which is an imitation of Nature; by which being adopted into the family
of the Jews, they were esteemed the Sons of the Jews, not according to flesh
and nature, but according to that adoption which is perfected by mystical
nature. I say, by that same election, by which the Jews are the Sons of God in
the first degree of nature, and by which the Gentiles adopted in the Jews, are
called the Sons of God: but because they come in by a second degree, by
adoption, are only called and esteemed adoptive Sons. In which sense St. Paul
is to be understood, Ephesians. 1. where he says, That God did pr^destinate, or
choose, the Gentiles into the Election of the sons of God; that is to say, of
the Jews.

The Gentiles were adopted into the family of the Jews by that mystical
election; at which time they were made the sons of Abraham. And they were made
the sons of Abraham, when Abrams name was changed, and instead of that, he
called Abraham; and then when Abram was made Father of the Genti^es. Thou shall
be called Abraham, says the Lord to Abram, Genesis 17. Because I have appointed
thee father of many Nations. Abraham was made father of the Gentiles, by the
same right as the Gentiles were made sons of Abraham, and sons of the Jews in
Abraham. St. John Baptist meant that election, where reproaching the Jews, he
affirms, That God out of these stones could raise up seed to Abraham. For he
can raise up stones, who can call things that are not, as if they were; as to
this purpo^e St. Paul spoke, Romans 4. That is to say, who can call men out of
stones, and turn the stones themselves to be men: stones, I say, that are
distant from men in the whole scheme of animals: I say, God, that could do
these things, which are without and beyond nature, could likewise adopt
Children to Abraham, which is an imitation of nature.

Adoption, says he, is an holy thing, which imitates the benefit of nature:
But by how much truth is more holy than Imitation, by so much is nature more
holy than adoption. Nature and adoption make sons, nature true ones, adoption
feigned ones. Adoption transfers men from one Family to another, and from one
name to another. It changes the kindred, which is fiction and imitation; but
cannot change the blood, which belongs to nature and truth. But neither can
adoption alter the condition of the lineage. As for example, it can make sons,
but of libertines cannot make free, or of servants freemen. The mystical
adoption is otherwise, by the force of which, the nature of the Gentiles is
turned into the nature of the Jews. That which is imitation of nature in civil
adoption, is nature it self in the mystical: And truth, whose image is
pretended only by the Law, is by the mystery of this adoption really begotten.
Therefore the Gentiles change both their kind and their lineage by adoption, and
translation into the Nation and family of the Jews. And because they change
their stock, they change likewise the condition of their stock; for the
Gentiles become by that adoption not only sons, but of servants freemen, and
freeborn. For all the efficacy of this adoption, is to liberty: and all such
who by right of that adoption come to a part of the liberty of the sons of God,
claim a liberty.

That mystery, is the force and power of the Spirit of Christ, by which the
Gentiles are changed into spiritual Jews, and into the true sons of Abraham,
not according to the nature of the flesh, but according to the nature of
Promise and Spirit, which is the true adoption and election of the Gentiles.
Yea, Promise is that election, by which alone the Jews are what they are; by
which the Jews themselves are the sons of Abraham, true Israelites, and true
Jews, not according to the flesh, but according to Promise and to Spirit. For
all those that descended of Israel, are not Israelites, nor those who are the
feed of Abraham all his sons: but in Isaac shall thy seed be called; that is to
say, not the sons of the flesh, or the Jews, but those that are called sons of
the Promise in his seed, Romans 9. I say, that promise is it which makes true
Israelites, and true sons of God. But also the Jews without that shall lose
their own family, which is Gods, and their father Abraham, they would leave off
to be what they are, and of Jews become Gentiles, and by crosse-changing of
their kindred, of sons of God become sons of men.

The Scripture more significantly expresses this conversion of the kindred of
the Gentiles, into the kindred of the Jews, where it affirms them not only to be
adopted, but ingrafted in the Jews: That as a branch which is grafted grows to
be one with the tree wherein it is grafted, whether it be grafted by plastring,
or incision. I say, as by incision one tree is changed into another, and of two
arises one: so the Gentiles by ingrafting become one with the Jews: as also by
force of that ingrafting are changed to be the very Jews, and so from two
Nations are made one people of God.

Besides, there is a difference betwixt grafting of one tree into another, and
grafting of the Gentiles into the Jews; for an unfertil tree uses not to be
grafted in an unfertile one, nor a wild one on a kindly and right stock; but
the branches of the Gentiles, b^rren of holiness, were grafted in the Jews,
who were holy, and fruitful in holiness of works, and those wild ones,
implanted in the right and manured stock. Which St. Paul has taught us, Romans
11. where he compared the Gentiles to a wild Olive, but the Jew, in which the
Gentile is engrafted, to a good and right Olive. Likewise Saint Paul in that
place made that wild Olive partaker of that juice and fatness which is in the
true Olive. Therefore the Gentile being sanctified, or this wild Olive turned
into a a true Olive, may well wonder at the new fruits of his works, his new
sap, which is none of his own.

CHAP. VI.
Gentiles different from the Jews in Kindred and Original, in as much as they
are ingrafted in them. Gentiles called Atheists, because without a God: called
simply men, and Sons of men, and foolish, wicked etc.
WE shall prove the Gentiles different in their Original from the Jews, both by
their adoption, and by their engrafting in the Jews: for adoption concerns
strange Families; and trees of several kinds are grafted one in another. Nor
am I ignorant, that Kindred by the Female side, and Cosens might be adopted for
Sons: but we must observe, that Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2. set down the Gentiles
that were received into the Family of the Jews, strangers, aliens, unknown, far
distant from the Family of the Jews; which in that place the Apostle calls a
Commonwealth; and in regard of that, calls the Gentiles their fellow-Citizens
with the Saints, that is to say, of the Jews. But this Commonwealth, so to be
understood, as that the Jews and the Gentiles are both the Domestics and Sons
of God.

I know likewise, that in Trees of the same kind sweet are grafted in sweet,
and true stocks in true ones: but you must take notice, that in Romans 11. Saint
Paul has a twofold grafting, according to Nature, and against Nature. The
Apostle has given us in that place one example of grafting, according to
nature, when he sets down that by which he tells us, the Jews shall sometimes
be again grafted in their own Olive. Again, he has given us an instance of
grafting against Nature, which the Gentiles are grafted in the Jews: That
against Nature, he calls this, when the Gentiles, different in original from
the Jews, against the Nature of their stock, were grafted the wild stock in
the tame one. Nature then, which is the Original and Lineage of the Gentiles, is
different and not the same with the Original and Lineage of the Jews.

And by no more distinguishing and congruous difference could the Gentiles have
been noted different in stock and Original from the Jews, th^^ by such a
presupposition which grants the original of the Gentiles, or of the first men
to have such a beginning as was determinable from Adam, and accounts them
created many Ages before Adam; and, which again affirms, that the Jews were
later, and created in their first Father Adam, from whom to us according to the
vulgar account, there is no more then five thousand six hundred and seventeen
years.

Yea, you will say, If adoption admits only, in imitation of Nature, the
younger into the Family of the elder, according as Sons ought to be younger
than their Fathers. What Monster of adoption is that, by which, the Jews being
younger adopted the most ancient Gentiles to be their Sons. And again, if in
regard of the same age, a Tree is said to adopt a graft: I say, if a tender and
new plant is grafted in an old and strong stock, what new manner of grafting is
that, by which the most ancient Gentiles shall be grafted in the later Jews?
and if you look upon the original, quite green. I answer, That the Gentiles in
their Creation and Nature are indeed ancienter then the Jews: but the Gentiles
are said to be adopted into the Jews by that mystical Election, not by Creation
and Nature: of which, Genesis gives a fair instance, where Esau was elder, but
younger in election.

The Apostle calls those Gentiles, who according to my supposition were the men
of the first Creation, Atheists, or without a God, in respect to that
opposition by which that true God the Creator of Heaven and Earth: was not the
God of the Gentiles, as he was God of the Jews; and, as the Gentiles did not
enjoy him for their God, as did the Jews. And that was for this reason, because
God had discovered himself to the Nation of the Jews, and to them alone, but
not so to other Nations: wherefore the Jews are called The people of God. Hence
it is that God speaks to them friendly, Ezekiel 34. You are my flock, you are
the flock of my pasture, you are my men.

The Jews are the men of God, Let the Nations know, because they are men,
says, David, Psalm. 19. The Gentiles are called Men simply, not the men of God;
in that regard, because at first being simply created, they could have no
relish of God: for God is above men: and because they could have no taste of
God, nor draw near to him, they were without God, nor deserved to be called the
men of God. Wherefore men simply so called in holy writ, are meant the
Gentiles: so in Psalm. 66. Thou have put men over our heads; that is to say,
thou have set the Gentiles over our heads, which are to be understood of the
Jews vanquished by the Gentiles, to which refer that of Jeremiah, Thou have
given Israel to the Nations, and made him contemptible to men. Where Nations,
Gentiles, and men, are the same. Isaiah exhorts the Jews, Chap. 51. Fear not
the revilings of Nations. Then in the 6 Chap. of restoring the Jews, and
putting the Gentiles to flight, God, says he, shall set the men a far off, and
she that was desolate shall be multiplied in the midst of the earth. Men in
that place, are the Gentiles, whom God should drive out of the Land of the
Jews, that the Jews might again be restored to it. But for the same reason, as
the Gentiles were called Men, they were likewise called, the sons of men. Of
which, there is as many witnesses, as there are Chapters almost in both
Testaments: for which cause it will be here in vain to quote those innumerable
Autorities. The Gentiles were called, the sons of men, by way of opposition, as
the Jews were called the sons of God.

Those Gentiles which were called Atheists and without a God, were called
wicked, foolish, corrupt, abominable in their iniquities, Psalm. 9. Thou have
reproved the Nations, and the wicked shall perish; that is, the Gentile. Again,
in the Psalm 14. which is likewise the 53. The fool has said in his heart,
That there is no God. Which are to be understood of the Atheistical Gentile.
They are become corrupt and abominable in their in quities. There is none that
does good. God looked down from heaven upon the sons of men, that he might see
if there were any that understood and sought after God. They have all gone
astray, they are become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no, not
one. This was a lively portraiture of the Gentiles, because they are, and are
simply called the sons of men, and have nothing in their Nature to seek or
reach God. The Prophet mean'd the Gentiles in that Psalm, as it appears by the
following Verse, Will they not all know, who work iniquity, who devour my
people, as one would eat bread? Which could not be understood, but of the
Gentiles devouring the Jews. I know that Saint Paul did cite this Psalm to show
that both the Jews and Gentiles were involved in sin; but it is to be
observed, that the Apostle in that Chapter did take the Jews, not as they were
elected, but as they were simply men; as they were of the same peccant matter,
and subject to be defiled with the same sin.

The Psalm calls the Gentile here foolish, which the Psalm 92 calls a fool. The
foolish man shall not know, and the fool shall not understand these things.
Wherefore the Lord threatens the Jews, he would provoke them with the foolish
Nation, Deuteronomy. 32. Which foolish Nation are the Gentiles, taken for a Nation
opposite to the Jews, which is called a wise Nation. The Gentiles are called in
this place wicked, abominable in their iniquities. Whom Sam. 2. Chap. 7. you
may hear called, The sons of iniquity. The sons of inquity shall not afflict
the Jews as before. This is written in the 1 of Chron. Chap. 17. The sons of
iniquity shall not tread upon them, as at the beginning. By which it is meant,
that the Jews shall sometimes shake off the yoke of the Nations; For the sons
of iniquity are in that place the Gentiles. So understand that in the 24 of
Acts, where Paul says this of himself to the Jews, Having, says he, hope in
God, whom they also expect the resurrection of the just and the unjust. By the
just, understand the Jews. By the unjust the Gentiles: for so meant the Apostle
of the Gentiles, that the Gentiles should be partakers of the blessings of the
Jews, according to the faith of the Jews; and they should be partakers also of
the resurrection of the Jews, according to the belief of the Pharisees. Which
the Pharisees did expect, and which St. Paul, according to the doctrine of the
Gospel foretold should be common to both Jew and Gentile. You shall hear the
Jews standing on the bottom of their election, for a different reason, not
called wicked, but the worshippers of the true God; not unwise, and foolish,
but wise, holy, and incorrupt; just, not abominable in their iniquities, in all
holy writ.

CHAP. VII.
That the Gentiles are called Sinners.
IT is likewise common in both the Testaments, that the Gentiles are are called
Sinners, by way of opposition, as the Jews are called holy and just. This was
Gods intention, that the Jews might be turned away from the fellowship and
customs of the Gentiles. Therefore David calls him Blessed, which had not gone
into the council of the ungodly, and had not stood in the way of sinners; but
whose will was in the Law of the Lord. That is to say, he thought that Jew
blessed, who had not betaken himself to the Gentiles; but had stood close in
his estate of Jewish election and sanctity; who was a Jew, not according to the
flesh, but according to the Spirit, and was constant in the meditation of Gods
Law. For a Jew in this place, is he who is addicted to Gods Precepts. Gentiles
called those who were wicked and sinners every where in the same Kingly
Prophet, Psa. 37. The sinner watches the just man. And a little after; The
sinner watches the just man, and seeks to put him to death; That is to say, the
Gentile lies in wait for the Jew. For the sinner is the Gentile, and the just
man is the Jew; yea, understand this whole Psalm of the Jews and Gentiles; for
there is a perpetual opposition betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles.

There is a remarkable place in the 85 Psalm, of that mixed cup, which God in
revenge of the Jews, shall give at the end of time to the Nations to drink, and
which the Revelation speaks of, Chap. 14, and 18. All the sinners of the earth,
says the Psalmist, shall drink the dreggs of it. Which in its own place I shall
show to be understood of the Gentile, and in most places of the holy Scripture.
The Psalm 109. is likewise sung of the last rejection and curse of the people
of the Jews: where you shall read among other things, Appoint thou a sinner
over him; that is, put the Gentile over the Jew, and let the Jew be the tail,
who was before the head.

The New Testament has more expressly taken notice of the Gentiles for sinners;
especially St. Paul, in the second to the Galatians, where he says concerning
himself and Saint Peter, We, says he, by nature are Jews, and not sinners of
the Gentiles, which were by nature and original Jews, not Gentiles. To this
add what our Savior says, Luke 6. speaking to the Jews, If you do well by
them which do so by you, what thanks have you? for sinners do that likewise.
Sinners in that place are Gentiles; for it belongs to a Gentile, and to
humane nature, to do good to such, as do good to them. Yea, it is common to
all other creatures to return a like for a like, which is a natural
retaliation. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, Isaiah 1.
It is a natural thing therefore to return thanks, and one good thing for
another; but it is a supernatural blessing to return a good deed for a bad. And
God to this supernaturality invites his Jews. To these add, that which follows
in the same Saint Luke in the same Chapter, If you lend to those from whom you
hope to receive, what thanks have you? for sinners lend to sinners, that they
may receive alike: but love you your enemies. Which is the same, as if the Lord
had said, The Gentiles lend to their Friends for usury and benefit: but O you
Jews, my men, do not lend upon use to the Gentiles: but lend them freely, and
without use and hope of gain. Yea, let all thy things be common to him, as to
thy Friend, which is your duty, as being holy and elected in the Lord, and to
whom it were base and shameful to emulate the deeds of the Gentiles, who were
neither elected, nor holy.

The Jews thought Christ a Gentile, not a Jew, because he had healed a blind
man on the Sabbath day, in the Gospel of Saint John, Chap. 9. This man, say
they, is not from God, who regards not the Sabbath, but a sinner. Which is as
much as if he had said, This man is not a Jew but a Gentile: for the man from
God or of God, as we said before, is the Jew; the sinner, the Gentile. It is
likewise known, the Jews were wont to reckon Christ amongst Eaters and gluttons
of the Gentiles, because he was a Friend of Publicans and sinners, and because
he came into their houses and sat with them, as also, because he received
Publicans and sinners. Both with the Jews are unlawful, either to enter into
the Gentiles, or to receive them. Publicans and sinners are put together in
many places of the Gospel, because the Publicans or Farmers of the Customs,
which the Jews paid to the Romans, were Gentiles or sinners amongst the
Gentiles.

We must likewise consider the answer which our Savior gave to the Jews when
they enquired of his Disciples, why he sat and did eat with publicans and
sinners: I came not, says he, to call the just, but sinners to repentance:
which is, I came not to call the Jews, but Gentiles to repentance. For Christ
did prophecy there should be a call of sinners and Gentiles, of all such as
would hear his voice, and a rejection of the sinners and Gentiles of all such
which would not hear his voice. Like to this is that Mat. 26. The Son of man
shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners: for the Son of man was betrayed
into the hands of men, or sinners, or Gentiles, which is the same; that by the
Romans, who were Gentiles, and not by the Jews, he might be condemned and
crucified.

Moreover by this observation of sins we excellently find the meaning of that
place to the Galathians, Chap. 2. where you shall read this, But if desiring to
be justified in Christ, we be found sinners, is God the Author of sin, etc?
Which you must thus open and understand, But if we Jews desiring to be
justified in Christ: for here he discourses of the Jews who would not live
after the manner of the Gentiles. If we Jews, says he, desiring to be
justified in Christ, the God of the Gentiles, are found to be Gentiles, that
is, to degenerate into sinful Gentiles, shall Christ be the cause that we,
contrary to the Command of God, have departed from being Jews to be Gentiles,
that leaving the Law of God, we have turned to the Council of the ungodly, and
walked in the way of sinners? God forbid, says the Apostle, that we should
think any such thing. For Christ is not the cause of the Gentiles sins, but of
Faith. which Gentiles, who believe in Christ, have in Christ. Christ destroys
the sins of the Gentiles; but is the Author of Faith to the Gentiles, and
wakens that Faith which he revealed to the Nations, of sinners, then in name;
but elected through Faith, and called to the holiness of the Jews. What then,
if we be called Gentiles so long as the Faith of the Gentiles, is inherent in
us; and we are justified by Christ the God of the Gentiles.

CHAP. VIII.
Gentiles called children, little ones, and poor.
WE must very attentively observe that which we read in the 9 of the Proverbs,
where Christ, the wisdom of the Father, speaks to the Gentiles, whom being made
a man, he was afterward to call, in these words, My speech unto the sons of
men, Understand, ye little ones wisdom, and ye foolish take heed. Wisdom cried
out, standing in the streets and highways, speaking to the trivial, commune,
and unclean Gentiles, and who are here openly meant, by the sons of men, and by
the unwise, and likewise here called lutle ones. That voice which was heard
from Heaven, which stirs up both Jews and Gentiles, gathered into one Church,
Rev. 19. Give praise to God you his servants that fear him small and great, did
mean these same little ones, that is, praise the Lord both Jews and Gentiles,
as you were of old incorporal and unanimous, or as Saint Paul translates and
reherses it, Romans 15. Rejoice ye Nations with his people. But of the
agreement of the Jews and Gentiles in praising of God, we shall speak more in
its due place.

It is clear, that the Gentiles are called little ones, Psalm 64. The arrows of
the little ones are made their wounds; that is, the Gentiles are wounded with
the same Arrows which they shot against the Jews, according to the 35 Psalm.
The snare which the Gentiles have laid for the Jews, has taken them, and they
are fallen into the same snare. Wisdom cries out, Chap. 1. Ye little ones how
long will ye love childishness, and ye fools those things that are hurtful to
you, and fools hate understanding? The little ones, fools, and unwise, in that
place are the Gentiles, who stammer like Infants, who desire things hurtful to
them, and hate the knowledge which is of God. Solomon calls those same little
ones, evil and wicked men, Chap. 7. of the same Book, where he says thus, I
looked out of my window through the casement, and I see the little ones; I
observe the foolish young man, who walks in the street by the corner, walking
in the dark when it is almost night. Understand those little ones here, not such
are borderers upon Infancy, but those that are foolish, of untamed pleasure,
wicked men, who apply themselves to whores, which the following words do make
appear.

The Gentiles are called little ones, in regard of the Jews, who are called the
great Nation, nor was there another Nation so great, Deuteronomy. 4. And higher then
other Nations, Deuteronomy. 26. The Jews were called great, and mighty, and high, not
by reason of their stature: for they seemed to be locusts, compared to the
Canaanite, whom they had viewed by their Spies, and who Numb. 13. were of the
sons of Anac, men of mighty stature, and monsters, in regard of the Jews, who
were but little men. Therefore the Jews were great, in that they were chosen,
and beloved by God, and because in that regard they excelled all other Peoples
and Nations. On the contrary, the Gentiles were neither chosen nor beloved by
God; but for the contrary reason, called low, little, small. To this compare
what is written in the 24 Rev. And I saw the dead, great and small: which
ascribe not to the ages or statures of those that shall rise again, but to the
future resurrection of the Jews and Gentiles; which St. Paul calls the 24 of
the Acts, the resurrection of the just and the unjust, of which before Solomon
gives the reason of this why the Gentiles should be called little and small, in
that Book to which they say he gave the the Title of Wisdom, Chap. 12. Because
they wandered, says he, in the way of error, esteeming those things Gods, which
were superfluous in beasts, living like witless children, for which cause God
had given them a judgment, as to foolish children.

In this sense understand these words which the Lord professes in the gospel,
Matthew. 11. I praise thee, O my Father, that thou have hidden these things from
the prudent and wise, and have revealed them to little ones; that is, that
Gospel which thou have not revealed to the Jews, thou have made manifest to the
Centiles; For the Jews are called wise and prudent, according to Exodus 4.
Behold a prudent and a wise people. The Little ones are understood the
Gentiles. For Christ did not come to the Jews, whom he was not then rejecting,
because they believed not in him; but to the Gentiles, whom, being made a man,
he called, and took to himself. To this calling and assumption he had invited
the Gentiles in Wisd. aforesaid. If there be any little one, let him come unto
me; and she spoke to the unwise, Come, eat my bread, and d^ink my wine, which I
have provided for you: leave your childishness, and live and walk in the ways
of Wisdom. Christ invites whom he there signifies, by unwise and little ones,
to the participation of the gospel, to the eating of his body, and the drinking
of his blood. In them who renounce childishness, and the prudence of men, life
eternal is begotten, and wisdom, which is of God, is acquired.

The Princes of the Jews took it ill, that the children in the Temple should
call Jesus, the son of David; that is, King: and cry Hosanna; but Christ
alluding from the little ones to the Gentiles, who were called children, and
little ones, thus answered the Jews, Did you never read the cause, Out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise. This was the Lords
meaning, You, O Jews, reject and speak evil of me; but the Gentiles, as it is
written, shall receive me, and perfect my praise; for, by children and
sucklings, he meant the Gentiles, who are called children and little ones.

These word; in the 18 Chapter of Lukes gospel, are likewise to be taken
figuratively, Let the children come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such
is the Kingdom of heaven. Which is, suffer the Gentiles to come unto me; for
they shall hear my voice, and believe in my name. But the kingdom of heaven
belongs to such, who shall hear me, and believe me. Certainly, the simplicity
of infants and children, which was that likewise of the first creation, is not
that alone by which we enter into the kingdom of heaven, by which comes
Election and Salvation; but the grace of the gospel, which is the faith of the
Gentiles in Christ. Which that you may more clearly understand, take heed to
that which follows, Whosoever, says Christ, receives not the kingdom of Christ
as a little Child, shall not enter into it. Which thus interpret and explain,
Whosoever receives not the doctrine of the gospel as a little child; that is to
say, like a Gentile, who believe me, and humbly relies upon my grace, not as a
Jew, who believes Moses, and is gloriously addicted to the works of the Law, he
shall not be partner of the salvation and glory which is in the kingdom of God.

The disciples of Christ were striving, and the Jews themselves, who should be
the greatest in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 18. And Jesus calling a little
one, placed him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, unless
you be converted, and made like little ones, you shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself, as this little one
does, he shall be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. The words and the
actions of our Savior, certainly, were for the most part Parables; Therefore
he spoke here figuratively and parabollically to the Jews, swelled with
vainglory, because they were called great, and a great Nation, unless their
stomachs fell, and they were turned to little ones, as the Gentiles, they
should not have entrance into the kingdom of heaven. Here God apparently meant
the Gentiles, by those Little ones, because he says after, Whoever shall offend
one of these little ones who shall believe in me, etc. Which could not be taken
of no infants, or children, which were so by age, whose faith was yet
stammering, but of the Gentiles of riper age, who believed in Christ as men of
age and ripe reason believe in him; but the Jews used to defame the Gentiles,
whom they esteemed vile, humble, and nothing worth.

Besides, it is manifest, that the Gentiles were types of Christian humility,
which by infants and children is represented, and the Jews only bubbles of
vainglory; from that Parable wherein the Pharisee marches so stately into the
Temple, casting his merits to God, Luc. 18. Lord, says he, I thank thee, that
I am not like other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even like this
Publican, I fast twice in the week, I give the tenth of all that I possess. But
the Publican standing afar off, would not lift up his eyes to heaven, but
struck his blessed, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. The Pharisee, without
doubt in that place, was the Jew; for which cause he said, I am not like other
men; that is, like the Gentiles; for the Publican was a Gentile. But he said,
Be merciful to me a sinner; that is, to me a Gentile. As also those that
exacted tribute from the Jews were Gentiles, as we have said. Certainly, the
humility of the Gentiles, which was the default of their vileness and
rejection, became a Christian virtue under the Gospel. On the contrary, that
glory by which the Jews exalted themselves to be a great Nation before the
Gospel, was turned into the smoke of idle pride under the Gospel. And bence it
came to pass, that the Gentiles, who were truly humble, were exalted to be
Jews really great. On the contrary, the glorious Jews became a base and an
abject people. I say to you, says the Lord, The Publican went to his house
justified; that is to say, made a just man, or a Jew of a Gentile. The
Pharisee, on the contrary, not being heard, left off to be just, and to be a
Jew, and fell off to be a Gentile. To which apply that of Matthew, now cited,
Chap. 18. Who shall humble himself like a little one (or a Gentile) shall be
greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

We must moreover narrowly consider that of St. Paul, Romans. 2. Thou, O Jew,
believe that thou art a leader of the blind, a light of those who are in
darkness, a teacher of the unwise, an instructor of children. By those who are
blind, by those who are foolish, by infans; to ^certainly the Gentiles are here
understood, who seteachers, instructers, and leaders, the Jews presumed
themselves to be, by that prerogative by which they esteemed themselves for a
light to the Nations, Isay 42. All this Chapter is designed against the Jews,
who mis-regarded, and set at naught the Gentiles. That instructor of children,
is the same meant by St. Paul, as a teacher of little ones, Isay 33. Where,
says he, is the learned? Where the expounder of the Law? Where the teacher of
little ones? The learned, and the teacher of the Law, is the Jewish Doctor, who
is both reacher of the Little ones, and of the Gentiles in this place, because
the Jews taught the stranger and the Proselyte their Laws, because, I say, they
boasted themselves given as a light to all Nations, and a light to those that
were in darkness; that is, to the Gentiles, to whom God was in a cloud, nor
did manifest himself to them.

(...) in Greek, in Latin an Infant who can not speak, and is commonly taken
for a foolish and an ignorant person: For a fool and an ignorant person has
nothing to say. The Jews called the Gentiles foolish and ignorant; because they
knew not their Law; nor thought they that any speech, which spoke not of the
Law of God. Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
Straight the Prophet would have thought himself dumb, if he had spoken any
thing besides the praise of God, his justice, and his law, which was the chief
duty of the elected Jews, whose lips therefore were said to be circumcised; but
the Gentiles were of uncircumcised lips. And therefore were rightly called
(...) or Infants.

The Gentiles were called little ones, for the same cause as they were esteemed
poor; and because God had opend to them, as to the Jews, his treasures of
election and grace. Little, small, and poor the same: as Servius upon that of
Virgil.

Take from poor Micon, Goddess, in good part,
This wild boar's head, these horns of an aged Heart.
Little Micon, that is poor Micon. The Gentiles, by the poor, are chiefly meant
by Authors in both Testaments. There was not a poor man, nor a beggar amongst
the Jews, because the Law did forbid it: And those which begged within the
Ports of the Jews were strangers and gentiles; nor did the Lord so earnestly
recommend the poor to the Apostles, as they were merely poor: for the Apostles
being likewise poor themselves, how should they have helped the poor: but
because the Gentiles were poor, whom by his coming Christ called to the
participation of election and grace, which is by the Jews, and to whom he
opened the door of his gospel.

CHAP. IX.
The Gentiles called the sons of wrath, the enemies of God, beasts, and so
esteemed by the Jews, yea, unclean beasts, the opposite comparison betwixt the
Jews and the Gentiles.
IN the Epistle to the Ephesians, Saint Paul called the Gentiles, the sons of
wrath, and reckoned himself amongst the Gentiles, being the Apostle of the
Gentiles, when he says, And we by nature are the sons of wrath, whether we
conceive them to be the sons of the first Creation, whom the Lord abhors, or
whether we take them as opposite to the Jews, who by the Nature of their
Election, are esteemed the sons of love.

The Gentiles likewise called the Enemies of God, in as much as the first
Creation, which is Elesh, is enmity with God; or because the Gentiles, by a
narural imbred hatred, are Enemies to the Jews: Let all thy enemies perish, did
Deborah sing, who had destroyed the Gentiles, who were Enemies to the Jews and
to God: but concerning the Gentiles, Enemies to God and the Jews, more at large
in its due place.

Furthermore, that which is the chief disgrace of the Gentiles, is, that they
are compared every where to Beasts in sacred Authors; and are accounted Beasts,
beneath men, by reason of that great opposition, by which the Jews are
accounted Gods. The 22 Psa. thus complains of the Nations who had assaulted
Israel, Many Bulls have encompassed me, fat Bulls have beset me, they opened
their mouth upon me, like a ravening and a roar-Lion. (Psalm 57. Deliver me
from the Lion's whelps, the sons of men, whose teeth are weapons and arrows.
Yea, the 74 Psalm called the Gentiles Beasts, Give not the beasts souls that
trust in thee: that is, Deliver not the Jews who acknowledge thee to be the God
of the Jews to the Gentiles their enemies, who neither know thee nor
acknowledge thee: to which apply, that of Baruch Chap. 3. Where the Princes of
the Nations shall have dominion over the beasts of the earth, that is, over the
Gentiles, their flocks and their people.

There is a remarkable place to this purpose, in Isaiah Chap. 3. Thou are made
honorable and glorious in my eyes, said God to the people of the Jews, I have
loved thee, I will give men for thee, and Nations for thy soul. That is, I will
expiate and redeem thee by the death of men and people, that is, of the
Gentiles, whom like Beasts I will sacrifice for thee. There could be no thing
granted to the Jews more honorable and glorious than that honor and glory to
become honorable and glorious before the eyes of God. As likewise, the
Gentiles are numbered among the Beasts and Creatures walking upon the Earth, in
the same Chap. Isaiah 24. So says the Lord who created the heavens, giving
breath to the people upon the earth, and life to them that tread upon it. The
people walking there upon the earth, is indifferently taken for men and beasts:
for which cause, the Gentiles are called a people, not a people, Deuteronomy. 32. I
will provoke you by a Nation which is not a Nation, and a people which is not a
people: in which words, Deuteron^my meant the Gentiles; as also: the men of the
first Creation, who were properly in flocks, like Cattle, nor made up in
Cities, and Civil Societies of men.

The Jews did not value men by their reason, but by their understanding: I say,
by that intellect by which the true knowledge of God is gained, which is above
reason; by which the manifestation of the Divine Law was given to the Jews, and
by which the granting of the Spirit of Christ was revealed to the Jews. Hence
that famous promise to Israel, Psalm 32. I will give thee understanding, and
inform thee in the way wherein thou shall walk. Then immediately after a
Precept given to the Jews. Be ye not like to horses and mules, which have no
understanding. And cettainly, Divine understanding makes all men quite
different from brutes. Which although men have excellent beyond horse and Mule;
yet have they it in a manner commune with horse and mule, so really did the
Jews believe, that the Gentiles were not men, because they thought them
altogether destitute of the knowledge of God.

But you shall likewise find the Gentiles reckoned amongst the unclean Beasts,
Mat. 15. It is not good to take the bread of the children, and throw ^t to the
dogs, said the Lord to the Gentile a Ca^aanitish Woman. In which, the Jews are
the sons, and the dogs the Gentiles. The Lord meaning so likewise, said to his
Disciples, Jews, Gave not that which is holy to dogs, nor cast your pearls
before swine; That is, be^^ow not that which belongs to the sanctified Jews
upon the Gentiles, whom the Evangelist here call dogs and swine: It is meant,
that the Apostles ought to preach the Gospel to the Jews first, before they
addressed themselves to the Nations. Lastly, it is excellent which the Lord
advises us, Luke 12. God, says he, caeres not for the sparrows or the crows
which are said of the Jews and the Gentiles; whom God should esteem and care
for without any difference is here meant by the unclean sparrow^ the Jews, the
foul Crows the Gentiles.

The Gentiles are esteemed unclean by the Jews, Acts 10. where Saint Peter
says thu^ You know how abominable it is to a man, who is a I^^ to enter into a
stranger, But God has showed me to ca^ no man common or unclean. For the Angel
ha^ said so to Peter. What the Lord has cleansed, (...) not thou call common.
Before then that the Lord purified the Gentiles, that is, before Christ (...)
death, the Gentiles were common and unclean^ but after the death of Christ, and
after that God had purified the Gentiles, it was not lawful to call any man
common or unclean.

But that I may comprehend in brief what (...) have spoken here of the Jews and
the Gentiles and to show that in stock and nature the Gentil^ were different
from the Jews: let us imagine (...) our selves, the Gentiles every way opposite
(...) the Jews. The Jews by their Election and Creation placed in the degree of
Gods, the Gentiles in their Creation thought mere men; the Jews the sons of
God, the Gentiles the sons of men; the Jews holy, the Gentiles wicked and
ungodly; the Jews just, the Gentiles sinners; the Jews wise and understanding,
the Gentiles foolish and unwise; the Jews great and high, the Gentiles low and
small; the Jews rich, the Gentiles poor; the Jews sons of love, the Gentiles
sons of wrath; the Jews friends, the Gentiles enemies; the Jews thought clean,
the Gentiles unclean, and raised of unclean beasts.

But if sometimes we likewise read the Jews called simply men; as also, sons of
men, wicked, impious sinners, unwise, unworthy sons of wrath, enemies, unclean
beasts, and so stigmatized, these Jews must be understood such as had fled over
to the Customs of the Gentiles, which as the first Psalm speaks, Have departed
to the council of the ungodly, had stood in the way of sinners, and not in the
Law of God. Of Jews, who called themselves Jews, but were not, but of the
Synagogue of Satan, such as they are called, Chap. 2. of the Revelations.

CHAP. X.
The Jews formed by God in Adam. The Gentiles created by God. And created by
the word of God, as other creatures; as also on the same day when other
creatures were created. The Jews peculiarly formed by the hands of God. God
called the fashioner of the Jews. Adam first Father of the Jews. The Jews are
called the sons of Adam.
THe Jews are the Sons of God by election and fabric. By election, which was a
mystical generation. By fabric, which is nigher to Nature. God formed the Jews
in Adam, as he took them in Abraham and led them into Canaan, of whom Isaias in
the 41 Chapter, And thou Israel, my servant, the seed of Abraham my friend,
since I took thee from the furthest parts of the earth, and took thee from far.
God brought the Jews into the Holy Land in Abraham, by that mystical promise by
which he gave that Land to Abraham, the first Father of the Jews, and promised
it with an Oath to his seed. In which respect, Abraham, by the right of the
Promises, is fitly called the first Father of the Jews. God formed the Jews in
Adam, when he formed Adam, the first Father of the Jews, and made him, in the
fashioning of him, the first Author and Father of them. Wherefore God was
called the fashioner of the Jews, Isa. 45. Thus says the Lord, the holy one of
Israel, the fashioner of him. God was the fashioner of Israel, because he was
the fashioner of the first Father of them, whom he made of the clay of the
earth. Wherefore God is said in Deuteronomy. 26. To have made the Jews higher than all
the Nations he had created. For God had first created the Gentiles, and the men
of the first creation; then formed the Jews, the sons of Promise, and the
second creation.

It is worth our taking notice, that the men of the first creation, (who,
according to my supposition, are Gentiles,) as also the whole world, were
created by the word. The first Chapter of Genesis has this expressly; which is
the Chapter of the creation. And God said, Let us make man according to our own
Image. He said, Let us make. And by his word he made him. But not by his word,
but of wrought clay, the Lord made Adam, Genesis Chap. 2. Which Chapter peculiarly
handles the creation of Adam, and the framing of the Jews in Adam. Whose
History Moses being about to write, began it from the dust of Adam; the first
father of the Jews, as is usual amongst all Historiographers who write the
History of their Nation, to begin from the first Authors of them.

And God made Adam of the dust of the earth, says Gen: Chap. 2. He did not
create Adam by his word, but made him with his hand out of the dust of the
earth. That dust of which the Lord framed Adam, was as the clay in the hand of
the Potter, as Jeremiah speaks to this purpose. Wheresore you shall find it
written in the 45 Chapter of Isaias, now mentioned. Ask the things to come of
my sons, and command me concerning the work of my hands. Where the sons of God,
and the work of Gods hands, are clearly the Jews. I know it is written in the
same Isaias, My hand has laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand
has measured the heavens. As also Chap. 19. The Assrrian is the work of my
hands. But you must understand, where you read that the hand of God was used in
the creation; that phrase is there used according to the force of the Hebrew
tongue, for the force and power of God, which is the word of God. And in that
regard, the word of God, who is the Son of God, and who is the only force,
power, and great strength of God, is not only called the hand of God, but the
arm of the Lord; which I must in another place more exactly examine. But where
the hand of God is ascribed to forming, and as it were to the Potter, they are
merely taken for the hands wherewith he, as a Potter, molded the clay, and
made the work. Therefore, in the same sense as the Lord is called the fashioner
of the Jews, Isa. 54. in the same signification the Jews are truly and properly
called the work of the hands of the Lord, in the same place and the same
Chapter.

Certainly Adam in the genealogy of Christ is called the first, and the Father
of the Jews, where Christ is derived from Adam, in the third Chapter of the
gospel according to St. Luke. Where take good notice, that Adam the first
author, the first Father of the lineage of the Jews is called the son of God.
For it is said about the end of that Chapter, Who was the son of Enos, who was
the son of Seth, who was the son of God. Adam then was the son of God. By that
fashioning, and for that reason, because being made of the dust of the earth,
he was the work of his hands. For which reason all the Jews descended from
Adam; that is; the sons of Adam, made by God, and the work of his hands in
Adam, are called the sons of God. But why may I not likewise call the Jews the
sons of Adam, since they are also called the sons of Jacob, the sons of Isaac,
the sons of Abraham? I say, for the same reason as Adam was the Father of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

The Jews by name are called the sons of Adam, Psalm 58. If you truly speak
justice, and judge rightly, ye sons of Adam, for ye work wickedness in your
heart, and your hands work injustice upon the earth.

The Kingly Prophet in this place reproves the Jews, whom according to the
Hebrew text, he calls the sons of Adam, because professing justice with their
mouths they judged wickedness, and in their heart and affections wrought the
wickedness of the Gentiles. Which reproach you shall often find cast upon the
Jews. Such is that of Isay 49. This people draw nigh to me with their lip, but
their heart is far from me, and they have worshipped me according to the command
of men and doctrine; that is, they have worshipped me according to the order,
commands, and doctrine of the Gentiles. The second reproach cast upon the the
Jews in this Psalm, is, That their hands wrought wickedness upon earth. Which
earth is to be understood that choice holy earth, and Land of the Saints, that
is, of the Jews, Isa. 26. It was a great crime in the Jews that they had
wrought injustice, but a greater crime, that they had wrought it in the land of
the Lord, which was elect and holy, which to fill with iniquity, as Ezekiel 8
Chap. speaks, was to provoke the Lord. Hence that laid upon the Church of the
Jews, Thou have polluted the land with thy fornications and wickedness; which
in another place he called to defile the earth.

Here the Jews are understood by the sons of Adam, who spoke justice with their
mouths, but judged wickedly and wrought iniquities in their heart, and framed
injustice in the Land holy and elect, which is as much to the Jews, as to live
like Gentiles. And David, to deter the sons of Adam, the Jews, from such
deeds of the Gentiles, shows them what the Gentiles were, and what punishment
they were to expect for their wickedness in the same Psalm, and in the next
words, They err, say they, being sinners from the womb; they are sinners from
their from their nativity; they have spoken false things: which read thus in
that place, That he meant, they were sinners from the womb, in the same sense
as St. Paul speaks of the Gentiles, Ephesians 2. Sons of wrath by nature; for
by nature, is the same as from the womb. It is added, they have spoken lies,
which could be only ascribed to the Gentiles. For the ^ons of Adam, that is,
the Jews, are here s^eaking justice, and truly. If you truly speak justice, ye
sons of Adam. Yea, truth was granted to the Jews, according to that of Micah,
Chap. 20. Thou shall give truth unto Jacob. That truth was the law and justice
of God, For which cause the Jews, who had the Law of God, were called a just
Nation, and observing truth. On the contrary, understand the Gentiles by those,
who spoke lies, according to that of the 5 Psalm. In the mouth of the Gentiles
there is no truth. And again, Ye sons of men, why wander ye in vanity, and
follow after lies? And in the 62 Psalm, The sons of men are vain and light in
the balance. Vain and Liars are joined together. And when St. Paul writes in
the first of the Romans, That all the creation is subject to vanity: Understand
the first creation, which of it self is vain, flying, and like a first dream.
Wherefore, Nature her self being bad, made those of the first creation liars,
and wicked. Therefore the Jews who truly speak justice, are the sons of Adam,
The sinners the Gentiles, who spoke lies.

CHAP. XI.
The Jews are called by Moses the sons of Adam. The 32. Chap. of Deuteronomy. is
explained. And Isaiah and Hoseas of Adam the first Father of the Jews. The
Gentiles called strangers, the Jews a kind of men distinct in species from the
Gentiles. The Gentiles earth-born. The Psalm 49. is explained. Abraham had
servants born in his house, and also bought, who were not of his stock, that
is, of Adam. Who are the sons of men? who is the son of man? The difference
'twixt the brethren of the Jews, and other strangers.
THere is a remarkable^ place, Deuteron. 23. which is the song of Moses, in
which the Jews are prophetically restored into their Land, and are separated
from all the People and Nations: but the people and the Gentiles separated from
the Jews) And whom the Jews, being in the midst of them, shall sometime
separate) are placed on this side and that side, bordering upon the Jews, where
Moses says, The most high divided the Nations, when he separated the sons of
Adam, he appointed their bounds according to the number of Israel: or, which is
the same, according to the twelve Tribes of the Jews, which is the number of
the sons of Israel. And in the 54 Chap. Behold, a stranger shall come, who was
not with me: and he who was a stranger to thee, shall be joined to thee. The
Gentiles shall adhere and be joined to the Jews, shall be near to the Jews, and
near to the borders of the Jews, but shall not be mixed with them; which
observe, for that was openly decreed and promised, Deuteronomy. 33. Israel shall dwell
with security and alone, that is, undefiled with the mixture of the Nations;
which is not yet, but that it shall be, we shall show in its due place.

Moses gave this reason of the separation of the Jews from the Gentiles in the
same song, and in the words immediately following, His people are the
inheritance of the Lord, and his portion, that is, Although in that day the
Lord bless all the G^ntiles, and in his second Election make them partakers of
his inheritance, although in that day, according to the promise made to
Abraham, all the Nations be blessed in the seed of Abraham. Notwithstanding the
Jews who are the seed of Abraham, blessed first and before the Gentiles, shall
be a better part and inheritance of the Lord, and shall be accounted to God as
a peculiar inheritance: the most elect are set apart from the less elect, as
Saint Paul said, that he himself was set apart for a most elect vessel, for the
Gospel of God, Chap 1. Epist. to Romans

Further, these are applied to the Prophes^e of Isaiah, and are expounded by
it, Chap. 19. In that day Israel shall be third, 'twixt Egypt and Assyria, a
blessing in the midst of the earth, which the Lord has blessed Blessed be my
people of Egypt, and the Assyrian the work of my hands, and Israel my
inheritance. Where note, That Egypt is beyond Nile and the gulf of Arabia, and
Assyria beyond Euphrates, placed on the one side and on the other, borderers
upon Israel: that Israel is placed in the third plece betwixt Egypt and
Assyria, betwixt the Bounds of his Rivers: I say, observe, that Israel is
placed in the third place betwixt the Egyptians and the Assyrians, as also,
that he is a blessing in the midst of the earth, that Holy earth, which God is
said here to have blessed. Therefore we may here see the Egyptian and Assyrian
placed on this side and that side, according to the number of the Sons of
Israel, and placed near the banks of the Tribes of the Jews. That the Sons of
Adam, or the Jews, were separated from the Egyptians and the Assyrians, betwixt
whom being placed, they are parted from them by the Rivers Nilus and Euphraies,
is briefly set down in that Geographick Table which is inserted in the third
Chapter of this Book. Therefore the Sons of Adam are set apart in the Song of
Moses: The Nations divided by interposition of the Jews, are the Egyptians and
Assyrians, Gentile^.

The Jews are called the sons of Adam upon the same account as Adam is called
the father of the Jews, Isaiah 43. God repro^ing Israel in that Chapter for
their sin, objects this to him, Thy father sinned first. Which the Prophet
meant of the father of the Jews, and not of the Gentiles; for he spoke only to
Israel, and for that reason he said, Thy father O Israel, who was not likewise
the father of the Gentiles: that first father of the Jews is without doubt
Adam, because there was no sinner before him, nor none after him can be
understood. But let us hear Hosea the Interpreter of Isaiah in the sixth
Chapter of his Prophecy where God lays the same reproach against the Jews,
They, says he, have transgressed my Covenant as Adam did. Adam, then as he was
the Father of the Jews, so was he the Prototype of the Jews sin, according to
whose example, the Jews were sinners begotten a sinful by father transgressed
the Covenant of God: and as Adam is the first Father of the Jews, so the Jews
are all the sons of Adam: as likewise Adam was the son of God, and derived from
God, Woe be to the Nations that rises up against my kindred. Judah sung when he
had overcome the Nations, Woe be to the Gentiles, who rise up against the Jews.

On the contrary, The Gentiles were called strangers, who did not derive
themselves from God and Adam: to which strangers and Gentiles, it was not
lawful for the Jews to approach, Act. 10. It is abominable to a Jew, to be
joynedor draw nigh to a stranger, that is, to a Gentile; besides, they were
called by the Jews strangers, unknown, because they were aliens, not only from
the Nation, but family of the Jews, nor were not only received as brothers
into the Holy Cities, Ephesians. 7. The sons of strangers shall build the walls,
Isaiah 60. and in the 61 Chap. And strangers shall stand up and feed their
cattle, and the sons of strangers shall be laborers and dressers of vines.
Which ought to be understood of the servants of the Jews, or their hirelings,
to which add, six hundred such, which you may every where find in holy
Writers.

But not only by kindred, and exposition of kindred did God distinguish the Jews
from the Gentiles, but would have them different in the species it self. He
chused it for his inheritance, the kindred of Jacob, whom he loved, Psalm 47.
Where observe, that the kin of the Jews is distinguished from the kin of the
Gentiles, whom God did neither love nor choose for his inheritance. Certainly,
the Philosophers make the brures a distinct species from men: and with the holy
Writers the species of the Jews is distinct from that of the Gentiles, whom you
shall every where read confusely mentioned with beasts, and esteemed beasts in
regard of the Jews, who by excellency are called men, or by a more excellent
title are called the men of God. You shall find the species of the Jews
peculiarly made and formed by God in Adam; you shall find the species of the
Gentiles promiscuously created with the rest of the creatures in the same day
of Creation, which is diligently to be observed, that a day did not distinguish
them whom the nature of their Creation did not distinguish.

The Jews were properly and apart from all other things created the frame and
work of the second Creation in Adam: the Gentiles properly were the promiscuous
buds of the first Creation, together with all things else created, and the
offspring of that earth which likewise brought forth other creatures.
Therefore did David call upon all Nations in these words; Hear all you Natious,
hearken all you inhabitants of the earth, and ye sons of men. David spoke
palpable to the Gentiles, sons of men, the Inhabitants of all the earth, whom
he likewise calls born upon the earth to distinguish them from the Jews, who
were not born upon the earth, or born from the earth, as the Gentiles, who were
not created in the beginning of things, but formed out of the clay in Adam.
Furthermore, the Psalmist comparing here the Gentiles to foolish beasts, says,
They were made like to them who like beasts were allotted to death, to eternal
death, from which they should not return to life, their graves are their houses
for ever, says the Psalm, as also in the same place, they shall not see light
for ever: likewise David distinguishes the Jews from them in the same Psalm, in
which he exhorts them not to fear those beasts born upon the earth, who should
sometime be governed by the Jews, The just shall have power over them in the
morning: the just are the Jews, of whom we spoke before: that power of the Jews
upon the Nations, as also, that morning, shall be expounded in their own
places. This Psalm has given us a reason why the Jews ought not to fear these
earth-born Gentiles of the first Creation, in the words following immediately,
Their help shall grow old in the grave from their glory; but God shall redeem
my soul from hell. David mixes his soul with the souls of the Jews: none of the
Gentiles, says he, shall redeem his soul; God shall redeem the souls of the
Jews, when he shall receive the Jews, or at such time as he shall receive the
ejected Jews: the Gentiles shall rise to eternal death, or, which is the same,
they shall die eternally by the fate of their Creation: the Jews shall rise
again to eternal life, or, which is the same, they shall live eternally by the
prerogative of their regeneration. Therefore let the Jews, who shall receive
eternal life, little regard the Gentiles, destind to eternal death.

So far were the Gentiles different in relation and kindred from the Jews, as
those diverse species of creatures in unknown Countries are from those which we
know: so likewise were there more Nations unknown to the Jews, than were known;
that is to say, in those Countries which the Jews knew not: Nor were these
Nations only unknown to the Jews, but likewise to their Fathers. I say, to
their Fathers who were derived from Adam: Which God having a regard to,
threatens the Jews, Deuteronomy. 28. The Lord shall lead thee and thy King to a Nation
whom thou and thy fathers knew not. He says thy Fathers indeterminately, in
which are comprehended Adam himself, the first Father and clay of the Jews.
Therefore all Nations were not known by Adam, and the posterity of Adam, the
Fathers of the Jews according to Moses himself, yea, were utterly unknown. But
men are not ignorant of their own Offspring. Nor had these Nations been
unknown to the Jews, if they had been derived from them or their fathers. But
these Nations unknown to the Jews, and their ancestors, were probably those of
America, the Southern, and the Greenlanders, and the rest, to which neither the
Jew, nor the rest of the Gentiles as yet had access, To this add what is
written concerning the King of the Jews, Psalm 18. A people whom I know not
shall serve me, and expound and conjecture in this Psalm, as in Deuteronomy.

And that by a most indubitable truth I may clear it, that the Gentiles were
different in kindred and their first original from the Jews, take good heed to
that which God says to Abraham, at which time he enjoins circumcision to him
and all his house, Genesis 27. says he, The servant born in thy house, and bought
with thy money shall be circumcised, and whatsoever of your own lineage; that is
to say, whatsoever is not of the stock of Adam, who was the stock of Abraham.
The strangers were sprung from another stock, then either Adams or Abraham's.
Nor will it be an ill supposition, to take here for the lineage of Abraham,
Abraham himself, as he is taken for the father, and the Jews, with a regard to
the promises made to Abraham, the first of all the Jews; in which sense he is
called the first and the lineage of the Jews, the first Chapter of Matthew,
which is the genealogy of Christ. And that thou may know, and grant thy
self, that the lineage of Abraham in this place is to be recalled to Adam the
father of Abraham, read what is written in the end of that 17 Chap. of Genesis.
And all the men of that house, as well born at home, as bought with money, and
strangers were circumcised. Abram then had domestics his own Country people,
and those which were born in his house: that is to say, of of the same stock of
Adam, as he was born; as also those that were bought, who were of another stock
and lineage different from that of Abraham, and who had not their original from
Adam, the stock of Abraham, or which is the same with Adamits, whom
notwithstanding Abraham is said to have circumcised, as if they had been
Adamits, and of the stock of Abraham.

The stock and originals of all Nations is confused and unknown for this
reason; because those created from an unknown beginning, and innumerable ages
ago upon all the earth, propagation still increasing, by which they were
thronged one upon another, as likewise by manifold conjunction in which they
were mingled one among another, destroyed and confused the knowledge of their
first beginnings. But no such thing happened to the Jews. For their proper and
certain original and stock is in Adam, from a beginning very well known, and
not very far distant, and derived by a continual line to these days, by a line
as yet different from the Gentiles. We have Josephus a Jew himself, and a most
acute Writer of the affairs of the Jews, witness of this truth: where against
Appion he asserts the proper original of his own Nation, which he there calls a
conjunction, and which in his Jewish antiquities he likewise derives from Adam.

The Gentiles, who according to my supposition were originally created in all
the earth, are called almost every where sons of men; because they had their
stocks and originals, not from one man, but innumerable fathers of the first
creation. But the son of man simply so called, was a Jew, who is likewise
called the son of Adam, and the son of Isch; that is to say, the son of Adam,
the first father of the Jews, and only author of that Nation, who is called
Isch, a man by way of eminence, and his Wise called Ischa, Genesis 2.

The common opinion is, that the Gentiles sprung from the Jews which fell over
to the Gentiles; as for example, That some sprung from Cain, who dishinherited
himself: from the sons of Cham, whom Noe cursed: from the sons of Ismael, the
Bastard: of the sons of wicked Esau; but every one ought to know, those sort of
Jews were never accounted Strangers and Gentiles, but Jews, and brethren of the
Jews; of which Moses is an eminent witness, where he speaks of those that
were fit to be denizen'd amongst the Jews. Thou shall not, says he, loath the
Edomite, because he is thy brother, Nor the Egyptian, because thou wast a
stranger in his land. Here observe, that the Edomites having lost their liberty
by falling off from the sons of Adam, are again restored, as brethren of the
Jews, and of the same descent. And the Egyptians admitted as fellow citizens
(who had been their entertainers) as strangers, being of the stock of the
Gentiles. Moses likewise understood the Edomites to be the brethren of the
Jews, when he sent Messengers to Edam, to tell them, Thus says thy brother
Israel, Numb. Chap. 20.

The Ismaelites are also reckoned amongst the brethren of the Jews, as they are
the seed of Abraham, Genesis 21. I will make the son of thy handmaid a great
Nation, because he is thy seed. You may say the same of the Moabite^ and
Ammonites; the seed of Lot, being sprung of the same seed. Their the father of
Abraham; and imagine the same of the sons of Cain and Cham, who departed, and
were strangers from the Jews, as being notwithstanding of the same stock.

All the Jews are called brethren, because likewise derived from Adam, and all
begoten of Adam. But the Gentiles were neither brethren amongst the Jews, nor
thought the brethren of the Jews; for all of them were almost of diverse
fathers, because men innumerable were at first created, for which they were
called sons of men, to distinguish them from the Jews, who were all the sons of
Adam, and therefore were called sons of men. The Gentiles were not numbered
amongst the brethren of the Jews, because they were esteemed aliens, strangers
of a diverse stock from the sons of Adam, Thou can not make one King who is
of another stock, but only thy brother; says God to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 17. that is
to say. thou can not make a Gentile, who is not thy brother, thy King; but
him shall thou appoint whom God shall choose of the number of thy brethren; that
is to say, of the Jews, which is set down in the same place.

Therefore, let us resolve that the Gentiles are different in stock and
original from the Jews, which I was to prove.

The Third Book of this SYSTEME OF DIVINITY
CHAP. I.
The original of the Gentiles is proved to be different from the original of
the Jews, out of Genesis. The Gentiles were created in that creation which is
mentioned Chap. 1. All creatures and all men male and female were created on
the sixth day of the creation, as plants, trees, and fleeing fowls, upon their
own days through all the world. Why upon that day one man, and he alone, from
whom all should arise, was not created.
BUt go to, that I may leave nothing un-essay'd that may conduce to the
clearing of this famous Argument. I Will prove out of Genesis it self, that the
Gentiles are different in stock from he Jews, which being understood it shall
appear ^leares, th^n the Su^, That (...) of the first ^ ^ ^

But indeed, to read, that which ^erlwaded by your Ottin^on^ of (...) with
superstition, you dare, nor will not understand, is not to read it. Here^^en
(...) of such P^it^^ as in holy mysteries is entertained, and betake my self to
that Faith which is the Sister of a good Understanding, and which loves right
Reason. Hen^e then, those ill contrived, and ill hanging together miracles,
which such fain to themselves, who use to have their recourse to needless Faith
and the power of God, not necessary in such cases, when there own reason is
weak. This they gain, that without choice, believing every thing, no body
believes them in any thing; for where reason is absolutely weakened, there
Faith is quite destroyed, especially in those things where there is a natural,
rational, or historical connection: such as are related in the first Chapter of
Genesis, of the Creation of the first men, of the framing of Adam, and of the
framing of Eve his Wife, as also of Cain and Abel, brothers: the chief heads of
which I shall only touch here.

It is clear then, from the beginning of Genesit, in that sixth day wherein the
earth brought forth all Creatures, That God upon the same day (...) man and
created the male and femal^. (...) Oenesis speaks here of the species (...)
them, and relates the individuals, Mate and Pemale: he declares, that every
Male was created with the Female, for the Male and Female are taken for one
man: for he manifests that without interruption and by one action and the same
tenor of creation, man were created by God, Male and Female, they two being
one man: but Genesis called that one man, being Male and Female, Adam: for if
the Scripture at any time has occasion to mention one man indifferently, or all
mankind, it uses to express them all in the same word, by the proper name of
Adam.

Moreover, for the same reason as the earth brought forth grass and trees and
all things were enlivened; I say, as all things were created according to their
own species and in their own days, in the self-same progressive Creation upon
the whole earth, whether known to our Forefathers or but lately, or not yet
known: According to the same Analogy of Creation, we must believe, that men
were made by God Male and Female in one day, with an uninterrupted Creation,
and upon the whole earth, and that there was no place in the whole earth which
brought forth grass, fostered trees and cattle, which before the sixth and last
day of the absolute Creation had not its own men and its own Lords. Besides,
these things were certainly created to serve man their Lord, speaking in
specie, or men their Lords, mentioning the individuals: and God would have
seemed to have created something in vain and inconvenient, if upon that same
day, when he ordained these things for the service of men, he had not created
men at the same time, who had either used them, or might have used them
wheresoever they were.

But if we affirm Adam to be the first and the only man by whom afterward the
colonies of men were drawn out and dispersed over the earth, to what purpose in
that vast space of time in which the whole earth must needs receive its people
from one man: I say, to what purpose should the Countries of Mesopotamia, the
Antipodes, bring forth grass and herbs? for what Lords use, should the fruit
have hung upon the trees in those Countries? the cattle of, them whom should
they have helped? being merely created for that purpose to help men: for either
in that long space of time, you must confess that they were created in vain, or
created to an use that God had never appointed them for, or else, that men were
there created to make use of them.

The world was created in the beginning every way perfectly adorned, every way
perfectly good, every way perfectly fair: But the World had been created in the
beginning every way without ornament, every way imperfect in fairness, every
way imperfect in goodness, which is a sin to think, if all the places in the
earth had at first wanted their own men. The earth had been deformed if it had
wanted grass, trees, and creatures; but they had been absolutely deformed
indeed, if they had wanted at the beginning their comeliness and ornament, their
men, for whom the earth was created, and all that therein is; and if the ground
had wanted Tillers, as it requires.

What was the intention of God in the Creation of the world, is found by God's
Decree in the preservation and Government of the World. It is written, Exodus
23. That God when he led Israel out of Egypt to lead them into the Land of
Canaan did thus provide for him, I will not throw ont the people of the Land of
Canaan before thy face, least the Land become waste, and wild beasts multiply
against thee: I will by little and little drive them out of thy sight till thou
be increased, and possess the Land. That is likewise written in Deuteronomy. 7. these
words, The Lord shall consume these Nations in thy sight by little and little:
thou can not overthrow them at once, least the wild beasts increase against
thee.

Here is a twofold condition why God would not in one year, and at one push,
throw out all the Nations of the Land of Canaan, in whose place he was to
settle the Jews. The first was, because he would not have that earth, which he
was about to bless, to become ugly and ill-favored; for there is horror, not
comeliness in desolation, yea, solitariness is a mark of cursing. Therefore did
the Prophet weep when she was cursed, Why do thou sit a solitary City, that
was full of people. And afterward, All the comeliness of Sion is departed from
her: her Princes, her young men, and her virgins are gone into captivity. And
Isaiah chapter 64. The city of the holy one is laid waste, Jerusalem is desolate.
The second caution was, Lest the Beasts should grow and multiply in Canaan
against the people of God. The first caution was, for comeliness; the second for
security. God would not, as h^ might easily have done, quite destroy the
Nations of Canaan; but drive them out by little and little, till the people of
the Jews might increase, and that Land might have its full number of its own
men, which should be the glory of the earth. The Lord would have his people
increased to a full and sufficient number of inhabitants, which should be able
to defend themselves from the beasts of Canaan, and secure the people.

But if God had a double caution in this case for the comeliness and security of
the Land of Canaan alone, although the Jews then abounded in number, and were
grown to be many hundred thousands, What care shall we think God took in the
Creation of the World, for the comeliness not only of one Land, but also of the
Lands of the whole World, lest they should be made desolate, if he had created
one man and one Woman from the beginning in the earth. And if God would not
expose many hundred thousand Jews to the beasts of one Land, shall we think,
that he would expose one single man and woman to the heasts of all Lands?
Certainly, if the beasts of the Land of Canaan had been so much multiplied
against so many hundred thousand Jews that dwelt in it: much more should they
have been multiplied against Adam and Eve, being alone upon the whole earth.

CHAP. II.
Adam was created apart from other men in that creation which is mentioned Genesis
2. Adam was thefirst and father of the Jews, not of all men. The framing of
Adam was altogether different from the creation of the first men. Eve could not
be created the same day as Adam was made.
THe author of Genesis having absol^'d in the first Chapter the six days of
the creation, begins the second Chapter from the sanctification of the Sabbath,
which was the seventh day, and rehearses what he had said in the first Chapter
of the creation: of the whole of which there was no more to be related. But
because the nation of the Jews was separate and set apart from all the Nations
of the earth, being elected by God, That it might be to him a peculiar people
of all the nations upon the earth, which we proved our of the 7 of Deuteronomy
Therefore the author of the Pentateuch, who was himself a Jew, whose end it was
to write the original, the deduction, the Laws and Chronology of his own
Nation apart from the creation of the whole world, and of all Nations, begins
the particular framing of the first Jew, from whom that peculiar and choice
Nation was derived; that is, of them by whom salvation should be communicated
to all Nations in Christ, as to all Nations had come perdition from Adam.

And God framed Adam, Genesis 2. Man, that is, Adam; But because this Narration
begins with and, it is ordinarily received as a more special explanation of the
creation of that man in his kind of whom Moses spoke in the Chapter 1. Let us make
man. But they heed not that the particle and in the Hebrew is the introduction
of a new matter, not a continuation of that which was mentioned before: such
beginnings of Narrations you shall every where meet with in sacred authors; yea
books beginning with and, as Ezechi^l. And it came to pass in the thirtieth
year. And Jonas: (...) the word of the Lord came to Jonas. Hence is it chiefly
prefum'd, that this framing of Adam was not that which is mentioned in the
former Chapter of Genesis Because it is granted by all, that ^ha^ first creation
in the first Chapter; which accoring to my supposition, was the creation of the
first men, was completed moan day, the sixth and the last; as is set down in
the first Chapter. But it is impossble, that all those things which are set
down in the second Chapter, could have been transacted in that time which is
received from morning to evening. Therefore much less in the half of that
sixth day, in which God first oreated all creatnres, then man. Let us tell
every minute in which God was pleased to declare that all his works were
performed with time, though he could have done them without time, We shall find
no such thing in the first creation of men, nor the action of the creation of
male and female interrupted, as it is a long space betwixt the forming of Adam
and Eve.

It is first said, That God created Adam of the clay of the earth: Where
observe, that God, who in the first Chapter created man not simply of the
earth, but of that first matter of which he made the earth; in this second
Chapter framed Adam of the dust of the earth. Observe that God, I say, who was
in the first Chapter the Creator of man, was in the second the framer of Adam.
For which cause God is also the framer of the Jews* Isa. 45. Thus says the
Lord, the holy One of Israel his maker. The maker of Israel, because the maker
of Adam, the first Father of Israel. But of this enough already.

Secondly, it is said, That God breathed upon the face of Adam the breath of
life. Thirdly, He led him into Paradise. Take good notice of these words of
Genesis. God had planted from the beginning a Pa^ adise of pleasure, wherein to
place man. Understand by that beginning, not of that time in which God made
Adam, but of that beginning long before, which is spoken from the beginning of
the first Chapter of Genesis: In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth. In which he likewise created men in their kind, who from the beginning
did inhabit that earth. Certainly, if this Adam had been he who was created in
the beginning, three days after the earth was created, Genesis had not spoken
of this Adam whom the Lord carried into Paradise, God had planted Paradise from
the beginning: Nay rather upon the third day he made Paradise; for the third
day dry land appeared, and Paradise was planted, and the sixth day man was
created in his kind.

Fourthly, it is written, that God gave this Adam laws, what he should eat,
what he should not eat, what he should do, what he should shun. Observe here
narrowly no Law given to the men of the first creation, which is related in the
first Chapter of Genesis: and no tree forbidden them. And God said, Behold I
have given you every herb bearing seed upon earth, and all trees which have in
them their seed, according to their kind, that it may be to you for meat. The
tree of knowledge of good and evil was forbidden Adam, the first man of the
second creation, which is mentioned in the second Chapter, Thou may eat of
every tree in the garden; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil
thou shall not eat; For in the day that thou eatest of it, thou shall dye the
death: But those being diverse ordinances, argue different times. Fifthly, the
Scripture stammeringly shows us, That God had learned, as it were by
experience, in a certain time passed, That Adam being without a helper, had
neither tilled, nor conveniently kept the Garden. Therefore God said, It is not
convenient that man should be alone. Let us make him a helper like unto himself.

Sixthly, God brought to Adam all the creatures of the earth, and all the fowls
of heaven. Which it is not likely he did in half a day. For thither must the
Elephants come from the furthest parts of India and Africa, who are of a heavy
and a slow pace. What shall I speak of so many several species of creatures and
fowls, unknown to our Hemisphere, who must swim so much Sea, pass over so much
Land, to come from America to Mesopotamia, and there receive their names.

Seventhly, He saw what he would call them. He saw; that is, that he took
notice that he should fitly call every one of them, and in every name he
disputed with himself; that is, he had those operations of mind which are
distinguishable, discursively, and in time. Nor is it possible that Adam could
in one half of a day see all the creatures of the earth, and the fowls of
heaven, and then premeditately give every one of them a convenient name; which
neither in pronouncing of their names, not in a continual rehearsing of them,
he could have performed in so short a time.

Eighthly, God sent a deep steep upon Adam, and when he had slept a long and
deep sleep, God took one of his ribs, and filled up the flesh for it.

Ninthly, He made a ^oman of the rib. Nor did the Grecian Jews believe that the
rib of Adam was made a woman the same day that Adam was made; for they affirm,
That Adam was made in the New Moon, that is, the first day of the Moon. But Eve
was made the second day of the Moon. Which the famous Salmasius has mentioned
in his Climacterical years, and refuted the superstition of the Jews; and
withal, has cleared their Opinion, who believed that there was the distance of
a day betwixt their creation.

Tenthly, God brought Eve to Adam. If you all reckon these things severally,
not half a day, not a week, not a month will suffice for half of them.

Nor is it to be overslip'd, that Adam called that Female a woman, as being
taken out of a man, nor called her man, as the females were in the first
creation. He created them male and female. For this man in the second creation
did so much excel all other men who were created before, and begotten till his
time; for which cause he was to be the first, and the Father of a Nation chosen
by God, and by which he was to represent, by Gods decree, all mankind. That he
could find no fit helper for him amongst all the women of the former creation;
But a woman must be framed for him more excellent than all oother women. And
hence it comes to pass; that Marriages with the rest of the Nations are
strictly forbidden the Jews: and that the marriages of the sons of God must not
be made with the daughters of men, left the holy and elect people should be
defiled with the profane Nations, and those that were created altogether in a
huddle.

CHAP. III.
Of the mavelous framing of Adam. Of the mavelous conceptions of Isaac and
Christ. Adam was made a type of Christ, in all things like him, but his
justice. Eve, the wife of Adam, was likewise a figure of the Church, who was
the spouse of Christ.
THey which take pains in reading of the holy Scripture, and are serious in the
perusal of them, find three men marvellously and peculiarly brought forth. The
first, is Adam. The second, Isaac. The third, Jesus Christ. The first was Adam,
whose mother was the Earth, God his father. The second Isaac, whose father was
Abraham, God was his mother: for it left off with Sarah to be according to the
manner of women, Genesis 18. To which God alluding, Isa. 46. speaking to the Jews,
the sons of Isaac, says, he carried them in his womb. The third is Jesus
Christ, whose mother was a Virgin, and whose father God. God was father both to
Adam and Christ, under whose imputation all the world was sometimes to fall.
God was the father, Adam, was the son of God. Christ was the son of God, and
God the son. Adam was a sinner, Christ was just. In all other things Adam and
Christ were alike. Adam was a type of Christ, and opposite to Christ. Isaac was
a type of Christ, and in the middle 'twixt Adam and Christ. Christ was a
Prototype of Isaac, and an Antitype of Adam.

The common Opinion is, That Adam was created by God of a full age, of the
perfect stature of a man, and that the day wherein he was created, he might be
a man of thirty years of age, at which age, Christ died. Truly, I shall rather
think, that Adam was in all things like Christ, except the justice of Christ;
as Christ was made in all things like Adam, except the sin of Adam: and that
Adam not straight, nor the first day, but by leisure, and by several ages,
successively grew from infancy and youth to man's estate, by as many degrees as
Christ arived at the same state at which Isaac arived at it, being himself
likewise miraculously brought forth: and as other men begotten after the
ordinary manner, arise from children to be men.

And he shall find this to be most probable, whosoever shall seriously peruse
the History of Adam, from the framing of him, till the framing of his wife Eve;
for God framed Adam out of Paradise, whom he afterward carried into Paradise,
that he might manure it, says Genesis. Hence I gather, that Adam was framed an
Infant without Paradise, because I read, that he was carried into Paradise to
till it, at such time of his age and strength as he was able to perform it.

Again, I believe that that Paradise was that place of the Holy Land which is
called Arabia felix; for it is bounded Chap. 2. Genesis, By Tigris and
Euphrates, two Rivers joining their streams in their course toward Arabia,
fall into the Bay of Persia. Arabia felix is likewise to be understood the
Paradise of the Lord, in that place of Genesis 12. where Lot lifting up his eyes
saw all the Region about Jordan, which was altogether watered like the Paradise
of the Lord, and like Egypt, as thou come from Segor: for it is probable,
that Genesis has compared and joined to Arabia felix and Egypt, two
neighboring Regions, and two of the most pleasant.

I think that Adam was brought to that Holy Land, even as I find Abraham led
to the same Land: that Adam might have the first natural possession of it, the
first and the father of all the Jews, and which by a stricter title, and a more
peculiar obligation, God might afterward promise and give Abraham, and to the
Jews his posterity, being Adam's seed, and his own. Adam being a young man and
cultivating of Paradise, God thought of giving him a Wife; and being as it were
uncertain whom he should bestow upon him, he brought unto him all the creatures
of the earth, and all the Fowls of heaven, that he might see what he would call
them: for every thing whatsoever Adam called it, that is the name thereof.

Here I imagine two things: first, because it is said; that he might see what
Adam would call them; that he might see, denotes, that Adam made use of his
reason in the proper and determinate Names, which he gave to all the living
creatures and fowls. And hence I gather, That Adam being now of ripe age, was
taught the natural history of all Creatures and Fowls. As is known of Moses,
whom we read to have been, by the care of Pharaohs daughter, bred in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians. As also Rabbi Moses Ben-Maymon, makes mention of the
books of his Predecessors, which make relation of Adam's Master, whose name,
say they, was Somboscer. And although I give little credit to the Fables of the
Rabbis, yet there is nothing so fabulous* but has a taste of an ancient truth.

Then it is written, all which Adam called any living thing; that is the name
of it. Hence I guess, that at what time Adam did conceive the nature of all
creatures and fowls, he at the same time set them down in writing, and made a
book of all their names; for how could it come to pass, that every thing which
Adam called any thing, should be the name of it, unless Adam at the same time
when he named them, had then composed a Dictionary of them for the use of
posterity, least Adam himself should have forgotten all those living creatures
and fowls, which he was never afterward to see? For all Lands and Countries
are not stored with all manner of Cattle and Fowls.

Adam called by their names all creatures, and all Fowls, and all Beasts of the
earth. But for Adam, says Genesis, was not found a helper like to himself. It
would be absurd to think, that a helper was sought for Adam amongst the Beasts
of the earth, and the Fowls of heaven. For, what similitude or relation has a
man with a four-footed Beast or a Bird? But here you must observe, that the
Gentiles, and those men of the first creation, are here numbered amongst the
rest of the living creatures, as you shall find them without distinction
called with the rest of the beasts, The People that treads the earth, Isa. 42.
Yea, that they were called Beasts by the Jews, and so esteemed, as is proved
before. This then is the meaning of Genesis, That Adam did not find a helper
amongst the Females of those creatures, that is, the Gentiles; For Adam such an
excellent man, who was Isch, an excellent wife must be chosen, who should be
Ischa, and not an ordinary and Gentile-woman.

Therefore a wife was framed for Adam. But, as a house does not arise from the
bottom, nor is perfected so soon, as in one day to be inhabited: so do I
believe that Eve was not made so perfect in that very day wherein she was taken
out of the side of Adam, that she was marriageable.

Besides, Eve was a mystical figure of the Church of Christ, for that same
reason as we laid before Adam was a type of Christ. Yea, and that is most
certain, that the marriage of Adam and Eve was a Sacrament and mystery,
signifying that unanimous conjunction by which God adheres to his Church.
Again, we understand that the Church, the spouse of Christ, was built thus,
Mat. 16. as we find Eve built in this Chapter of Genesis, where God speaks to
his Church in these words, I multiplied thee as the herb of the field. Thou
wast multiplied and made great, and thou enter'dst in, and came to have women's
attire. Thy breasts swelled, and thy hair sprouted; and behold thy time a time
of lovers. I guess that Eve, the wife of Adam, grew from her infancle to ripe
age by little and little, as a house grows, as trees grow, which are called the
sprouts of the field, from twigs to large branches: so as we read in this place
the Church did, which was the Spouse of Christ.

The Lord brought Eve to Adam. I guess that Eve being now of age, and ready
for a man, was brought to Adam at that same time when Adam was of ripe age
about the three and thirtieth year of his age: so as Adam may be thought to
have sinned in the same year of his age as Christ dyed for the sin of Adam.

Which things if they be so, what difference was there betwixt the forming of
Adam and building of Eve, which are rehearsed in the second Chapter of Genesis,
and the creation of man, whom God created male and female upon the sixth day of
the creation, which is made mention of Chapter 1. of the said Moses?

CHAP. IV.
Cain a tiller of the ground. Abel a shepherd, and a keeper of sheep. Cain
having killed his brother Abel, is afraid, Flies the punishment of fratricide.
Flies, like all guilty men, to the East of Eden. Marries a wife, begets a son,
and in the same East of Eden builds a City. Adam is said to have begotten sons
and daughters, from the birth of Seth, to the death of Adam himself. It is not
written, that he begat either sons or daughters from the death of Abel to the
birth of Seth.
WIthout doubt it is so. That except the framing of Adam, who was made of the
dust of the earth; and except the building of Eve, which was taken out of the
side of Adam: it is probable in all other things, that they grew and lived as
other men who were created long before; yea, after the same manner as we know
that Christ the Antitype of Adam, conceived after a more wonderful manner, did
live and grow. Which, that by the History of Genesis it may be more clear, let
us go on. After Adam had sinned, he was afraid, because he was naked. And God
made coats of skins for Adam and his wife, and clothed them with the skins of
cattle which had been killed. With which it is probable men in those days did
use to cloth themselves; but who from thence will not guess, that there were
in those days Curriers, Shoo-makers, and Skinners?

Adam knew his wise Eve, and she conceived and bare Cain her firstborn, then
Abel her younger son. And Adam divided his substance among his children, being
men of age, as men do who are under the verge of the Civil Law. He gave his
lands to till to Cain, and his sheep to keep to Abel. Therefore there was at
that time a Meum and Tuum, as there is, and has been always in all societies
well ordered. Cain had his Patrimony and his grounds to till. Abel had his own
goods, his sheep to keep. Such division being made betwixt them, as uses to be
made by all good Masters of Families.

Cain was a Husbandman. Abel a keeper of sheep, He that speaks of tilling,
presupposes a great money other arts: and he that speaks of a husbandman,
pre-supposes a great many other artificers. But if there was no artificer in
those days beside Cain, certainly Cain was a very busybody. Therefore he
dug Iron-Mines, made Fornaces, made his Hammers and his Anvile, and other
tools to make his Plow-share, sharpened his hatchets, with which he was to cut
down timber to make his Ploughs, his Harrows, his Carts, and the like. Then, if
of that Corn which he reaped, he made bread, then Cain too dug the quarry to
make his Mill to grind; or, if they used no Mills in those days, Cain was
carried to those places where Knaves make their moan, in kneading of brown
bread, and made himself a bake-house to bake his bread in. Therefore Cain was a
tiller, a harvest-man, and a baker: And Cain had all these arts alone, for the
exercising of which so many artificers are required; which could not be found
out but by long study and long experience. All these things are nothing. The
noblest of all men, who had God for his Grandfather, and the Earth his
Grandmother, was turned into the Iron Mines, and quarry-pits, or in the
pounding Mill to break Corn, whither those were carried who were condemned to
digging of Metals, or servants, who were to be punished.

Let us come to Abel. It is written, he was a keeper of sheep. Abel fed and
kept his own sheep. Why did Abel keep them? What thieves should he fear, beside
his Father, Mother, and Brother, if there was no more upon earth? But of Wolves
and ravenous beasts Abel had as great reason to be afraid, as his flock: lest
leaving them they might have fallen upon him.

Moreover, it is probable that Adam lived either in that time in an enclosed
Village, or a fenced City. For after that Cain had resolved upon that wicked
deed which he was hatching, He said to his brother Abel, Let us go forth: And
when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother and slew him.
That Let us go forth shows, That Cain and Abel were either shut up within the
enclosure of some Hamlet, or within the walls of some town. Within what
enclosure, or within what Town-walls was Cain afraid to be apprehended and to
be carried to prison, if openly, and in the sight of the men of the Village, or
of the Citizens, he had killed his brother? And he killed him when they were in
the Field, which is opposite to the City. Which observe. He killed him when they
were alone, without witnesses: which Robbers and wicked men, who do ill deeds
and commit Murder, use to do. That there was rewards for good deeds and
punishment forbad deeds at that time, hence chiefly appears because God
speaking to Cain, being angry, and his countenance fallen, because Abel was in
better esteem than he, says, Why art thou angry? and why is t^y countenance
fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be regarded? but if thou do evil,
sin lies at the door. In the gates, that is, in the ports. For it is well
known in many places of the Holy Scripture, that judgment amongst the Eastern
people used to be given in the gates: Yea, yet with them a gate is the same as
a Court: For God told Cain, if he did evil, he should be carried before the
Judges, who should punish him for his wickedness. The which Michael Marole,
Abbot of Villeloing, very learnedly observed, and very nobly did communicate to
me.

Let us press it further. From what Robbers did Cain get a sword to draw his
brothers blood? Whom did Cain fear after he knew that his slaying of his
brother was blown abread? When he said to God, Whosoever finds me, shall slay
me; for he was afraid of his Judges and the Laws, by which he was to suffer
death.

Therefore he fled from their jurisdiction who had power to punish him. And
fled, like all guilty persons, who find that they have deserved ill, and
straight betake themselves to flight. I say, he fled to another Country. To
the East of Eden, says Genesis. The words that Ca^n had with God before he
fled, are very observable. Thou throwest me out from the face of the earth.
That is to be understood the Holy Land, from which Cain was thrown out. And I
shall be a wanderer, and a vagabond upon the earth. Again, that earth is to be
understood the earth of the Gentiles, to which he was now flying, to seek a
mansion in it, Therefore, whoever finds me shall slay me. Observe, that in that
strange earth of the Gentiles, he shall slay me. Neither did Cain in a strange
Land think himself safe, being conscious of his crime* And lest we should think
he feared the Judges of those times in vain, God provides for his safety. Cain
should have feared in vain, and God should in vain have set a mark upon him,
that he should not be killed by any man, if those Lands whither Cain had fled
had been destitute of people.

These things which Josephus being himself a Jew, and a great Defender of the
Jews antiquities has written of this subject, are worth our knowledge. One, who
(it is to be thought) would write nothing, which he had not either received in
ancient tradition, by word of mouth, or gained it by reading. He tells us, that
Cain flying to the Eastward of Eden, did not change for a better course of
life; but that by force and rapine he increased his stock, Getting, says he,
from all parts companious of his robbery and villainy, and became their teacher
in all wickedness. The famous and learned Ismael Buillaldus that he had read
something much to the same purpose in a Greek Manuscript in the Kings Library,
translated out of the Hebrew Chronicle, which being rendered in Latin, sounds
thus, And when Cain had cravel'd a great way, he came to a place called Cainan,
and did all manner of wickedness, falling upon passengers in the way, robbing
and slaying them, of whose spoils he got a great sum of money.

But pray what manner of men were those companions whom Josephus says that Came
gathered from all parts? Would not he rather have called those men the
Grandchildren of Cain, if he had thought them to have been so? But he only
calls them Cains Fellows, or his Companions, as Soldiers are called by their
Officers and Commanders. And against whom did Cain provide this band of wicked
men? Would he have armed his own Grandchildren against his own Grandchildren?
Nor must we imagine that this was the mind of Josephus. To what purpose should
he have raised his Grandchildren against his Grandchildren? What? to extend his
Territories? But that cannot be probable, the earth being then so empty, if we
believe that the world and all men were then but newly created and made.
Besides in this place of Genesis, which is the proper History of the Jews, no
other Jews are said to be either born or made, but Adam, Eve, and Cain: and
those Jews, of wh^m we doubt not. Nor do we read that there was as yet any
other woman begotten, who should be the Mother of those men we look for.

Who then should be Cains wife, of whom we know he did beget Enoch, when he was
to the East of Eden? Certainly, if not of his Father Adams Family, who was the
first Father of the Jews, which Cain was not able to do; because Adam had as
yet begotten no daughters: He must marry a wife of the daughters of the
Gentiles, who was sprung from the men of the first creation. That wicked
brother-killer degenerated from his own stock, and grafted himself into the
profane Nation.

Cain coming to this East-quarter of Eden built a City, and called the name of
it according to the name of his son, Enoch; to distinguish it from other Cities
of the East of Eden: which had likewise their own names. But with what Workmen
and Carpenters did Cai^ build this City? Of what Citizens was it made up? If he
had no other Workmen but from his Fathers house, no other Colonie but what came
from thence to inhabit his City.

Adam then had no children, Abel was killed, Cain fled. And Adam then being one
hundred and thirty years old, begat Seth, whom so soon as Eve had born, Adam
said, God has given me another seed for Abel whom Cain slew. By which words it
is manifest, that Adam had no seed instead of Abel, til the hundred and
thirtieth year of his age. At which time Cain had married his Wife, and built
his City. Genesis says beside, And the days of Adam, after he begot Seth, were
eight hundred years; and he begat sons and daughters. Which without doubt he
would have spoken concerning the time betwixt Seth and Abel, if Adam had in
that time begotten any sons or daughters. But because in that time he neither
begat sons not daughters, it is said after he had begotten Seth, God has given
me another seed for Abel, whom Cain killed; that is, Seth is come in the place
of Abel, who is dead.

CHAP. V.
The Gentiles proved different from the Jews, out of the monuments of the
Gentiles, and from the stock of Adam. The argument of eternity divided into
two classes by the ancients. Of time. Of the bundles of years which the
Chaldaeans had made up. Of the Periodical year. Of the returning and great
year. Years signified by Serpents. Of the cave of age deciphered by Claudian.
Of the age of ages.
WE have seen that the Gentiles in their kind, and affection to their kind
were opposite to the Jews, were begotten of another ^ock than the Jews; and
also called and esteemed strangers by the Jews themselves. We have seen the
Gentiles, the first men that were, Genesis Chap. 1. created with the Sun and Moon,
which dete^minate beginning is unknown to all men.

On the other side we have seen Adam, from whom the Nation of the Jews is
derived, created apart from those first men created in the first Chapter, and
from the men of the first creation. We have seen Eve his Wife created after a
discontinuance of his creation, and not upon the same day. We have seen Cain a
tiller of the ground, and Abel a keeper of sheep. Two brothers, undertaking
several tasks, undergoing diverse duties found out and established by custom.
Abel slain by Cains when they were gone forth; slain in the field, to hide it
from men, and the concourse of people. We have seen Cain afrighted, for the
slaughter of his brother; fearing the men of his own time; that is, his Judges:
Flying from his own Country, and a Captain of Thieves in a strange Nation;
marrying a Wife, building a City, nor a City without a name, but with such a
name as was signal, from his firstborn Enoch. Which, that I may the more
clearly illustrate* we have seen Adam and Eve otherways created by God, than
the Gentiles were created, and the men of the first creation. We have seen Cain
banished from the house of his Father Adam, and the Family of God, a renegado
to the remote and strange Gentiles.

Lastly, we have seen out of Genesis, and out of other choice places of both
the Testaments, the multitudes of proofs by which it is abundant^ proved that
the Gentiles are different from Adam and from the Jews of his posterity. But
because it is said, That arguments joined are more strong; we desire to join to
these arguments of Scripture, those monuments, which are a great many, of the
creation of the world and the first men, whom the most ancient and
best-esteemed Philosophers and Historians have delivered to have been many ages
ago.

And those which argued concerning the world were distributed into two Classes.
One was of those, who affirmed that the world was without beginning and ending,
that it was from eternity, and should remain to eternity. Others disputed, that
the world had a beginning, and should have an end; but both granted, that the
beginning and ending of it were neither of them known. They that said, that the
world was eternal, believed that there was a God, who was not begotten, and who
never should die; Yea, they would have God and the world to be one thing; and
that God had put on the world: And that Jove, the greatest of the Gods, was the
whole world, a living soul composed of living souls, and a God composed of
gods, as of his parts. For they made the parts of the world of the number of
eternal Gods; for there were eternal Gods, to wit, the Sun and Moon, and the
rest of the stars, which were in continual motion; and, which had no beginning,
nor ever should have an end. And for this did they affirm, that the Universe
was eternal; because, if it was begotten, it was begotten of nothing. But that
nothing could come of nothing, they did imagine granted. Likewise they guessed
the eternity of the world, by that eternal perseverance and constancy by which
the world is permanent. and always like to it self. Therefore did they say it
was immutable, because it was always such, and should be always such as it now
is. To which add that of Ecclesiastes, Chap. 1. What is that which was, but it
shall be. There is nothing new under the Sun. Nor can any one say, Lo this is
new: For it has been in the ages which have been before us. And the same Sun
still arising. This was certainly the cause that there were Adulterers too
before Helen; that there were Captains before Idomeneus and Sthenelus; and that
Troy was taken before Agamemnon.

God made Eternity, Eternity made the world, said Mercury in Poemander.
Therefore God was before eternity, and eternity before the world. But as the
Sun being the cause of the day, is born with the day, not before the day: and
as God, the cause of eternity, was not rather before eternity, but from
eternity with eternity: So the eternity which made the world, was not so much
before the world, as with the world from eternity: Wherefore the same Poemander
would have eternity to be in God, and the world in eternity: Yea, he said that
eternity was the soul of the world, as God was the soul of eternity. He said
then, that the world was the work of eternity; that it was not made at a set
time, but always, and from eternity: and since eternity never ceases, the
world should likewise never cease.

Besides action was always in God a power unvanquishable; for God was never
idle: which we perceive by the world, which is the image of God. For there is
no rest in all the arts of the world. For the world is always big, and always
brings forth, according to the nature of time and place. Therefore we shall
easily imagine that the world had no birth, if we have regard to God, in whom
the world and all creatures must be from eternity, from whom they must needs
have their birth, and of whom God in his good pleasure traveled with from all
eternity. But if we believe that God always, and from eternity carried the
world in his mind and will, we must needs believe, That God, by that
unvanquishable power by which he acts and brings forth always, did beget the
world from eternity.

On the contrary, they that assigned to the world a beginning, teach us that
things had a beginning, the forms of which, by little and little this Universe
did receive. And that the unsettled Globe of the world became one lump, and that
the first creatures crept out of the earth, and believed that the world was
amazed at the sight of a new Sun. Nay, Porphyrius has very elegantly deciphered
the youth of Nature, where he speaks of the first and most ancient sacrifice of
the Egyptians. He says, There seems a great space of time to have past over
since the Egyptians, the wisest of men, began at home to sacrifice to the
heavenly Deities, not with the first fruits of Myrrh, Cassia, or Frankincense,
but with green grass, which with uplifted hands, as being the first gown of
teeming nature, her did present.

Porphyrius did not say that an infinite time had past, but seemed to have
past. Which observe, to be according to the opinion of those, who said that the
world from all eternity did roll with a perpetual motion, nor that it was
begotten at any certain time. At a certain time; that is, at a known time. In
which sense Sanchoniato, who lived before the destruction of Troy, said, that
the beginnings of the world were infinite, and that the world should have no
end, but after many ages.

They likewise believed, that the perpetual motion wherewith the world is
rolled, had likewise begotten returnable time. Time, I say, which has from many
ages lasted, and shall last out many more. As also they granted the parts of
this time to be minutes, hours, days, months, ages, ages of ages, or that age
which is extended from age to age. There were likewise years of years, the
twelf-years, eight years, and nineteen years amongst the Greeks. The things
which Claudius Salmasim a man of most excellent learning has written in his
Preface to his Climacterical years, are things curious and choice. He said,
that the Chaldaeans were so large and liberal in the computation of the times
of their Kings; that they numbered them not by years, but by diverse sums
consisting of years. There were three kinds and names of those, as he says,
(...), and (...), as he has found it written, contained six thousand years.
(...), contained six hundred. (...), sixty. It was ordinary too amongst those
of Mexico and Peru, to make up such h^^^s of years in making up the account of
the world, and numbered the age of the world by Suns. One Sun, says Go^^ar^,
consisted of eight hundred and sixty years. And if there be any trust to be
given to them, the last Sun amongth them was to be reckoned from the year of
our Savior, a thousand forty three, which Garcillassus a Vega, a Mexican
himself, of the royal Posterity of Inca, has left us written in his
Commentaries.

There are likewise diverse years of fixed stars, and wandering ones, in which
they end their courses, or are joined together. For a year, as Scaliger says,
is the circuit of that Period, by which it is surnamed. That is thought the
greatest Period, which is made up of the course of the eighth sphere, and which
ends, when all the stars return to the point from whence they go forth. Which
Cicero called The returning year; because all the courses and conjunctions of
those stars being ended, they returned, and should again begin their turns,
like single stars, who go and return in their courses and conjunctions with an
unwearied motion. -- That year being done which is called great,
The wandering stars again that course begin,
Which, when the world was new, they entered in.
Which Verses are in the elegant Poet Ausonius. To which you may add those
things which Pomponius Mela after wrote of the Egyptians; They, says he, have
it recorded in their Histories, That the stars have perfected their courses
four times since they were Egyptians.

Claudian has lively described that great year, which according to Ciceroes
relation contains so many ages of years, in his Panegyric to Stilice. Far
hence, unknown, and from our senses hid,
Scarce seen by Gods, Times mother does abide,
The immense cave of age, whose lap affords
All space of time, or else recalls and hoords:
But round this cave a mighty serpent lies,
By whom each mortal thing decays and dies;
Youthful, with burnishe scales, whose mouth devours
Still his own tail, re-furnishing lost hours.
It Is ordinary, that all sorts of years are signified by Serpents taking their
tails in their mouths: according to all circular figures, which is always
returned into it self, as all years are always returned into the same
beginning* Therefore did Claudian assign a huge Serpent to this great year, and
that Ca^e the pale and aged mother of years, encircled by that Serpent, and
feigned that she devoured her own tail; because that great year, like other and
the lesser tyears, should always return into it self, and begin where it left
off. Yea because, as he speaks, it should always, by a silent motion, run over
again its own tracks.

Nor was the eternity of years represented by Serpents only for the figures
sake, because they were wrapped round; but likewise by reason of their own
nature, by which they were thought, after along age, to be again renewed in
themselves^, and be as it were immortal, as the Phoenicians and Egyptians
believed. That great Serpent which environs the care of the great year, is said
to be always green in her scales; because this sort of creature is believed,
by reason of the force and abundance of spirit that it has, not only to put
off old age, and become young again, but likewise to receive greater increase
of strength: as likewise because the nature of it is lively and fiery. For
which cause Virgil has set forth his Serpents blustering with blood and fire,
which agrees very well with the great year, which has a green and fresh old
age, always taking and retaking, recalling and furnishing time out of his
large bosom.

That which we have said of Serpents turning back to bite their own tails,
agrees with these Periodical years, whose beginnings are certain and known, and
have certain and known ends, whether they be these lesser years, or the greater
year, whom we always make periodical, and confine within certain limits. It is
not so with the great year, which comprehends the past periods of all the
years, both lesses and the greater, which is called the age of ages, or that
age which begins at the beginning of ages, and shall endure to the end of them.
For this age has no determinate period. It depends of a beginning not
imaginable, and although it always rends toward its end by a restless
motion, yet it never reaches it. For which cause this Serpent of Claudian does
not fitly express this year, but rather Lucans Bear, which turning his teeth
toward his tail, endeavors to draw out the Huntsmans dart, but reaches it
nor. Iamblicus speaks fitly to this purpose: says he, God the creator turning
the celestial globes with incredible swiftness, turns his own frame toward
himself, and has commanded it to be in perpetual motion from the beginning to
the end.

That age, which runs out from the beginning of things created, and shall only
stay when there is an end of them, and which is time it self properly, and a
comprehension of all things past, and to come, is called the body of times by
Tertullian, Apol. 26. But is called the age of ages, and the age, simply: and
the day of eternity, by holy Authors. But if the great and returning year of
Cicero does so astonish him in numbering those ages: If the Cave of Claudian,
which is the same as Ciceroes great year, is unknown and hid from our senses,
scarce accessible to the Gods: In what clouds and darkness do you think shall
men's minds be, in recounting all those ages which make up eternity it self? I
say that eternity, in which are comprehended all those that are past, and all
that are to come; And which devours that Cave of Claudian, as a throat does a
morsel, and turns Ciceroes returning year round, as a Potter does his wheel.

This was that, which the Author of Ecclesiasticus wrote concerning, in the
beginning; Who can tell the sand of the sea, the drops of the rain, and the
days of eternity? And in the 18 Chapt. of the day of eternity, As a drop of the
sea, or a grain of sand, so are a thousand years in the account of eternity.
Therefore did Socrates call those Madmen, that were more curious in their
disputes concerning the original of the world. Plato in his Dialogue of the
soul, He professed he knew nothing of it, the contemplation had made him so
blind. The knowledge of the original of the world, which is only competent to
God himself, deceives men, because it is hid from men: nor can we find out the
times and ages of the world. And if the Son of God, as he was man, knew not the
end of the world, why should we, poor men, search the beginnings of it? For the
future, and that which is past, are the same in the account of time. The times
are not hid from the Almighty, Job 20. And belongs not to us to know them, Acts
last Chapter. Wherefore it is written in Ecclesiastes 1. There is no
remembrance of things past. There were stout men, says Horace, before
Agamemnon, but all died unlamented and unknown; because they are shut up in the
long and lasting night of Oblivion.

CHAP. VI.
Men know not their first histories and originals. Of the Chaldaeans. Of the
stupendous number of years which the Chaldaeans are said to have set down in
the computation of their Astronomical Tables. Of the Egyptians. And of the
myriads of years that the Egyptian Kings are said to have reigned. The Kings of
the Egyptians, Gods, Heroes, and men.
WEll said that old man: The Gods wrap up our minds still in a cloud.

But as Geographers use to place Seas upon that place of the Globe which they
know not: so Chronologers, who are near of kin to them, use to blot out ages
past, which they know not. They drown those Countries which they know not:
These with cruel pen kill the times they heard not of, and deny that which they
know not. The Grecians divided the times into those which were unknown, into
those which were Heroic and fabulous, into such as were Historical, and which
they knew to be true: The unknown times were those with them which past from
the beginning of things to the Flood; which time, whether it had a beginning or
not, certainly by computation cannot be comprehended, as Censorinus since Varro
affirms. The fabulous and Heroic times were those which were from the Flood to
the first Olympiad: unknown likewise: Nor is it plainly known how long Inachus
was from Ogyges, or Codrus from Inachus. The Historical and known part, is
computed from the first Olympiad, and is treasured up in History.

But whatsoever we have learned in the knowledge of things, we owe to the
Greeks, and to Latin Authors, who have written after them. But says he, all
things among the Greeks are very late, and you shall find that the building of
Towns, and the invention of Arts, was immediately found out, and but a day old.
And they last of all began to write History. But the Egyptians and Phoenicians
had a constant record of things past, the Greeks themselves confess. Those
same Greeks, but very lately learned the use of Letters from the Phoenicians,
being taught by Cadmus, who was himself a Phoenician; for which cause, it was
doubtful, whether the Greeks had any use of Letters in the time of the Trojan
expedition: as Josephus has written against Appion. But the Greeks, that could
scarce assert their own affairs for truth from the first Olympiad, nor could
be sure of any thing that was before the first Olympiad: yet, by hearing and
reading, knew such things as came to their ears concerning the Chaldaeans,
Egyptians, Scythians, and Phoenicians, the most noble of Nations; but by
allusion, and so confusedly delivered, that those things which from their
Predecessors they received confused, to their Successors they in like manner
returned them. And if the particulars taken severally beget no faith; yet being
joined together, they will prove, that those Nations many ages before were
reigned over, and were famous both in peace and war.

Diodorus Siculus, a most famous man, and who had a great opinion of learning
amongst all, by reading, enquiring, and traveling Europe, Asia, and Africa
forty years, had furnished his Library with many ancient and exquisite Volumes.
This he relates concerning the Chaldaeans, That they thought very long ago
that the world, according to its nature, was eternal, which had no beginning,
nor should have any corruption in order to an end thereof. And that mankind
was from eternity, without any beginning of their generation. That they
believed the Stars were eternal. And by long observation of those eternal
stars, and by an exact knowledge of each of their parcicular motions, foretold
a great many things which should befall^men. You will haodly believe the number
of years, that the College of Chaldaeans affirmed that they had spent in the
consideration of the world, says Diodorus. For, til the expedition of
Alexander into Asia, they reckoned four hundred and seventy thousand years,
since the time they had begun to observe the stars. Diodorus^ thought it hard
to be believed, but not impossible; as believing himself, that the motion of
the eternal circuit, by an eternal Law, was ordered by the constellations and
the stars. And that was it which made Cicero, living at the same time with
Diodorus, write the same things of the Chaldaeans, whom he calls Babylonians.
For they deceive us, says he, in saying that the Chaldaeans busied themselves
four hundred and seventy thousand years in calculating the nativities of all
children; for if they had so done, they had not left off. But we know no body
that can inform us that such a thing is practiced, or ever was. Cicero refutes
not the account of years in that place, which he did not think impossible,
otherwise by impossibility he had refuted it; but the vanity of the Caldaeans
predictions, those careful trials, and experiments given by tradition
concerning the Nativities of Children, all through the continuation of so many
years; which to Cicero seemed improbable. For why, says he, should the
Chaldaeans have discontinued, and not in his time likewise have calculated
Nativities? Besides, that wonderful number of years, which as Diodorus and
Cicero relates, the Chaldaeans bestowed either in the observation of the stars,
or in the raising of Schemes in Nativities, is not different from those bundles
of times and years, which (as I showed before) the Chaldaeans made use of in
the computation of the inaugurating of their Kings. For the number of those
times was so great, and returned so far upon former ages, that they numbered not
those many sums of ages by years, not by thousands of years, but by several
compactions of years.

The Egyptians contending in Astrology with the Chaldaeans, thought that the
motions of all the stars and constellations, and every particular one of them,
was ordained from eternity. And the same Diodorus affirms, that they had
preserved in memory the descriptions of those motions, all through an
incredible computation of years; As it is likewise known that they kept the
Histories of their Kings all along, through incredible computations of time.
Having Gods for their Kings, and Heroes, and men. Of whose most ancient
Dynasties mavelous things are related by Herodotus, and other Writers of the
Egyptian affairs. Salmasius, the learned both amongst those Greeks and
Romans, makes mention of a most ancient Writer who sets down thirty Dynasties
of Kings, and writes, that they endured three Myriads of years, and expounds
those myriads to have been ten thousand thousand, and three thousand years.
There are those in Egypt, who say, that the times of their King, God Vulcan,
was worn out of memory: whom they affirm to have reigned infinite ages in
Egypt: And that the Sun, the Son of Vulcan, did possess the Kingdom of Egypt
six hundred thousand, six hundred and seventy six years after his Father.
Salmasius, the most acute inquirer of their affairs, recounting the number in
his Climacterical years.

Nor must we traduce the truth of Herodotus, and other Writers of the Egyptian
affairs, because Diodorus has written, That they embraced those wonderful
relations for truths. For those words of Diodorus have relation to something
else, than those almost infinite accounts of time. For Diodorus in so doing,
should have turned those monstrous relations back upon himself; who doubted not
to relate those four hundred and seventy thousand years of the Chaldaeans:
which were also hard to be believed. For it is indeed probable, that Herodotus,
an excellent Writer, and very acurate in most things, and Diodorus himself an
assertor of Historical truths, spoke nothing of those accounts, but what they
had heard either from Egyptian Priests, out of their records, and had acuratly
examined, and seen them in Egypt; which for their own parts both Herodotus and
Diodorus ingenuously confess. But Diodorus himself also relates this of the
Egyptians, nor thinks it any wonder, in part 2. book 1. of his Library, That
the Egyptian Kings born in that Country ruled Egypt above 4700 Years. Whose
times we shall find to have surpassed above threescore thousand years, if we
reckon that there is already a thousand two hundred years past, since
threescore of the Kings of France began to reign.

But to say, that those thousands of years, and myriads which I have mentioned,
are to be understood of Lunary years, or of the the third part of the year, as
they say it was sometimes divided into the Spring, Summer, and Autumn, were to
make Objections to no purpose. Since Diodorus himself says this of the
Chaldaeans, That they said, that the Sun and Moon runs through the twelve signs
of the Zodiac; That the Sun ends his course in a year; The Moon in a month. As
likewise Herodotus says this expressly of the Egyptians, that he had learned of
the Inhabitants of Heliopolis, who were thought the most skillful of all the
Egyptians, That the Egyptians were the first of all men that found out years,
and divided them into twelve months. This division of years and months, is
meant in the first Chapter of Genesis, where he speaks thus of the creation of
the Sun and Moon. Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven, and let them
divide the night and the day, and let them be for signs and times, and days
and years. For the days in this place are months, which are divided into
thirty days: and years, which are made up of twelve months. The Sun, being the
greater Luminary, had allotted to him the greatest parts of the year, The Moon
had allotted to it the less, that is, the dision of the months. Therefore that
division of years and months was allotted by creation and nature from God
himself, to the Sun and Moon; nor was there ever any other account used among
the Chaldaeans and Egyptians, men most expert and skillful in the knowledge of
the stars.

But the Chaldaeans were so far from augmenting the numbers, by breaking their
years (which they reckoned always by the Sun) by dividing them into monthly
and Lunary years, that of those very Solar years they bound up their years into
compacted numbers, which they used for convenience of reckoning, and a far
shorter way of account. Let them alone then, who ever uses such trifling
diminutions and divisions, to make such handfuls and heaps of years, which they
neither know, or ever could satisfy themselves in, to this day. However it
comes to pass, it will always appear, that those myriads I spoke of will
always much exceed, in the least computation, that beginning of the creation
which is always set down in Adam.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Egyptian Kings, who were men. Plato in Timaeus concerning the warriers
of the Atlantic Islands, is cited. The sons of this age wiser than the sons of
light. Of the prodigious account of the Chinensians, according to Scaliger.
BUt grant that Herodotus were negligent and careless in many things, wrote by
hatred or favor, related Fables, and that Cicero in his first book of Laws,
tells many of them. Shall we likewise call him a cheater, and a truthlesse
person, whom Cicero calls, The father of History? that we shall not believe him
in those things wherein he had no interest, and wherein he was both an eye and
ear-witnesse with others, and upon certain and sure grounds has left us the
relation? He relates in his Euterpe, That he was brought in by the Egyptian
Priests into a great room; that he there saw three hundred forty and one
wooden Colosses, whom the Egyptian Priests related had been the images of so
many Egyptian Kings. And as many wooden Colosses, which were the images of so
many Egyptian Priests. And in the time of their discourse, one Hecataeus
relating his descent, and ascribing it to the sixteenth God: that they on the
other side did likewise rehearse their descens, but would not admit what was
spoken by Hecataeus, that a man could be progenerated of God. They likewise
agreed in that, that every one of those wooden Colosses, had one honest man to
his Father; And those men that were Kings, the Priests declared to have been
all such, but far distant from those Kings who were Gods. On the other side
stood the images of the Priests, according to the life that every one had
lived. The Priests rehearsing them, and showing every one of their Statues, til
they had shown them all, affirmed, That every one of them was, says Herodotus,
the son of a Priest deceased. The Priests told, that the time that those Kings
had reigned, was ten thousand three hundred and forty years. In which time they
affirmed, that no God had reigned in humane shape in Egypt. But in relating
these and the like stories, Herodotus very warily provides in the said Euterpe,
And these things, says he, the Egyptians affirm that they know upon continual
account, and setting down the years. By which records it is plain, how trusty
and conscientious Chronologers the Egyptians were; and how conscientious a
Writer of the Egyptian affairs Herodotus was, who was so cautions in these
relations.

And grant, that Plato, though called Divine, did mix his Philosophy with a
great many Fables. Shall we think therefore that the History which Critias in
his Dialogue called Timaeus, relates, a matter of fact, not opinion, is a
fable? And which Critias by all probable reasons did demonstrate to be true and
certain, as having learned by a continued tenor of tradition; he, from his
Father; his Father, from his Granfather Critias; his Grandfather Critias, from
his great Grandfather Dropidas; and Dropidas himself from Solon, his
acquaintance. He related, that an ancient Egyptian Priest mocked Solon, who
told him of the ancient acts of his Athenians; of Phoroneus, and Niobe, before
the flood; of Deucalion and Pyrrha, after the flood. That this Priest, I say,
laughed at these Histories which Solon related, as of great authority and
antiquity, as if they had been boyish tales. First, because he had mentioned
but one flood, there having been many more before. Next, that he had not known
the most famous of his ancestors. That he had no knowledge of another Athens,
the most ancient, which had stood before the Flood, which had destroyed them;
Nor had not heard of those famous enterprises, and glorious actions, which
those Athenians had performed ten thousand years before the flood. At which
time an innumerable company of most fierce Warriers had invaded Egypt and
Greece, and all that was within Hercules pillars. Against all whom, the only
valor of the Citizens of Athens, amongst all Nations, was only then shown. The
same History is cited likewise in Arnobius, a Writer of a very high spirit;
where writing for the Christians against the Pagan Gentiles, he uses these
words. We were the cause, says he, that ten thousand years ago a great Army of
men came from the Atlantic Islands, as Plato relates, and destroyed a great
many Cities.

Let us return to Solon. He wondered at the relation of the Egyptian: Nor did
he doubt of those things he had heard, because he had occasion to inquire of
those things seriously and diligently at the Fountain head, in the Histories of
the Egyptians, which were of indubitable truth, which they reserved so sacred
in their Temples, in their holy Bibliotheicks; which they entitled, the
Medicine of the mind: as the Library of the most ancient King of Egypt,
Osimandius, was styled. Solon believed before, that the flood of Deucalion was
the most ancient, and taken out of the most over-worn records, and believed
that there was nothing known before it. He wondered at the Egyptian History,
which he found had surpassed that long in extent of time. Nor did Solon reject
that jeer of the Egyptian Priest, in which he called him and all the Grecians
children in the knowledge of History, he knowing very well, that neither Solon,
nor any other Grecian, knew any thing of true antiquity. For so soon as Solon
returned to Athens, being convicted of his error, and certainly persuaded of
the truth of these things he had heard in Egypt, made Verses in the
commendation of those gallant men, that had performed so valiant actions ten
thousand years ago, before Deucalions flood.

Certainly, it were great madness to affirm that the Gentiles ever had any
other knowledge of God, than that which they might gain by the things which are
visible in the creation. The invisible things of that true God, were first
revealed to the Jews, to whom God first manifested and declared himself, to
them first in Adam, and afterward in the rest of the Patriarchs of the Jews.
This God was hid and concealed from the Gentiles; as was the Altar in Athen^
dedicated to the unknown God. The Gentiles were blind in the knowledge of the
true God; But who ca^ say that they were blind in the knowledge of the world,
and of those things that were cone in the world? In Divinity they were blind,
but who will deny but that in humane affairs they were clearsighted? The Lord
himself says, The sons of this age are wiser than the sons of light in their
own generation, Lu. 16. In which place the sons of this age are the Gentiles;
the sons of light are meant by the Jews. In which signification we see Israel
called, A light of them that were in darkness, Romans 2. As likewise St. Stephen,
in the 7th of the Acts commends the wisdom of the Egyptians. Nor did he think
that all their humane knowledge was lies. Therefore the sons of this age, the
Gentiles, were clearer sighted, and wiser than the Jews, who were the sons of
light, not in the knowledge of God, but in their generation, says the Lord:
that is, in things which rellish'd of the deduction and kindred of the Gentiles,
of their own creation, which belonged to the History of the world, the nature
of men, humane science, men's actions, and inventions.

Solon, who was the wisest thought, and the learned man of his age; and whose
times are just betwixt ours and Adams, and whom we think not very far distant
from us, and who told, as is credible to the Egyptian, the History of many
thousand years, could he have been ignorant of the beginning of the world, if
it had been from Adam, from whom, to Solons time, were not as yet passed three
thousand years? Would not he have confuted those tales and fables of the
Egyptian, with such a pregnant argument, for telling him stories which
transcended his record ten thousand years?

Beside, shall we think those Egyptians, chronicled for Wise men by St. Stephen
himself, to have been so unskilful, as not to know the beginning of the world,
which had been so lately? or so much Sycophants, as to relate those things for
truths which they knew to be lies, if they had either known or supected any
thing concerning such a beginning? What shall I say more of so many famous
Philosophers, excellent in learning, who flocked to those Priests, that they
might learn the Egyptian customs and knowledge, with such a general opinion of
the Egyptian learning and prudence? Do we think that those Philosophers were
such blockheads, that they would not have found themselves grossly gulled and
abused in Histories of so many thousand years ago, if they had but smelled, or
had the least hint that the world was so lately made, and only from the time of
Adam?

To these add what is reported of the Scythians, always reputed most ancient:
as also that contention which continued long betwixt the Scythians and
Egyptians. As likewise that which is spoken of the ancient descent of the
Phaenicians. The French imagined their own beginnings so obscure, that they
were said to be begotten by the Night, or by Pluto, which is the same. For that
reason, they defined the space of any time, not by the number of days, but
nights, and observed the birth-dayes, the beginnings of years and moneths' so
that the day followed always the night; which Caesar diligently observed of
them. The account likewise of the Americans concerning the original of the
world, runs backward a great many ages. Scaliger thought the time from which
the Chinensians reckoned, most prodigious: According to which, says he, this
year of Christ 1594. (in which he wrote his Book, De emendatione temporum) is,
since the creation, according to their account, eight hundred eightscore
thousand and seventy three. And no doubt we should find a great many such
accounts in the Southern parts, if they were but known to us. For in those
thousands of ages, there is a general Harmony of those new found Nations, with
the Chaldaeans, Egyptians, Phoenicians, and French.

CHAP. VIII.
The most ancient creation of the World is proved, from the progress of
Astronomy, Theology, and Magic of the Gentiles. In this Chapter the fabric of
the Sphaere is handled.
IT is certain, that those Sciences of the Chaldaeans, that is to say
Astronomy, which observed the motion of the stars; Astrology, which observed
their Periods; and Magic, which found out the harmony of things celestial with
terrestrial, flourished in the time of Abraham: Yea, Abraham made exceeding
skillful in all these arts by his own Nation, is said to have taught them to
the Egyptians, when he sojourned amongst them. Besides, Moses is said to have
been learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7. But the Egyptians
wisdom was the same with the Chaldaeans; for it consisted chiefly in Astronomy,
Astrology and Magic: It will be worth while here to consider, whether or no it
was profitable for the Chaldeans to gain that exact knowledge of those sciences
which they had in the time of Abraham, in that space which was betwixt the
creation of Adam and Abraham, and which Scaliger according to the Jewish
Greeks, reckoned to be a thousand nine hundred and eight years; And whether or
no the Egyptians could perfectly learn those sciences, as they had them in
Moses time, in that thousand years space which is reckoned from Adam to Moses
his writing of Exodus, and which, according to the former Authors is, two
thousand four hundred and fifty three years.

They which have the least knowledge in Astronomy, not to speak of those that
are perfectly skilled in it, could no otherwise have been found out but by
knowledge of the earth. For the first men by several experiments observed that
the Inhabitants of the earth in diverse places, did inhabit some cold, some
hot climates; and according to their several dwellings, that they had
diversities in their nights, days, and seasons: and that the shadows fell
contrary to one as to the other. Nor were these observations made slightly, or
by chance, but by long and reiterated journeys, by many and wise searchers of
these truths. Which after long and grounded experience when they found to be
certain and indubitable; from the earth turning toward heaven, they inquired
from the Sun the causes of all these vanities, and changes of days and nights,
Summers and Winters. They observed, that the Sun went out, and returned to the
Equator, as they called it, being confined in his course by two circles on
both sides, called the Tropicks, through a circle which they called the
Zodiac, which touches the two Tropicks, but cuts though obliquely the
Equator. And that those Countries which the Sun looked upon betwixt the
Tropicks, his rays were upon them directly, but his beams more distant: from
the other, the more distant they were from the Tropicks, and nigher to the
Poles of heaven. Then were the five Zones found out, and distinguished. The
Torrid Zone, which was under the scorching Sun, betwixt the Tropicks; two
temperate ones, which being placed betwixt the Tropicks and the Poles, enjoyed
a meeker heat. The two cold ones, which from the Polar circles, environing the
Pole it self, were always benumbed with ice and cold. There were imagined also
two Colures, one of the Solstices, another of the Aequinoxes, the two props of
the Sphaere. To these the Meridian was added, which standing still when the
rest moved, might be assigned to move, and every motion might have his own
Meridian.

The Sphaere being thus invented and framed, and according to his position
fitted to the Horizon; they observed a threefold Sphaere; a direct, an
oblique, and Parallel. In the direct Sphaere they placed those that inhabited
betwixt the Equator. In the Parallel, those which were under both Poles. In
oblique, those which lived in places betwixt the Equator and either of the
Poles. To those that inhabited the direct Sphaere they observed, that all the
Stars did rise and set. But to those that inhabited the oblique Sphaere, some
did rise and set, others never did arise, but remained perpetually under the
Horizon: that some did never set, but were continually upon the brink of the
Horizon. That in the Parallel Sphaere, none ever did arise or set, but part of
them were always above the Horizon, and part beneath: Unless those, that
running through the Zodiac in their course, were half seen, half unseen. That
those that were in a direct Sphaere, had a perpetual Aequinox. That in the
Parallel the day continued for six whole months, as also the night for six
whole months more. That in the oblique Sphaere, there was inequalities both of
days and nights, according to the elevation of the Sphaere toward either of
the Poles. Observing always this tenor and temper in the partition of days and
nights, That there was no place upon the earth that had not in the revolution
of one year, six months of day, and as many of night; which was apparent to
those that inhabited the Direct and Parallel Spheres. That in the Oblique, the
length of the days, and shortness of the nights in Summer, was recompensed
with the shortness of the days, and length of the nights in Winter.

Besides, they took notice of the Perioeci, inhabiting under the same Equator,
in a Parallel Circle under several Meridians, to whom the days and nights fell
out at contrary times, but their Summers and Winters at the same time. The
Antoeci, under several Parallels, at an equal distance on this and the other
side of the Equator, on both sides at the same height of the Meridian, who had
their nights and days at the same time: but their Summers and Winters at
several seasons. The Antipodes or Antichthons, under parts both aequidistant
from the Equator; but placed in parts opposite of the Meridian; who had their
times altogether different, both their Summers and Winters, and their nights
and days. Took notice likewise of the Amphiscii, who had two shadows, to the
right and left. The Heteroscii, who had but one shadow; either to the right or
to the left. The Periscii, who had shadows about them to all parts of the
Horizon.

I speak not of a great many things which belong to the frame of the Sphaere;
the heads of which I have but here briefly handled, And which, being long since
known and public, may be thought easy to be found out, and to need no great
pains, to such as take not notice. But if we observe well, these of them that
seem the least, could not have been found out, but by long and continual
search. Nor could all disciplines, as they now hang together, have been
demonstrated, except Arithmetic and Geometry had first been well known by
those exquisite Masters of Sciences in many ages. In many ages, because all the
Mathematicians, though excellent, found not out all in their own times: Nor
could a clear demonstration of the Sphaere, such as the Egyptians and
Chaldaeans had, been gained, but successively, and by experiments and
observations searched and gathered over all the world.

CHAP. IX.
Of the antiquity of Astronomy.
BUt whatsoever belongs to the Sphaere, were but Rudiments of that wisdom and
Astronomy, which flourished chiefly amongst the Chaldaeans and the Egyptians;
for by such beginnings the infirm knowledge of the stars first was strengthened.
For the first authors of Astronomy, when they guessed the motion of the stars,
They observed the seven Planents placed one above another; and innumerable
six'd and wandering stars higher than those Planets, toward the North and the
South, distinguished by several figures of constellations. They observed
likewise, that all the stars did rise and set diversely, Astronomically,
Poetically, Cosmically, with the beginning of the night, or according to the
Sun. Concerning the Planets, that they rose and set, now in one place of the
Horizon, now in another; and that under the Meridian they did arise now higher
to the North, now lower to the South, but both within certain bounds. That all
went sometimes more fast, sometimes more slow; seemed sometimes bigger,
sometimes slower. Many more are observed about the Sun and Moon. That the Sun
went thorough the Zodiac, where a line divides it in the middle, which they
call the Ecliptic, dividing the two Hemisphaeres, the North and the South.
That the Sun moves only that way. That the Planets courses are oblique toward
this line, and strayes from it, now to the North, now to the South. That the
Moon appears in several Cantons, increasing or decreasing, and that she is in
travail and is eclipsed, when she is opposite to the Sun, and cuts obliquely
the Ecliptic in either of the opposite points, which they call nodes, the head
of the Dragon being one, and the tail of the Dragon another. That Mercury and
Venus go round the Sun, and are called his followers. That Mars, Jove, and
Saturn, are not so tied to the Sun, but sometimes opposite to him. That their
course is sometimes concentrical, sometimes excentrical, either high from the
earth, or low toward it. Which sometimes comes to pass in Epicycles,
sometimes direct, sometimes retrograde, sometimes continued. But the fixed
stars kept not always the same distance from the aequinoctial points, but that
in their reaching of them they were exceeding slow.

To salve and explicate these appearances, several grounds were laid,
disputations broached of some, that said, that the heaven moved, and the earth
stood still: of others, who swore the contrary, that the earth moved, and the
heaven stood still. Affirming, that the stars moved in very free distances, or
bounds, and that their natural motion was from the East to the West, and those
that moved more slowly to the West seemed to move toward the East. And others
on the contrary affirmed, that the stars were fixed and planted in solid
sphaeres, by whose motion they were turned about, and together with them did
move from the East to the West. And, to end in few words, several Theories were
assigned to every Planet, found out by long observation and experiment, which
could not have been achieved, but in a very long time and observation. They
observed likewise various motions of the stars, their several ways and
periods, and diverse knots of them. That the Planets were diversely and
wonderfully configurate one with another. Manifold conjunctions of the stars. I
pass by the lesser. They relate that the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn in
once in Nine hundred years. Of the great Period, at which time all the stars
return to their first point, enough before. I omit a great many things to the
same purpose; which for fear of displeasure and tediousness I pass by: All
which, because they are already published, seem to people that understand not,
to have been suddenly found out, and without any trouble; but whosoever shall
consider with himself, that the most ancient and most famous Astronomers, for
the speculations and observation of the least of them, dwelt upon mountain tops
all their life's, will not think that they were so easy, and so slight to be
sound out. Take notice of that, that as a good King, or a good Poet, is not
born every day: no more were there such Astronomers, who, to find them out,
would bestow such care night and day. Therefore it appears, that the knowledge
of Astronomy, of far more large extent than the Sphaere, could not, but in a
longer time, and far more ages, be gained, and found out.

CHAP. X.
Of the antiquity of Astrology.
BUt although it must needs be a vast and incomputable time in which those
first searchers bestowed their study in contemplation of the Sphaere and
Astronomy, their little and of no consideration, in comparison of those in
which the influences and natures of the stars were found out, and by which the
strength of the stars, both in the motion of the air, and moderating men's
fortunes, were found out to have a special command. The first Astronomers
advanced their faces to heaven, to attain to the positions and motions of the
stars. The Astrologers who followed them, returned their eyes from the heaven
to the earth, to consider earnestly what the force and influxion of the stars,
could operate upon the Earth; for they imagined, that the stars had long goads,
with which they did punch us from heaven, and that qualities were engendered in
men, as their stars did incline them.

They found by manifold and long experience, that some of the stars were of a
fiery quality, hot, and choleric; some earthly, dry, and melancholy; some
ayrie, moist, and sanguine; some waterie, moist, and phlegmatic. They
believed, that every Planet had their winds assigned to them; and that the
courses, and returns, turnings and passings of stars, did foreshew the times;
that some of the stars were bountiful, some malevolent; those bountiful,
which foretold happiness to men; those malevolent, which foreshew'd danger,
and were destructive to men. That those were mixed and temperate, which
sometimes made men's lives happy and good, sometimes unhappy and unprosperous.
That some stars were masculine, others feminine: some Homogeneous, others
Heterogeneous. That some were happy for the day, some for the night. That some
stars by their presence and testimony wrought; some by their rays and aspect.
That they foreshew'd good or evil, if their presence were good or bad, their
rays good or evil. That there were destroying stars, which upon their meeting
cut the thread of life. Others Climacterical, which troubled the course of life.
That there were heavier or lighter climactericals, and by the meeting of some
malevolent star became deadly. That the numbers of seven and nine was not the
cause of a Climacterical, but the decree and finishing of a star; and that
therefore every Planet had his particular Period, to signify the climacterical
returning to the same Period every year. That there were besides, trigonal,
retragonal, hexagonal, and diameter aspects. That the trigons, tetragons and
hexagons, some were placed on the right hand, some on the left: on the right
hand, those that wrought by radication and aspect: on the left, those that
wrought by presence and testimony. In Diameter, were weekly Climactericals, in
ninths, or nine days in the Tetragon. That benevolent stars softened the force
of a climacterical star or place; and that the aspect of a star sometimes
changed the aspect of a sign. They observed that the Zodiac had its parts,
masculine and feminine. And as the Astronomers divided the Zodiac into twelve
signs, or parts; the Astrologers divided every sign of the Zodiac into three
Decans, and nine benefactors or patrons, that divided the twelfth part of the
Zodiac into twelve parts, which had the impression of the force of the twelve
signs, and their names allotted twelve parts in a twelfth sign in signs
predominant. Besides, the ancients painted these Decans with several colors.
The seven Planets, and the twelve Asterisms of the Zodiac: those in more
flourishing colors: the others in darker and obscurer colors. To Saturn, they
allotted black: to Jove, white: to Mars, red: To the Sun, a shining color: to
Venus, diverse colors: to Mercury, sand color: to the Moon, an ayrie color.
They thought that a clear star was blunted by a dark one: a dark star
enlightened by a clear one; and that stars, by admixtion of others, received a
hundred colors different from their own.

Also, to these Decans the Casters of Nativities attributed the first place in
all Astrology and Divination, which arises from casting of Nativities. Nay,
they thought that those Decans were so powerful, that there were so many people
in government, and so many universal Laws as there were Decans. Hence not only
the nativities of Cities, but likewise the nativity of the world was essayed.
But the Chaldaeans and the Egyptians were most acurate in the casting of
Nativities, in the framing of the Dodecatrope, and the Scheme of the Horoscope;
They first sought for the Horoscope with all diligence: they found out the
Planet of the Nativity, whom they called the Lord of the birth, the Prince, and
giver of life: then sought for the Lord of the time, the alotter of his time
and fortune. In the erecting of the Scheme, they appointed twelve places, bad
and unhappy, according to whose determinations or aspects they gave Judgment:
As many they made fortunate or unhappy, in Fortunes dodecatrope, which they
styled, the twelve rewards of Fortune: and so styled by the learned Salmasius,
not the labors of Fortune, as they are commonly called. According to the
position and fabric of the Scheme, they ordained stars, who received strength
from the Horoscope, and which moderated every ones Nativity. And although every
one of them were of sufficient force of themselves; yet for diverse aspects and
configurations, by which they were allayed, they either lost their forces, or
gained new influxions. The Horoscope was generally with them the same which a
Decan; but in division, and in their visibility: according to which, the
Egyptians and Chaldaeans did cast Nativities: they inquired out the twelve
parts of the Horoscopant star: and not only in what part of the twelve the
Horoscope was, but in what twelfth part of the twelfth part; nay, whether there
were any one in the sixtieth part. And they who were more acurate in their
search, whether there were any horoscope in the sixtieth part of the sixtieth,
The stars seemed well or ill disposed, when the Planets were placed in good or
bad signs, in good or bad parts of them. Besides, they ordained several
Climactericals, according to the Horoscops or Decans. And as to every Decan
they assigned their own Planets, they made also several Climactericals,
according to the order of the Planets, to be disposed in every narivity. Nor
did they only take notice of the Planets and Decans, in finding out of the
Climactericals; but considered likewise the ascensions of stars, and the bounds
of every time. All which, by exact and division to the least, were inquired out
and invented, and accommodated and fitted carefully to their definitive art.

They observed besides, general Lords of the times, who from the beginning of
their lives, to the ends of them, were constant companions of their fortunes
and actions. Who disposed the times, years, months, days, and hours, to the
following stars; and those that followed, to those that next them ensued. That
the general Lords of the time, received its times from none, but from its self:
But did dispense them to the particular Lords of time; and that these
particular Lords, who received it of their general, distributed them likewise
to their followers: so that every star had its lordship of time in order. That
also those general Lords had special ones in their bosoms yearly, monthly,
daily, and hourly; in the accounting of which, and placing them in order, it
cannot be set down how diligent the ancient Astrologers have been, especially
in the giving and receiving of time which the stars substitute to another, did
borrow from one another. They observed that stars did alter and change from
good to evil, and that one Lord of time did not confer good or evil, but many;
and when good or bad at one time happened to one man, these contrarieties could
not have been foreseen from one Lord, but many: For as the aspects of the
stars, their courses, circulations, and meetings, were mixed: so were men's
actions and fortunes mixed upon earth.

Several things besides were observed of this kind, which are common with the
Masters of this Science. And a great many more things, which by the antiquity
and malice of time are bereft us, and lost with the books of the Chaldaeans and
Egyptians. Of which, if they were extant, we would, perhaps, see what Psellus
has written of the Books of Teucer of Babylon. Whosoever, says he, reads
them, shall find many things in them wonderful, of the Celestial signs and
Decans, which arise with them, which have influence on several actions and
events.

I confess, that all these things, and all matters of Nativity, consisted of
wandering and arbitrary principles, but being various, and so often reiterated,
for that very same reason were to be found out by observation and experiment.
And for that cause, must needs have been a perfecting through a great many
ages. For which canse the ancient tradition of them was in such repute amongst
the ancients, that it had Patrons, both Gods, Heroes, and men: Mercurius,
Aesculapius, Anubius, Petosiris, Necepson, Orpheus, and a great many more who
have written Aphorisms concerning the determinations of the stars, and who have
thought that something, which we think idle stories, and have added weight to
this smoke.

Which things so often as I consider with my self, I wonder no longer at so
many Thousand years, which Cicero says the Chaldaeans set down in trying of
Children according to their Nativities. Hence that scrupulous care amongst the
ancient Casters of Nativities, in finding out the partile Horoscope, in
distributing the lordships of time among the stars, in searching out the
Climactericals. Most of which, to this age unknown, the singular and excellent
Salmasius, has wonderful, exactly, and learnedly laid open, according to his
hidden learning in all sciences, in which he is excellent.

CHAP. XI.
Of the antiquity of the Divinity and Magic of the Gentiles.
THat the Divinity of the Gentiles was an addition to that most ancient and
first Astrology, none can deny. For the first men strayed a great while upon
earth, before they turned toward heaven, and gaind from the dimensions of the
earth, the dimensions of heaven. Astronomers, who succeeded them, strayed long
in heaven in finding out the courses of the stars. Astrologers, who followed
them, looked long down upon the earth, to find out by diligent consideration,
what power the stars had upon earth. The Divines, who were the Disciples of the
Astrologers, turned their eyes back again upon heaven, and when they saw those
celestial fires as it were pierce our inferior bodies with their rays, for
which cause the Bible calls them the host of heaven, they thought them to be
Gods omnipotent, to whom all things did give obedience, and turned all things
toward themselves; and so gave them names, either from the power they
exercised upon earthly things, or from some peculiar effect that they had in
men's destinies.

They attributed to the world its God, or genius, whom before I did show at
large to have been the Prince of the inferior Gods, and a spirit of the first
creation; They called him Pan, and gave to him a whistle of seven reeds; at the
sound of which, all the rest of the Satires and Pans did dance; signifying,
that that universal spirit and God, did move and moderate all the rest, by the
harmony and consent of the seven Plants. Afterward, they assigned to
particular places, towns, peoples, houses, their own Genius. All which, because
they are tedious, and known to most, I pass.

But likewise because most men did referr the beginnings and causes of things,
not only to stars, but to supercelestial intelligences, and to the author of
the world: many things were spoken of gods and their degrees; which contentions
Mercury of Egypt to compose, called by them Trismegistus, and esteemed a God,
performed a wonderful thing, as Firmicus relates, Mercury of Egypt, says he,
wrote twenty thousand volumes of diverse substances, and beginnings of degrees
of celestial powers, which were diversely related. In which the Astrology and
Divinity of the Egyptians was explained. Which arts he had taught Aesculapius
and Anubius. The which, that it may be confirmed by good authority, Iamblichus
relates this of those books in his Mercurials: Mercury, says he, made twenty
thousand books, as Meneteus says; yea thirty thousand, threescore thousand,
five hundred and twenty five books. He wrote a hundred books of the Empyrean
Gods, as many of the ethereal, a thousand of the selestial. Hence we may guess
how exceeding ancient the Theology of the Gentiles was, both by the Antiquity
of Mercury himself: as also from the first authors of the Theology of the
Gentiles, who, long before Mercury, could not agree concerning their own Gods.
Hence it is also manifest, that the Theology of the Gentiles flowed from the
knowledge of the stars; because whatsoever fables the Gentiles did invent
concerning their own Gods, were understood of the influences of the Planets,
their aspects and conjunctions. Therefore they feigned, that Saturn was harsh
and cruel, because the appearance of that star in heaven was malignant and
hurtful. That Jove was given to love, because his star was bountiful, and
exhilarated men's hearts. That Mars being fierce and bloody, was mollified by
the intervening of Venus. That their conjunction was hindered by the Sun. And
the rest, which in relating I should be troublesome.

Besides, the Theology of the Gentiles begot their Magic; and those which
were the Priests of their Gods, were also their Magicians. The Ancients thorght
there were hidden virtues in all things terrestrial, either by a divine ray, or
a virtue so disposing them, or infused by intelligences, by ways of mediate, or
impressed in them in the creation by primitive copies. That likewise all things
terrestrial were in heaven in a celestial and pure form, in the intelligences
more simply and intellectually, in the primitive copies purely, and in manner
of Idea's. And that all things, by divine attraction, and symbolical love, were
reciprocable, and by mutual breathings fed one upon another. That things
celestial and supercelestial, by their influxions did draw things terrestrial
toward them. That things terrestrial likewise by their appetites drew down
things celestial to them. And for this reason, that there was no growing thing
in the earth but had its proper star, by whose spirit it possesses both life
and strength, and those faculties with which it was endued. Not to speak of
stones, metals, precious stones, trees, beasts, and men, to whom they likewise
appointed their own stars. Therefore with such efficacious things they were
thought to work wonders, preparing them according to the Moon, Star, or the
Aspect. For, as the virtue operative from things occult produced things
manifest: so these Magicians, by the help of things manifest, seemed to produce
hidden effects by the influxion; of stars, and things natural sympathizing with
the celestial. And imagined, that the celestial influxions, mixed with the
power of things natural, produced effects admirable here on earth, though the
causes of them were in heaven.

Hence it is that they relate that the shapes of stars and gods have by
enchantments been called down, and the Gods themselves forced by their charms,
by sacrifice, consecrations, incense, invocations and imprecatious. Those forms
of gods and stars they called persons and presences, such as the Decans were.
For Decan, according to the Chaldee and Persian, as the same Salmasius relates,
was a presence or appearance. These presences or appearances sometimes were
prosperous, som^times unfortunate. The direful shapes and Gods that ruined Troy,
Present themselves.
In sacrificing they appeared either hostile or friendly. For the depulsion of
hostile appearances, the Purple tire of the head was appointed amongst the
Romans, as Trojan Helenus ordained A Eneas: Aeneid. 3. With purple vail thy
sight and head attire,
Least at the sacrifice and holy fire,
Some direful interrupting shape thou see.
Which after must a solemn custom be,
To thee, thy friends, and thy posterity.
From those enchantments all witchcrafts and Philtres took their beginnings, by
which men were either bewitched to love or hatred, or made well or ill. To this
add the impressions either of good or bad virtues, in those Images, which they
call Talismanical, by characters, adjuration, lights, sounds, numbers, words,
and names. For they thought that Nature expressed hidden effects in like
shapes, as it were by sympathy, and that the Gods expressed the truth of Ideas
by manifest Images. As also the ancient Priests of several things composing one
thing, liken'd it to that one thing, which is above many things. The separation
of which composition would weaken every one of the materials, but the mixtion
of them by exemplary force restore the Idea. They relate, that the Decans in
those Talismanical figures were used to be painted, one with an ax, another
with a dart, another with a head of a man or woman, with rays about it, and
that the images of them were graven upon the stones of rings for charms. And
that they thought there was a great deal of force in those Talismans, if they
had consecrations graven in them in the Chaldee or Egyptian tongue, those being
the tongues of ancient Nations.

What shall I speak of those Magical words breathed upon things enchanted,
which fitted them for the susception of any virtue the Magician pleased,
besides the ordinary custom, and that being spoke backward would cause unusual
effects? Is it not ordinary, that by the force of Magic it has thundered,
without the knowledge of Jupiter, rivers turned back, the Seas staid, the Sun
stopped, the Moon cleared, the stars pulled down, the jaws of Vipers broken, and
the heads of Asps by charms split in pieces? What shall I speak of the River of
Hell turned back, Ghosts called up, men's shapes changed, the course of nature
interrupted, and the whole world astonished?

Besides, there were several ways of Prognostication, by Astrological and
Magical inventions, by Physiognomic, by Metoposcopic, by Chiromancie,
Geomancie, Hydromancie, Aeromancie, Pyromancie, by sacrifice, thunder,
lightning, by dreams, by apparitions, after long waking, by surie and madness,
after watching; in all which things there were predictions of future things.

It is not my desire that all these things which I have declared, should be
believed. But that it may, appear that the least part of Magic and Divination
had its arts found out by manifold observation and long experience; and those
not frivolous and vain, but of such weight and moment, that they were next to
miracles. Such as were to turn rods into Serpents: to change the waters of the
river into blood: and to bring up Frogs; Which were not merely the cosenage of
the Devil, but the mighty and wonderful power of Magic. Which Magic St.
Stephen in the 7th of the Acts calls Wisdom, and which Moses was chiefly
skilled in, according to the Hebrew. Writers themselves, and not only in that,
but all the w^sdom of the Egyptians; as says the holy Martyr in that place, in
Astronomy, Astrology, and the Sphare, whence Magic had its original. But if
the Egyptians were so skillful in Magic, according to the Scripture; as also
the Chaldaeans, who in this did contend with them, How skillful must we think
them in Astrology, Astronomy, and the Sphaere? Yea, if they were skillful in
many things of Magic in this age unknown, Why should not we think they knew
many things in Astrology, Astronomy, and the Sphere, which we know not? And if
they knew more in those disciplines, Why should not we think that they
bestowed more time in the learning of them?

To these let there be added many other Arts and Sciences, depending and
adherent to these, which whosoever knows, must be thought to have learned the
other. And let us seriously consider whether or no (which we undertook to
demonstrate) the Chaldaeans and Egyptians could learn all those Sciences, which
is betwixt Adam, and Abraham the Chaldaean, or Moses the Egyptian. Certainly,
if we do this freely and with clear intentions, there is none but will think
this time exceeding narrow to have found out the most trivial experiments of
Sciences; not to speak of the highest, such as were Astronomy, Astrology, and
Magic, curiously observed, weighed, and demonstrated.

The Fourth Book of this SYSTEME OF DIVINITY.
CHAP. I.
Adam, though framed perfect, could not that hour he was made, understand the
Sphere, Astronomy, and A strology; But in progress of time might gain the
knowledge of them. Of holy Writ. Many things copied, not original.
TO salve these doubts, a miracle steps out of the Engine. They that say the
world was created with Adam, say, That Adam the first hour he was made, had all
sciences, arts, and disciplines perfectly, which afterward without any trouble
or experiment, nor no long process of time, he taught his posterity. Let those
famous persons pardon me, if I tell them, that they do not seriously consider
what they say. Adam, as we said before, being made perfect, had in him all
perfections belonging to a man, but notwithstanding gained nothing by that
perfection, which might exceed that perfection and his own humanity: But Adam
had exceeded the perfection of all humanity, if that day he was made he had
perfectly known all arts and sciences. Therefore he understood them not. Let us
grant, that the world was made with Adam, it will not therefore follow, that
all sciences and arts were framed with Adam. Truly, in the beginning the prime
causes and means of all sciences were in God, but the seeds of them were only
sowed in Adam, which could not arise, but by meditation, reasoning with
himself, by cultivating, and time. Adam might attain all arts and sciences; but
not for that cause he attained to them that minute he was born. Besides, Adam
could not understand any thing of things past, or judge of things to come, as a
man, though most perfect, unless by knowledge or conjecture, or rather by
consideration of things present, according to the common phrase, that there can
be nothing in the knowledge or intellect of the most perfect man, which is not
first his sense.

For Example then. Adam could not subdivide the regions of heaven, which is the
knowledge of the Sphere, but that he first must find out the regions of the
earth, unless he had first traveled about the world, and viewed it. But such a
thing could not be performed, but by daily journeys, meditation, and comparing,
according to the Psalm, One day ^elates to another, and one night preaches
knowledge to another. In which place the day signifies the apprehension of
things, which is signified by the sight, the most noble of the senses. The
night the recollection of those things apprehended, by consultation and
meditation.

But if Adam, as a man; yea in the integrity of his perfection, or before sin,
which is the same thing, could not but by little and little, and succession of
time, gain all sciences, arts, and disciplines: Certainly he must be far longer
time in gaining them after his fall; especially according to their supposition,
who think, that his mine was darkened and dulld by ignorance of all things.
Besides, according to them, there is so short a time betwixt the framing of
Adam, and his sin, that Adam could know nothing but what cost him travel
enough, yea the same travel and rate as all disciplines are sold for to sinful
men.

Those which are scrupulously addicted to the books of Moses, use to refer
the inventions o^ all arts, sciences, and disciplines, either to Adaem or his
posterity; because in Moses there is no man read of before Adam. This they
believe upon the same score, as they believe that all antiquities, both in
natural and humane history, are rontained in holy Writ, especially in Moses. I
intend not, God forbid I should either diminish the authority of the
Scriptures, or doubt the truth of them. I will tell you ingenuously what is my
opinion (...), if I be mistaken, let it be upon my self. (...), and will still
hold, That there is as much in the Bible, as God has granted us to know, either
of the Original of the World, of Prophecies, Divine mysteries, or our
salvation. Those things which belong merely to our Salvation, consist but in a
few things. And in them the holy Spirit has bestowed so much pains and
clearness, as belongs to humane capacity. Those things which concern other
things are set down more at large. And concerning them, I shall openly declare
that which all know, but most are loath to speak, That so great things are
written with so great carelessness and obscurity, that sometimes nothing can
be more obscure, nothing more intricate.

Seeking with my self what should be the reason of this, I answered thus in
reason to my self, as any one would have done, That God, who would have himself
known by men, hid himself, and would not be perfectly seen. For that he
professed concerning himself to the Jews, That he would dwell in a cloud. And
therefore in the Old Testament opened himself unto them not always under one
name. And in the Gospel hindered the Devils and the Spirits from divulging who
he was. Besides, whatsoever he said was a Parable, and by diverse
circumlocutions he delayed his auditors; But if God, speaking face to face
spoke intricately, and aenigmatically, it is not unlike that the Scriptures,
remitted to posterity, should be more knottie and intricate. Hence those
unusual apparitions, which we read to have been seen by holy Writers, set down
in unusual and strange ways of expression.

But howsoever, who will make it good, although all we have received be knotty
and intricate, that those are the Originals which we now have? Certainly, it
cannot be denied, but the Books of Josuah, Chronicles, and Kings, have been
copied out, and I shall make it appear. The miracle of Joshua, at whose command
the Sun and Moon stood still, is manifestly copied out; For it is written in
the 10th Chapter of that book, And the Sun and Moon stood still, till the
people were avenged of their enemies, Is it not written in the books of the
just?

This miracle then, is taken out of the books of the just; that is, out of the
books of the Jews, who were called just, as I observed before. I say, taken out
of another book, whether it were the Original, or no. And nothing more frequent
in other books, Behold they are written in the books of Nathan, or in the books
of Gad, or in the books of the remembrances of the Kings of Israel, and the
Kings of Judah: or in the words of Jehu, the son of Hanani; or in the words of
Hosea the Prophet, or in the Prophet Isay, every one of them having their own
History, to which it had relation, now lost. Whatsoever is read in the Kings,
or Ch^onicles, are gathered out of the books of Nathan, Gad, Jehu, Hosea, Isay,
etc. Whence they are taken and gathered, as is found by the confession of the
authors who wrote them.

I know not by what author it is found out, that the Pentateuch is Moses his
own copy. It is so reported, but not believed by all. These Reasons (...)
believe, that those Five Books are not the Originals, but copied out by
another. Because Moses is there read to have died. For how could Moses write
after his death? They say, that Josuah added the death of Moses to
Deuteronomic. But, who added the death of Josuah to that book which is so
called; and which, being written by Josuah himself, is reckoned in Moses his
Pentateuch?

Besides, we read in the 1. Cha. of Deuteronomy. These are the words which Moses spoke
beyond Jordan. Which if Moses had spoken, he had said, on this side Jordan. For
Moses had not passed Jordan; nay he never passed it: but he that writes
Deuteronomy, says beyond Jordan, because it was in the holy Land, and because
that place in the plains of Moab, where Moses last spoke to the Israelites, was
beyond Jordan. And this beyond Jordan, you shall find repeated often by the
same Moses. It being to him on this side Jordan.

There is also a passage cited out of a Book, whose Title was, The Wars of the
Lord. The words in Numbers are these. Whence it is said in the book of the
wars of the Lord. As he did in the red sea, so shall he do in the brooks of
Arnon. But that Book of the Wars of the Lord could not be cited by Moses, in
which there could be mention made of those things which were done at Arnon, in
the very place where Moses performed this exploit. Truly I believe that Moses
made a Diarie of all those wonderful things which God did for the people of
Israel, under the conduct of Moses. From which collections the books of the
wars of the Lord might afterward be taken; Which for that cause was neither
the Original, nor the Original of the Original: but indeed a Copy from a Copy.

That which we read in the third Chapter of Dentronomy does manifest, that they
are written long after Moses; Jair the son of Manasses possessed all the
Country of Argob, and it is called after his name, Basan Hanoch Jair, to this
day. Moses could never have said to this day; For Jair scarcely had possession
of his own Villages at that time, when Moses is brought in so speaking. And
hence it manifestly appears, that the author intended to show whence, according
to the most ancient and first original, that City was called Jair, deriving the
cause from Moses to his own time: and therefore, as was fit, called it Jair from
that ancient Jair, unto this day.

The like we read in the same Deuteronomy, in the same Chapter. Only Og King of
Basan was remaining of the race of the Giants. His iron bed is shown, which is
at Rabbath of the children of Ammon. For what needed Moses to have said to the
Jews, that his bed was shown at Rabbath of the children of Ammon, that they
might learn the bigness of the Giant? Why, I say, needed he to send the Jews
to another place to see the bed of the Giant, who had seen him in his own Land,
and overcome him, and measured him as he lay along in the fields of Basan? It
is a great deal more likely to think, that this Writer, to gain credit to what
he wrote concerning the King and Giant Og^ of whom he made mention, spoke of
his iron bed, as a testimony of the wonderful spoils of that terrible Giant,
which were not at that time to be seen at Basan, where Og lay, but in Rabbath
of the children of Ammon, the succession of ages having changed the place.

We read also in the 2. of Deuteronomy, The Horraeans first dwelt in Seir: whom
the children of Esau driving out, dwelt there, as Israel did in the Land of his
possession, which the Lord gave him. In these words it is said, That the
Idumeans, who are the Sons of Esau, inhabited Mount Seir, driving out the
Inhabitants of those Mountains, And that the Jews again inhabited this Mount
Seir, and gained Mount Seir as a possession, driving out and destroying those
Idumaeans. Yet it is most certain, that the Idumaeans, according to Moses
himself, were not thrown out in his time, as it is in Deutronomy in the same
Chapter. And the Lord said to me, says Moses, You shall pass through the
confines of your brethren the sons of Esau, who dwell in Seir, and they shall
be afraid of you; Therefore take heed you move not against them, for I will not
give you of their Land one foot; for I have given Mount Seir in possession to
Esau. Therefore Idumaea was not given to the Jews in the days of Moses, but
long time after, as David Prophesies, Psalm 108. Over Edom will I cast out my
shoe. that is, I will extend my possession over Idumaea; For possession is
taken by setting down of the foot, and the shoe in this place is the foot: the
thing containing for that which is contained. And David made also good his
prophecy, 1 Chro. chap. 18. where we read, that David consecrated silver and
gold. Which he had taken from (...) Nations, Edom, Moab, and Ammon. And befides
in the same place. Abishai the son of Zervia, smtoe Edom in the valley of salt,
eighteen thousand, and put a Garrison in Edom that Edom might serve David.
Therefore in the time of Dav^d, and not of Moses, Edom became a land of
possession to Israel, as God had promised, as being a lot and part of the Holy
Land. And hence it is gathered, that these essays of Deutronomie were written
long after David's time, a great while after Moses.

I need not trouble the Reader much further, to prove a thing in it self
sufficiently evident, that the five first books of the Bible were not written
by Moses, as is thought. Nor need any one wonder after this, when he reads many
things confused and out of order, obscure, deficient, many things omitted and
misplaced, when they shall consider with themselves that they are a heap of
Copy confusedly taken. Those things which we read concerning Lamech, Genesis 4.
are defective, Because I have slain a man to my hurt, and a young man to my
grief. For there is no mention made of that young man whom Lamech slew. That
History which is related in the fourth book of Moses, concerning the
circumcision of the son of Moses is desicient, and is conjectured to be
deficient, because we see clearly what it should be. The The 20 Chapter of
Genesis, of Abraham's sojourning with Abimelech, King of Gerar, is misplaced:
For it is not likely that the King would lust after Sarah, who was an old
woman, and with whom it left off to be according to the manner of women, and
who was not capable of pleasure. As also Genesis 26. the same is to be thought
of Rebecca. Nor must we think that the King was then in love with Rebecca,
Jacob and Esau being th^n of age.

That which we read in the 10 of Deuteronomy is misplaced, The Children of
Israel removed their camp from Beeroth, of the sons of Jacan, where Aaron dyed.
And in the same place, He separated the tribe of Levi to carry the Ark of the
Covenant. Though long before the death of Aaron, the Levites were separated to
look to the Tabernacle, and the Ark of the Covenant, according to Gods command,
often iterated both in Leviticus and Numbers. Yea, whilst Aaron himself was
alive, yea still after that the Tabernacle was perfected, the Levites carried
the Ark as often as the Children of Israel remo^ed their Camp. And if the
Reader will take pains, let him but run over this tenth Chapter of Deuteronomy. and he
shall find the death of Aaron preposterously inserted in that Narration, having
nothing there to do, and nothing be^onging to the bu^nesse. Yea, he shall find
it contrary to the computation of time, whilst they were talking of the
delivery of the Law of Sinai, long before Aarons death.

You shall likewise find that passage in the 18 of Exodus misplaced; And Jethro
came, the Father-in-law of Moses, and his sons, and his wife, to Moses in the
wilderness, where he was encamped by Jo^dan. For how could Jethro come to Moses
hi^ son-in-law, after the going out of the Jews, together with the wife of
Moses, and his sons: Seeing Moses himself, when he went away from Jethro his
Father-in-law, returned into Egypt, before he went out. The which that he might
do, he is said expressly, To have taken his wife and his sons, in the same
Exodus, and the 4. Chapter.

Whoever but slightly revises those Books, shall observe more things of this
kind, and many things every where in them confused and obscure, yea
contradictory to one another, as cold to hot, dry to moist.

But you, who think it enough to find out answers every where: You take all
that pains in vain, unless you salve it by this observation: And believe that
these things were diversely written, being taken out of several authors.

CHAP. II.
God made himself obscurely known to men. God in a cloud. Of the Bible copied
out. There were Writers before Moses. Genesis could not mention all. He wrote
not the history of the first men, but the first Jews. The Ark was not the first
of ships. The Vine planted by Noe was not the first vine. How Melchizedech is
to be understood without father, mother, or original.
WHy God would not fully manifest himself to men. Why he spoke to them so
intricately and obscurely. Why commanded his word to be written so intricately
and obscurely, let wiser men inquire. And why he suffered the primitive Copies
to perish of a great many things which Writers received from God himself, and
permitted the more obscure and difficult to arive to our age. But let God be to
me as much hid as he will. It is nothing to me, Why God did it, since I know he
did it. I cannot pierce that cloud with my eyes wherein God dwells, but know
certainly that God dwells in a cloud. And in the cloud I worship him. I am not
able by that clearness which I have, if any such there be, to enlighten those
obscure things in the Scriptures, which we read daily; to order all those
things which are consus'd and undigested; to recall those things which have
been slipped; to restore things that are wanting, or reconcile things that are
contrary; nor to have full knowledge of the beginning of the world, by reading
of them; nor distinguish the order of the holy Scripture; nor perfectly
understand the Prophets; nor perfectly know the efficacy of mysteries.
Whatsoever else in the holy Scriptures is omitted or defective, or is contrary,
I know notwithstanding that the holy Spirit of God is in them. For either I
believe that the originals of them were dictated to holy authors, or taken out
and copied from the Originals. And, as in a cloud thickened by a tempest, the
rays of the Sun which dart through it witness that the Sun is there: so also
in those obscure and hidden clouds of the extracted Copi^, the fiery beams of
the holy Spirit, which runs all along through them, bewrayes that God, whom
those clouds hide.

I know likewise, that in Gods cornfieldsd burs and thorns grow up, that tares
grow up amongst his seed, that weeds and barren stalks arise in his harvest. I
know, that in the Lords harvest there is a great deal of chaff mixed with the
wheat. I know, that the building of Christ is raised with gold, silver, wood,
stone, hay and seed, confusedly intermixed. And I know also, that such things
are built up with, confused with, and grow up with the Scriptures. Yea, you
will say, it is easy to discern the cockle from the wheat, the chaff from the
grain, the gold from the silver, the hay from the stubble. But what wit so
clear can we have, who can distinguish the primitive copy from the second copy?
A copy, I say, so near to the original, that, according to your own confession,
he shall mock your skill in the several similitudes of phrases. And yet truly
it is not very hard to distinguish the true copy from the other, where the
author confesses out of what books he took it. The difficulty is, to know what
are the words of the Copier, and which are the real words of the Original. And
to speak the very truth, it is impossible to know all these things. Many things
indeed there are, that if one take good heed, you shall find which are the
Original, which the Copy. And if a hound who hunts after a wild beast where he
sees most steps in the dust, according to his exquisite sent discerns them, and
runs the track of the beast which he pursues: Why also may not our reason,
using its own weights and measures, especially being assisted by God, discern
things humane from divine? And if Isaac the Father distinguished the voice of
Jacob, from the hands of Esau, Why may not our minds also, enlightened by God,
distinguish the voice of God, from the hands of men?

That force I have not, nor weakness, rather to call it, to presume my self
inspired from heaven, in understanding, expounding, and distinguishing them. So
much, I say, that I have that divine spark of fire, reason, in me, as another
man may have, and the same Spirit of Christ which informs every Christian, and
without which no man can be a follower of Christ. For if any one have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is not Christ's, Romans 8. Trusting in the help of that holy
Spirit, and moved by that instinct, which is rather a touch of God, than a
knowledge, I dare guess at some things in the Bible; for all men cannot
perform all things. And these indeed, I think I have successfully found out;
for I have ventured upon nothing, which I have not weighed in the scale of
Reason and Faith.

That the same fate which swept away abundance of profane authors, has
likewise consumed most of the Original copies of the Bible, I am very certainly
persuaded. I do not doubt but Moses set down very accurately the Jews going out
of Egypt; God's Law delivered in Sinai; the Ceremonies prescribed in that Law;
as also the History of Four hundred years, in which the Jews wandered in the
desert; as also that memorable mystery of Deuteronomy. I also believe, that
the incomparable Prophet, according to his high knowledge of the Jewish
affairs, wrote the Chronicle of the Jews, from the first original of them, and
from Adam, the first author of that people, till his own times; as also the
original of all things before Adam. And that he learned those things, and the
ancient monuments of the Jews, and the first creation, out of ancient Writers,
and by Gods instruction. For although we know no Writer more ancient than
Moses, yet who dares deny that their are Writers more ancient? Yea, it appears
clearly, that there were Writers before him, because he has written the
History of his own Nation, before and after the Flood, for two thousand and
five hundred years. Which according to the nature of things, and their tenor
and order (which is also to be observed, without all incon^enience) it is
thought either from books in his own time extant, or from ancient traditions
derived to his own time. We know certainly, That the Phoenicians had the use of
Letters long before Moses, and that the Phoenicians spoke the same language as
the Hebrews did. A clear proof of which, Samuel Petit has given us in his
Miscellanea, and the famous Bouchard in his Phaleg. But if the Phoenicians
learned to speak from the Hebrews, Why should not we think they learned
likewise to write from them. Therefore the Hebrews wrote before Moses. But what
should the Hebrews rather write, than their own history? and what hinders us
to believe, that Moses received the Jewish Chronicle from them, which he w^ot.

Truly I think that Moses, whose end it was to write chiefly his own History,
and the History of the times wherein he lived, wrote very briefly all the things
which were before his own time; especially such things as concerned the first
creation And those which were the gatherers of Copies, touched a great deal
more briefly the heads of the Jews, and the universal creation. And hence I
think it has come to pass, that the creation of the world is ended in one, in
the first Chapter of Genesis; and that afterward, the framing of Adam, and
building of Eve, are a little more particularly set down, and that after all
that time which was betwixt Came and Noah, is run over in the 4. and 5. Chap.
Let any reasonable man judge, whether or no in those 4 and 5 Chapters, which
are very short, and full of Genealogies, all could be comprehended which was
acted or invented upon the face of the earth for a thousand six hundred years
and more? And whether in any reason we can deny such things, as without
violation of Mysteries of Faith, by natural and right demonstrations can be
made appear, only for this cause, because these two short Chapters make no
mention of them.

Thus I seriously considering, and diligently weighing all those things, which
I at large have spoken concerning those most ancient times, both out of
profane and sacred history: as also, which I shall speak hereafter of, that
Eternal age since which the world is said to have been framed, by the Prophets
and Apostles. I doubted not to recall the creation of the first men to the
beginnings of things, long before Adams time. Nor does it trouble me, that
Genesis makes ^o mention of those men. Yea I thought it enough, that it had not
expre^ly denied such men. Yet, although Genesis have so briefly, nothing more
brief, gone over the originals of things, yet we may gather from the same book,
that the creation of the first men was far different, which is hinted at in the
first Chapter, from the fashioning of Adam, the first father of the Jews; which
is more largely set down in the second Chapter.

They argue ordinarily. We hear no men named before Adam in Genesis; Therefore
there were none before Adam. And yet we deny that, that there was no men before
Adam, because there are none named in Genes's. For it is well known, that all
things are nor ^et down in Genesis; nor that all things must be denied, which
Genesis mentions not; whose intention it was, not to write the History of the
first men, but of the first Jews only. On the same account they affirm, that
the Ark of Noah was the first of all ships; because we read of never another in
Genesis. As if Adam, who according to their supposition, was taught all arts at
his making, should have been ignorant of Navigation, the most excellent of all
arts, and most necessary for the society of men. They also tell us the same
story of Noah's plan^ing the first Vine; because Moses tells us of no Vine
planted before it: as if the earth, when it it was created, in the youth of the
world, had not brought forth any Vines, the giver of mirth, and restorer of
youth: Adam, being an excellent Husbandman, should have neglected the planting
of Vines, the sweetest part of agriculture, and abandoned wine, which according
to the Scripture, glads God and man.

But they talk of a Man-monster, not of a man, who think that Melchisedech was
really without Father or Mother, or without Original, neither having any
beginning of days, nor end of life, only for that reason, because Moses in no
place makes mention either of the Parents, birth, or death of Melchisedech.
They do not mind that which John Cameron, a most learned and acute Divine has
observed, That these things were by Moses mystically passed over, and
mystically observed by Moses, to show that the Priesthood of Melchisedech was
eternal, according to the Priesthood of Christ; not temporal, like the Legal
and Mosaical Priesthood, which beginning from Fathers, begat sons in the same
order; and taking its rise from Moses, ended in Christ. But Melchisedech's
Priesthood neither came from the Fathers of it, which were Priests, nor was
derived upon the Sons which were Priests; but such a one it was, as had no
known beginning, and was like to have no known ending. Reason and Faith
persuade us to understand these things so, least the mystery of silence should
pervert the order of nature; according to which, Melchisedech, who had both
Father and Mother, might naturally beget children, and naturally have an
original, and an end. But, say they, Genesis does not set these things down so?
Nay, these things are not against Genesis; these agree with Faith and Reason.
And these things show, that Genesis wrote mysteries, not monstrous things.
Therefore these things are so; because so to be understood.

And with like negligence they believe that there was no men before Adam,
because there is none before him read of in Moses. Nor is it taken notice of,
that the design of Moses in setting down Adam, was not to mention the first of
mankind, but the Father of the Jews, whose peculiar History he wrote, and not
the History of all Nations. Truly the beginning of the Jews in Moses, and in
Josephus both, is with Adam. After that, Moses has told us the beginning of
men, and of the Gentiles, in the first Chapter, with the beginning of the
world; and has set down the Gentiles different in stock and original from the
Jews. The Gentiles, I say, the births of divine creation from the beginning;
and the Jews, the sons of divine architecture in Adam.

CHAP. III.
Men err as often as they understand any thing more generally, which ought to
be more particularly taken. The darkness at the death of our Savior, was over
the whole Land of the Jews, not over all the world. The Star which appeared to
the Wise men, was a stream of light in the air, not a star in heaven.
THere is great error in reading the Scripture many times, when that is taken
more more generally, which ought to be particularly understood: as that of
Adam, whom Moses made first Father of the Jews, and whom we hyberbolically call
the first Father of all men.

That which is believed of the darkness in the death of our Savior, is of the
same strain. For the Divines think, that this darkness was spread over the face
of all the earth; Because all the Evangelists agree with one consent, that they
were upon the whole earth. Which notwithstanding the better Interpreters have
translated, upon all the Land of the Jews; according to the Hebrews, say they,
which for the earth, mean Palestine. Nor was the miracle without a mystery;
for there had been a time when dark night covered all the Land of Egypt at the
command of Moses, but all the Israelites had light in their dwellings. Now was
the day come, at the death of Christ, when the light of the Gospel should
appear to the Gentiles; and all the Land of the Jews, and the Jews themselves,
should be o'rcast with the darkness of incredulity.

Here let us speak of the Star which appeared to the wise men, on the Nativity
of our Lord, which it is common and ordinary to place in heaven, amongst the
rest of the Stars: which that it never was, nor ever could be, is made appear
thus. All other men on the earth had seen it, as well as the wise men. Herod
had seen it among the rest, being troubled at this report, whom this appearance
did more especially concern; But Herod neither saw it, nor could see it: for
calling the wise men privately, says the Evangelist, he enquired of them, what
time the star did appear? Therefore it is clear, it was neither a Star in
heaven, nor visible to all, as is commonly believed; but that Star, that fire,
did only shine to the wise men, that by the guiding of it they might arrive at
Bethlehem, and which those wise men did follow, as a torch, that they might
worship the King of the Jews; nor did it appear to Herod, nor any of the rest.
Such was that fiery army sent to the help of Elisha from heaven, whom the
Prophet saw, and yet his Servant that stood by him, could not see: such another
miracle, though different in the species of it; for one man did not see those
fires innumerable which Elisha saw: The three wise men saw one Star, which a
great many men could not see.

It appears out of the Gospel it self, that that Star was not fixed in heaven,
from these words, Behold a star went before them, and stood above the place
where the child was. But if that Star had bin in heaven, how could it stand
above the place where the child was? or how could the wise men draw a
perpendicular line from the point of that Star upon the house? The wi^e men
might have discerned to what Country that region of the heaven, where in that
Star was, did answer; But to know that small place, that manger, in which the
child lay, could not be done by seeing, by any count or wit of man. Therefore
it is certain, that Star, or that light or fire, as I may call it, as it is
written in the 8. of the Apocalypse, It fell from heaven, burning like a lamp. I
say it is certain, that lamp from heaven which lighted the Magi, was sent from
heaven for their particular use, after which the Magi should walk, and which
standing still above the place where the Child lay, they should likewise stand
still, and adore that Jesus Christ whom they sought for. Such was that cloud,
like a white one in the daytime, and fiery in the night; which no man will
say was an apparition in the whole Hemisphaere; for it was particularly over
the Jews camp, and particularly covered the holy Tabernacle; They marched
according to the particular motion of that cloud, and stood still when it stood
still; as we must likewise believe the wise men did with their Star.

As also, if that Star had been fixed in heaven, it had gone before others also
who journeyed from the East to the West, which is not written; yea, only that
it went before the Magi. It would likewise have run according to the account
and course of other Stars which are about the Tropic, from the East to the
West; But who could have followed it with like swiftness? Lastly, if this Star
had been placed in sight, all famous Historians would have spoken of it, who
wrote the memorable things of their own times and ages, which none did.

Therefore it is sufficiently proved, that most, thought not the wisest
Interpreters, err, who think that that Star appeared to all men in heaven,
which appeared indeed to the wise men only, only to three men, as is written.
They err, I say, because they understand that generally of a Star, which ought
to be particularly understood of a light, or a burning flame.

CHAP. IV.
In the miracle of Ezechiahs sickness, the Sun went not back in heaven, but
in the Dyal of Achaz.
THat which I shall speak of the miracle which God did in curing Ezechiah,
being sick, is less common, of greater concernment, as it is in the Kings,
Book 2. Chap. 2. The Prophet Esaias being to give Ezechiah a sign that he should
be whole, and go into the Temple of the Lord; calls upon the Lord. And God
brought back the shadow by those lines that it had gone down in the Dyal of
Achaz, back ten degrees. Which is written in Esaias, chapter 3^. in these words,
Behold I will make the shadow of the lines by which it is gone down in the Dyal
of Achaz, to return in the Sun. And the Sun returned ten lines by the degrees
that it had gone down.

In this miracle it is received as current, that the Sun went back in the
heaven. For the miracle which was only in the Dyal of Achaz, is put in the Sun
and the heaven, and because the shadow is brought back in the Dyal, the Sun
must needs go back in Heaven; nor could God make a miracle in the Dyal of
Achaz, but with a violent motion he must turn the whole heaven, and disturb the
most general frame. This is to fool one with that fine sport, as if one would
cause remove the chimney and the fire from him, that he might not be burnt,
rather let him go back himself, and let the fire stand still, lest the house
be undermined by the removing of the chimney. Let the miracle be placed in the
Dyal, as is the meaning of the Scripture, and then the miracle will be in its
own place: Nature will stand in its own frame, and men's intellects will not be
fooled with vain jugglings. For, good God, what a mistake is this, that has
befooled a great many wise men, that they believed that the Sun had gone back.

If the Sun went back, either he went back in the Zodiac, or that degree of
the Ecliptic standing still, which he was running that day; the primum mobile
came backward, and with the primum mobile all the rest of the Sphaeres; amongst
which the Sun was likewise turned back. If we say that he went back only in the
Zodiac, and a tenth part of the Zodiac, according to the proportion he is
said to have gone back in the Dyal of Achaz, the Sun must needs return through
a great many signs of the Zodiac, and return passed months, yea seasons of
the year, which were past in the minute of one hour; which were an horrid
confusion and absurdity. But how much are they gone backward, not to say from
truth, or from any probable conjecture, who think that the whole heavens went
back, that the shadow of the Dyal might go back? That were to disturb all
nature, to make a difference in the tenor and order of all things, to confuse
the rising and setting of stars, to destroy all Ephemerides, and Astronomical
tables, and to make a confusion in all Astronomy. But who ever heard of any
such confusion? who ever heard of this back supersant? for the memory of things
which past in the days of Ezechiah, is yet extant among the Gentiles.

But why should there be a greater miracle in the sickness of Ezechiah, than
in the death of the Lord. There was darkness only about Jerusalem in the death
of the Lord, and should the Sun shine longer to the world, in the sickness of
Ezechiah; Christ died, Ezechiah was only sick; Christ in his death was
perfecting the redemption of the World, Ezechiahs sickness only concerned
himself and his people: How ill such compari^ons show let the miracle be placed
in the Dyal, not in heaven, and all things will be very agreeable with that
Dyal, for the life of man is very well compared to a shadow, yea, to the shadow
of a Dyal. The last period of a man's life, and of his Dyal, is called the last
hour. Again the life of the King is well compared to a Kingly Dyal. The shadow
went back, which was descending in the Dyal which Achaz had made. The life of
Ezech^ah who was dying, whom Achaz had begotten, went backward likewise, nor
could Ezechias have any more convenient sign of his recovery than this miracle,
which therefore was given as a particular sign to Ezechias, Chron. 2. chap. 32.
Ezechias was sick unto death, and God gave him a sign, he gave it to him, not
to all. And this sign was seen in the land of Judah, not in all lands, which is
to be observed and is proved by the same place of the Chron. That their was
Ambassadors sent from Babylon, who came to enquire of the sign which had
happened, not in the heaven, which take notice of, but upon the earth, meaning
the land of Judah: Nor had the Babilonians needed to have enquired of the Jews
concerning the miracle, if it had happened in Babylon, or if the Sun had gone
back in the Firmament, for they themselves had seen it.

Therefore this miracle must be reduced to the Dyal of Achaz; yea the holy
Scripture expressly meaned so, and directly sets it down in both places of Esaias
and of the Kings, if the words of both places be well weighed as is fit. The
words in Kings are these. The Lord brought back the shadow by the lines by
which it had gone down in the Dyal of Achaz. Observe here, that the miracle is
expressly signified in the Dyal of Achaz. The words of Isay are. And the Sun
returned ten lines by the degrees it had gone down In these places the
bringing back of the shadow and the Sun, are the same; because the shadow could
not return, unless the Sun returned: nor the Sun return, but the shadow must
return. And that is it which Esaias says in the words immediately before, Behold,
I will make the shadow of the lines return, by which it is gone down in the
dyal of Achaz, in the Sun; or with the Sun, which is the same. The Sun is not
there taken for the Sun it self, but for the light which it throws upon any
superfice whereon it shines: which it throws upon all dyals, and such a one as
you may believe it cast upon the dyal of Achaz. Moreover, those lines of which
the Kings and Isaiah here speak, were drawn out upon the dyal of Achaz,
according to the shadow of the Gnomon, which, according to art, is placed in
the middle of the dyal. There were twelve chief ones of these marked upon the
dyal, to show so many degrees, or hours of the dyal, whilst the shadow of the
Gnomon, in the mean time overrunning the whole superfice of the dyal, cast out
a great many other lines, by which it designed the smallest minute of every one
of these degrees and hours. But these lines are h^re promiscuously called the
shadow and the Sun, because they are really set down and composed in all dyals,
by the Sun and shadow, without prejudice to the principles of Geometry, who
define their lines, pure, not compounded longitudes. Nor can I call those
precisely shadows, or precisely the Sun; but rather the extremities, or
individual distinctions of the Sun and shadow; for in them the last part of the
Sun is the first of the shadow, but the last of the shadow is not the first of
the Sun, But what Mathematician ever imagined such lines in the heaven, if the
words of the Kings and Esaias are taken here for the Sun it self, and the light
it cast upon the dyal of Achaz?

Take notice that Esaias here calls that indifferently the shadow and the Sun;
which the Kings simply in that place calls the shadow, never the Sun. Will thou
have the shadow to ascend ten lines, or go down ten lines? And Ezechiah said,
It is easy for the shadow to grow ten lines: let it not be so, but let it go
back ten lines. And Isaiah called upon the the Lord, and he brought back the
shadow ten lines, by which it had gone down in the dyal of Achaz. It seems all
this miracle was within the compass of the dyal of Achaz. For Ezechiah said,
It was easy to make the shadow to come forward: Not that it was indeed so
easy for a shadow to come forward ten degrees in a minute, which could not be
done but in ten hours; but because it seemed more easy for a shadow to go
forward, than to turn backward, he required that which seemed harder, and a
greater miracle, that it might run back ten lines. Certainly, the force of this
miracle was altogether in the dyal of Achaz, according to the intention of sick
Ezechiah, and according to his Prayer: For Isa. had asked him, Will thou that
it go forward, or turn backward? Let it turn backward, says Ezechiah, and the
shadow of the dyal was brought back. According to the intention of Ezechiah,
and the Prayers of Isaiah, there was her^ nothing to do with the turning back
of the Sun in heaven, but the turning back of the shadow upon the dyal; and the
miracle, according to the will of the King, and prayers of the Prophet, was
performed really not in the heaven, but in the dyal. Nor had it been a miracle,
that the shadow was turned back in the dyal, if the Sun had turned back in
heaven; for the shadow follows the motion of the Sun in the dyal, not b^
miracle, but by nature.

And it is certain too, that the light of the Sun upon the dyal should be taken
for the Sun it self; as Strato of Sydon was saluted and proclaimed King,
without any dispute, because first of all the Sydonians, on the top of all
their City, he showed not the Sun it self, but the light of the Sun, over
against the East, and found first of all the rising of the sun in the West:
others in vain expecting toward the East to see the Sun; which Justin relates
out of Troyus Pompeius, in his 18th book Right reason therefore, and approved
authority, join themselves with these places, and the word^ of the Scripture,
that this miracle should only be understood of the dyal of Achaz: In which the
Sun running his course, as he uses to do, the dyal standing in his own place,
and the gnomon of the dyal not being stirred, against the custom, order, and
natural effect of the Sun and shadow, by a miracle, and way to men unknown, the
shadow was brought back ten degrees: and that they are deceived, who think that
the heaven and the Sun went backward. I say, that they are deceived, because
they have averred it as a general miracle in the heaven and Sun, which was to
be understood particularly, and in the dyal of Achaz.

CHAP. V.
How the Sun stood still in Gabaon in the miracle of Joshua. That long day
should not extend it self beyond the Country of Gabaon.
LEt us try if any such thing may be understood in the miracle of Joshua, in
whose wrath the Sun was stopped, Ecclus. Chap. 20. As also, stood still, and
obeyed the voice of a man, Joshua 10. God had routed the Amorrhites before
Israel, who being beaten from the top of Gabaon to the descents of Bethoron,
sought for shelter in the valleys; Joshua was resolved to destroy them utterly,
whom least the night should rescue from his sword and revenge, he said in the
sight of Israel, Thou Sun stir not from Gabaon, nor thou Moon from the valley
of Ajalon: And the Sun and Moon stood still, til the people had revenged
themselves on their enemies. And in the same place, The Sun stood still for the
space of a whole day, and made no have to go down.

There is none, but upon the first sight of these words will affirm, that the
Sun stood still in heaven; But if any one weigh more attentively the force of
the miracle, and contain the miracle within its own bounds, he shall easily
find, that the light and rays of the Sun are understood, not the Sun it self.
It gives us boldness to conjecture so, because it is said, That the Sun stood
still in the midst of heaven; For the Sun was then going down, when Joshua bid
it stand still. Nor could the Sun then stand in the middle of heaven, where he
was not; for the going down of the Sun is distant from the middle of the heaven
a whole Quadrant: Therefore this miracle is so to be understood, That when the
Sun was really going down, the light of the Sun, without the Sun it self, by a
great miracle remained as yet in the Atmosphaere, or region of vapors, which
is over the middle of the air, and the sky. And that light of the Sun, without
the Sun it self, did beat upon the City of Gabaon, and the mountain of Gabaon,
so that those rays which came from that light, being reverberated from that
mountain, shone through all the valley: insomuch as the Amorrhites who fled,
could not eschew Joshua who pursued them, which was the cause of the miracle.

I began to be of this opinion long ago, living in a very pleasant valley
amongst the Cadurcian Mountains; whence a little of the heaven appearing,
allowed us the sight of the Sun about six hours in the Summer, in the foresaid
valley. But the Sun in the mean time who to my thinking was set before, through
the distances and openings betwixt the hills, did beat upon and guild the high
ground over against it, with which light the whole valley shone, till the Sun
was under the Horizon. So it came to pass, that in the hill over against me I
saw a Sun without a Sun for many hours together, which was to me like a
miracle: which so often as I saw, I bethought my self of the miracle of Joshua,
that God by a greater miracle could retain the light of the Sun without the
Sun, than that by which I had seen the Sun over against me upon the mountain.

As far as my reason could serve me, I thought I was arrived to a conjecture;
because it is written, Thou Sun upon Gabaon move not, for the Sun at his going
down did enlighten the opposite Mountain of Gabaon, and not every Region of the
Horizon, which no doubt it had looked upon, had it stood still in the midst of
heaven; God therefore retained in the Mountain of Gabaon, and not in all the
places of the Horizon, by a memorable miracle, that light by which the Sun
going down shone in that Mountain, and the neighboring places; Or whether it
were better to believe, that the similitude of the Sun going down by the
Atmosphaere, and refractions which are ordinary in it, did appear after the Sun
was down; As the Hollanders in Nova Zembla, after a night of 2 months and a
half long, say that they saw the Sun a little sooner than they could expect
him, because the Atmosphaere represented the light of the Sun to them, some
days before they saw the Sun it self, which Petrus Gassendus a famous man, and
a great Philosopher known over all the World, has related and taken special
notice of 1 Book Chap. 19. Of his Inst^tution of Astronomy.

It is like wise written in Josua. And the Sun hastened not to go down, for
the space of a whole day. Which is expounded in the 46 Chapter of
Ecclesiasticus. And one day was made as two. The space of one day, which Josua
observed, not a whole day, but to be understood. For that light of the Sun
which gilded the hill of Gabaon vanished by little and little, and a light like
that of the Moon did succeed, till the Israelites had revenged themselves of
their enemies. In which sense those places in Joshua are taken, Thou Moon move
not beyond the Valley of Ajalon.

Also in the same place of Joshua, There was not before, nor shall there be
hereafter so long a day. And truly, that one day is made as two. It will take
but little time up, and it will be worth while to relate a contention betwixt a
Minorite Friar, and a Mathematician. The Mathematician was showing, that there
were days which extended the length of many, according to the obliquitie of the
Sphaere, yea a day of six months, with them who live under the parallel. The
Divine at this waxed angry, crying it was impious, and to be punished with a
branding Iron, with which Heretics are marked, to affirm that there could be
any longer days, than in the miracle of Joshua, where one day was made as two:
Especially since it is directly set down. There has not been, nor shall be so
long a day. Than which there is nothing more express, nothing more clear. And
we should, says he, makes the holy Scripture a liar (a thing horrid, and not
to be thought of) if that were true which the Mathematician did demonstrate and
therefore that Princes did very well, who did banish Mathematicians out of
Christendom. My little Priest, says the Mathematician be not so fierce, Your
zeal carries you beyond your wit. For both the word of God is true, and that
Mathematical demonstration is likewise true. It is true, that neither before
that time, nor since, could there be so long a day in Gabaon, as there was by
the command of Joshua. But extend not that miracle and that length of day
beyond Gabaon to Neighboring Nations. For it is true, nor can there be any
thing more true, that in those Countries which are near the poles, those days
are, and shall always be longer than that day, in which, according to the
command of Joshua the Sun made not have to go down upon Gabaon for the space
of one whole day, and one was made as two. For they are really days under the
pole, not of two days, but of a hundred and eighty two days, and more, which
the Mathematician by irrefragable arguments made clear. But the Divine being
here baffled, did wrangle to no purpose. But that our speech may return whence
it begun. The miracle of Joshua must in effect not be placed in heaven, but
upon the earth, nor upon all the earth neither, but only in the Country of
Gabaon, In which there never was before, nor shall be after so long a day, for
that could not be made good every where else.

There will not be wanting men of ill conceits, who will either render me
suspicious, as having an ill opinion, of the faith in miracles, or think me
mad, or desperately bold, that I depart so far and wide from the received
opinion, who undoubtedly believe that the Sun upon the command of Joshua stood
still in heaven, as they also think, that in the recovery of Eze. it went back.
They will detract from my conjectures and defame them as rising from bad
Principles, that will offer to overcloud the Scripture, where it seems to speak
so clearly, saying, that in the miracle of Joshua, It stood still in the midst
of heaven, and upon the prayer of Isaiah, it returned ten lines. Such men as
these think all things that people will not believe Religion and Divinity, and
miracles with them have the greater repute of sanctity, the more incredible
they are; and which is a strange thing, the more they are past belief, the more
they believe them: I Ingenuously confess, I do not give in my name amongst
those enormous upholders of miracles, who put all reason out of square. I am
reasonable, and any thing that is belonging to reason I pretend an interest in
it. I believe those miracles of Joshua, and Isaiah, and do very much magnify
God in them, but think them not greater than they were, nor as is agreeable to
reason, therefore I have contained them within their own limits. And I beseech
the Reader will not be so rash in his judgment concerning those those things
which I have here written. For I have written far from any ambition, not to
triumph over men's common errors, but to search them out, for the love which I
bear to truth, and whosoever is a friend to reason and truth, let him judge of
my observations.

CHAP. VI.
Where the miracle is of the Jews garments not worn out in the Wilderness, and
the not wearing of their shoes.
SUch another wonder that is thought indeed, not a miracle, which is read in
the 29 Chapter of Deuteronomie, where Moses rehearses this miracle, and bounty
of God to the Jews. The Lord, says he, led you forty years through the Desert,
Thy clothes were not worn nor thy shoes waxed not old. It is commonly thought,
that the clothes of the Israelites therefore were not worn out, because God had
made their clothes incorruptible, as also one occult faculty of growing
bigger, that the clothes which the Israelites put on, so soon as they grew,
they grew likewise which they also wore. Concerning their shoes, that could
not be spent nor grow old; and so soon as they put shoes upon their childrens
feet, as the childrens feet grew, so the shoes grew likewise.

This they believe, because they consider not that the force of this miracle,
was nor placed in those idle fancies and childish stories, but in that
wonderful providence by which God led the Israelites forty years through the
Desert, destitute of all things, notwithstanding they had such abundance, that
they wanted not materials to make clothes and shoes of, that their clothes
were not worn out, because they had several changes, that their shoes were not
spent, because they found new ones to put on, that they fed a thousand Flocks
in the desert, of whose wool they made cloth and raiment, and of their skins,
and leather made shoes, and wanted besides no Weavers, Tailors, Curriers, and
Shoemakers.

God says moreover in that place, Bread ye did not eat, Wine or strong drink
you did not drink in the Desert, that you might know that I was the Lord your
God. Manna had reigned down to them out of Heaven, Water flowed to them out of
the Rock, both by a miracle from God, that they might eat and drink Manna and
Water, in lieu of Bread and strong drink. It was likewise a miracle from God,
that their Flocks should find whereupon to feed, and what to drink in the
barren and dry Wilderness.

This was then the force of the miracle meant by Moses, to show that the Jews
wanted nothing for forty years, which by several ways, but always to the same
sense he expressed, He opened himself more clear in the 2 Chapter of
Deuteronomie, The Lord knows thy journey, how thou passed through this great
Desert dwelling with thee forty years, and thou lacked'st nothing. In which
sense understand the 8 Chapter of the same Deuteronomie. Thy clothes was not
worn out with age, and thy feet were not beaten, behold this is now the
fortieth year. The Garments of the Israelites might grow old, but not fail them
with antiquity, God not suffering them to want new garments to repair the loss
of the old. Their shoes might burst in their upper leather, but their feet not
to be galled, because they had leather enough in the Desert, so that they could
not be bruised either with a worn or cobled shoe. So understand that place
where it is said, The Jews did not thirst in the Desert. For the Jews might
thirst in the Desert, but they wanted not water wherewith to quench their
thirst. Yea whatsoever the words of Isay may seem to imporr; The Children of
Israel must needs be dry in the Desert, or else they had drink in the Desert,
for none drinks water but he that is dry. The fool is dry when water's nigh.
That is (...) suffers thirst, God could indeed by his miracle, in which he is
wonderfully powerful, have done all that, that the Jews should not be hungry
nor dry, nor their clothes be worn, nor their shoes be spent. And there ha^
^^en need of these miracles, if they had had no wool, nor no leather; but they
wanted none of these things, nor was any such miracle needful. Yea this
miracle would rather have manifestly evidenced the want of clothes and shoes,
if for want of clothes and shoes, and by the virtue of that miracle they had
always put on the same clothes, and the same shoes which could never wear out:
On the other side it showed the abundance of clothes and shoes which they had,
because neither their clothes nor shoes grew old, because they changed both so
often.

And ascribe this to the providence and care of the Lord, by which all things
which were necessary for the Jews were provided for them, because he led them
sometimes through pleasant and plentiful places, from whose Inhabitants Deuteronomy.
2. and elsewhere; They bought m^at for money and did eat, and bought water for
money, and did drink, for which the Israelites were beholding to the Edomites
and Moabites, And when Sehon forbad them this privilege, they smote him, with
all his people, and all his Cities, and took the prey and spoil of his Towns,
Deuteronomie, Chap. 2. And in the third Chapter, they destroyed Og the King of
Basan; And that time they took the land from the Amorites which is beyond
Jordan. Moses himself would have said, On this side Jordan: which observe: And
that amongst the prey and spoils of these two Kings, there were garments and
shoes found, and more than enough of materials to make both clothes and
shoes. This you may imagine also of the Amalekites, oververcom by the Jews.
Exodus Chap. 17. before the Law given in Sinai. To this you may add, that the
Jews for many years compassed Mount Seir, inhabited by the Edomites, from whom
they bought victuals and water, which I made now appear, and from whose Cities
they had clothes and shoes at a price.

CHAP. VII.
That the Flood of Noah was not upon the whole earth, but only upon the Land of
the Jews. Not to destroy all men, but only the Jews.
GIve us leave to discuss this last miracle of the flood of Noah, which is
believed to have overflowed the kingdoms of the earth with most mighty
overflowings, and which I rather believe overflowed only Palestine, and the
Land of the Jews. The causes of this conjecture are chiefly, the causes of the
Deluge; which here I shall mention from their beginnings.

I showed you before, that the Jews were framed in Adam, and esteemed the
peculiar sons of God; that they were separated from all other Nations which God
had created in the beginning. And that those Nations were called the sons of
men in many places of holy writ, I have set forth at large. The Lord likewise
set the Jews apart from all Nations, when he placed them in his holy Land, as
in a fenced garden, whither it should not be granted to other Nations to come.
God then had forbidden the Jews to make any mixture with other Nations.
Chiefly, he suffered them not to defile their sons with the daughters of men.
Against the command of God, the Jews had admitted the Gentiles into their land;
Who says Genesis, when they began to multiply upon the earth, the sons of God
seeing the daughters of men that they were fair; or, which is the same, the
sons of Adam, who were after called Jews, seeing the daughters of the Gentiles,
took to themselves wives of all which they chose; and by that copulation Giants
were begotten: For the Jews being made strong and lively by Gods late framing
of them, and going in to the daughters of men, as strong men are begot by
strong and divine seed, mixed with humane, begets Heroes: the sons of God lying
with the daughters of men, begat Heroes, valiant men, as they are set down in
that same place, by valiant and famous men in their age.

It repented God, being angry at the wickedness of the Jews, that he had made
men, and wrought the clay of which he framed Adam, of whom the Jews were born,
an earthie and corrupt generation of men. The cogitation of whose heart was
bent upon evil continually, at all times; that is, from their first beginning,
both in Adam their Father, who had transgressed the commandment of God; and in
themselves, who had likewise broken the covenant of God.

I will cut off, says the Lord in that place, man whom I have created, from
the face of the earth, from the man to the beast, from the creeping thing to
the fowl of the heaven; for I repent my self that I have made them. Here take
notice, that by earth we understand Palestine, according to the Hebrew, who by
earth simply expressed, mean their own: As I observed of the darkness before
in the death of the Lord. God then had decreed to destroy man, whom he had
created, from the face of the earth. By the man whom he had created, understand
the Jews, the posterity of Adam. I say of that Adam whom he had created or
framed, for creation and framing here is the same. By living creatures,
understand also the Gentiles mingled amongst the Jews, and causes of the sins
of the Jews, according to what I formerly set down at large, where I made it
appear, that the Jews are simply called men, in comparison of the Gentiles;
that the Gentiles on the other side, compared to the Jews, were called beasts,
and a people which was not a people, in holy Scripture; And such was Gods
anger, that he resolved not only to destroy all those Jews and Gentiles, but
all the men of that Land, and all the cattle of it, from the creeping things to
the birds of the air; except only Noe, the Jew, who according to Gods command
framed an Ark, to escape the violence of the Deluge.

The treasures of the great depth were opened, says Genesis, and the windows
of heaven were opened, and it rained upon the earth forty days and forty
nights. And there was a deluge upon the earth: and the waters were multiplied:
and they lifted up the Ark high from the earth; for they increased exceedingly,
and filled all things upon the face of the earth. And the waters preval'd
exceedingly upon the earth. And all the high hills were covered under the whole
heaven. The water was fifteen cubits above the mountains which it had covered.
And all flesh upon the earth was destroyed, birds, living creatures, and
beasts, and all creeping things. All men, and all things wherein is the breath
of life, died. And he destroyed all things that was upon the earth, from the
man to the beast, as well creeping things, as fowls of the heaven, and they
were cut off from the earth. Only Noe remained, and those that were with him in
the Ark. All which Genesis prophetically expressing and opening, as by
inspiration, sets forth, to declare, that all the beasts of the land of Judah
perished, when Palestine was drowned: which words, if you take only the literal
sense of them, seem to intimate, that all the earth, or both Hemispheres, round
about which the Sun takes his course, were overflowed.

Nor is it material to me that which is said, that the treasures of the great
deep were broke up, and the windows of heaven opened; For, that great Abyss
was the sea of Palestine, from which all the fountains spring. Which Genesis
sets down to us were to have been broken up, to represent to us, that all
Palestine was dissolved in water, and did sweat out all the moisture in its
veins. But there are some, who to add force to such things as are
hyperbolically written, interpret the Cataracts of heaven, The waterie heaven
disgorg'd upon the whole earth; which is a mere soppery. For these things were
written in a high style, to express the abundance of rain by which the Land of
the Jews was overflowed. The mountains were covered under the whole heaven,
must be understood of the high mountains of Palestine; as also the whole
heaven, was that which covered Palestine. For it is ordinary to assign every
Country its own heaven. In the same sense understand the 2 Chapter of Deutr.
where God casting a fear upon all the nations of the Holy Land, to which he was
to lead his people Israel, exhorts them in these words, To day I will begin to
send thy fear and terror upon the Nations which dwell under the whole heaven.
All the heaven is here understood, which was over the whole Land of Palestine,
For God did not that time send the fear of the Jews upon the Nations that dwelt
in China, America, the South, or Greenland.

But if we will take notice of the thing and not of the words, it will appear,
that the Deluge came only upon the Land of the Jews, and not upon the whole
world. Both from the causes of the Deluge, which I now spoke of, and which I
now told you were the sins of the Jews. As also by Noe the Jew, and his sons,
the relics of the Jews; as also from the place upon which the Ark stood upon
the decay of the waters: upon the mountains of Armenia, says Genesis. Which
mountains of Armenia, as they look toward; Palestme, make up a part of Syria,
next to Palestine.

But, certainly Josephus me^nt that that was a particular Deiuge, where writing
against Appion lib. 2. he speaks of all the authors, Gentiles, who have made
mention of the Jews; amongst whom he mentions Berosus. Berosus* says he, has
^ritten of the Ark, in which the chief of our Family was pr^served. He said
not, in which the chief of mankind was saved; but the chief of our stock or
lineage; that is, of the Jews: For there he speaks of the J^ws, whom Josephus
calls his own, and his own stick b^ing a Jew himself: Who, I say, was the chief
of the people of the Jews after the F^oud; for Josephus derives the first
kindred of the Jews before the Flood, from Adam; by which it is very clear, that
only the relics of the Jews were saved in the Ark, and that the Family of the
Jews was restored by Noe, who was the second beginner of that kindred after the
Deluge.

CHAP. VIII.
The same which was proved in the former Chapter by the Dove sent out by Noe,
and by the natural descent of waters.
IT is clear, that this Deluge was peculiar to the Jews, not universal in all
Nations, by that which is written of the Dove, which Noe sent out, and she
returned to him at night. For that branch with green leaves which the Dove
pulled from the tree, was not of those Olives which the Deluge had overwhelmed;
and for a whole year buried them in mudd. Therefore it is more probable to say,
That that Dove being sent from the mountains of Armenia, flew over all the
waters of the Deluge, and in the higher fields of Asia, gathered from an (...),
free from dirt and slime, that branch with green leaves, to show to Noe a
flourishing, not a withered hope of his deliverance.

Which that we may more clearly perceive, let us consider, and recollect that
violence, with which the showers of the flood in great bodies of water broke
out, and did beat the whole earth, without rest or interruption day or night.
Let us bethink us how great muddy streams fell from the mountains into the
valleys, And that deluge made up and sweld with those torrents, was nothing
else but Water mixed with slime and clay, which being afterward macerated for
a whole year, in which it was upon the highest mountains, and fifteen cubits
above them, the dregs of that slime falling down to the bottom, stuck in the
branches of the trees, and every leaf of them. For this we are taught by daily
experience, where troubled and clayie rivers break over their banks; For after
the^e waters are driven off, we see the reeds and the trees with which these
banks are planted, pressed down with the weight of the slime, and defiled with
most filthy clay; As also all the Olives were drowned at the Flood of Noah; As
likewise we may very well read, that all those Olives for a whole year, in
which the deluge is said to have whelmed them, to have been altogether spoiled
and destroyed, and to have rotted at last.

And thus I conceive, that the fields of upper Asia are higher than the
Mountains of Armenia, because I think the lowest earth lies always to the Sea
side, and those grounds are higher which are the farthest from the Sea, and are
higher raised, within the uppermost and continued Globe of the earth: which we
see clearly, when we see famous and swift rivers, through great and long tracts
of land; hasten to the sea, according to that reason, by which they flow down
from upper ground to a continued descent. Nor shall I omit to relate what a
most experienced Geometrician related to me, That he had tried the descent by
which the river of Garonne run from Toulouse through the land of Bordeaux into
the Ocean, and measuring a hundred rods, he found many tim^s a whole rod of
de^cent for this swift course to the Sea. I persuaded my self that it had been
so accounted by Ausonius in his Mosella: Smooth Loyrs, and swift Rhoans, strong
Garonns stream.

If you will not grant such a declination, as the Geometrician said the Garonne
run into the Ocean, take the Danow, that famous and swift River, which runns
six hundred miles of continual descent from its own so^ntain, into the Euxine
sea. And let us know his de^cent, not in a hundred, but six hundred ro^s
measuring; as also, that after the measuring of^^x hundred miles, there is
found one mile of descent; By which reason, the fountain of the River Danew may
be found higher than the shore of the Euxine sea, one whole mile. Grant also
that dec^i^itie not to be hindered by any intervening mountain, nor rough with
any stops, through a clear plain, as we see in a globe, either of Metal, or
Yvorie, very even and smooth: so that nothing can hinder those waters slowing
along so smooth a channel. Then grant, that the Country about the Euxin sea is
so much drowned, that the waters of it are raised from the bottom
perpendicularly a whole mile. Which height will doubly outvie the height of
the highest hills. This being granted, it would be found according to that which
I said, That the sountain of the Danow was higher than the shore of the Euxine
sea, that that deluge, which would rise up to the right and left of that
Continent, would only touch the brim of the fountain of Danow, and not pass
those lands, and those on the other side would remain untouched, and dry, as
before.

Think so likewise of the deluge of Noah. Concerning whose waters we might
easily gather how much of Asia they overflowed beyond the Armenian mountains,
if we knew the height of the mountain of Ararat, which is one of the highest,
and on the top of which the Ark stood; and what risings, and what bars that
Globe of the Continent of Asia raised against those waters that flowed down
upon them from above; from above, I say, those fifteen cubits, by which,
according to Genesis, it was higher than the mountains which it covered.

Truly, I really think that the waters of Noah's flood rose a hundred miles, or
thereabouts, up inthe Continent of Asia, because the continent of that Globe
being full of risings and stops, nay, advancing it self with very high ridges
as far as the hill Taurus, broke, as is probable, the for^^ of the water, by
the interposition of mountains, that the waters could not go any further.

That the Dove could flee and return one hundred miles, to bring that branch
with green leaves, in a day, I guess from hence, because she being out in the
morning, and came home at night; both by reason of the swiftness of her wing,
with which the Dove is naturally endowed, as also by the leading and conduct of
God Almighty, she went to fetch the pledge of peace, by which God was
reconciled to the Jewish Nation: But she had not flown so far, if she had
intended to pluck a withered, and a slimie branch, for there were enough hard
by the Ark.

CHAP. IX.
This same is proved by the history of the sons and posterity of Noah. By
Eusebius in his Chroniclae. There were particular deluges. Egypt never
drowned. Strabo, of the Turdetanian Spaniards. Scaliger and Servius concerning
the Trojans, are cited. Solinus of the Indians. Sanchoniato, Iombal.
ACcording as it is believed that all mankind was o'rwhelmed in Noah's Flood,
they likewise believe that the loss was repaired by his posterity. And if it
could appear, that the people of all Lands were propagated since the Flood of
Noah, from his posterity, there were no reason but I should yield to them. Read
but attentively the tenth Chapter of Genesis, from whence the reparation of all
mankind is ascribed to the sons of Noah: as also the division of the whole
earth by them is asserted. And it will appear more clear than day, that not all
the Countries and regions of the earth were possessed after the flood by the
sons of Noah, but only those Countries in the Holy land, as they are there set
down, or rather those Countries of the Holy hand, and the Countries round about
it. In that chapter, the beginning of the Kingdom of Nimrod was Babylon. Assure
built Niniveh. There is nothing but Babylon and Niniveh said to be possessed in
the whole chapter, either beyond Euphrates, or beyond the River of Egypt, or
beyond the red sea or beyond the whole Palestine, which I determined before the
bounds of the holy land, and which do environ it every way.

Yea you shall read in that chapter, that the Philistines, the Hethites,
Iebusites, Amorrhites, Gergesites, Hevites, Sinites, Aradites, Samarites, and
Amathites, were all Nations of the holy land, which appears from the places and
journals of that Country. And the bounds of Chanaan the Sons of Cham are as one
comes from Sydon to Cerar, even to Gaza, till thou enter into Sodom and
Gomorrha, and Adma, and Zoboim, even unto Leza, which are either places, or
Cities of the holy land. It is immediately added, After this the Chananites were
dispersed. But no body doubts of them, but that they were a very well known
people of the holy land, Then thou shall find it thus written. These are the
sons of Cham, in their kinreds, tongues, generations, lands, and people. Which
if you read suddenly, you will imagine, that those tongues, generations, lands
and nations, had possessed the third part of the earth. But take notice that
these great names of tongues, generations, lands, and nations, are to be
understood for their own nations in the holy land, divided and distributed
amongst them, wherein they dwelt according to that description in the tenth
chapter. Observe too, that tongues are here preposterously set down, For at
that time all the Nations were of one lip. The earth was of one lip, and of one
speech, and so of one tongue, as it is written in the following chapter the 11
of Gensis. Not was that confusion of tongues which follows in in the 11 chapter
in the building of Babel.

The Sons of Sem are reckoned, who was the Father of the Sons of Heber. And
there were born unto Heber, says Genesis, two sons, the name of the one was
Phaleg, because in his days the earth was divided, and the name of his brother
Joctan. That land which was divided, is to be understood the holy land; For it
is said moreover of these brothers, that their habitation was as one goes from
Messar to Sephar, a mountain in the East, which is a mere itinerarie of the
holy land. These were the families of Noah, and according to their peoples and
Nations, and from them were the Nations divided upon the earth after the Flood.
For by them was the habitation of the holy land divided. For land simply named,
the Hebrews interpret for their own, which I have told you oftener than once
before. Grant that all the world was at this time divided by Phaleg, could it
be possible that in five generations: for Phaleg is the fifth in descent from
Sem, that they could inhabit China, America, the Southland, and Greenland, and
whatsoever land lies betwixt them? therefore the name of land must here he
straightened to the chosen land only, which if the business be well looked
into, could not be well inhabited and replenished by the offspring of Noah in
ten generations.

But they guess, and rashly too, that all the places of the earth were divided
and inhabited by the Sons of Noah, out of an opinion, which, as I said before
has prepossest all persons, that all the men of the world were drowned in Noah's
Flood, As also from the names of the Sons of Noah, which names some having some
affinity, some altogether different; they have wrested to some the likelihood
of the names of some people now remaining or some ancient Nation, by mere
force, and have brought all those Nations from the Sons of Noah by conceited
conjectures.

See other fancies, they say it is written in the tenth Chapter of Genesis, of
the Sons of Japhet. From them the Isles of the Gentiles were divided, according
to their Countries, every one according to their tongue, and families, in their
Nations, Those Isles some expound, such as are scattered all the Sea over, both
Aegean and Mediterranean, and those which the Ocean invirons, Britain, Ireland,
the Hebrides, the Western Isles of Scotland, Shetland, and all the rest of the
Islands known or unknown. They will have the Sons of Noah to have been so
numerous in the days of the posterity of Japhet, that the whole continent of
the earth not being able to contain its dwellers, they spread themselves into
all the Islands far and near; And the Colonies being thronged one upon another,
they divided the land, and dwelt in their own Countries, as it is here written;
which whether or no it could come to pass in the third generation of the
posterity of Iaphet, let any wise man be judge. There are those who by all the
earth, understand all the earth beyond Palestine, and will have Europe in that
sense, particularly called one Island, according to Hebrew authors, if they
conjecture that the Sons of Japhet did sail to Europe, and divided those vast
tracts of land, which that the most famous quarter of the earth contains,
within the third generation of the sons of Iaphet; which observe, for here is
the third, only in the lines ascending to the sons of Iaphet. Yea if they
conjecture, that those sons of the third generation of Iaphet, did not only
assign themselves Europe, because Europe is called one Island by the Hebrews,
and because it is here written; That the Islands of the Gentiles were divided
in their Countries by the sons of Japhet, according to their tongues and
families; how uncertain a faith do they build upon such weak conjectures,
especially upon the Hebrew speech, which is so much famouus in its
signification, and so strange, that it speaks almost nothing but Figures?

But if there be any faith in conjectures, I rather believe that those Islands
of the Nations were divided by the sons of Iaphet, according to their tongues
and families in their Nations, were the Nations of the holy land, which the
Sons of Iaphet divided, according to their tongues and families in their
Nations. Because the same things are there understood of the sons of Iaphet,
which are said afterward of the Sons of Cham, These are the sons of Cham in
their kinreds, tongues, and generations, their lands, and people. For it is to
be thought that the sons of Iaphet settled themselves in the Countries of the
holy land, as the sons of Cham did. For if the Sons of Cham, being reprobates,
had their lot in the holy land, which was the land of the Lord, why should not
we believe that the Sons of Iaphet had likewise their portion in the same land
of the Lord whose father the Lord had loved and chosen? Truly we have showed
you, that the lots of the sons of Shem and Cham fell in that land, why then
should only the sons of Iaphet of all the posterity of Noah, be dis-inherited
from the holy land, which was their own? or by what title could they have been
called by their brethren, being dis-inherited of that land? Take serious notice
of these words concerning the Sons of Iaphet. By these were the Islands of the
Gentiles divided according to their nations; For I could easily believe that
Islands and Countries are here the same. And the Countries inhabited by every
one of these Nations are called Islands, because hedged in by neighboring
Nations, as they call those Islands of houses, which are hedged in by lanes
round about, why may we not as well say Islands of the Gentiles, if we say
Islands of houses? its properly enough used.

Eusebius in his Chronicle is a great motive to persuade me, that the flood of
Noah was particular to the Jews, where about the time of Abraham's birth he
speaks thus. In the three and fortieth year of which Ninus reign, Abraham was
born amongst the Hebrews, It was there the sixteeenth power over the Egyptians,
which they call a dynasty, At which time the Thebeans ruled, who governed the
Egyptians in the year 190. According to the Greek Jews, it was not three
hundred years from the flood of Noe to the birth of Abraham. How then could it
come to pass, that the most famous Empire of the Assyrians in the space of
three hundred years, could be settled and established in the space of forty
three years. I say, the Empire of Ninus, whole Original is of such an ancient
date, that it runs back, not only to fabulous, but unknown times.

Justine rehearses those that are more ancient than Ninus in his first Book,
Vexor, who ruled Egypt, and Tanaus, who ruled Scythia; by which means that
Government of the Theban Kings over Egypt might be settled, which at that time
had been strengthened a hundred and ninety years. But, which is more to be
wondered at, is it credible that within three hundred years, so short a time,
fifteen Dynasties could pass over, and the sixteenth be begun, if we call to
mind that the Kings of France have yet but three Dynasties now, in the space of
about two thousand two hundred years. Its likewise known out of the History of
Genesis, which favors Eusebius very much, That Abraham went to Egypt in the
Dynastie of the Pharaohs, which flourished also in the time of Joseph, Abraham's
great Grandchild, and which flourisht four hundred years after Joseph, in the
time of Moses, in whose times the New Pharaoh knew not Joseph, whom the old one
knew so well, which Dynastie of Pharaohs, comparable to that of the Caesar's for
its continuance, was also famous in the days of Solomon. For Solomon was
joined in affinity to Pharaoh King of Egypt, Kings 1. Chap. 3.

Besides the deluge of Ogyges makes it clear, that there have been particular
deluges, which deluge drowned all Boeotia: as also, that Deucalions flood,
which swallowed up all Thessaly: and many more particular ones, which Plato
relates that he had heard from the Egyptian Priest in Timaeus. The Chinensians
boast also of their deluge. The Americans of theirs: Both of them, according to
their account, far distant from the Flood of Noah, and why should we not grant
to Palestine their particular deluge?

Yea, the Egyptians, the neighbors of the Jews, deny that ever Egypt was
damnified by any flood. They say that Nilus waters and makes fruitful every
year their Land; but never overwhelmed it i^ a general deluge; which by very
strong arguments, and most approved records taken out of their Histories, the
forementioned Egyptian Priest did make clear in the forementioned Timaeus.

It will not be inconvenient to join Strabo to Plato in his third Book of
Geographie; where he relates this of the Turdetans, the Inhabitants of Spain.
These, says he, are held the most learned amongst all the Spaniards, they use
Grammar, and have their monuments of Antiquity written, and Poems and Laws in
Verse, for six thousand years, as they say. The Turdetans then had their Laws
long before the flood, if in the days of Strabo they had then written six
thousand years: which they being themselves in that deluge untouched, kept
likewise untouched for the space of six thousand years continually, and used
and observed them.

Scaliger likewise thinks, that the first Olympiad was celebrated in the year
of the world 3074, and that the destruction of Troy was four hundred and eight
years, or thereabouts, before the first Olympiad. And Servius has observed upon
that Verse of Virgils.

The Old Cities sacked, reigned in for many years. Ancient, says he, or noble,
because it is said to have reigned two thousand eight hundred years. The
beginning then of the Kingdom of Troy, must be before the beginning of the
world; and if Troy was ruled in for two thousand and eight hundred years,
Phrygia, as also Spain, must be said to be freed from the flood of Noah. Which
you may also think of India, which Father Liber first entered. From him (says
Solinus in his 25 Chap.) unto Alexander the great, there are reckoned six
thousand four hundred and fifty years, and three months over: accounting it by
the Kings, who are said in his time a hundred and fifty three of them to have
lived. Salmasius, the restorer of Pliny in Solinus, and the disperser of his
errors, sets down this number in Pliny.

Besides, the same Scaliger is author, that Semiramis was before the
destruction of Troy, and places her in the first age after the Flood, and says
that Sanchoniato lived in her time: and makes Iombal more ancient than
Sanchoniato; and says, that Sanchoniato received many things from Iombal out
of Porphyrius. And Eusebius relates, that Sanchoniato met with some reserved
pieces or volumes of the Ammonites, which he took out of the Repositorie of the
Church where they had lain. But, how can such stories agree with the time of
Noah's flood? To this add, that neither Sanchoniato, nor Iombal antienter than
he, are reckoned amongst the sons of Noah. And it must needs be, that those
volumes lay without the Ark, and were preserved, on which Sanchoniato lighted,
as Eusebius says.

Here to reckon those things which I set out before more at large, That is an
inconsistent time which is reckoned from Adam to Abraham the Chaldaean, or to
Moses the Egyptian, and it is unadvi^edly set down to be sufficient to gain the
knowledge of those arts which Abraham and Moses were exact in. But certainly
the time 'twixt Noah's flood and Abraham would be likewise a great deal more
incompetent, if according to the same inconsiderateness, it should be
proportioned as sufficient for the attainment of the forementioned disciplines;
especially Astronomy, Theology, and Magic. The which that they did flourish in
the time of Abraham, is evidently proved, because Vr of the Chaldees, is called
by Eusebius, Camarina: and Camarina is the same with the City of the
Chaldaeans. And the Camarini were called Chaldaeans, as well as Astrologers and
Magicians. For the name of the Chaldaeans was a token of Nation and Art. It is
likewise written of the Camarinian Magicians, that they raise Leviathan, who is
the Devil. That there is a land and water Leviathan, is certain, or which is as
much, that there are land and water Devils, from whom Philippus Codurcus, a
learned man, and ^ell skill^^ in the Hebrew, imagined that those Spirits which
we in our mother tongue call Luithons or Luthins, have taken their derivation.
To think that these Theorems of Magic, or spells, hateful to God, were kept in
the Ark that they might not be lost in the flood, were a wickedness to believe.
But to say that the art was invented or repaired, betwixt the flood and
Abraham, were impossible to prove, as other things are.

CHAP. X.
Of Eternity before Eternity. Of Eternity from Eternity.
THose who think that the flood of Noah was over all Nations, err much in the
ordering of all actions and dispensing of them since that time. They are
likewise very much deceived in the ordering and dispensing of all actions,
since the beginning of the world, who affirm that the world was made with Adam.
They have straightened the beginning and the ending in such narrow bounds, that
it cannot by any means fit to so small room, which is read of the world created
from eternity, and which shall endure to eternity, I need not say, amongst
Historians and Philophers, who were Genti^es, but likewise amongst the Prophets
and Apostles. But indeed that little space of time to which they limit the
things past, and things to come, those two eternities, how well does it accord
with that expression of the short garment in Isay, Chapter 4^28. A short
garment, says he, cannot cover both.

It is written, I confess, That God created the heaven and the earth, in the
beginning. That I dare boldly affirm we know not that beginning. I know there
is a settled number of the stars in heaven, there is a determinate number of the
grains of sand in the Sea shore: But I think to make up a sum of all those
stars* all those grains, all those ages which have bin from the beginning, is
without the compass of all Arithmetic and humane account. In these numbers
there is no number, nor need we to comprehend the number of them. It is enough,
that God does know the number of the stars which he created. The times are not
hidden from the Almighty.

Moreover I find two several acceptions of eternity in the holy Scripture. The
first is, by which God is called eternal, before time, and before all things
created. Another, by which eternity is bounded by ages, and the beginning of
the creation. These two ^gnifications of eternity, are both together
comprehended in that place of the Proverbs, where Wisdom is brought in speaking
after this manner, God possessed me from the beginning of his ways, before he
made any thing. Or, according to others, I had a rule from eternity, from the
head, from the beginnings of the earth, or from the creation of the world.

There appears here a twofold beginning, one before time, and before the
creation of the earth; one from ages from the beginnings of the earth, or since
the creation of the world. The first is distinguished from the second, because
in the first God is only said to have possessed wisdom: in the second place, to
have ordained and installed her to have a rule over all things created. Both
beginnings then are eternal, but the first antientest. The first beginning was
eternal by its self, eternal before eternity. The second beginning was eternal,
in regard of us, since our understanstanding cannot reach its number.

St. Paul has most clearly evidenced this to us in the last Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans: and in the third Chapter of the Epistle to the
Ephesians: and in the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, when he
called the Gospel in these places, An opening of the mystery, which was hidden
and concealed from ages, and eternal times. In his 1 Epist. to the Cor. 2.
Chap. he defined the other. The hidden wisdom of God, which he appointed before
all times. As also in his second Epistle to Tim. Chap. 1. The Grace which was
given to us in Christ, before the times of eternity. And in his Epistle to
Titus, The hopes of eternal life, which God had promised before eternal times.
St. Peter speaking of the same in his first Catholic Epistle, chapter 1. says,
That Christ was foreknown before the foundations of the world were laid. By
which places that difference of eternities which I observed, is evidently
found, That eternity is called first, before ages, and eternal times. That
eternity is called secondly, from all time, and from all things. That the
eternity which is before eternity, and before eternal times, is the same which
Peter calls, before the foundation of the world. Therefore, the eternity from
the foundations of the world is the same with that from eternal times, and that
therefore the foundations of the World were laid from eternal times, or from
eternity, in regard of us, or from times and ages to us unknown, or from that
beginning, of which there is no certain knowledge. That eternity of the world
is not that eternity of God; but the resemblance of it, according to that of
Mercury in Asclepius. God eternal, says he, had the World before it was found
within himself; But as the World is the image of God, it is also the imitation
of eternity.

CHAP. XI.
Of eternity beyond eternity Of eternity to eternity. The Kingdom of Messiah,
how eternal.
AS God is called eternal before eternity, he is likewise called eternal after
eternity, or beyond eternity. God shall reign to eternity, and beyond it, said
Moses in his ^ong: When the Scripture would express the continuance of any
thing, not to eternity, which is only attributed to God, but to eternity
according to the duration of the world, it uses to express it by the eternity
of the Sun, and the eternal course of the Moon and Stars: Thus says the Lord,
who gives the Sun for the light of the day, and the Moon and Stars for night,
If these Laws be left before me, then shall the seed of Israel fail before me,
that it shall be no m^^^a Nation before me. That Covenant made with the
Israelites is called an eternal Covenant, Genesis 17. Isay 55. Jeremy 32.
Ezech. 37. and many other places eternal and for ever, which is the same. The
Sun then, and the Moon, and the Stars, are placed with Israel for eternity.
Take that eternity, not beyond eternity, but to eternity, in which sense
Ecclesiaste^ is to be understood; But the earth continues to eternity.

God does prove that the Kingdom of Messiah shall continue to eternity by this
argument, Jeremy 33. If, says he, my Covenant with the day can be frustrate,
and my Covenant with the night, that night and day be not in their own time,
then can my Covenant be in vain with my servant David; which not in the same
words, but in the same sense the 72 Psalm has ^et down, and it shall abide with
the Sun and Moon from generation to generation. Where observe that the Sun and
Moon there answer to the night and day of Jeremy, that is expounded in the 72
Psalm, In generation and generation. In the 88 Psalm. I have once sworn to my
holy one, if I^le to David, his seed shall last for ever, and his throne as the
Sun in my sight, and as the Moon, perfect unto eternity, as a faithful
witness in heaven. Where a faithful witness is the same with one permanent
and eternal. The tenth Psalm speaks that openly. The Lord shall reign for ever.
And in the tenth of Daniel. His kingdom shall not perish, As also in the 6 of
Chronicles. I will confirm his Throne for ever. That was it which was written
in the 11 Chapter of John. Christ endures for ever. But that the Kingdom of
Messiah should be eternal and for ever, The Angel did most expressly say,
speaking to the blessed Virgin, concerning her Son, and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end.

And notwithstanding there shall be an end of the Kingdom of Messiah, as Paul
firmly bears witness of, in the 15 chapter 1 Cor. And then an end shall be,
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to the Father, but he must reign
till he have put all his enemies under his fect. The eternity then of the
Kingdom of Messiah in the forementioned places, is to be underhood of that
only, which being taken in the second acception, shall continue till eternity,
and not beyond eternity, as in the same regard, there was no beginning of the
eternal beginning.

What the Kingdom of Messiah was, and what it shall be, we may clearly see out
of the forementioned Chapter of the Proverbs, as also out of this place of St.
Paul to the Corinthians, thus says the Wisdom of the Father, who is the Messiah
and Christ, Proverb 8. The Lord has possessed me from the beginning of his
ways, before he made any thing in the beginning, the great depth was not when I
was conceived, and the fountains of water had not as yet broke out, nor the
mountains were raised up; before the hills I was brought forth: As yet he had
not made the earth, the winds, and the hinges of the world; which are to be
understood of the eternity of Christ before eternity, of that eternity I say
which was before ages, before the times of eternity, and before the foundations
of the world. I was ordained from the beginning, says the same Wisdom, or, I
had a rule from the head, from the beginnings of the earth, when he prepared
the heaven I was there, when he confined the depths, when he placed the heaven
above, and weighed the fountains of waters, when he gave bounds to the Seas,
and gave a law to the waters, least they should pass their limits, when he
weighed the foundation of the earth, I was with him. Framing all things; Which
are to be understood of the eternity of Christ, by whom all things were made
who moderates all things, and rules over all things: of that eternity, I say,
which was from ages, from eternal times, from the foundations of the world. The
Kingdom of Messiah begins th^n from the creation of the world, from the laying
of the foundation of the world, and from eternal times: It was from the
beginning, which was without beginning: And that Kingdom shall also end within
that eternity which shall have no end, by which the world, which had its
beginning from ages and times eternal, shall be swallowed in eternal times, and
in the end of ages. Then shall there be an end, says St. Paul, when he shall
resign the Kingdom to his Father. The Kingdom of Christ was from eternity, it
shall likewise end within age and eternity; For this cause, all times were made
by Christ, Heb. 1. and Christ was called the Prince of time. Timothy 1. cap. 1.
Yea the Kingdom of Christ is called the Kingdom of all ages Psalm. 144. For
which cause St. Paul calls Christ, Blessed unto all ages. God the Father
reigned before ages, before the times of eternity, before he had ordained
wisdom, and had given her command over all things. God the Father shall
likewise reign after ages, after that wisdom, who is Christ the Son, has
yielded up the Kingdom to the Father in the end of ages. God the Father reigned
before eternity, and shall after eternity. God the Son reigned from eternity,
and shall to eternity. In which sense understand that in the 90 Psalm. From age
to age thou art God. As also which David sings, 4 Chron. chap. 16. Blessed be
the Lord from eternity to eternity.

CHAP. XII.
Eternity uses to be understood in Scripture, by the duration of the Sun and
Moon. Of an age. Of eternal times. St. Paul expounded. Eternity indefinite.
JEremie, to signify the eternity of that Law and Covenant, by which God had
taken the Jews to himself to eternity, as also the eternity of that Covenant
which God had made with Messiah, and with his servant David, by things
undoubted and very well known. If, says he, the Laws of the Sun, and Moon, and
the Stars fail, then the seed of Israel shall fail before him. And again, If
the Covenant of the Lord with the day and night can be frustrate, then can the
Covenant of the Lord be frustrate with David his servant: Therefore both of
them are set down indubitable and unmovable, the eternity of the seed of
Israel, as also of the Kingdom of Messiah; as also the eternity of the Sun, and
Moon, Stars, Days and Nights: And as they are conveniently joined, so are they
conveniently convertible thus. The seed of Israel shall never fail before the
Lord, for the Sun and Moon and Stars can never fail before him: It is
impossible that the Covenant of God should be in vain, which he made with his
Servant David, that he should be and remain for ever. It is likewise impossible
that the Covenant which God made with the Day and Night should fail, but they
should be to eternity, and remain continually: God meant that impossibility of
his Law, which should never perish, and of his Covenant never to be broken. In
the 6 chapter of the Gospel according to St. Luke. It is easier for the heaven
and earth to pass away, than that one tittle of the Law should pass away. Of
the Law, that is, of the Co^enant which God made with Israel, and with his
Messiah. The whole world is here understood by the heaven and the earth, and
that impossibility he clears by another as great an impossibility; that is, the
least tittle of the Law shall never pass away, nor shall ever the world pass
away. Such is that which we read Psalm 72. The Messiah shall endure with the
Sun and Moon unto eternity. Which is convertible thus, The Sun and Moon shall
endure together with Messiah for ever.

It is written Genesis 1. Let us make lights in the midst of heaven, that they
may divide the day and night, and be for signs and times, for days and years.
Which the author of Ecclesiasticus rehearses in these words chap. 43. The Sun
and Mo^n show the time and appoint the age. Times are made up of days, and
nights, months, and years, and ages, which the Sun and Moon divide, and
dispense, and appoint the measure of them; especially the Sun, who for
excellency is called the Father of times and ages by the ancients. For which
cause holy Writ measures out the eternity of ages by the Sun.

It is common in holy authors to reckon weeks of years, months of years, years
of years; and with them you have many times also ages of ages, which comprehend
many myriads of years, of which an eternity is made up. Which you may well call
the year of the world, or the great world, whose times and ages are reckoned
innumerable. Which you shall not need to wonder at, if you wonder that the day
of days, the year of years, the age of ages, and all ages of ages have
descended from eternal times, and shall endure to eternity; I thought upon the
days of old, I have the eternal years in remembrance, I have counted the years
which were from the beginning, says David, Psalm 76. The Prophet counted those
days, but could never find the number of them, For there is no remembrance of
things past, Ecclesiast. chap. 1. And truly. For the memory of men, being
finite and fading, can no way extend it ^eif to the knowledge of those former
things which are infinite, and derived from years eternal.

As if St. Paul had meant in those places, which I mentioned before in the
former chapters, where he said, that the mystery of the Gospel was hid from
eternal times and ages, to express a thing so much secret and remote, that the
mystery had been hidden since the world was made with Adam, from whom to the
Apostle was not above four thousand years. That had been indeed to have thrown
four drops of water into the midst of the Sea, or to have thrown four grains of
sand upon the Sea shore, according to what is written in the 18 chapter of
Ecclus. As a drop of the water of the Sea, or a grain of sand, so little are a
thousand years in the days of eternity. The author of the Ecclesiasticus here
meant; that whatsoever proportion a drop has to the who^e Sea, or a grain of
Sand to the whole shore, a thousand years should have the same proportion to
the day of eternity, which contain^ the beginning and ending of all things
created, in the endless volums of years. For eternity here is taken in the
second acception, which is from eternity, and shall remain to eternity; Which
times are compounded of ages, which ages are accounted by years.

Nor think here that age to be the first and pure eternity, which admits of no
distinction of years, of no composition or comparison with this second
eternity, which is secular and compounded. For although the author of
Ecclesiasticus seems to have taken this out of the 88 Psalm, where it is said,
A thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday. It is to be observed that
the Psalmist in that place meant, that there could be no proportion or
comparison betwixt 1000 years and Gods eternity, which 1000 years he compared
with a day that is past, with that which is not. For there is no proportion
betwixt an entity and a non entity. But in this place the author of
Ecclesiasticus admits a perfect proportion betwixt a thousand years and the day
of eternity, betwixt a drop of water and the whole Sea, betwixt a grain of
sand, and all the sand in the shore. For a drop of water and the whole Sea are
things omogeneal, as also a grain of Sand and the whole shore; as also these
are here compared according to their habitude of number and measure, by which
they have relation one to another; But there can be no proportion betwixt a
thousand years, which is a body of years, and a Homogeneous body. These are
likewise compared together, according to the habitude of number and measure,
which have relation one to another; but there can be no proportion betwixt the
eternity of God and a thousand years; because they are of different kinds: A
thousand years, and that pure eternity are of several kinds, because that
eternity consists not of years, nor is compounded of ages, or times, and they
cannot be compared according to their habitudes and measures, for they have
none common to both.

The things which I mentioned before of the beginnings of things, and of the
creation of the world from eternity out of Diodorus, agree very well wi^h these
testimonies of holy Scripture. That the ancient Physiologists and Historians
did believe, that the world was eternal, as also affirmed that men were from
eternity; which Diodorus, peaking of the Chaldeans, expounds thus, That they
believed that the world was eternal, having no certain determinate beginning,
for they did not deny the beginning of the world; but thought it unknown and
uncertain, according to that of Ecclesiasticus, There is no remembrance of
former things.

That eternity was uncertain and undeterminate; Wherefore in the Bible eternity
is often undeterminate. As it is read Genesis 6. My spirit shall not contend
with man always; Eternity in that place is long after undetermin^d, which
appears by what follows. And his days shall be a hundred and twenty years. For
God determined here the age of man a hundred and twenty years, which before was
far longer and undetermined: so it is to be understood of that servant, whose
ear his Master pierced with an Awl. Deuteronomy. 5. He shall se^ve thee for ever, that
is undeterminately, and so long as he li^es: I pass by a great many places of
this same sor^.

Let it therefore be taken for good, that the creation of the world, which is
said from eternity, by the authority of both Testaments, could by no means be
unders^ood since Adam was made, according to the definition of both ages.
Whether you call eternity, which is reckoned from many ages, and times. Or
whether you understand it indefinitely or undeterminatly. For it is known that
the time betwixt ^s and Adam is within account. For the times from Adam are of
a known period, without the account of ages. Besides there is a great deal of
difference betwixt those things that preceeded the beginning of all things, and
those things which were before (...) Adam. Of these there is neither mention
nor knowledge: Of the other there is certain knowledge and memory.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the ages of creatures describ^d by Hesiod and Ausonius. Why the Histories
of the first men were not known. Out of Plato. By the change of the Epoche. The
Aboriginal Nations of the world are not known.
I Often have wondered at the ages of creatures which Hesiod relates; That the
just age of a man is Ninety six. The age of a Crow eight hundred and sixty
four. The age of a Heart three thousand three hundred and fifty six. The Rooks
ten thousand three hundred and sixty eight. The Phoenixes ninety three thousand
three hundred and twelve. The Nymphs live Nine hundred thirty three thousand a
hundred and twenty. For he put those very ages into a Verse, from a tradition
far more ancient, as we may conjecture, than Hesiod. There Hesiod was antienter
than Ausonius, who since that time a long while did translate them in Latin
Verses. But Pliny thinks that but a Fable which he writes concerning the
Phoenix, and the Nymphs. Well, grant they be fabulous, notwitstanding it
appears by this, that Hesiod received them of a fabulous and most ancient
tradition. I say, from that tradition which had set down the ages of Crows,
Hearts, and Rooks, of which the Ancients doubted not, and which they could not
affirm the certainty of, without many and frequent experiments: Neither had
Hesiod, a most learned and elegant old Poet, vouchsafed to have described such
idle stories in such excellent Verses; nor Ausonius after him, a sweet and
acute Poet translated them, if both of them had thought that the beginning of
things was to be reckoned from Adam, from whom to H^siod there was not as yet
passed the age of an Heart.

Those Poets set down such ages, such bounds to the lives of Beasts; but
thought that God the Judge of eternity, knew all other ages, namely, that of
the world, heaven, and stars. Of eternity, I say, which in that place Ausonius
sets down as a secret, and known to God alone. The knowledge of those eternal
ages which were from the beginning, was hid from men, according to that decree,
by which he has hindered men to know all things; and through which he thought it
fit in his wisdom that they should be ignorant of the dispensations of time:
According to that of the Lord when he was ascending to heaven, It is not for
you to know the times, which the father has put in his own power, Acts. chapter 1.

The Egyptians, according to Plato, ascribed the cause of this ignorance to the
several destructions of men; of which the greatest were by fire and water, the
lesser by many other several ways. They said, in some long tract of time there
were some changes and differences of things in motion, both in heaven and
earth, and in some long tract of time. Whence higher Countries either were
consumed with too much fire, or the lower drowned by too large effusion of
showrs. But the Egyptians were free from fire and flood: Nile saving them from
fire: And such was the temper of their climate, that no shower from above had
ever watered them, or ever should. Nor were they watered at any time with any
other water, than which either flowed over from Nilus, or sprung out of the
bowels of the earth. And for that cause, being not much subject to fire, nor
overwhelmed with water, some men were always preserved with them, sometimes
more, sometimes less, but never a general desolation. For which reasons they
reser^'d alone the most ancient Records. And that both their own actions, and
the actions of other Nations which were memorable, were diligently set down,
and written in the Records kept in their Temples. That the Greeks and other
Nations, either by Plagues sent down from heaven, or being des^royed either by
water or fire, in certain space of time had lost both letters and knowledge;
and entered as it were again into their childhood, beginning at their Alphabet;
nor knew what had been at home or abroad, but through a cloud, and by hearsay.
Therefore they believe that the head of all things flowed from that beginning,
which is the beginning of their knowledge, and are content to remit that alone
to posterity. So Plato.

To this add the length of time, which changes and consumes all things, from
whole devo^ring jaws the Egyptians could not rescue themselves. For they,
though they showed abundance of ancient monuments, both of their own and other
Nations, had notwithstanding lost the Annals of their King God Vulcan, and of
the Sun, his son. To these deluges, fires, and devouring times, add that gross
ignorance, which in several ages has orerun the whole world, more powerful
than fire, than water, than time it self, which has swallowed, blotted out,
and defaced the memory of things past. To this add the wickked dispositions of
many men, and the hateful desires of Princes; as that of Nabonassar the
Chaldaean, from whom to the death of Alexander, there were four hundred twenty
four years. He caused the deeds of all Kings before him to be abolished, that a
new beginning of all affairs, and Kings, might begin its computation from
himself; whence the date of Nabonassar was derived. Alvarez a Samedo in his
History of China, relates, That a certain King called Tein, commanded by a
Proclamation to burn all the Books of the Chinensians, except Physick-books:
and was so careful in bringing an utter destruction for 40 years that he
reigned, that he utterly overthrew all learned men, and all learning in his own
age. As that was likewise the ambition of vanquishing Princes, which so much
altered the computation of time, when they changed the Epoche, and would have
the times named by their names. Hence those known Periods, from the death of
Alexander: of Augustus, from the fight of Actium: and that which was called the
Epoche of Dioclesian. The ancient Egyptians renewed the intervals of their
years, as often as they received new Laws from new Kings and new Conquerours.
Which Scaliger in his Book De emendatione Temporum, says they did very
frequently.

We must needs imagine that all climates of the world have been diversely
ruined, but successively, and by turns, not all with one push, or at one time.
That those men who were in their own land too numerous, behooved to make up
their losses. That by diverse chances and fortunes mankind has been tossed
hither and thither, nor could not always continue in the same stations. Hence
it is, that no Land could ever boast it self of its Aboriginals; that is to
say, of those men who were first created in it, who in the first spring of the
Creation came forth every where out of the earth. And hence it is, that I trust
neither Egyptian, Scythian, nor Aethiopians, calling themselves Aboriginalls,
and the most ancient of Nations.

The Christian Fathers who lived in the next age to Christ, whom its fit we
call the sons of light, as they were not wiser than the sons of this world in
their generations; so were not they more diligent or provident than they in the
enquiry of those generations. They were wi^e in those things which belonged to
heaven, and the second creation: they neglected such things as were of the
earth, and the first creation. And as they adhered to the reading of the holy
Scriptures, they very well rejected the fables of the pedigrees of the
Gentiles, who thought themselves Aboriginals. But on the other side, too
negligently, by their leave, they rested upon Adam, and thought him alone the
first parent of all men, because he is read the first in Moses.

The same negligence which possessed the first, pursued the successive Doctors
of the Church; who knew no other men, but such as were begotten by Adam; Yea,
they pronounced them Heretics, that placed the Antipodes over against Adams
posterity; because they must then think them the posterity of some body else. I
would St. Augustine and Lactantius were now alive, who scoffed at the
Antipodes. Truly they would pity themselves, if they should hear or see those
things which are discovered in the East and West Indies, in this clear-sighted
age, as also a great many other Countries full of men; to which it is certain
none of Adams posterity ever arived.

CHAP. XIV.
They are deceived, who deduce the Originals of men from the Grandchildren of
Noah. Grotius, concerning the Original of the Nations in America, confuted.
IT is the manner of all men, who search out the Originals of Nations, to
derive them after the flood from the Grandchildren of Noah, who were the
Grandchildren of Adam. And great men are so earnest in this, (whom I very much
prise, and have in continual respect for them) that they cut out all their
originals out of this block: And either from some ancient record, or some old
tradition, or the similitude of some old and obsolete name, or from any other
conjecture: Some they imagine that landed at such or such a place, to have been
the authors or fathers of such a Nation. As if Italus, who fled (for example)
into Italy, and gave a name to that Country, had been the father and author of
all the Italians, and that Nation had had no Inhabitants before Italus. As if
the Francks should be thought the authors and first founders of all the French
Nation, and that there had been no Frenchmen before the Franks; because the
Franks seized upon France, and changed the name of the Province, and of Gallia
made it Francia. Must needs Peru be thought to have had their Original from the
Chinensians, because a piece of a broken boat, like those of the Chinensians,
was found on the banks of Peru? Those who guess so, seem to me to be like that
two-peny Doctor, who told the sick man he had eaten an Ass, because he saw the
dorsers standing under the bed.

Hugo Grotius sets out a discourse of the Originals of the Nations of America,
whom he derives from the Norwegians, who eight hundred years ago were carried
to Island, and went from thence to Greenland; and so from Greenland, through
the Lands adjoining, he conjectured, got to the South parts of America. Laetius
did confute the conjecture of Grotius. Grotius vindicates himself from Laetius,
and those things which in him Laetius had confuted, he by this absurdity
resolved to restore. But, says he, if the Americans are not Germans (the
Norwegians and Germans were with him all one) now they shall be the Offspring
of no Nation; which is as much as to believe, with Aristotle, that they were
from eternity; or born of the earth, as is reported of the Spartans; or of the
Ocean, according to Homer; or that there were some men before Adam, as one in
France lately dreamed. If such things, says he, be believed, I see a great
danger imminent to Religion.

Grotius had ^^ittle before read a little discourse of the Prae-Adamices,
undigested, and about to be revised, which he under color of friendship, by an
acquaintance had required of me, which I friendly did communicate to him; not
that he should abuse me: Nor do I desire to make return, or speak ill of the
dead; let him keep with him his aspersion, and preserve it in his grave. Let
this be enough, that the fame of the man, which now goes up and down the world
with the creditable report of diverse and high endowments of learning, deceive
not more with the allurements of his Eloquence, and by his trappings of
probable conjecture.

Grotius argues thus. The Norwegians landed in Greenland. They went forward
from Greenland to America. Therefore the Norwegians were the authors of the
Nations in America. Let us grant, that Grotius took the right way of proving
this, and that all were true he built upon this ground. Certainly, if America
must needs be peopled by the Greenlanders, which were likewise Norwegians: He
must prove first, according to his own ground, and first of all that the
Norwegians, who first lighted upon it, found it empty, and only the winds
blowing upon the leaves in those Countries, whence he might gather this
conclusion, that the Norwegians first planted Greenland, who afterward
straying about the world, strewed Colonies over all America, and so the
Americans and the Greenlanders should be indeed the posterity of the
Norwegians, I say he ought first to have proved, that the Greenlanders were the
offspring of the Norwegians, before he should guess that the Americans were
sprung from the Greenlanders, and of the same stock of Norway.

It is most certain that the Norwegians w^^h first landed upon Greenland in the
Easlern parts of it, rough and wild, which the Norwegians called Ostreburg,
going to find out the western parts better habitable, which they call
Westreburg, found it full of all manner of herds and cattle as also full of the
men of that Climate, whom they called Schlegringians, who beat off the
Norwegians, falling upon their quarters with a great slaughter. A true and
faithful narrative of which is in the Greenland Chronicle written in Danish,
which is in the hands of the most famous Gauminus, skillfull in all languages,
which I also knew in Denmark. The Norwegians were there strangers, not the
founders of the Greenlanders, much less of the Americans.

These are fancies of Grotius, made for ostentation of his learning, In that he
says there are many words among the Indians agreeing with the German language,
as also that the customs of the Americans in many things is like the Germans,
as milk is like milk, which he by several examples instances, that he may pro^e
that the Americans had those customs from the Norwegians, who first had them
from the Germans. Let us pass by that chain by which Grotius would ingraft the
Germans in the Norwegians, the Norwegians in the Greenlanders, the Greenlanders
in the Americans, and so one Nation into another. It is a true story and very
well known in all Copenhagen, the chief City of Denmark, which I also in the
same City received from Danes, that there lived in Copenhagen Greenlanders,
Barbarians, taken by the Danes about thirty years ago, yea two of them for the
space of two years were kept as Danes, who notwithstanding could not by no
means learn the Danish, and he had no similitude of speech or behavior like
the Norwegians. This I have set down more at large in my relation of Greenland
in French: But if the Greenlanders had no affinity in their customs with the
Norwegians either in speech or custom, the Norwegians must needs sail some
other way to America to communicate their customs to them, than from Greenland.

But what would Grotius say, if he were now alive, and should read that the
Schlegringi were there, and inhabited Greenland before the Norwegians came?
what manner of men would he say they were? Would he say they were from
eternity, or sprung from Greenland it self, or cast out by the Ocean upon land,
or founded by another than Adam? if any such thing be believed says he,
Religion is in danger. The danger that he saw, was, that by this means he
perceived the original sin of Adam was by this doctrine quite overthrown;
because it is the common consent of all Divines, that only by traduction it
could pass upon all men.

This then I must prove, and this is only my task, to make it appear that we
needed not Adam for our Father, nor traduction of Adam to make us partakers of
his sin, as we needed not that Christ should be our Father, and his traduction
should make us partakers of that grace is by Christ, and all the following book
shall be of this, which shall begin with the end of this.

The Fifth Book of this SYSTEME OF DIVINITY.
CHAP. I.
Men behooved to die, to become immortal. Men dye in Christ. They behooved first
to sin, and be condemned in Adam. Men dye in Christ spiritually and mystically.
Of the fictions and mysteries of the Law. Of divine mysteries; which were
either fictions, or parables, or mystical similitudes. We die spiritually,
according to the similitude of Christ. We sinned spiritually, according to the
similitude of the sin of Adam.
I Must recapitulate what I said in the beginning of this Systeme, That men,
who were to be renewed by a second creation, were to receive a new form: which
could not, without blotting out of the first form, and extinguishing of the
first creation, be performed. All corrupt and mortal men behooved to be so
ordered, as decrepit and feeble Pelias, whom Medeae slew, and cut him to
pieces, to change him from old to young. Corrupt and mortal men behooved to die,
to recompense corruption with incorruption, and death with immortality. But
such a destruction, by which God must needs break all men, as it were in a
mortar, seemed cruel to God. God had thought it better to heal those whom he
would not bruise. And by mystery brought that to pass, which by harshnesse he
deemed inconvenient to himself. He resolved that men should die for the death
of one man, who should be an expiation forthem. Nor yet by the death of one
man, who was simply a man, but of man-God. I say of that God and Spirit, who is
begot of God incorrupt and immortal. And who should become mortal, like to
corrupt flesh, that by this similitude he might make men incorrupt and immortal.

God decreed that men should die in the death of that man-God, who is Christ.
But the decree of men's death, which should be to them as a condemnation, must
needs pass before the death of man, according to a divine and spiritual
mystery to men unknown. And the cause of their condemnation, which is guilt,
by reason of sin, must needs pass before their condemnation. Men then must
become guilty by their own sin, before they were condemned of sin, and be
condemned to die for the punishment of sin. And that guilt is called by the
Apostle, the condemnation of sin in the flesh; that is, of natural sin, which
had no imputation, no guilt, no condemnation before the Law. For sin in the
flesh, is the same with carnal, material, and natural sin. God is just, and
deals with men according to Law. Men had not sinned against God, when that
fervor which was within them, the corruption of their imperfect nature, forced
them headlong from the perfection of their creation to the imperfection of
their matter. For no guilt could be imputed by God, no lawful condemnation
pronounced, no death justly inflicted upon men, merely for that backsliding; by
which men, who were of their own disposing, turned from the uprightness of
their creation into the wickedness of their own creation. According then to
that mystery that God would have all men to die in one God-man; according to
that same mystery he resolved, that all should sin, and by one man be
condemned; a man I say, simply so, and not a God. God would have all men die in
Christ, and sin in Adam.

The virtue of the most high, according to the great power of God over-shadowed
a Virgin untouched; and of her Christ was born, in whom all men should die: a
pure sacrifice of a pure Virgin, and of the stock of the Jews. That so by the
Jews, and by the seed of the Jews, Jesus Christ, all men might receive
salvation. God framed Adam, the Father of the Jews, of common and impure earth,
corruptible; to whom he gave his Law: which if he did violate, all men should
be guilty in him, and condemned by that Law. That so likewise condemnation
might come upon all men by Adam, the father of the Jews. But there was no need
that men should by traduction be born of Christ, that in him they mig^^ die;
nor needed all men to be born of the descent of Adam, that in him all men might
die. All that mystery, of salvation and condemnation of men, in Christ and
Adam, made up the body of the mystery; that is, the spiritual and divine way,
above nature, and which is engendered in all men by intellect and mystery, and
not by nature.

Whosoever understands the ways of Supposition in Law, shall easily conceive
the force of that mystery, by virtue of which, men suffered loss of degree,
were changed or restored unto their estates, and by which things only agreed
upon were ratified, and by formality of which they did obtain in ancient time,
and yet obtain the lordship of most things. All these things might have
compassed their effects, and shown their natural force, by bare Covenant or
consent, without any supposition; But the Lawgivers did imagine ingrafting in
these things, which were naturally acted, the legalities of their art, to have
added a better understanding to them: As choice plants grow better, when they
are planred in Crab-tree stocks, and such as grow wild.

God resolving to restore man that had fallen from his creation, would not
perfect the work in that direct and natural order as many things are done
amongst men, but by crooked windings of mystery, by applications, and spiritual
graftings, he thought best to perform the whole work. Such mysteries seem to me
very well to be titled, Holy draughts, Parables, or Similitudes, as the Apostle
called them in that place of the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, where Isaac
is presupposed, as a figure of Christ, to have laid down his life under the
knife, and according to that Parabolical death, resembling the death of Christ,
he is presupposed to rise according to the similitude of the resurrection of
Christ: Where Abraham, I say, is presupposed to have sacrificed his son Isaac,
and to have received him again in Parable, or similitude of resurrection; which
the Apostle purposely, and very subtly observed.

The Apostle Paul has taught us, that men die in the death of Christ,
according to parable, and similitude of his death, 6 Chap. to the Romans In which
place he directly tells us, that by Baptism there is engendered in us not only a
similitude of his death, but that there is engrafted in them, by that same
Sacrament, a similitude of his resurection, For if we be engrafted in him in
his death, so shall we be also in his resurrection. And the Apostle taught us,
that all men sinned, were guilty, and were condemned in Adam, who sinned
according to the similitude of his transgression, According to the similitude
of the transgression of Adam. For that is to be understood a similitude, and a
Parable, no propagation of nature, as all men died in Christ. Which that we may
the better understand, we must more at large handle the sin of Adam, which is
commonly called Original sin.

CHAP. II.
Of Original sin. It is inherent. It is imputed. What it is to impute. That is
imputed, which is joined in a kind of communion with that to which it is
imputed. Of communions and conjunctions of things, Physical, Political, and
Mystical. Christ the end of all mysteries. Adam ought to be referred to Christ,
not Christ to Adam. Adam ought to be imputed to men, as Christ is imputed to
them spiritually and mystically,
WHat I shall speak first concerning Original sin, is asserted by all Orthodox
Divines. That sin is considered two manner of ways, either as sin, or as a
guilt; as a sin, so it is inherent; as it is a guilt, it is adventitious, and
passed from Adam upon them all. The one is proper to all men; the other a
stranger, and called the sin of Adam. The first is the formality; the second is
the materiality of the sin. The material sin is proper, and inherent, an
hereditary disease, or blemish, in which all men are conceived and born,
according to that of the Psalmist, In sin has my Mother conceived me. A formal
sin, which is another, and is become a guilt; which was the disobedience of
Adam imputed to all men: according to that of the Apostle, By the disobedience
of one, many became sinners. The materiality of sin, which is the proper fault
and infection inherent in all, by propagation of the matter and nature of men
subject to corruption. The formality of sin, which is a stranger, and
transient, had its beginning from imputation, by the transgression of the Law
which Adam did violate.

To impute to any one the sin of another, is to esteem him in the same
condition, as if he had committed the fault himself: Otherwise it is not
another fault, but his own, which is imputed to him. Beside, the fault of one
uses to be imputed to another, which has some communion or conjunction with
him, as having some manner of corporal society and similitude with him; For,
as smoke coming near the fire takes fire, by reason of the similitude and
aptitude is has to flame: so things that have a communion and conjunction
betwixt them, are apt, or susceptive one of another imputations.

Communions and conjunctions of things fit for imputation by reason of their
similitude, are threefold, Physical, Political, and Mystical. The fault of
their Fathers is imputed to the Children, by reason of that common and natural
similitude, by which sons begotten of their fathers are naturally joined to
them. The sons are said to have sinned in the loins of their Fathers, as Levi
is said to be taken for tithe in the loins of his Father Abraham, Heb. 7. As
also the Hebrews are said all to be taken by God in the hand of Abraham their
Father, Isay 41. There are both divine and humane Laws for imputations
ordained, according to natural communion and similitude. The divine, by which
God is said to visit the sins of the fathers upon the children to the third and
fourth generation: And according to that here, the fathers are said to eat the
sour grapes, and the childrens teeth to be set an edge. The humane law, by
which there is punishment decreed against the Children of the Traitors by the
guilt of their Parents. There are examples both divine and humane, of
imputation of the Fathers fault to the Children: That amongst divine examples
is eminent of the seven sons of Saul, whom, according to the command of God,
David gave the Gabaonites as an expiation, because their Father before had
broke his promise with the Gabaonites, and cruelly slain many of them. Its read
of Alexander, that after he had taken Tire, as if he had been the defender of
the public tranquillity, he crucified all the Tyrians who outlived the siedge,
who were born of those slaves their Ancestors, who long before had destroyed
the free people of Tire, together with their Masters, cruelly, by a conspiracy
made against them.

God imputed to the Jews the numbering of the people, which David had caused,
and consumed seventy thousand of them with the plague, for their Kings offense.
For that communion and conjunction politic, whereby the whole Kingdom is
thought one and one entire body, like a living creature, whose head is their
King: And as a murder performed by the hand is not only imputed to the hand,
but the whole man: So in a body politic, that which the head does, as being
head, is imputed to the whole body. It is the work of Jove, says Hesiod, to
punish Cities promiscuously for the transgression of the Magistrate. So because
the Priest of Apollo was violated by Agamemnon, the whole Army of the Greeks
was almost destroyed by Pestilence. And whatsoever the Prince did amiss, the
Greeks smarted for it. Nor only the act of the head of a City, but also of
another member, makes the whole body liable to guilty. So as it is read of
Achan. Who having taken of the accursed thing, brought all Israel under a
curse, Josue 7. And which is also read of the Levites Concubine, 19 Judges,
whom the Inhabitants of Gabea of the tribe of Benjamin swiv'd to death. And
whose wickedness was so rigidly imputed to all the Tribe, that all the Tribe
for that wickedness, was almost destroyed and routed out. Nor were the
Heathens ignorant of such imputations. As Hesiod says, Many times, says he, the
whole Country is destroyed. And Horace.

Neglected Jove does sometimes add
In punishment the good to bad.
Those imputations which by politic Communion are contracted from the
offenses of others, others of them are of the law of Nations, others according
to Civil law. According to the Law of Nations, the fault of Sedecias by perjury
was imputed to the whole Nation; for which cause being overcome, and falling
into the Enemies hands, they were all carried Captives to Babylon By the same
Law of Nations, whatsoever the Ambassador transacts, is imputed to the
Commonwealth, or the Nation, as also it is imputed to the pledges, whatsoever is
done by them who give the pledges. By Civil law it is imputed to the whole
people, whatsoever the chief procurer does for the people, and to the chief in
Government, whatsoever they do in behalf of the people; To the Colonie or
College, whatsoever their Trustees shall do in their behalf; To Pupils and
Minors is imputed, whatsoever shall be judged against them, according to the
consent of the Tutors or Overseers.

There are likewise mystical bodies, which by their mystical Communion and
similitude do engage imputations. Such is that mystical body by which all men,
as it were by a mystical conglutination are joined with him, by reason of that
similitude they have with Christ; For God did not put on the shape of an Angel,
but the shape of a Man, that he might become in all things like to men, except
Sin, that he might be a fellow sufferer with men, and be an expiation for them.
By that mystical Communion and society, by which his death is imputed to all
men. Such is that mystical Communion and society by which the faith of Abraham
is imputed to all the faithful, And all the faithful are called the Sons of
Abraham, not the Sons of Nature; but the sons of Adoption, and mystical
similitude, which did unite all things: According to that same Communion and
mystical society, the sin of Adam was imputed to other men. For although Adam
was made by Gods hands, by a peculiar and choice way of framing, beyond other
men: yet God had framed him, as in other places. I took notice of the same
clay, of the same common earth, and of the same matter, subject to corruption,
in which all other men were created. And in all things was Adam made like other
men, with sin also. Yea even as fin was a natural imperfection, to all
inherent, and proper to Adam himself, and so to all men; And likewise as all
men by reason of that society of sinning, were apt or suceptive of that guilt
which came by the transgression of Adam.

It is commonly believed that the death of Christ was imputed to men, because
the sin of Adam was imputed to them. They are deceived that think so; Yea upon
the contrary, the sin of Adam was purposely imputed to men, that the death of
Christ might be imputed to them likewise; For Christ ought not to be referred
to Adam, but Adam ought to be referred to Christ: For all things tend toward
their end for which they are made: Christ was the end of all mysteries;
therefore were all mysteries merely for Christ, and not Christ for the
mysteries. Adam was a type of Christ, But Christ was a prototype of Adam. A
type is referred to a prototype, and not a prototype to its type.

Nor for any other cause was the sin of Adam imputed to men, than that the
death of Christ, which appeals for all men's sins, and regenerates them, might
be also imputed to them. Therefore in Gods decree the imputation was first
designed in the death of Christ. Secondly in the sin of Adam, as you shall read
it in the Revelations, That Christ was a Lamb slain from the ordaining of the
world. Yea, and that the mystery of shedding his blood was known and decreed
before the ordaining of the world. 1 Pet. chap. 1. Which you shall never find
of Adam, because Adam ought to be referred to Christ, as the principle decree
of God, and his own first type.

But these things which were first in the decree and council of God, were not
also in order of the performance made first. Hence also it happens, that the
sin of Adam went before the death of Christ; And hence it comes to pass that
the imputation of the sin of Adam, is thought the cause of the imputation of
the death of Christ, though indeed by reason of the imputation of the death of
Christ, the sin of Adam was imputed; Yea, because really and properly God, by
the sin of Adam, made way to the Covenant of grace, which is by Jesus Christ:
Therefore the first born reason of those imputations was in the death of
Christ; the condition of which, the secondary imputation of Adam, sin must
needs ensue, and as Christ was not imputed by Nature, but by the mere mystery
of God, so was Adam imputed to men, not by nature but by the mere dispensation
of the divine mystery.

CHAP. III.
Of the two chief in the two mystical imputations Adam and Christ. Abraham in
the middle betwixt them. We pass from the sin of Adam to the Justice of
Christ, by the faith of Abraham. Punishments inflicted by mystical imputations
are mystically and spiritually to be understood. No man, no not Adam himself
died for Adams sin; Only Christ dyed for that sin. All men are understood dead
in Christ, spiritually and mystically.
CHrist and Adam were types one of another, or rather antitypes, and by
dissimilitude like one another, like because Adam and Christ are both imputed
after the same manner by dissimilitude, because Christ was imputed for justice,
Adam was imputed for sin; but justice and sin are quite different.

Adam and Christ were in these mystical imputations chief, the middle betwixt
them was Abraham: The guilt of Adam was imputed to all men, that the expiation
of that guilt might likewise be imputed to them; I say, that it might be
imputed to them by faith in God, which is in Christ; such as Abraham first had,
and it was imputed to him for Justice; But it is not writ for Abraham's own
sake, that his faith was imputed to him for justice, but likewise for us, says
the Apostle, that is for all men, to whom it shall be imputed, believing in him
that raised Jesus Christ from the dead, who was betrayed for the sins of men,
and rose again for the justification of them. In the Romans chap. 4. Abraham was
the original and fountain of that justification in that sense, as he is called
the Father of all believers in the same place of the Romans.

All that mystery then of regeneration of men, which is men's redemption,
sanctification, and salvation, consists in these thtee mystical imputations.
The imputation of the sin of Adam, The imputation of the expiation of it by the
death of Christ, And the imputation of the faith of Abraham, which was the mean
or mid path by which we should pass from the sin of Adam, to that
justification and sanctification which by the death of Christ, and his
resurrection, is engendered in men. There was then a continued imputation from
the sin of Adam to the death of Christ, by the faith of Abraham. And the whole
mystery of man's redemption was accomplished in the persons of three Jews, Adam,
Abraham, and Christ, accordnig as salvation comes to all the Nations by the
Jews, according to the promise confirmed to Abraham, That in him all nations
should be blessed, and in his seed.

Adam was the Father of Abraham according to the flesh, and according to the
imputation of sin: he was likewise the Father of Christ, according to the
flesh, without the defiling of the flesh. Abraham was the Father of Christ,
according to the blood, without the blemish of the blood, he was likewise the
Father of Adam, according to the imputation of faith. Christ was the Father of
Adam and Abraham, according to the redemption and expiation of that sin which
flowed from Adam, and was imputed to Abraham. In that these three heads of
those mystical imputations agree. That those three Jews were the Fathers of all
Nations, not according to the flesh, but each of them according to his own
mystical imputation. But the Gentiles are indeed the Sons both of Adam and
Abraham, not naturally, but according to their engrafting and mystical
adoption, according to which, Adam and Abraham being Jews were imputed to the
Gentiles; that Christ being a Jew might be imputed to them also.

Mystical imputations share in all kind of natural and politic imputation. A
natural conjunction of bodies is common both to the mystical and Physical
imputation, which by traduction in propagation is engendered in mystical
imputations, and a mystical imputation is imagined in the similitude of
creation, and formation. According to that mystical communion and conjunction,
Adam and Abraham are called our Fathers, and we are said to be begotten in
Christ; For these three men were common Representatives of all men, supposing
the whole species. But as Adam, Abraham, and Christ were all men: even so were
all men one in Adam, Abraham, and Christ, by unity of similitude, and
participation of the nature; as amongst Philosophers, all men participating of
the same species are reputed one man: also, amongst Divines the whole species
of men is believed to be deposited in those three, Adam, Abraham, and Christ.
In Adam, according to sin; in Abraham, according to faith; in Christ, according
to redemption.

Mystical imputations agree with imputations politic, in that Adam, Abraham,
and Christ, were the chief presidents, cautioners, and sureties for all
mankind. That whatsoever Adam should do as to the Law; Christ, in the business
of Redemption; Abraham in matter of Faith, should stand firm. Certainly Adam,
of whom we chiefly here speak, was according to divine Law in an universal
esteem, as a Prince in behalf of his people, Ambassadors for a Kingdom or
Commonwealth, or a President for the Universities. And Adam was so ordained,
being the Prince of all mankind; that so soon as he should transgress the Law
of God, he should not only be guilty himself, but make all men guilty
likewise: for, as the Divines say, the act of Adam was not personal, but
representative; that is, it was not the act of one person, but of a person
represented others, as sustaining the person of all mankind.

God had obliged all men in that Covenant which he made with Adam, as with a
security, a Procurer or Protector of them, that what he should sin in, they
should also all be guilty. Adam had a charge from God, not from men; according
to which he might trannsact men's business without their knowledge. Adam broke
the Covenant of God, and according to that punishment of imputation, which God
upon that breach destined for all men, all men are likewise thought to have
broke it. Adam was a common Representative of all men. Men sinned in general by
a unition to that representative, as the Schoolmen say: and as Christ, our
Justice, was the form of the mystical imputation, according to the same manner
of imputation was Adam our sin.

It is known, that punishments by Natural and Political imputations, have not
only seized upon men's persons, but have by the sins of men had likewise an
influence both upon things living and dead. Not that the sins of men were
imputed to men; but that by the damage of such things which were profitable to
men, those errors which they had committed might be more imputed to them: so
we read, that for the sin of men all things that were upon the face of the
earth were destroyed, from men to beasts, as well creeping things, as the fowls
of heaven. Moreover, for the wickedness of the Sodomites, both their Towns and
themselves were destroyed. What shall I mention, that for the wickedness of the
Jews their earth was made iron, that the heaven became brass, and fires were
kindled to burn every tree, both dry and green, That became common by the
mystical imputation of the sin of Ad^m; For the earth was cursed for the
rebellion of Adam. The Serpent was accursed among all creatures and beasts of
the field. He was commanded to go upon his belly, and commanded to ear dust
all the days of his life: and those things which were joined in no society
with Adam, endured the condemnation of that fault.

This was the difference betwixt inflicting of punishments in Physical, and
punishments ordained upon the Mystical imputation of the sin of Adam. That
those punishments were Physical and real, according to their Physical and real
imputations: the other Mystical, and spiritually understood, according to the
spiritual and mystical imputation of the sin of Adam. Certainly, the sin of
Adam added nothing to the sinful nature of man, but a mere guilt, which ought
mystically to be understood. Nor did the punishment ordained against him from
the imputation of sin, add any thing to the corruption and natural condition of
men, but a mystical condemnation, which could only be imagined in the
understanding. The punishment decreed against the Serpent, added nothing to the
reptile nature of the Serpent, besides a condemnation merely spiritual and
mystical; For according to the reptile condition of his nature and his
creation, the Serpent was to creep upon his belly, and to eat dust all the
days of his life; which I showed before, and thought fit here to rehearse. The
punishment decreed against the earth, to bring forth Thorns and Thistles, added
nothing to the condition of the earth, but the mere imagination of
condemnation; For the earth is properly called, the mother of thorns and
thistles. The punishment pronounced against men, that in the sweat of their
brows they should eat their bread, added nothing to the natural destiny of
men, but a bare mystery of condemnation: For a man is born to labor, and a
fowl to fly. And it is as natural for a man to labor, as to a fowl to fly.
And the same is to be thought of the pains of women in childbirth. Nor did the
condemnation of death pronounced against Adam, add any thing to the natural
death, by which Adam, and all men, according to the Law of their creation ought
to die, besides the mystical condemnation, consisting in mystery and spirit.

Adam is understood to be dead according to that condemnation, and all men are
understood to be dead in Adam, by that mystery, and mystical way of
imputation, by which the death of Christ ought to be applied to Adam, and to
all men. Nor did Adam really die, nor man ever died really by the decree of
that condemnation: one Christ alone, who was the expiation for all sin, both
ought to do, and did that, and died for Adam and all men, and repeal by his
death that condemnation which was gone out against Adam, and all mankind. Yea,
Christ himself, who was slain, before the world was ordaind, and to whom was
allotted the task of expiating Adams sin, succeeded in Adams place at the very
minute when Adam sinned, and in the place of all men, who were esteemed to sin
in Adam. And God sustained the punishment for Adam, and for all men, who ought
to have dyed for Adam, and who from that very minute wherein Adam died, were
understood dead, not really and actually, for they could not, because they had
no being as yet, but by the force of mystery, and that mystical imputation
which was in force after the death of Christ, and before the death of Christ,
upon men not as yet born.

CHAP. IV.
The imputation of another man's sin is not conceivable, but by some supposition
in Law. Adams sin was imputed to all men in a spiritual manner, not by natural
propagation. Divines confuse nature and guilt, which ought to be understood
apart in original sin. Nature is before guilt. Guilt did not corrupt nature;
yea on the contrary corrupt nature caused guilt. Which is proved by the example
of Adam when he sinned.
IT is a most certain truth, of which no Orthodox Divine makes any question,
That God in a secret way, and by a mavelous mystery, imputed to all men, the
sin of one man. And that all mankind had a being in one man, not truly and
properly, but mystically, which is so to be understood, by a certain
presupposition in the Law of God, according to the words of no ordinary Divine,
The whole nature of man, says he, was in one man Adam, as in the head. And all
we, not truly and properly, for that time truly and properly we were not in
being, but potentially and virtually, or by a certain supposition in Gods Law,
in the act of Adam broke the Law of God, and transgressed his Covenant, as
says the Scriture.

And truly, if we take diligent heed, there is no imputation from another
fault, whether Physical, Political, or Mystical, or any other kind, which is
any other than imaginary, or can any other way be conceived than by
imagination, which is chiefly to be thought of mystical imputations, which are
less corporeal, and more spiritual, and therefore more apt for fiction.

That is, according to imputation, mystical, which the Apostle says Romans 2.
That uncircumcision is reputed to them that keep the Law for circumcision: But
how could the uncircumcised be thought circumcised, but by that supposition,
which being corporeal is conceived in spirit and thought? The sin of Adam was
made the sin of all men by imputation, and that same supposition of mystery, by
which all men that are, that were, that shall be, are imagined to have plucked
that forbidden fruit with their own hands, at the same time when Adam did
snatch it, and to have eaten it at the same time when Adam swallowed it, and by
which supposition the numerical sin of Adam, is thought to be numerically the
sin of all men, he, in whom all men are thought to have been in him; all men
are said to have sinned, and so have deserved death: Nor were all men really
and actually in Adam, nor are they to be thought to have sinned really and
actually, nor did they really and naturally deserve death by that sin, but by
force of mystery, which I have often repeated interpretatively, and
imputatively, as the Divine says, which was merely by supposition.

And since these things are undoubted and believed firmly: I see nothing that
may be any ways prejudicial to Christian Doctrine, if I say, that we did not
need Adam for our natural Father and begetter of all Mankind, to have his sin
imputed to all men. For to what purpose should there here be a confusion of
mystical and natural, and of imputation merely spiritual, with propagation
merely natural; For the guilt of imputation which is by Adam, and natural
wickedness, which is by traduction, and propagated by generation, are
different.

The Divines do confess those two together, who say, that original both as it
is imputed, and as it is naturally derived, came from one fountain, Adam: They
acknowledge a distinct and real difference betwixt mystical and physical, that
which is imputed, and that which is naturally inherent. They say likewise that
it is not by nature that all men are condemned for one man's fault. They
acknowledge something else, another communication; which is by imputation,
mystery, and by the council of God; besides the natural way of Propagation, by
which sin is inherent in men. They know also that none will ascribe that to the
unserchable judgments of God, that a sickly man begets a sickly man, that a
diseased person begets a diseased person: But that comes not by miracle, but by
nature, and an ordinary way: They also call that sin of Adam which was first
imputed to all men, that defection, transgression, a thing transient and
actual. They call that sin, which is naturally inherent in all persons, a
corruption, an infection, depravation, a sin sprung up, permanent, internal,
natural, habitual. And although these two sins are so much different one from
the other, as mystery is different from nature, imputation from natural
inherence, external and adventitious from internal and proper, material and
corporeal from formal and spiritual, which is utterly another thing.
Notwithstanding the Divines make up one original sin of these two sins, which,
they say, consists of two parts, imputation, and real communication of
corruption; out of two wholes they make up the two parts of one. Furthermore,
they say, that the imputation of the first sin of Adam, and his inbred
corruption, are so indivisibly linked, that they make not up more guilts, but
one entire guilt, which by traduction of propagation, as they say, passed upon
all men: But we shall readily prove out of the Apostle Romans 5. That sin
naturally inherent, is originally different from that which is imputed, and and
that these two sins were not always invisibly joined, nor were not always the
same original sin, says the Apostle, Until the Law sin was in the world. If sin
was in the world until the Law, it was before the Law also, and had its
original before the Law. Certainly that sin which was before the Law, was not
sin imputed, because sin imputed was not before the Law, but by the Law after
the Law; for the imputation of sin could only come by the Law. And these two
sins come only under consideration, Imputative, and Naturally inherent.
Therefore if sin imputed was not before the Law, certainly that natural
inherent sin must be before the Law, which was not imputed when there was no
Law. And again, if sin which was imputed, had its original from the Law, that
which was naturally inherent, no doubt, was the Ancestors, being before the
Law. The Law was by Adam, and was given when Adam was made: Therefore sin
naturally inherent was ancienter than Adam, and ancienter than sin imputed,
which had its original from Adam.

And that I may make it appear by plain truth, and demonstrate it by an
irrefragable argument, that sin naturally inherent was by inbred corruption,
and the viciousness of man's nature; that it was ancienter than the sin of
Adam, which in Adam was imputed to all men, we must more narrowly pry into the
History of Genesis and the sin of Adam. The Woman saw, says Genesis That the tree
was good to eat, fair to the eye, and delightful to behold; and she took the
fruit, and did eat, and she gave it to her Husband, and he did eat. Where you
see clearly, that the sen^es of Adam and Eve were corrupted before both did eat
and sin. Both were deceived with the fairness of the fruit, sweetness of the
smell, and softness of the touch, the enticement of his Wifes tongue, and
deliciousness of the taste, before he did eat the fruit and sin. The corrupt
senses of Adam, corrupted him, by that small fault of this corruption which was
inherent to Adam. So soon as he saw it, he was undone. Adam sinned by his
sight, before he sinned by his taste: He saw the fruit, and as his liver was apt
to concupiscence, he covered it. The concu^i^cence was a sin; And according to
the saying of o^r Savior, Adam who coveted the fruit, sinned before he did
sin. He sinned by concupiscence which is called corruption. Pet. chap 1. where
he exhorts us: to eschew The corruption of concupiscence. And St. James in the
first chapter of his Epistle. Everyone, says he, is tempted, being drawn away
and enticed by his concupiscence; and concupiscence having concerved, brings
forth sin; and sin coming to perfection, brings forth death. Where observe the
progress of natural sin from the first corruption of concupiscence to ^o^id
sin, and full corruption, which engenders death. The concupiscence then of Adam
did corrupt him, before he was corrupted by that ^n which was imputed to him
from the transgression of the Law, not from the corruption of nature.

They that interpret the sin of Adam Allegorically, say, that the Serpent
washissense, the Woman the reason, the Man the intellect; the fervent
persuasion of his sense blinded his reason, and reason deprated blinded his
intellect. The corrupt sense of Adam sinned, his crooked reason was faulty,
before that his vitiated intellect had sinned. Hence you may see how
preposterously they overturn the order of things, that say Adams reason was
therefore deprated, his senses corrupted, because he had eaten the forbidden
fruit; Nay rather, upon the contrary, Adam sinned eating the forbidden fruit,
because his senses were first corrupted, his reason first depraved. And Adam
sinned twice, first in his senses and reason, before he sinned in his intellect
and will, in that sin which was imputed to him, and in him to all men. Here
observe the force of that innate and inherent corruption, before the fruit
touched his lips. His concupiscence was neither afraid of the edict of God, nor
dreaded death, which was threatened to him; yea such was the fury of his Nature,
that he would have endured death in the bitterest manner, rather than he would
not satisfy his appetite.

I acknowledge that the imputation of his sin and inbred corruption were joined
in him after he had sinned. But these were not always joined in Adam: That
league was not entered before the Law of God, and before the expiation of it:
The inbred and innate corruption of Adam, was only inherent to him before his
fall. That natural corruption was the sin, of which the Apostle, Which was
before the Law, which was not imputed, because sin is not imputed where there
is no Law. And there was first an inbred corruption in Adam before that
imputation, which was caused by the transgression of that Law. Therefore the
imputation of sin was the Mother of his inbred corruption, which begat the
imputation of sin. Sin naturally inherent ought to be first before sin which
was imputed, as nature was before imputation or mystery.

As also sin naturally inherent was not imputed according to Law, there being
no Law; nor was there any legal guilt by that sin; for guilt and imputation are
the same things: Nor could it be said, that under the Law legal imputation and
imbred corruption were indivisibly joined, and made up but one guilt of two.
Under the Law legal imputation of Adams sin, and imbred corruption joined: But
therefore were not so indivisibly and closely joined, that they made the least
confusion of guilts; for there was never any guilt of another sin by imbred
corruption. The legal imputation of Adams guilt, flowed from the transgression
of the Law by Adam, which passed upon all men; from imbred corruption flowed
sin naturally inherent, not another sin, but every man's own sin, proper and
particular to himself; which is not imputed by the Law, and by the adventitious
sin of Adam; but the very nature of the sin inherent from ones imbred
corruption is naturally ascribed to all men, that they may undergo death, which
is according to nature, nor attain to immortality, which is above nature.

CHAP. V.
Those who think that the imputation of Adams sin was engendered by traduction
from Adam, do gather it from thence, in that they believe, that Adam was the
Father of all men. The Apostle has distinguished, and not joined sin naturally
inherent, and that which is imputed. He has distinguished and not joined
natural death with that which is inflicted by the Law. Death which was by the
sin of Adam began with Adam, and ended with Moses and Christ, Natural sin and
natural death were before Adam; and shall be after Moses and Christ to the end
of all time.
ONe opinion, as it is usual, is begotten by another. They who think that men
took their Original first from Adam, because it is no opinion but a reality,
that the first imputation of all sin, sprung from Adam, believe likewise that
innate corruption and the imputation of sin were so indivisibly joined in one
man, that that imputation could no other ways pass upon all men, but by way of
propagation, the original of which they bring from Adam, who first sinned, and
the act of which sin, say they, was in all men by imputation, and the quality
of the sin really inherent, since that act, which was not to interpret the
matter, but entangle it, not to unrevel it, but tie faster. Furthermore, this
opinion, as I said, thence took its beginning, because Adam is thought the
Original of all men. And that opinion again hence is imagined, because they
think that Moses spoke of Adam, as the first Father of all men, because there
is no other man named in Moses Books before Adam: as if there never had been
nothing in nature, nor in the world, which Moses had not mentioned. But Moses
tells us no where that which St. Paul first declared, That sin entered into the
world by the sin of Adam, and that death by that sin passed upon all men:
although Moses said no such thing, yet he no where denied it. And no where has
he said that which St. Paul expressly declares, That sin was in the world until
the Law, or before the Law, which is the same thing; I say, that first, and
firstborn Law, as the best Divines call it, and which is here to be
understood, as being the first of all Laws which God gave to Adam, and from
which proceeded the imputation of sin: Nor did Moses deny that which Paul
affirmed, Therefore it is better to assert it, since the Apostle affirms, Moses
does not deny it, that there were men before Adam.

As it was never the intention of the Apostle to derive the original of all men
from Adam, so also the Apostle never intended so to join sin naturally
inherent, with sin imputed: and certainly it is as clear as Noonday, That the
Apostle never made any mixtures of these sins, Romans 5 where he manifestly
writes concerning the sin which in Adam was imputed, By one man, says he, sin
entered into the world. That by one man St. Paul afterward explains, not by
traduction from one man, and natural propagation, but by his disobedience,
which is moral and spiritual; By the disobedience, says he, of one man, many
became sinners. He did not then join that which is moral and spiritual, with
that which is material, and naturally propagated.

But that man by whom sin entered into the world, is without doubt Adam, whose
sin was the sin of the whole world. The sin, I say, which by the transgression
of the Law was imputed to the whole world. The Apostle adds in pursuit of his
argument, Till the Law sin was in the world; that is, till that man Adam sin
was in the world. At the same time as sin entered into the world through the
Law by Adams sin, there was another, (...) in the world, as the Apostle
witnesses; (...) and Adam, which is the same thing. Not the sin which was
imputed by transgression of the Law, but sin which was naturally inherent, and
was not imput d^whilst there was no Law. Nor did the Apostle join ^n which was
before the Law with that which was after the Law, and had its original from the
Law, which in this Chapter he only h^ndles.

By one man sin extord unto the world, and by sin death, the Apostle adds in
that place. Where observe, the death which the Apostle here mean^ is not
intended the natural death, which was deeply rooted in the bowels of meir by
innate corruption, and by the depraving of his ^^^ation, but the spiritual and
mystical death is here to be understood, which followed the spiritual and
mystical imputation of Adams sin.

Which that you may the more clearly know, remember what I said before; That no
man ever dyed for the sin of Adam, but one Christ alone, in whom, according to
mystical imputation, all men are thought dead, as all men are thought to have
sinned in Adam. They are, I say, thought dead in Christ, by similitude,
parable, and fiction, mystically, as Isaac was supposed killed by his father,
as before out of the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews. That death then, of which
here the Apostle speaks, was mystical; fictitious, and Parabolical, which
ensued upon Adams mystical, fictitious, and Parabolical sin. Which death no man
ever actually suffered in Christ, as no man actually or really ever sinned in
Adam. The Apostle spoke in this place, not of that sin which was naturally
inherent to all men, but only of that which by mystical imputation passed upon
all men from the sin of Adam. The Apostle spoke likewise here not of that death
which is naturally riveted to man's corruption, but of that only which followed
the nature of Adams sin, and which by mystical imputation, passed from the
death of Christ upon all men. And Christ's death was called a transient death,
as the sin of Adam was called a transient sin. Death, says the Apostle, passed
upon all men; that he might intimate that he had nothing here to do with that
death, which by their natural corruption is naturally inherent to them, and
happens to them naturally; but only of that which in the expiation of Adams
sin by the death of Christ passes upon all men.

But that you may yet have a clearer light shine into your eyes, take good
notice to what in the same place presently follows, Death reigned from Adam
t^ll Moses. Death reigned from Adam, and that Law which Adam brake, until
Moses, and that Law which was in force from Moses till Christ. Christ dying,
extinguished all Law, both that of Adam and Moses his Law; Blotting out says
the Apostle, Col. 2. the seal of the decree which was against us, for it was
contrary to us, and taking it away, nayl'd it to his cross. That bond or
decree which was against us, was the condemnation of death decreed by the Law
and obligation against all men in the sin of Adam, For judgment from one,
became condemnation, as it is written Rom, 5. For that condemnation hung over
all men's heads, and reigned over them from Adam til Moses, and that time laid a
tie of Law upon all men. Nor did death properly, as I said before, reign upon
all men, because no man properly dyed for the sin of Adam, but properly the
condemnation of death which reigned over them, was that, which by the death of
Christ was blotted out, taken away, and nailed to the Cross.

God appointed then Adam and Moses the known limits and times for Adams sin, or
to that death or condemnation of death, which was decreed by that sin; But the
same God appointed no limits, no times, either to sin naturally inherent, or to
death, which by natural default is inherent to all persons. Sin naturally
inherent was before the Law, and Adam, since the creation and beginning of
things, which is without beginning. Natural sin reigned after Moses, and after
legal death of Adam and Moses, (...) the same death reigned, and shall reign to
the end of ages, which cannot be numbered.

The same natural death St. Paul meant, first to the Corinth. chap, 15. The
last enemy that shall be destroyed, says he, is death. Which death cannot be
understood of death deserved by the sin of Adam: For when Moses was dead, that
was destroyed. Death reigned upon Adam till Moses, they must then be understood
of a natural death, the destruction of which God has deferred till the end of
things. The last enemy which shall be destroyed, is death; For natural and
inherent death is not yet destroyed, which follows the nature of its natural
and inherent sin. These two shall we force indivisibly, till the end of time,
natural sin, and natural death, nor shall they be destroyed, but when the world
is destroyed.

Therefore the Apostle did not join these two, which he handled apart, and
which the order of things set at a distance; that is, sin Imputed, and sin
Naturally inherent, death reigning by the imputation of sin; and death
naturally following sin naturally inherent. The one treatise was spiritual and
mystical; the other material and natural. The Apostle ^ivides that spiritual
and mystical subject from the material and natural, to show that there was no
need of the traduction of Adam, material and natural, toward the imputation,
which was mystical and spiritual; which he more openly declares, Romans 5. where
he compares the obedience of Christ with the disobedience of Adam, and the
imputation which did abound, from the sin of one Adam, to the condemnation of
death, with the imputation of grace, which is given from above, of which is
given to the satisfaction of life, in the offering up of one Jesus Christ,
which are nothing material or natural, but relish altogether of spirit and
mystery. And that the compafison of Adam and Christ may be absolute, Adam ought
to be imputed to men after the same manner, spiritually and mystically, as
Christ is imputed.

The best Divines confess, that Paul spoke properly in the 5 chapter to the
Romans, of the guilt and imputation of Adams sin; and considered sin, not as
the fountain of humame corruption; but as it involves Adam, and in him all men
in the same guilt: For the Apostle did not write, that men were corrupted in
Adum, but sinned in him: That they sinned in Adam, by imputation, not since
Adam by imputation: That they sinned ^irtually in Adam; not by virtue of seed,
but by virtue of imputation. And Adam is ordained in that place the head of all
men, not naturally, but mystically. And one excellent Divine speaks very fitly
to this place. By natural reason, says he, It cannot be, that all men who were
not yet born sinned in Adam; Unless Adam in his moral existence be supposed
the Prince of all men. For which cause, the Apostle says in the same chapter,
not of those sins by which Adam was corrupted naturally, and by which all men
are naturally corrupted; but of one offense, one sin, one disobedience, which
deserved a guilt to Adam, and in him to all men, and which not actually, but by
imputation passed upon all men: By which means, says Cardinal Bellarmin, That
disobedience might be communicated to all men: And the famous Gamach of Sorbon.
We grant says he, That the actual sin of Adam, as actual, was not in men, but
by imputatign.

The Law, or the transgression of the Law, caused the imputation of that sin:
Nature begat the real inherence of habitual sin, which is wickedness of
Nature. Nature and Law are quite different in the scheme of things. God the
Creator of all things produced nature: The same God, the restorer, or second
creator, made the Law; And as nature could not contract a guilt from another
fault, as the violation of the Law might do: so neither guilt, by the
violation of the Law, and by another fault, could corrupt Nature. A moral
cause, such as was the disobedience of Adam, could not produce a natural
corruption. Therefore much less could the imputation of that disobedience
produce that corruption. Tha^ imputation, which is an effect merely spiritual
o^ that moral cause, and a cause mystical arising from a moral. Therefore the
Apostle coupled not these things thus dis-joyned, and which can no way agree
one with another, Nature and Law, Sin by Nature, and Guilt by Law, in this
Treatise which he here intended concerning that sin, which in the transgression
of Adam was imputed to all men. Nay no where in St. Paul, or in any other
sacred author can be read or gathered, that the natural traduction of Adam did
any way conduce, not to say was necessary to the imputation of Adams sin.

CHAP. VI.
How the sin of Adam was cause of men's salvation, not condemnation. Since the
death of Christ no man's sin is imputed to another, but every own bears his own
sin.
THat question which is commonly disputed concerning original sin, is
intricate, dark, and difficult, upon presupposition, that all men were born of
Adam. Upon my supposition, if God give me leave, I will make it so plain and
open, that we shall never have any difficulty.

There are some that throw hatred upon God, according to the first supposition,
in saying that his Law was too rigid and cruel, in that he imputed that which
was done by Adam, without the knowledge of men, before they had a being, to all
mankind; and in that the punishments for that sin were so heavy, that the whole
nature of man was overrun with punishments and plagues. For by no humane Laws
was there ever any successors appointed of others crimes. Let Children, says
Plato, not suffer for the wickedness of their Parents. It seemed a cruel and
pernicious president to the Senate of Rome to destroy Cassius's children, when
Cassius the Offender himself was destroyed; and people who did endeavor to
settle such ways of punishment, seemed to do things worthy the hatred of men,
and the anger of the Gods: But this seems to exceed all kind of cruelty, that
after a miserable and tormenting life, men should be cast into a burning lake,
and give their enlivened liver again to be gnawn by worms, and there in weeping
and gnashing of teeth to die, and never die, for ever, and beyond eternity.

To which inconveniences, that from my supposition I may briefly and clearly
answer and stop every mouth speaking irreverently of God: It is before
sufficiently shown, that the imputation of Adams sin, added nothing to the
nature of man, given to corruption, which is merely mystical, and is only
conceived in spirit; therefore, as to nature that imputation added, no new
business. We must here consider what damage men received in this, according to
mystery; We must first resolve, that the Apostle Paul, where he says in the 10
to the Romans. That Christ is the end of the Law. Meant, that Christ was the
end of all mysteries; both which were commanded by the Law, and contained in
the books of the Prophets: In which signification, the Law is very frequent,
and is taken for the whole Bible. Let it be so, says the Lord to St. John,
refusing to baptize him, for thus it becoms us to fulfill all-truth. Truth in
that place is the mystery; For Christ fulfilled all mysteries, which he
perfected, and accomplished the ends of them: Besides mystery is called truth,
because all mysteries ordained by God lead to truth. Nor is mystery an empty
name, and a bare title or fiction, without its reallity and species: Yea it
accomplishes the chiefest thing of all, in that it begets truth, salvation, and
immortality to men, which shall be cleared in its own place.

Christ was the chief end of that mystery, by which the sin of Adam was
imputed to men, that to them the justice of Christ, which is the death of
Christ might be imputed. You must also take notice, that Christ is Jesus, who
is the Savior, to whom the destroyer is opposed, and that is Antichrist, the
destroyer of men; Jesus came to save men, not to destroy them. But as Christ
was ordained the end to the salvation of man, their were mediums appointed to
bring them to that end, for the accomplishment of the forementioned salvation.
The imputation then of the sin of Adam, which brought us to that end, was the
cause of our salvation, not our destruction; Therefore that dispensation of the
divine Law, was first of meekness and bounty, not of wrath and cruelty, by
which men, not knowing, and being not yet born, had the guilt of Adam imputed
to them; For the sin of Adam was imputed to them without their knowledge, that
the justice of Christ might be likewise imputed to them without their
knowledge, which is the salvation of the Lord: Sin begat Justification by the
same miracle as darkness is said to have produced light, and death raised up
life.

They are much deceived, who think that eternal death ensued that condemnation
of death, which was decreed upon the sin of Adam, For I think it is
sufficiently cleared out of the Apostle Paul to the Romans, whom to this
purpose I cited in the former chapter, that the condemnation was not eternal,
but bounded with some limits, That it was born with Adam, and ended with Moses.
Death reigned from Adam to Moses, says the Apostle; For that death followed the
fate of sin, and of the father of it, who begat it. The sin of Adam began to
reign from the transgression of the Law, which I therefore call a legal sin:
Legal sin lived as long as the Law lived, and when the Law was extinct, that
was likewise extinguished. That legal death reigned as long as the Law reigned,
and behoved to die also when the Law died. Eternity also is indefinite, Legal
death had its certain limits, Adam and Moses, beyond which it could not remain.
Therefore that death could not confer an eternity upon men, which it self had
not,

What then shall we sin, because we are not under the Law, and because there is
now no condemnation remaining by the Law, which may hinder our design of
sinning? Far be it, says the Apostle. And that this objection may be quite
satisfied. I think I shall do very well to discover the whole mystery in
order, and what I have spoken apart, to set down together, and represent it
altogether to the view.

Reason, and holy Writ witnesses, that all things are corruptible and mortal,
which are composed of mortal and corruptible matter; And that men being made of
matter mortal and corruptible, by virtue of their mortal and corruptible
creation, could not ascend up to an incorruptible and immortal God, to become
themselves immortal and incorruptible. God is incorruptible, but men from their
flesh, which is their matter, reap corruption. Galat. 6. God is immortal, The
flesh savours of death, Romans 8. God is good it self: Goodness dwells not in the
flesh of man; but evil is continually with it. Romans 7. Men that are in the
flesh cannot please God; For the flesh is enmity to God, Is not subject to the
Law of God, nor can be. And a thousand such things we read in the Scripture: By
which it appears, the vitiousnesse of the flesh, matter, and creation of man
ought to be redrest, and that men ought to be transformed to new creatures;
that of evil they might become good; of corruptible, incorruptible; of mortal,
immortal, and possess the Kingdom of God; Which flesh and blood, which is
corruption, cannot possess. Cor. 1. Chapter 15.

Men that were to be transformed and new created, behooved to die, as we have
shown you before. And God decreed that they should all die in his Christ, who
in forming a humane body, and dying for them by proxy, might alter the forms
of men, and change them into new creatures: Which could not be done, but by
mystery, by the virtue of which they might be thought dead in Christ, whose
blood had sprinkled them; and as the Dyers of red colors, such garments as
they intend of a crimson, or scarlet dye, they first work them, rub them, and
stain them with woad, that they may prepare a convenient reception for red
color, that fastens to the woad, which is the ground of it: So it behooved men
by the imputation of Adami sin, first of all, as it were with woad, or the
first ground, be wrought and drenched, that they might more fully suck up the
blood of Christ, and after the second coloring, be of a more perfect dye.
Therefore the imputation of Adams sin was a preparative for the susception of
justice, which flowed from the blood of Christ, by which preparation all men
thirsting, might more earnestly seize upon his justification, and receive it
inwardly.

And as scarlet dye added to the wool drenched in, takes away the stain of the
woad, and extinguishes the woad it self: so likewise the blood of Christ cast
upon the ground of Adams imputation, took away the imputation of sin, and
utterly extinguished the sin it self, so that by the death of Christ there is
no imputation of that sin. Sin was before the Law, but it was not imputed when
there was no Law, To. 5 For the strength of sin is the Law, Cor. 1. Chap. 15.
The Law adds strength and force to sin, and so has doubled sin, and of sin
simply so called, made a sin imputable by Law; Christ took away that imputation
by Law, and the Law it self.

The Revelation tells us of a Beast with many heads, whose one head was wounded
as it were to death, the rest of his heads remaining, but his wounds unto death
was cured. Sin was the two-headed beast, whose one head was before the Law, the
other after the Law. Christ dying, cut off that head of sin which was after the
Law, and that wound unto death was not cured; for that head was quite cut off,
and plucked from its neck. After the death of Christ there is another head,
which was before the Law. That sin is extinguished in the death of Christ,
which was imputed to Adam, and in him to all men, by violation of the Law,
which sin I call legal. Since the death of Christ that sin remains, which was
not imputed whilst the Law was not, which naturally before the Law was inherent
to all, which I now call natural.

Christ then restored men to that condition wherein Adam had found them, into
the condion of sin not imputed by the Law, and men became after the destruction
of that Law, the very same thing before the Law was given to Adam; for another
man's sin is not imputed to any, since the death of Christ, but every one bears
his own sin. It is not now said, as under the Gospel, The faithers have eaten a
sour grape, and the childrens teeth are set on edge, Jer. 31. Every one dies
not for the sin of Adam, but every one for his own sin. Every one gives an
account of himself to God, Romans 14. Of himself, not of Adam, of his sour sin in
his own behalf, not of the strong sin of Adam, which diligently observe, Every
one carries his own burden, Galat. 6. And every one obtains what he does in
his own body. Cor. 2. chap. 5. God, under the Gospel, judges the secrets of
men, Romans 2. The secrets of men, that is, their proper faults, their beloved
vices, every ones own sin, and no man's else imputed to them Since the death of
Christ, God imputes not sins done against the Law, but ascribes to all men
their natural sins, which are not in the Law, but in the flesh, and which reap
corruption according to the nature of corrupt flesh, which savor of death, in
whom goodness dwells not, but on the contrary evil cleaves to them, and who
not in regard of the Law, but in regard of their corrupt and mortal nature, can
not possess the immortal and incorruptible kingdom of God. The old Adam is
crucified with Christ, and our old legal man; but our old natural man lives in
us, which is really ours, and is not dead in the death of Christ, but shall by
the virtue of his resurrection, sometimes, be extinguished, when God shall
cloth us with full sanctification, which shall be our full and perfect
restoring and resurrection. At which time our last enemy, Death, shall be
destroyed. I sa^, natural death, the reward of natural sin, which so long as
natural sin is in force, is always in men, which also, when the natural sin is
extinguished, tinguished, must also be extinguished.

But in the mean time, let it be our business continually to be in exercise of
godliness, and endeavoring of our sanctification, that the old sin which
adheres to our flesh may be extinguished, and the justification of Christ may
be revealed in us, from faith to faith, as it is written in the first of the
Romans, that is, from sanctification to sanctification. For sanctification is
our true and solid faith in the concrete, here meant by the Apostle, not that
idle and empty faith which some do urge in the abstract. Let us not therefore
sin, because we are no more confined by the Law of Adam, or by any punishment
of death decreed since the Law of Adam, after Christ's death, but because
really, and according to the nature of the business, we barricado our way to
eternal life, and to the sight and glory of God, if we indulge matter and our
flesh, and extinguish not sin bred in us. No thought of cruelty then as to the
Law of God, nothing dissonant or inconvenient shall arise in our thoughts by
the imputation of that legal sin of Adam, which ensued upon that transgression,
if all this business, according to my supposition, be taken as a mystical
institution, that it might prepare a fit ground for the reception of the
justice of Christ, which is the sanctification and salvation of men, and their
chief happiness, for according to this mystery, any thing which might have
seemed in God cruel against mankind, seems rather to have been designed for the
salvation of man.

CHAP. VII.
Why Adam, who sinned in the nature of a head, was not likewise punished in the
nature of the head. The sin of Adam was disobedience. Natural and Legal sin was
the twofold barricado against men, to shut them out of Paradise. Christ dying
broke the bar of the Law. Christ rising again, and sanctifying us, shall also
break the natural sin.
EXaminers use to be more severe in the punishing of the actor, than in the
punishing of the accomplices and partakers, which all Laws teach us, both
natural, civil, and Law of Nations, Nor needs this any proof, for it is already
so often proved, that it would be clouded to cite all proofs; Only that Law
held not in Adam, who, although he sinned as the head, yet he was not punished
as the head for his sin. For, if all sin and wickedness, all fevers and
plagues, and eternal death it self, as it is believed, enterd into the world;
and passed upon all men, Why was not Adam readiest to sin amongst all men,
being the head and cause of all sins, by reason of his transgression? Why was
not he seized himself with troops and companies of all manner of plagues and
fevers? And why was not that author of eternal death himself, given to eternal
death? Yea, why did Adam, if we will except his single transgression, become
famous for no other sin? Yea, why did he enjoy his health so well? Why enjoyd
he a long life nine hundred and thirty years, Why has none of the Divines sent
him to Hell, that amongst the torments of the wicked and the damned, he might
be punished with eternal death. But if on the contrary no man was ever partaker
or conscious with Adam of Adams sin; yea if all men were purer from that sin,
then Children are free from sin, as being not born when Adam dam sinned, What
was the reason thar men should become more wicked by that sin than Adam
himself? For it is certain that a great many men have been thought more famous
for the sin of Adam, then Adam himself, were sore handled* their life short,
and sickly, and at last thrown down to hell, there to die an eternal death.

This darkness, from my supposition I will make as clear as day, if we consider
the sin of Adam, either against the Law, which was a legal sin, or by default
of his Nature subject to corruption; which is a natural sin. If we consider
Adam sining by a legal sin or against the Law, which is the same thing; we
shall conceive him, not only as to himself; but also in regard of all men, and
to all mankind, whom he did represent; by force and virtue of which
representation, he deserved the imputation of that sin to himself and all
Mankind. For as an Ambassador who yields up a people to a conquering Prince in
the name of his Country, does not only bind in his rendition himself, but all
the people of the City, whom the Ambassador represents: So Adam, in regard
that he did represent all mankind, did not only bind himself, but all mankind
to the decree which went out against his sin, and made them and himself
partakers of the same sin: And as in the business of rendition which the
Ambassador does in the behalf of his Country, all are equally obliged to the
Laws of it, as well the Ambassador, as all men of the Country; Just so in the
business of Adams sin; all mankind did equally fall into the imputation. And
as this rendition according to the School men, is neither less nor more in one
than another; nor of all those that are yielded, none is more engaged to it
than another: Just so the imputation of the sin of Adam admits not of a more,
or a less; nor can the sin of Adam be thought to be imputed more or less to
any man that ever was, or is, or shall be: And Lucans expression might be very
fit in this case: It stains and equals all; Yea Adam and all men that ever were
made, or shall be, have suffered alike for that sin, for all have equally
endured the condemnation of death decreed against that sin; and all those men
were thought to be dead alike, according to that legal, spiritual, and mystical
death, which ensued upon that legal, spiritual, and mystical sin.

If we consider Adam sinning in the default of his Nature given to corruption,
which is natural sin; then we shall conceive him in regard of himself, not in
regard of all men: And in that regard the more that Adam sinned to himself in
that natural sin he gained himself more natural evil and punishment, and so had
fallen into more grievous diseases. And indeed, because natural sin is
receptive of more or less, according to man's nature, more or less corrupt, as
likewise all natural punishments admit of more or less, and all natural evils
which ensue upon that natural sin: And as Adam beyond all other men was of a
less corrupt nature by the prerogative of his creation, which he had from God
himself; so sinned he less than other men in natural sin; And was less
punished for his natural sin; and suffered fewer evils than other men suffered;
yea fewer than they for the self same sin now suffer.

Let us examine this business on the right balance of reason, that it may
appear beyond all controversy, that the sins of all men, and all those evils
and plagues which punish men, and their eternal death, which hinders them from
eternal life, to have flowed from the fault of their own nature, inherent to
them, and not from the sin of Adam. Whence I pray that thirst of blood, by
which one man is a wild beast to another, one man kills another; is it not from
black choler, with which man's liver swells? whence all those incestuous
marriages contrary to Law; whence unlawful venerie, and those wild lusts by
which men run upon beasts rashly, not from perverse and corrupt lust, which is
the itch of perverse and corrupt nature, whence rapine and theft, whence war
and strife amongst you says St. James in his 4 Chapter of his Epistle; are they
not from your lusts? And hence we chiefly gather, that such vices are
altogether tied and addicted to the substance of men; since the same substance
is to men and beast, and men and beast have the same vices. Hence it is they
call murderers cruel persons, Tigers, Bears, Lions; Lustful persons, Goats;
Backbiters, Dogs, Thieves, Kites, and Eagles tallons; Bellygods, hogs, etc.
Because we believe that the sin of Adam was imputed to beasts, and engendered
such vices also in them.

Whence is it likewise that men have their health so? that they are girt with
the spleen as with a girdle? whence have they the Kings evil? whence bleer'd
eyes? their guts ache? the roots of their hearts are perished? whence have they
these continual, uncertain, or Periodical Fevers? whence so many sorts of the
Gout? and either the stone or gravel in the Kidneys, which occasions a
strangurie, and other several sorts of diseases by which men's bodies are
tormented? are they not from the ill dispositions of men's bodies? which are
higher or less grievous in humane bodies, as the badnesse of their affections
is either lightened or remitted: But certainly varieties of sins or health,
which make men either ill or diseased, do plainly show that all this
vitiousness springs from our nature, and from the substance of men, which as it
is diversely affected to diverse, by either less or more it is corrupted and
troubled: Neither could the legal sin of Adam ever bring any such thing to
pass: For it is but one, and not vicious; and passed not upon men, either more
intense, or more remiss, but made all men alike guilty; and had made all men
alike evil, and alike bad, and had put all men in the same kind and condition
for sin and death; if the sins and diseases of men had taken their originals
from that one and one kind of sin.

It is objected to this, that Adam when he transgressed the Law, did sin
naturally, for he naturally desired the forbidden fruit, and naturally did eat
of it; Therefore the sin of Adam was natural not legal only. And therefore not
only by mystical and spiritual imputation, but by Nature also, and traduction
from Adam, it passed upon all men. I answer, that Adam did not therefore sin,
because he naturally desired the fruit, and naturally did eat it; but because
he desired it against Gods command, and eat it contrary to his Law. The Apostle
calls the sin of Adam disobedience moral, not natural; or as there was a
formality, not a materiality in that sin: I say a formality, morality, and
mystery, which alone was imputed to Adam, and to all men, and for which he
gained death to himself, and to all men: The nature and materiality of that sin
was properly no sin; For of it self, and naturally, it was no sin to covet and
eat that fruit which was fair to the eye, and good to eat, as Moses witnesses
of it: The force of that sin consisted only in the transgression and
disobedience of Adam, which was the formality and morality of that sin.

Besides, that sin was two manner of ways imputed to Adam; Either in that by
his corrupt mind and will he transgressed the Law of God, or in so much as
corporally, or by eating he broke it; In so far as Adam by his corrupted mind
and will broke the Law, which was the formality, and the spirituality of his
sin, he deserved that condemnation ordained by the Law of God, and so dyed the
death a moral and a spiritual death, which Christ really, and in his body
suffered for Adam. In so far as Adam in his body transgressed, he was in his
body thrust out of Paradise; lest perhaps, says Genesis, he should put out his
hand and take the tred of life, and live for ever.

Both these happened to Adam by this transgression, death, and thrusting out of
Paradise: but both significatively, parabolically, and by similitude. All men
dyed by the sin of Adam, by the same spiritual and mystical death by which Adam
dyed. All men were thrown out of Paradise not actually and corporally as Adam
was, but significatively, and mystically. The nature of Man corrupt and subject
to death, debarred men of the Paradise of God which is eternal life. The Law
given to Adam did double barricado the way to this Paradise, and added strength
to that sin, as says the second Epistle to the Corinthians, which that sin
brought to pass, making it exceeding sinful, as the Epistle to the Romans
speaks. And man had two stops to eternal life, the default of his nature, and
the rigor of Gods Law; which was drawn, and offered the sharp edge to all that
should offer to enter into Paradise. The nature of men given to corruption was
the first and material stop, their own impediment which hindered man's entrance
into immortality. The Law violated by Adam was the second and the spiritual
hindrance, not an innate, but an impediment by another, which shut up Paradise,
and which not naturally, nor by traduction from Adam; but which by imputation,
spirit, and mere fiction of divine mysteries was objected to all men, that upon
the same account they might lose eternal life: Christ dying for us, took away
the second spiritual hindrance, which by Adams sin was against us. The first
natural and material stop yet remains, and shall be removed by Christ also,
when he shall arise again, and sanctify us. All that are dead, and are mortal,
are thrown out of Paradise, and shut out of eternal life by the sin of Adam,
mystically and parabolically, that by the resurrection of the same Christ, they
might enter into the same Paradise, and enjoy eternal life, not mystically nor
Parabolically; but truly and really; all, I mean, that should be chosen to it.

CHAP. VIII.
All men have sinned according to the similitude of Adams sin. Infants have
sinned according to the same similitude.
THe Apostle writes, that Adam was a type of Christ, Christ was then a
prototype of Adam, but by way of similitude of Adam with Christ his prototype.
And in regard as Christ who was to restore what Adam had lost, was not the last
of all men, to comprehend men that were only past in his grace and
justification, no more needed Adam to be the first of all men, to involve all
men that were after him only in the imputation of his sin. And as the death of
Christ the prototype, was imputed to all men, both who lived in Christ's time,
and who were from all time before him, and those that have been since Christ,
and shall be born to the end of all time, by the same type and similitude of
the Prototype, the sin of Adam was imputed to all men, those who lived in the
days of Adam, and who were born before Adam, and shall be born to eternity,
and the one sin of Adam caused all men, both since and before, to be condemned.

And that was it which the Apostle spoke very palpably in the same chapter, 15.
Romans where he says, That death reigned from Adam unto Moses, upon those also
that had not sinned according to the similitude of the transgression of Adam.
Upon those who had not sinned; which words, are no doubt to be understood of
those men that were born before Adam. Men that were born before Adam did sin.
The men that were born after him sinned. Men that were sinners according to the
similitude of the transgression of Adam, born before Adam. Men that were born
after Adam, sinned acording to his similitude.

Which to open up in order, we must observe that never no man sinned actually,
as Adam sinned, but that it was actually imputed to all; for no man, as I said
before, did actually eat the fruit of the tree of good and evil; which
according to the common opinion, no mortal men ever saw, nor could see; for the
tree was removed from the sight of all men, so soon as Adam was thrust out of
Paradise. But if no man could actually sin, as Adam did, and yet all sinned as
Adam did, it remains, that all sinned, according to the similitude of that sin,
by the imputation of it. Certainly all Orthodox Divines agree upon what I said
before, That to impute to any one another sin, is to esteem him as the
committer of it. In which it is requisite, that one of the persons have not
committed it: otherwise, not another man's sin, but his own shall be imputed to
him. And it is certain, that the adventitious sin of Adam, was imputed to all
men: We must therefore think, that all men were esteemed in the same condition,
as if they had performed that sin not actually; for then no man's sin should be
imputed to any one, but his own. It remains then, that all men have committed
the sin of Adam, according to similitude, if not actually. And indeed, because
there is nothing in the world, which is not either the thing actually, or the
similitude of it, which is the image of reality: Nor could there be any lawful
imputation from the sin of another, but by that supposition; by which he who is
put in place of the sinner, is thought to be transformed into his image and
similitude, and to have sinned that by similitude, which the other sinned
actually: so that for the similitude such punishments may be laid upon the
personater of the guilty person, as were ordained for himself.

This the Apostle maintains to have happened to all men, and to have sinned as
Adam sinned, and to have suffered the same death which Adam suffered for his
sin, By one man, says he, sin entered into the world, and by sin, death: I say,
he would have all men turned into the image and similitude of the transgression
of Adam, that they might all be thought to have sinned, according to the
similitude of the transgression of Adam, and the like death reigned over them,
which reigned over him, for the similitude of his transgression. And the
Apostle, that none might be freed from the death of this punishment, adds, That
death reigned from Adam upon those also who had not sinned, according to the
similitude of the transgression of Adam: For it was known before, that the sin
of Adam had passed upon all men which had been born since the framing of Adam,
and should be born afterward, and that death reigned from him upon his
posterity. But that he might comprehend all men in the sin of Adam, whose roots
reached as far from Adam to the foregoing ages, as their branches reached from
Adam to the future ages, and the times after Adam: It was the meaning of the
Apostle, that the sin of Adam was indifferently imputed to all men, before and
since, and that death reigned from him upon those that were past, and those
that were to come. A wonderful, but no singular mystery. For the faith of
Abraham was imputed by the same mystery to all the faithful, both born before
Abraham from all eternity, and who were born after Abraham, and shall be born
to all eternity; in which sense Abraham is called the father of the Faithful,
of those that are past, and are also to come. To these add what I have said of
the imputation of the death of Christ, That the death of Christ was not only
imputed to all men born after Christ, but past back upon all those likewise
born before Christ.

And as it was fit it should be, so likewise the manner of the mystical
imputation persuades us, that it was so, spiritually I mean, and by way of
conception, according to which, mystical imputation takes hold of men: For as
Lightning breaking out of a cloud enlightens with one flash things above it,
and things below it: So the imputation that broke out of the sin of Adam,
darted one and the same lightning upon all men, those that were born after
Adam, and those that were born before him. And the same manner of mystery,
which may teach us, that the death of Adam passed upon all men that were not
born many ages after Adam, will teach us, that death could reign backward upon
those that were born before him never so long. For the manner of imputation is
alike for the time past, and for the time to come. Nor is there any new miracle
to be sought for, that sin should be imputed to men created before Adam, if it
be believed to be imputed to men created after Adam.

Let us, as far as we conceive, view all men from the beginning to the end. And
at last you will confess, that no other could sin, but according to the
similitude of the transgression of Adam; but only those that were begotten and
born before Adam. For it is certain, that all men after Adam, and their sons,
and who shall also be by them begotten, did sin according to the similitude of
the transgression of Adam, What kind of men must those be, I beseech ye, who
did not sin according to the similitude of the transgression of Adam? Certainly
it must be those who were born before Adam; because the Apostle says
manifestly, they sinned before the Law, Romans 5. And to whom, before the Law and
Adam, their sin was not imputed, because sin is not imputed when the Law is
not. And therefore they neither sinned nor could sin according to the
similitude of the transgression of Adam. To make the difference betwixt them
and all the posterity of Adam, who sinned after the Law, because after Adam, to
whom the sin of Adam was imputed. because sin began to be imputed from the Law,
and from Adam; and who could sin only according to this real similitude of the
transgression of Adam, of which we here speak, and which, no doubt, the Apostle
meant.

Let famous men pardon me that have expounded St. Paul upon this place, if I
tell them, that those things which they speak concerning children here, are
inconsistent, whom they would have here to be the persons meant, who sinned not
according to the similitude of the transgression of Adam, because they sinned
not actually as Adam did; Yea, if they had sinned actually, they had not sinned
according to similitude, because act is the reality of a thing, no similitude:
And in that very regard, because infants sinned not actually, they must needs
sin according to similitude. But the mixture of those natural sins of Adam,
deceived those most famous men, which were inherent to him; together with that
legal sin which passed upon all men. For they imagined that children sinned
not according to the similitude of the transgression of Adam, because they
sinned not actually as Adam sinned. As for example. Because they killed not
actually, as Adam killed, or might have killed; because they committed not
adultery actually, as Adam did, or might have done; because they stole not
actually, as Adam stole, or might have stolen: and so of the rest of Adams
natural sins. But here there was no intention concerning the similitude of all
his natural sins, but only of the similitude of his disobedience. Into which
disobedience no man nor no child could ever fall actually. The Apostle said
not, Who had not sinned according to the similitude of Adams sins. Nay that
only, Who had not sinned according to the similitude of Adams transgaession.
For here he intended nothing concerning all the sins of Adam, and those natural
sins of Adam which only concerned himself, but of that one transgression that
passed upon all men: All, I say, both of age and under age, as all men are
indifferently comprehended in the species; and in regard that old and young,
and men of all ages sinned in spirit and mystery, not naturally and
materially, according to the similitude of the transgression of Adam. For
although there be a natural similitude of all men's sins with the sins of Adam;
yet the Apostle meant not that material and natural similitude here, wherein we
may also communicate with the beasts, according to whose similitude, all men
sin naturally and materially, by reason of their commmon nature and matter. St.
Paul meaned only that mystical and spiritual similitude, which only man is
capable of, Men, I say, who have also a spiritual and mystical communion with
Christ; to which communion to say that beasts could come, were wickedness.

CHAP. IX.
How the imputation of the sin of Adam was imputed backward, and upon the
predecessors of Adam, by a mystery provided for their salvation. How the
predecessors of Adam could be saved.
BUt how could, say they, the sin of Adam be imputed backward. And how could
death reign back upon them that were already dead. Nor ought it seem a wonder
to any, that the sin of Adam was imputed backward, considering what I have
often inculcated, That the faith of Abraham, according to the consent of all
Divines, was imputed to the Predecessors of Abraham, though dead, and that
Christ was imputed to all, both before himself, and Abraham, though dead and
buried.

But yet it will seem prodigious, that death reigned back from the imputation
of the sin of Adam, considering that no death could happen to men, but that
which descended upon men by the seed of Adam, which as they say, became mortal,
and begat death, since Adam sinned; For grant this, and it is impossible to
imagine that death passed upon all men by the seed and sin of Adam, because it
is impossible to be done, and impossible to be conceived, that Adam did beget
his predecessors. But if we consider that death, which passed from Adam upon
all men, to be mystical and spiritual, which not materially nor naturally, but
mystically and spiritually returned upon all men, that will be very clear. For,
as we conceive that death invaded Adam, and all after him, that very hour when
he sinned, Why should we not think that death seized also all before and all
after? And if there be any thing of impossibility to be spoken of the men that
were before, Why should there not be the same impossibility in those that come
after? Yea, in this mystery their should be a greater regard had to those who
were before, than those that came after. Because those which are dead, and are
not, are in some condition thought to be, because they were certainly; but
those who are to come, never were, and it may be never will have any being.

The Apostle tells us plain, That the kingdom of death did vanish after the
destruction of the Mosaical Law, or since Christ, which is the same. Let no man
doubt, notwithstanding, that death reigned upon all men who were begotten since
Christ to our times, and upon those that shall be begotten after us to the end
of all time. The question is, Since which time did death reign over those that
were born since Christ, and shall be born after him? Certainly not since the
death of Christ, as is said; For Christ dying, destroyed the kingdom of Death.
Since that time then when the kingdom of death was in force. From Adam, and
since that time, wherein Adam, and all men in Adam deserved to die for their
transgression; who by Cassiodorus are elegantly said, To have deserved death,
before they tasted of life. Death then reigned from Adam upon men that were to
be, and were not yet born; which if it could, any otherwise than mystically,
and merely intellectually, let every body imagine. And what hinders us to have
the same thoughts of men that are past, as we have of those men that were to
come? And we grant, that death reigned mystically upon one, and that it did
reign likewise mystically upon the other.

Likewise by way of mystery, Parabolically, and in all supposition of Law,
there will be more reason why death should reign over those that are past, than
those that are not born; if we call to mind the ways of Judges in Criminals,
with whom it is no new thing to inflict a punishment upon the dead, who command
the dead bodies of guilty persons to be present at judgment, that according to
the punishment of the Law they may suffer a civil death, which by a natural one
they have prevented; But what Law is so cruel as to ordain any such thing
concerning men that never were? What Law condemns men not born, to die? Let us
therefore think that a mystical and spiritual death reigned upon all the
predecessors of Adam: Just as the Civil Law presupposes those that have dyed a
natutural death, may be also condemned to a civil death.

But any one may answer, Those guilty persons dyed a deserved civil death, by
the sentence of the Judges, for breach of the civil Law. But those men who dyed
before Adam, and never did violate any Law, because never none was given to
them, how could they deserve any such thing at Gods hands? and what such
barbarous Law allowed the Custom to involve dead men in guilt, kill them over
again, and add a legal death to their natural death, by a Law which they never
transgressed? Let us never have any such thought, that there is any such
injustice in God, or any cruelty in his Law, God forbid that any such thing
should come into our minds: that God should ever decree any thing that should
tend to their destruction, which we confuted before: Whatsoever God decreed
concerning men, it is decreed for their salvation, and if there was any thing
then which seemed to them disadvantagious, God would in his own time turn it to
the best. Therefore God provided for those men which were before Adam, that
they should die by the transgression of Adam, that they might again rise from
the dead, according to the spirit of sanctification which is in Christ; They
were saved because they perished; And it had been thought a disadvantage to the
mystery, unless those who were in possibility to rise again had perished: And
both could be well enough performed upon them, to die in Adam, and rise in
Christ, by the mutual and reciprocal imputations of Adam and Christ, mystically
and spiritually understood, if we conceive the condemnation of death turned
back upon them, in the same manner as we understand the absolution from
condemnation, by the satisfaction and death of Christ, mystically and
spiritually returned also.

Yea, they do object, How can ever the predecessors of Adam be sanctified, and
a rise up to eternal life in Christ, if life eternal, which is the salvation of
man, is granted to none but such as know* God the Father, and believed in
Christ his Son, whom the Father sent; But how could they either know God the
Father, or believe in Christ his Son, who never heard any thing neither of
Father nor Son; for knowledge and faith are by hearing? That I may answer this
according to time and place, you must know, that all Adams Ancestors might
presume of their salvation; upon the same account as all the Patriarchs of the
the Jews could conceive hope in their salvation; For neither did those Fathers
of the Jews know God the Father, as Father, nor believed in Christ the Son,
according to the Apostle, in the last Chapter of the Romans. The mystery of God
the Father and God the Son was hidden from eternity to our times; Therefore it
was hid and unknown to all those Patriarchs that were betwixt Adam and Christ:
But if any mention the words of our Savior, saying, that Abraham and Isay
foresaw the day of Christ, and were glad. I answer, they saw the day of Christ's
coming, but clothed in shadows and figures, as one Who sees in clouds, or
thinks he sees the Moon. They smiled upon Christ, but knew him not; as Infants
smile upon their Mothers, and whom by laughter they are said to know, rather
poetically than truly; for instinct it is rather in Children, than knowledge.

It is also written in the first Chapter to the Ephesians, That God did choose
the Gentiles to the Adoption of his own Sons, before the creation of the World:
God forbid that we should think that election was so unprofitable, and to so
little purpose, which we suppose to be from eternity, to the framing of Adam,
and so to Jesus Christ, that none of all the Gentiles was elected and called to
the participation of salvation which was in Christ, all that time which was
betwixt the infancy of the world, till the death of Christ. Melchisedech was a
Gentile, for he was not a Jew, which he has clearly set down in his Epistle to
the Hebrews. chap. 7, verse 6. And he was the Priest of the most high God.
Therefore elected; yea, a vessel of most choice election, who received the
tenths from Abraham, and to whose eternal Priesthood the eternal Priesthood of
Christ is compared. Job is thought to be a Gentile, a man single and upright,
fearing God, and departing from evil, a servant of God; and therefore chosen,
and to whom, as God says himself, there was not the like upon earth. Cornelius
the Centurian of the Italian legion, was a Gentile, a man pious, and fearing
God with his whole household, and given to good works. I pass by a great many
Proselites, as also those Gentiles whom Mothanus Vuyerius the Chiron of our
Achilles makes a long Catalogue of, in his elegant and and learned Treatise of
the virtue of Heathens; I say I pass by all those good, approved, and wisemen,
whom long before the death of Christ its probable, yea we may very well
believe, were chosen by God, and called unto the Lord; But in the same account
were after Adam to Christ, in the same account I say were those Gentiles in the
first age, from the creation of the world, till the framing of Adam.

For this cause I think that all those Gentiles begotten before and after Adam,
good and meek men, to have been Christ's chief, because I believe they were the
bondmen and servants of Christ. For if any had the spirit of Christ, he was
Christ's, as says the Apostle Romans 8. I think they had the Spirit of Christ,
because I think they were touched and inspired by the spirit of Christ, which
by secret operations and thoughts, wrought in them salvation to life eternal.
The spirit of Christ was in the Gentiles, as the soul is in Infants, by which
they are sensible, and which the Infants perceive; but are not sensible of it.
The spirit of Christ was in them as reason is in Children, which is in them a
power to become reasonable; but as yet not brought in to act. Therefore is that
spirit called, the power of God unto salvation. Romans chap. 1. The spirit of
Christ was in them; as in a grain of Corn, there is a vegetative power; For
that grain of Corn grows and increases in the earth, without the knowledge of
the Husbandman who sowed it. Which is observed in the Gospel according to St.
Mark: For this cause the spirit of Christ, which is the kingdom of God, is
compared to the grain of Corn: For that spirit which is in the elect, grows and
increases, whilst the elect, in whom it is, know not of it. That spirit of
Christ was given to the Gentiles, not knowing, being supine and asleep, to whom
that of the 127 Psalm agreeed very well: When he shall give his beloved sleep;
Behold the inheritance of the Lord? The inheritance of the Lord, which is the
Kingdom of God, the spirit of Christ, and life eternal. The spirit of Christ
was in them, but it was hidden and unknown, nor revealed it self unto them.
They felt and worshipped that spirit; they felt that which they knew not, they
worshipped that which they were ignorant of; They dedicated Altars, which they
consecrated to the unknown God, which unknown God St. Paul himself by name, did
expound to the Athenians. The spirit of Christ was hidden in them, therefore
were they elect unknown; as St. Paul calls others, Jews in secret, Romans 3.
They were shut up to that faith which was to be revealed. Which St. Paul also
affirms of those holy Jews, who lived under the Law from Adam till Christ; and
might be also well fitted to those just Gentiles, who lived under Nature,
before the Law and Adam. Those Gentiles were like wandering sheep, who knew not
the shepherd that led them, but which, according to Saint Peter, in his second
Epistle, chapter 2. might be turned to the shepherd of their souls. They were
hidden in their knowledge and profession: and only so far known, as they could
be discerned by their works, which was the true and real proof of their
Election. As the Lord says, By their works you shall know them.

More of this I will speak, if it shall please God; where I shall speak of
purpose concerning the calling of the Gentiles, which was in force after the
rejection of the Jews. I will begin the second Part of this Systeme from the
rejection of the Jews: Because I have spoken enough of the Election of the
Jews, and of the Gentiles elected in the Jews, and will speak no farther of it.

The End of the first Part.

