THE EARL of MELFORT's LETTER To the Presbyterian-Ministers IN SCOTLAND, Writ
in his Majesty's Name upon their Address; Together with some Remarks upon it.
The Earl of Melfort's Letter.
Gentlemen;
I Am commanded by his Majesty, to signify unto you his gracious acceptance of
your Address, that he is well satisfied with your Loyalty expressed therein;
for the which he resolves to perpetuate the favor, not only during his own
Reign, but also to lay down Ways for its Continuance, and that by appointing in
the next ensuing Parliament the taking off all Penal Statutes contrary to the
Liberty or Toleration granted by him.

His Majesty knows, that Enemies to Him, to You, and this Toleration, will be
using all Endeavors to infringe the same; but as ever the Happiness of his
Subjects Standing in Liberty of Conscience, and the Security of their
Properties (next the Glory of God) has been his Majesty's great end, so he
intends to continue, if he have all suitable Encouragement and Concurrence from
you in your Doctrine and Practice; and therefore as he has taken away the
Protestant Penal Statutes lying on you, and herein has walked contrary not only
to other Catholic Kings, but also in a way different from Protestant Kings who
have gone before him, whose Maxim was to undo you, by Fining, Confining, and
taking away your Estates, and to harrass you in your Persons, Liberties and
Privileges; so he expects a thankful acknowledgment from you, by making your
Doctrine tend, to cause all his Subjects to walk obediently, and by your
Practice walking so as shall be most pleasing to his Majesty, and the
concurring with him for the removing these Penal Statutes: and he further
expects that you continue your Prayers to God for his long and happy Reign, and
for all Blessings on his Person and Government; and likewise that you look well
to your Doctrine, and that your Example be influential: all these are his
Majesty's Commands.

Sic subs. MELFORT.


REMARKS.
THe Secretary hand is known to all the Writing Masters of the Town; but here is
an Essay of the Secretary's Style for the Masters of our Language: This is an
Age of Improvements, and Men that come very young into Employments, make
commonly a great progress; therefore common things are not to be expected here:
it is true, some Roughnesses in the Style seem to intimate that the Writer
could turn his Conscience more easily than he can do his Pen, and that the one
is a little stiffer and less compliant than the other. He tells the Addressers,
that His Majesty is well satisfied with their Loyalty contained in their
Address; for the which he resolves to perpetuate the favor. It appears that
the Secretary Style and the Notary Style come nearer one another than was
generally believed: For the which here, and infringe the same afterward, are
beauties borrowed from the Notary Style: the foresaid is not much courser. The
King's perpetuating the Favor is no easy thing, unless he could first
perpetuate himself. Now tho his Majesty's Fame will be certainly immortal, yet
to our great Regret his Person is mortal; so it is hard to conceive, how this
perpetuity should be settled.

The Method here proposed is a new Figure of the Secretary Style: which is the
Appointing in the next ensuing Parliament the taking off all Penal Laws. All
former Secretaries used the modest Words of proposing or recommending; but he
who in a former Essay of this Style, told us of his Majesty's Absolute Power,
to which all the Subjects are to obey without reserve, furnishes us now with
this new term of the King's appointing what shall be done in Parliament. But
what if after all, the Parliament proves so stubborn, as not to comply with
this Appointment, I am afraid then the Perpetuity will be of a shrort
continuance. He in the next place, mentions the Liberty or Toleration granted
by the King. Liberty is not so hard a Word, but that it might be understood
without this Explanation or Toleration, unless the Secretary Style either
approaches to the Notary Style in some nauseous Repetitions, or that he would
intimate by this, that all the Liberty that is left the Subjects is
comprehended in this Toleration. And indeed, after Absolute Power was once
asserted, it was never fit to name Liberty without some restriction. After this
comes a stately Period, The Enemies to him, to you, and to this Toleration. Yet
I should be sorry if it were true; for I hope there are many Enemies to this
Toleration, who are neither Enemies to the King, nor to these Addressers; and
that on the contrary they are Enemies to it, because they are the best Friends
that both the King and the People have. It is now no secret, that though both the
Prince and Princess of Orange are great Enemies to Persecution, and in
particular to all Rigor against the Presbyterians, yet they are not satisfied
with the way in which this Toleration is granted. But the reckoning of them as
Enemies either to the King or the People, is one of the Figures of this Style,
that will hardly pass: and some will not stick to say, that the Writer of this
Letter, has with this dash of his Pen, declared more Men Enemies to the King,
than ever he will be able to make Friends to him. He tells them next, that
these Enemies will be using all endeavors to infringe the same. This is also a
strong Expression. We know the use of the Noun Infraction, but Infringe is
borrowed from the Notaries; yet the plain sense of this seems to be, that those
Enemies will disturb the Meetings, of which I do not hear any of them have the
least thought, yet by a secret Figure of the Secretary Style, perhaps this
belongs to all those who either think that the King cannot do it by Law, or
that will not give their Vote to confirm it in Parliament: but I am not so well
acquainted with all the Mysteries of this Style, as to know its full depth.

There comes next a long period of 50 words, for I was at the pains to count
them all, which seemed a little too prolix for so short a letter, especially in
one that writes after the French pattern. But as ever the Happiness of his
Subjects, Standing in Liberty of Conscience, and the Security of their
Properties, next the Glory of God, has been his Majesty's great End; So he
Intends to continue, if he have all suitable Encouragement and Concurrence from
you, in your Doctrine and Practice. The putting ever at the beginning of the
Period, and at so great a Distance from that to which it belongs, is a new
beauty of Style. And the Standing of this Happiness, makes me reflect on that
which I hear a Scotch Preacher delivered in a Sermon, that he doubted this
Liberty would prove but like a Standing Drink. The King's receiving suitable
Encouragement from his Subjects, agrees ill with the height of Style that went
before, of appointing what the Parliament must do. Kings receive returns of
Duty and Obedience from their Subjects; but hitherto Encouragement was a word
used among Equals: the applying it to the King, is a new figure. A man not
versed in the Secretary Style would have expressed this matter thus. His
Majesty has ever made the Happiness of his Subjects, which consists in Liberty
of Conscience, and the Security of Property, his great end, next to the Glory
of God: and he intends to do so still, if he receives all suitable returns from
you in your Doctrine and practice. I have marked this the more particularly, to
make the difference between the Common and the Secretary Style the more
sensible. But what need is there of the Concurrence of the Addressers, with the
King, if he appoints the next Parliament to take off all the Penal Laws. Must
we likewise believe that His Majesty's Zeal for the Happiness of his Subjects,
depends on the Behavior of These Addressers: and on the Encouragement that he
receives from them, so that he will not continue it, unless they Encourage him
in it. This is but an Uncertain tenure, and not like to be perpetual. But after
all the Secretary Style is not the Royal Style, so notwithstanding this
beautiful Period, we hope our Happiness is more steady, than to turn upon the
Encouragings of a few Men: otherwise if it is a standing Happiness yet it is a
very tottering one. The Protestant Penal Statutes, is another of his
Elegancies: for since all the Penal Laws as well those against Papists, as
those against Dissenters, were made by Protestant Parliaments, one does not see
how fitly this Epithete comes in here; another would have worded this, thus,
the Penal Statutes made against Protestants. But the new Style has figures
peculiar to it self, that pass in the Common Style for Improprieties.

This Noble Lord is not contented to raise His Majesty's Glory above all other
Catholic Kings, in this grant of Liberty or Toleration, in which there is no
competition to be made; for tho the Most Christian King, who is the Eldest son
of that Church, has indeed executed her Orders in their full extent of
severity, yet His Majesty, who is but the Cadet in that Church's Catalogue of
honor, it seems does not think that he is yet so much beholding to his Mother
as to gratify her by the Destruction of his People: yet I say, as if this were
too little, the King's Glory is here carried farther, even above the Protestant
Kings, who have gone before him: whose Maxim was to undo you, by Fining,
Confining and taking away your Estates, and to harrass you in your Persons,
Liberties and Privileges. Here is an honor that is done the King's Ancestors
by one of his Secretaries, which is indeed new, and of his own Invention: the
Protestant Kings can be no other than the Kings Brother, his Father, and his
Grand father. Kings shut out Q. Elisabeth, who might have been brought in if
the more general term of Crowned heads had been made use of; but as the Writer
has ordered it, the satyr falls singly on the King's Progenitors: for the
Papers that were found in the Strong Box, will go near to put the late King out
of the list of Protestant Kings: so that this Reproach lies wholly on the
King's Father and his Grandfather. It is a little surprising, after all the
Eloquence that has been Employed to raise the Character of the late Martyr to
so high a pitch, that one of his Sons Secretaries should set it under his hand
in a letter that he pretends is written by the King's Commands, that he made it
a Maxim to undo his People. The Writer of this Letter should have avoided the
mentioning of fines, since it is not so long, since both He and his Brother
valued themselves on a point that they carried in the Council of Scotland, that
Husbands should be fined for their Wives not going to Church, tho it was not
founded on any Law. And of all Men living he ought to be the last that should
speak of the taking away Estates; who got a very fair one during the present
Reign, by an Act of Parliament, that Attainted a Gentleman in a Method as new
as his Style is; Upon this ground, that two Privy Councillors declared, they
believed him guilty. He will hardly find among all the Maxims of those
Protestant Persecuting Kings any one that will Justify this.

It seems the New Style is not very Copious in Words, since Doctrine is three
times repeated in so short a Letter: He tells them, that their Doctrine must
tend to cause all the subjects to walk obediently; now by obediently in this
Style, is to obey the Absolute Power Without reserve; for to obey according to
Law, would pass now for a Crime: this being then his meaning, it is probable
that the Encouragements which are necessary to make His Majesty continue the
happiness of his Subjects, will not be so very great, as to Merit the
perpetuating this favor. There is with this a heavy charge laid upon them as
to their practice; that it must be such as shall be most pleasing to His
Majesty; for certainly that can only be by their turning Papists: since a
Prince that is so zealous for his Religion, as His Majesty is, cannot be so
well pleased with any other thing as with this. Their concurring with the King
to remove the Penal Laws, comes over again; for tho Repetitions are
Impertinencies in the Common Style, they are Flowers in the new one.

In Conclusion, he tells them, that the King expects, that they will continue
their prayers for him; yet this does not agree too well with a Catholic Zeal;
for the prayers of Damned Heretics cannot be worth the asking; for the third
time he tells them to look well to their Doctrine: now this is a little
ambiguous; for it may either signify, that they should study the Controversies
well, so as to be able to defend their Doctrine solidly, or that they should so
mince it, that nothing may fall from them in their Sermons against Popery; this
will be indeed a looking to their Doctrine; but I do not know whether it will
be thought a looking well to it or not. He adds, that their Example be
Influential: I confess this hard new Word frighted me: I suppose the meaning of
it is, that their practice may be such as that it may have an Influence on
others: yet there are both good and bad Influences, a good Influence will be
the animating the people to a Zeal for their Religion; and a bad one will be
the slackning and sofning of that Zeal. A little more Clearness here had not
been amiss.

As for the last Words of this Letter; that all these are his Majesty's
Commands; it is very hard for me to bring my self to believe them. For
certainly he has more Piety for the Memory of the late Martyr, and more regard
both to himself, to his children, and to his people, than to have ever given
any such commands.

In order to the communicating this Piece of Elegance to the World, I wish the
Translating it into French were recommended to Mr. d'Albeville: that it may
appear whether the Secretary Style will look better in his Irish French, than
it does now in the Scotch English of him who penned it.

FINIS.

