THE DOCTRINE AND DISCIPLINE OF DIVORCE: RESTORED TO THE GOOD OF BOTH SEXES,
From the bondage of Canon Law, and other mistakes, to Christian freedom, guided
by the Rule of Charity. Wherein also many places of Scripture, have recovered
their long-lost meaning. Seasonable to be now thought on in the Reformation
intended.

MATTHEW. 13. 52. Every Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, is like the
Master of a house which brings out of his treasury things old and new.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. In Goldsmiths Alley. 1643.

THE DOCTRINE AND DISCIPLINE OF DIVORCE; RESTORED TO THE GOOD OF BOTH SEXES.
MAny men, whether it be their fate, or fond opinion, easily persuade
themselves, if GOD would but be pleased a while to withdraw his just
punishments from us, and to restrain what power either the devil, or any
earthly enemy has to work us woe, that then man's nature would find immediate
rest and releasement from all evils. But verily they who think so, if they be
such as have a mind large enough to take into their thoughts a general survey
of humane things, would soon prove themselves in that opinion far deceived.
For though it were granted us by divine indulgence to be exempt from all that
can be harmfull to us from without, yet the perverseness of our folly is so
bent, that we should never lin hammering out of our own hearts, as it were out
of a flint, the seeds and sparkles of new miseries to our selves, till all were
in a blaze again. And no marvel if out of our own hearts, for they are evil;
but even out of those things which God meant us, either for a principal good,
or a pure contentment, we are still hatching and contriving upon our selves
matter of continual sorrow and perplexity. What greater good to man then that
revealed rule, whereby God vouchsafes to show us how he would be worshipped? and
yet that not rightly understood, became the cause that once a famous man in
Israel could not but oblige his conscience to be the sacrificer, or if not, the
jayler of his innocent and only daughter. And was the cause oft-times that
Armies of valiant men have given up their throats to a heathenish enemy on the
Sabbath day: fondly thinking their defensive resistance to be as then a work
unlawful. What thing more instituted to the solace and delight of man then
marriage, and yet the mis-interpreting of some Scripture directed mainly
against the abusers of the Law for divorce given them by Moses, has changed
the blessing of matrimony not seldom into a familiar and co-inhabiting
mischief; at least into a drooping and disconsolate household captivity,
without refuge or redemption. So ungoverned and so wild a race does
superstition run us from one extreme of abused liberty into the other of
unmercifull restraint. For although God in the first ordaining of marriage,
taught us to what end he did it, in words expressly implying the apt and
cheerful conversation of man with woman, to comfort and refresh him against
the evil of solitary life, not mentioning the purpose of generation till
afterward, as being but a secondary end in dignity, though not in necessity;
yet now, if any two be but once handed in the Church, and have tasted in any
sort of the nuptial bed, let them find themselves never so mistak'n in their
dispositions through any error, concealment, or misadventure, that through
their different tempers, thoughts, and constitutions, they can neither be to
one another a remedy against lonelines, nor live in any union or contentment
all their days, yet they shall, so they be but found suitably weapon'd to the
lest possibility of sensual enjoyment, bemade, spite of antipathy to fadge
together, and combine as they may to their unspeakable wearisomnes and despair
of all sociable delight in the ordinance which God established to that very end.
What a calamity is this, and as the Wiseman, if he were alive, would sigh out
in his own phrase, what a sore evil is this under the Sun! All which we can
refer justly to no other author then the Canon Law and her adherents, not
consulting with charity, the interpreter and guide of our faith, but resting
in the mere element of the Text; doubtless by the policy of the devil to make
that gracious ordinance become unsupportable, that what with men not daring to
venture upon wedlock, and what with men wearied out of it, all inordinate
license might abound. It was for many ages that marriage lay in disgrace with
most of the ancient Doctors, as a work of the flesh, almost a defilement,
wholly denied to Priests, and the second time dissuaded to all, as he that
reads Tertullian or Ierom may see at large. Afterward it was thought so
Sacramental, that no adultery could dissolve it; yet there remains a burden on
it as heavy as the other two were disgraceful or superstitious, and of as much
iniquirie, crossing a Law not only writt'n by Moses, but charactered in us by
nature, of more antiquity and deeper ground then marriage it self; which Law
is to force nothing against the faultles proprieties of nature: yet that this
may be colourably done, our Saviors words touching divorce, are as it were
congealed into a stony rigor, inconsistent both with his doctrine and his
office, and that which he preached only to the conscience, is by canonical
tyranny snatched into the compulsive censure of a judicial Court; where Laws
are imposed even against the venerable and secret power of natures impression,
to love what ever cause be found to loath. Which is a heinous barbarism both
against the honor of marriage, the dignity of man and his soul, the goodness
of Christianity, and all the humane respects of civilitie. Notwithstanding
that some the wisest and gravest among the Christian Emperors, who had about
them, to consult with, those of the fathers then living, who for their learning
and holiness of life are still with us in great renown, have made their statutes
and edicts concerning this debate, far more easy and relenting in many
necessary cases, wherein the Canon is inflexible. And Hugo Grotius, a man of
these times, one of the best learned, seems not obscurely to adhere in his
persuasion to the equity of those imperial decrees, in his notes upon the
Evangelists, much allaying the outward roughness of the Text, which has for
the most part been too immoderately expounded; and excites the diligence of
others to enquire further into this question, as containing many points which
have not yet been explained. By which, and by mine own apprehension of what
public duty each man owes, I conceive my self exhorted among the rest to
communicate such thoughts as I have, and offer them now in this general labor
of reformation, to the candid view both of Church and Magistrate; especially
because I see it the hope of good men, that those irregular and unspirituall
Courts have spun their utmost date in this Land; and some better course must
now be constituted. He therefore that by adventuring shall be so happy as with
success to ease and set free the minds of ingenuous and apprehensive men from
this needless thraldom, he that can prove it lawful and just to claim the
performance of a fit and matchable conversation, no less essential to the
prime scope of marriage then the gift of bodily conjunction, or else to have an
equal plea of divorce as well as for that corporal deficiency; he that can
but lend us the clue that winds out this labyrinth of servitude to such a
reasonable and expedient liberty as this, deserves to be reck*n'd among the
public benefactors of civil and humane life; above the inventors of wine and
oil; for this is a far dearer, far nobler, and more desirable cherishing to
man's life, unworthily exposed to sadness and mistake, which he shall vindicate,
Not that license and levity and unconsented breach of faith should herein be
countenanc't, but that some conscionable, and tender pity might be had of
those who have unwarily in a thing they never practiced before, made themselves
the bondmen of a luckles and helples matrimony. In which Argument he whose
courage can serve him to give the first onset, must look for two several
oppositions: the one from those who having sworn themselves to long custom and
the letter of the Text, will not out of the road: the other from those whose
gross and vulgar apprehensions conceit but low of matrimonial purposes, and
in the work of male and female think they have all. Nevertheless, it shall be
here sought by due ways to be made appear, that those words of God in the
institution, promising a meet help against lonelines; and those words of
Christ, That his yoke is easy and his burden light, were not spoken in vain;
for if the knot of marriage may in no case be dissolved but for adultery, all
the burd'ns and services of the Law are not so intolerable. This only is
desired of them who are minded to judge hardly of thus maintaining, that they
would be still and hear all out, nor think it equal to answer deliberate
reason with sudden heat and noise; remembering this, that many truths now of
reverend esteem and credit, had their birth and beginning once from singular
and private thoughts; while the most of men were otherwise possessed; and had the
fate at first to be generally exploded and exclaimed on by many violent
opposers; yet I may err perhaps in soothing my self that this present truth
revived, will deserve to be not ungently received on all hands; in that it
undertakes the cure of an inveterate disease crept into the best part of humane
society: and to do this with no smarting corrosive, but with a smooth and
pleasing lesson, which received has the virtue to soften and dispell rooted
and knotty sorrows; and without enchantment or spel used has regard at once
both to serious pity, and upright honesty; that tends to the redeeming and
restoring of none but such as are the object of compassion; having in an ill
hour hampered themselves to the utter dispatch of all their most beloved
comforts and repose for this lives term. But if we shall obstinately dislike
this new overture of unexpected ease and recovery, what remains but to deplore
the frowardnes of our hopeles condition, which neither can endure the estate we
are in, nor admit of remedy either sharp or sweet. Sharp we our selves distaste;
and sweet, under whose hands we are, is scrupled and suspected as too lushious.
In such a posture Christ found the Jews, who were neither won with the
austerity of John the Baptist, and thought it too much license to follow freely
the charming pipe of him who sounded and proclaimed liberty and relief to all
distresses: yet Truth in some age or other will find her witness, and shall be
justified at last by her own children.

To remove therefore if it be possible, this great and sad oppression which
through the strictnes of a literal interpreting has invaded and disturbed the
dearest and most peaceable estate of household society, to the over-burdning, if
not the overwhelming of many Christians better worth then to be so deserted of
the Churches considerate care, this position shall be laid down; first proving,
then answering what may be objected either from Scripture or light of reason.

That indisposition, unfitnes, or contrariety of mind, arising from a cause in
nature unchangable, hindering and ever likely to hinder the main benefits of
conjugall society, which are solace and peace, is a greater reason of divorce
then natural frigidity, especially if there be no children, and that there be
mutual consent.

For all sense and reason and equity reclaimes that any Law or Covenant how
solemn or strait soever, either between God and man, or man and man, though of
Gods joining, should bind against a prime and principal scope of its own
institution, and of both or either party cov'nanting: neither can it be of
force to engage a blameles creature to his own perpetual sorrow, mistak'n for
his expected solace, without suffering charity to step in and do a confessed
good work of parting those whom nothing holds together, but this of Gods
joining, falsely supposed against the express end of his own ordinance. And
what his chief end was of creating woman to be joynd with man, his own
instituting words declare, and are infallible to inform us what is marriage,
and what is no marriage; unless we can think them set there to no purpose: It
is not good, says he, that man should be alone; I will make him a help meet
for him. From which words so plain, less cannot be concluded, nor is by any
learned Interpreter, then that in Gods intention a meet and happy conversation
is the chiefest and the noblest end of marriage; for we find here no expression
so necessarily implying carnal knowledge, as this prevention of loneliness to
the mind and spirit of man. And indeed it is a greater blessing from God, more
worthy so excellent a creatrue as man is, and a higher end to honor and
sanctify the league of marriage, whenas the solace and satisfaction of the
mind is regarded and provided for before the sensitive pleasing of the body.
And with all generous persons married thus it is, that where the mind and
person pleases aptly, there some unaccomplishment of the bodies delight may be
better born with, then when the mind hangs off in an unclosing disproportion,
though the body be as it ought; for there all corporal delight will soon
become unsavory and contemptible. And the solitarines of man, which God had
namely and principally orderd to prevent by marriage, has no remedy, but lies
under a worse condition then the loneliest single life; for in single life the
absence and remotenes of a helper might inure him to expect his own comforts
out of himself, or to seek with hope; but here the continual sight of his
deluded thoughts without cure, must needs be to him, if especially his
complexion incline him to melancholy, a daily trouble and pain of loss in
some degree like that which Reprobates feel. Lest therefore so noble a creature
as man should be shut up incurably under a worse evil by an easy mistake in
that ordinance which God gave him to remedy a less evil, reaping to himself
sorrow while he went to rid away solitarines, it cannot avoid to be concluded,
that if the woman be naturally so of disposition, as will not help to remove,
but help to increase that same God-forbidd'n lonelines which will in time draw
on with it a general discomfort and dejection of mind, not beseeming either
Christian profession or moral conversation, unprofitable and dangerous to the
Commonwealth, when the household estate, out of which must flourish forth the
vigor and spirit of all public enterprises, is so ill contented and procured
at home, and cannot be supported; such a marriage can be no marriage whereto the
most honest end is wanting: and the agrieved person shall do more manly, to be
extraordinary and singular in claiming the due right whereof he is frustrated,
then to piece up his lost contentment by visiting the Stews, or stepping to his
neighbors bed, which is the common shift in this misfortune, or else by
suffering his useful life to wast away and be lost under a secret affliction
of an unconscionable size to humane strength. How vain therefore is it, and how
preposterous in the Canon Law to have made such careful provision against the
impediment of carnal performance, and to have had no care about the
unconversing inability of mind, so defective to the purest and most sacred end
of matrimony: and that the vessel of voluptuous enjoyment must be made good to
him that has taken it upon trust without any caution, when as the mind from
whence must flow the acts of peace and love, a far more precious mixture then
the quintessence of an excrement, though it be found never so deficient and
unable to perform the best duty of marriage in a cheerful and agreeable
conversation, shall be thought good anough, how ever flat and melancholious it
be, and must serve though to the eternal disturbance and languishing of him
that complains him. Yet wisdom and charity waighing Gods own institution, would
think that the pining of a sad spirit wedded to lonelines should deserve to be
freed, as well as the impatience of a sensual desire so providently relieved.
It Is read to us in the Liturgy, that we must not marry to satisfy the fleshly
appetite, like brute beasts that have no understanding: but the Canon so runs,
as if it dreamt of no other matter then such an appetite to be satisfied; for
if it happen that nature has stopped or extinguished the veins of sensuality,
that marriage is annulled. But though all the faculties of the understanding and
conversing part after trial appear to be so ill and so aversly met through
natures unalterable working, as that neither peace, nor any sociable
contentment can follow, it is as nothing, the contract shall stand as firm as
ever, betide what will. What is this but secretly to instruct us, that however
many grave reasons are pretended to the married life, yet that nothing indeed is
thought worth regard therein, but the prescribed satisfaction of an irrational
heat; which cannot be but ignominious to the state of marriage, dishonorable to
the undervalu'd soul of man, and even to Christian doctrine it self. While it
seems more moved at the disappointing of an impetuous nerve, then at the
ingenuous grievance of a mind unreasonably yoakt; and to place more of marriage
in the channel of concupiscence, then in the pure influence of peace and love,
whereof the souls lawful contentment is the only fountain.

But some are ready to object, that the disposition ought seriously to be
considered before. But let them know again, that for all the wariness can be
used, it may yet befall a discreet man to be mistak'n in his choice: the
soberest and best governed men are lest practiced in these affairs; and who
knows not that the bashful mutenes of a virgin may oft-times hide all the
unlivelines and natural sloth which is really unfit for conversation; nor is
there that freedom of access granted or presumed, as may suffice to a perfect
discerning till too late: and where any indisposition is suspected, what more
usual then the persuasion of friends, that acquaintance, as it increases, will
amend all. And lastly, it is not strange though many who have spent their youth
chastely, are in some things not so quick-sighted, while they have too eagerly
to light the nuptial torch; nor is it therefore that for a modest error a man
should forfeit so great a happiness, and no charitable means to release him.
Since they who have lived most loosely by reason of their bold accustoming,
prove most succesfull in their matches, because their wild affections unsetling
at will, have been as so many divorces to teach them experience. When as the
sober man honoring the appearance of modesty, and hoping well of every
sociall virtue under that veil, may easily chance to meet, if not with a body
impenetrable, yet often with a mind to all other due conversation
inaccessible, and to all the more estimable and superior purposes of matrimony
useless and almost liveles: and what a solace, what a fit help such a consort
would be through the whole life of a man, is less pain to conjecture then to
have experience.

And that we may further see what a violent and cruel thing it is to force the
continuing of those together, whom God and nature in the gentlest end of
marriage never joined, diverse evils and extremities that follow upon such a
compulsion shall here be set in view. Of evils the first and greatest is that
hereby a most absurd and rash imputation is fixed upon God and his holy Laws, of
conniving and dispencing with open and common adultery among his chosen people;
a thing which the rankest politician would think it shame and disworship, that
his Laws should countenance; how and in what manner this comes to pass, I
shall reserve, till the course of method brings on the unfolding of many
Scriptures. Next the Law and Gospel are hereby made liable to more then one
contradiction, which I refer also thither. Lastly, the supreme dictate of
charity is hereby many ways neglected and violated. Which I shall forthwith
address to prove. First we know St Paul says, It is better to marry then to
burn. Marriage therefore was given as a remedy of that trouble: but what might
this burning mean? Certainly not the mere motion of carnal lust, not the mere
goad of a sensitive desire; God does not principally take care for such
cattle. What is it then but that desire which God put into Adam in Paradise
before he knew the sin of incontinence; that desire which God saw it was not
good that man should be left alone to burn in; the desire and longing to put
off an unkindly solitarines by uniting another body, but not without a fit
soul to his in the cheerful society of wedlock. Which if it were so needful
before the fall, when man was much more perfect in himself, how much more is it
needful now against all the sorrows and casualties of this life to have an
intimate and speaking help, a ready and reviving associate in marriage: whereof
who misses by chancing on a mute and spiritles mate, remains more alone then
before, and in a burning less to be contained then that which is fleshly and
more to be considered; as being more deeply rooted even in the faultles
innocence of nature. As for that other burning, which is but as it were the
venom of a lusty and overabounding concoction, strict life and labor with the
abatement of a full diet may keep that low and obedient anough: but this pure
and more inbred desire of joining to it self in conjugall fellowship a fit
conversing soul (which desire is properly called love) is stronger then death,
as the Spouse of Christ thought, many waters cannot quench it, neither can the
floods drown it. This is that rational burning that marriage is to remedy, not
to be allayed with fasting, nor with any penance to be subdued, which how can
he assuage who by mis-hap has met the unmeetest and most unsuitable mind? Who
has the power to struggle with an intelligible flame, not in Paradise to be
resisted, become now more ardent, by being failed of what in reason it looked
for; and even then most unquencht, when the importunity of a provender burning
is well anough appeased; and yet the soul has obtained nothing of what it
justly desires. Certainly such a one forbidd'n to divorce, is in effect
forbidd'n to marry, and compelled to greater difficulties then in a single
life; for if there be not a more human burning which marriage must satisfy, or
else may be dissolved, then that of copulation, marriage cannot be honorable for
the mere reducing and terminating of lust between two; seeing many beasts in
voluntary and chosen couples live together as unadulterously, and are as truly
married in that respect. But all ingenuous men will see that the dignity and
blessing of marriage is placed rather in the mutual enjoyment of that which the
wanting soul needfully seeks, then of that which the plenteous body would
jollily give away. Hence it is that Plato in his festival discourse brings in
Socrates relating what he feigned to have learnt from the Prophetess Diotima,
how Love was the Son of Penury, begot of Plenty in the garden of Jupiter.
Which divinely sorts with that which in effect Moses tells us; that Love was
the Son of Lonelines, begot in Paradise by that sociable and helpful aptitude
which God implanted between man and woman toward each other. The same also is
that burnining mentioned by St. Paul, whereof marriage ought to be the remedy;
the flesh has other natural and easy curbes which are in the power of any
temperate man When therefore this original and sinles Penury or Lonelines of
the soul cannot lay it self down by the side of such a meet and acceptable
union as God ordained in marriage, at least in some proportion, it cannot
conceive and bring forth Love, but remains utterly unmaried under a formal
wedlock, and still burns in the proper meaning of St. Paul. Then enters Hate,
not that Hate that sins, but that which only is natural dissatisfaction and
the turning aside from a mistaken object: if that mistake have done injury, it
fails not to dismiss with recompense, for to retain still, and not be able to
love, is to heap more injury. Thence that wise and pious Law of dismission,
Deuteronomy. 24. 1. took beginning; of which anon: He therefore who lacking of his due
in the most native and humane end of marriage, thinks it better to part then to
live sadly and injuriously to that cherfull covenant (for not to be beloved and
yet retained, is the greatest injury to a gentle spirit) he I say who therefore
seeks to part, is one who highly honors the married life, and would not stain
it: and the reasons which now move him to divorce, are equal to the best of
those that could first warrant him to marry; for, as was plainly shown, both
the hate which now diverts him and the lonelines which leads him still
powerfully to seek a fit help, has not the least grain of a sin in it, if he
be worthy to understand himself.

Thirdly, Yet it is next to be feared, if he must be still bound without reason
by a deaf rigor, that when he perceives the just expectance of his mind
defeated, he will begin even against Law to cast about where he may find his
satisfaction more complete, unless he be a thing heroically virtuous, and that
are not the common lump of men for whom chiefly the Laws ought to be made,
though not to then sins yet to their unsirming weaknesses, it being above their
strength to endure the lonely estate, which while they shunned, they are fallen
into. And yet there follows upon this a worse temptation; for if he be such as
has spent his youth unblamably, and laid up his chiefest earthly comforts in
the enjoyment of a contented marriage, nor did neglect that furderance which was
to be obtained herein by constant prayers, when he shall find himself bound
fast to an uncomplying discord of nature, or, as it often happens, to an image of
earth and fleam, with whom he looked to be the copartner of a sweet and gladsome
society, and sees withal that his bondage is now inevitable, though he be
almost the strongest Christian, he will be ready to despair in virtue, and
mutin against divine providence: and this doubtless is the reason of those
lapses and that melancholy despair which we see in many wedded persons, though
they understand it not, or pretend other causes, because they know no remedy,
and is of extreme danger; therefore when human frailty surcharged, is at such a
loss, charity ought to venture much, and use bold physic, lest an over-tost
faith endanger to shipwreck.

Fourthly Marriage is a covenant the very being whereof consists, not in a
forced cohabitation, and counterfeit performance of duties, but in unfeigned
love and peace. Thence says Solomon in Ecclesiastes, Live joyfully with the
wife whom thou love, all thy days, for that is thy portion How then, where
we find it impossible to rejoice or to love, can we obey this precept? how
miserably do we defraud our selves of that comfortable portion which God gives
us, by striving vainly to glue an error together which God and nature will not
join, adding but more vexation and violence to that blisfull society by oue
importunate superstition, that will not heark'n to St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. who
speaking of marriage and divorce, determines plain anough in general that God
therein has called us to peace: and not to bondage. Yea God himself commands
in his Law more then once, and by his Prophet Malachy, as Calvin and the best
translations read, that he who hates let him divorce; that is, he who cannot
love, or delight. I cannot therefore be so diffident, as not securely to
conclude, that he who can receive nothing of the most important helps in
marriage, being thereby disinabl'd to return that duty which is his, with a
clear and hearty countnance; and thus continues to grieve whom he would not,
and is no less grieved, that man ought even for loves sake and peace to move
divorce upon good and liberal conditions to the divorc't. And it is a less
breach of wedlock to part with wise and quiet consent betimes, then still to
soil and profane that mystery of joy and union with a polluting sadness and
perpetual distemper; for it is not the outward continuing of marriage that
keeps whole that covenant, but whosoever does most according to peace and love,
whether in marriage, or in divorce, he it is that breaks marriage lest; it being
so often written, that Love only is the fulfilling of every Commandment.

Fifthly, As those Priests of old were not to be long in sorrow, or if they
were, they could not rightly execute their function; so every true Christian in
a higher order of Priesthood is a person dedicate to joy and peace, offering
himself a lively sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and there is no
Christian duty that is not to be seasoned and set off with cherfulnes; which in
a thousand outward and intermitting crosses may yet be done well, as in this
vale of tears, but in such a bosom affliction as this, which grindes the very
foundations of his inmost nature, when he shall be forced to love against a
possibility, and to use dissimulation against his soul in the perpetual and
ceaseles duties of a husband, doubtless his whole duty of serving God must needs
be blurred and tainted with a sad unpreparednesse and dejection of spirit,
wherein God has no delight. Who sees not therefore how much more Christianly it
would be to break by divorce that which is more brok'n by undue and forcible
keeping, rather then to cover the Altar of the Lord with continual tears, so
that he regards not the offering any more, rather then that the whole worship
of a Christian man's life should languish and fade away beneath the weight of an
immeasurable grief and discouragement. And because some think the childer'n of
a second matrimony succeeding a divorce would not be a holy seed, why should we
not think them more holy then the offspring of a former ill-twisted wedlock,
begott'n only out of a bestiall necessity without any true love or
contentment, or joy to their parents, so that in some sense we may call them
the childern of wrath and anguish, which will as little conduce to their
sanctifying, as if they had been bastards; for nothing more then disturbance of
mind suspends us from approaching to God. Such a disturbance especially as
both assaults our faith and trust in Gods providence, and ends, if there be not
a miracle of virtue on either side, not only in bitterness and wrath, the
canker of devotion, but in a desperate and vicious carelesnes; when he sees
himself without fault of his trained by a deceitful bait into a snare of
misery, betrayed by an alluring ordinance, and then made the thrall of heavines
and discomfort by an undivorcing Law of God, as he erroneously thinks, but of
man's iniquity, as the truth is; for that God preferres the free and cherfull
worship of a Christian, before the grievous and exacted observance of an
unhappy marriage, besides that the general maxims of Religion assure us, will
be more manifest by drawing a parallel argument from the ground of divorcing an
Idolatresse, which was, left she should alienate his heart from the true
worship of God: and what difference is there whether she pervert him to
superstition by enticing sorcery, or disinable him in the whole service of God
through the disturbance of her unhelpful and unfit society, and so drive him at
last through murmuring and despair to thoughts of Atheism: neither does it
lessen the cause of separating, in that the one willingly allures him from the
faith, the other perhaps unwillingly drives him; for in the account of God it
comes all to one that the wife looses him a servant; and therefore by all the
united force of the Decalogue she ought to be disbanded, unless we must set
marriage above God and charity, which is a doctrine of devils no less then
forbidding to marry.

And here by the way to illustrate the whole question of divorce, ere this
treatise end, I shall not be loath to spend a few lines in hope to give a full
resolv of that which is yet so much controverted, whether an Idolatrous
heretic ought to be divorc't. To the resolving whereof we must first know that
the Jews were commanded to divorce an unbeleeving Gentile for two causes:
first, because all other Nations especially the Canaanites were to them
unclean. Secondly, to avoid seducement. That other Nations were to the Jews
impure, even to the separating of marriage, will appear out of Exodus 34. 16.
Deuteronomy. 7. 3. 6. compared with Ezra 9. 2. also chap. 10. 10, 11. Nehem. 13. 30.
This was the ground of that doubt raised among the Corinthians by some of the
Circumcision; Whether an unbeleever were not still to be counted an unclean
thing, so as that they ought to divorce from such a person. This doubt of
theirs St. Paul removes by an Evangelicall reason, having respect to that
vision of St. Peter, wherein the distinction of clean and unclean being
abolisht, all living creatures were sanctified to a pure and christian use, and
mankind especially, now invited by a general call to the covenant of grace.
Therefore says St. Paul, The unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the husband;
that is, made pure and lawful to his use; so that he need not put her away for
fear lest her unbelief should defile him; but that if he found her love still
toward him, he might rather hope to win her. The second reason of that divorce
was to avoid seducement, as is proved by comparing those places of the Law, to
that which Ezra and Nehemiah did by divine warrant in compelling the Jews to
forgo their wives. And this reason is moral and perpetual in the rule of
Christian faith without evasion. Therefore says the Apostle 2 Cor. 6. Mis-yoke
not together with Infidels, which is interpreted of marriage in the first place.
And although the former legal pollution be now don off, yet there is a
spiritual contagion in Idolatry as much to be shunned; and though seducement
were not to be feared, yet where there is no hope of converting, there always
ought to be a certain religious aversation and abhorring, which can no way sort
with marriage. Therefore says St. Paul, What fellowship has righteousness
with unrighteousness? what communion has light with darkness? what concord
has Christ with Beliall? what part has he that believes with an Infidel?
And in the next verse but one, he moralizes and makes us liable to that command
of Isaiah Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate says the Lord,
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive ye. And this command thus
Gospelliz'd to us, has the same force with that whereon Ezra grounded the
pious necessity of divorcing.

Upon these principles I answer, that a right believer ought to divorce an
idolatrous heretic unless upon better hopes: however that it is in the
believers choice to divorce or not.

The former part will be manifest thus; first, an apostate idolater whether
husband or wife seducing was to die by the decree of God, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 9. that
marriage therefore God himself dis-joyns; for others born idolaters the moral
reason of their dangerous keeping and the incommunicable antagony that is
between Christ and Belial, will be sufficient to enforce the commandment of
those two inspired reformers, Ezra and Nehemiah, to put an Idolater away as
well under the Gospel.

The latter part, that although there be no seducement feared, yet if there be
no hope given, the divorce is lawful, will appear by this, that idolatrous
marriage is still hateful to God, therefore still it may be divorc't by the
pattern of that warrant that Ezra had; and by the same everlasting reason:
neither can any man give an account wherefore, if those whom God joins, no man
may separate, it should not follow, that, whom he ioyns not, but hates to join,
those man ought to separate: but says the Lawyer, that which ought not have
been don, once don availes. I answer, this is but a crochet of the law, but
that brought against it, is plain Scripture. As for what Christ spoke
concerning divorce, it is confessed by all knowing men, he meant only between them
of the same faith. But what shall we say then to St. Paul, who seems to bid us
not divorce an Infidel willing to stay? We may safely say thus; that wrong
collections have been hitherto made out of those words by modern Divines. His
drift, as was heard before, is plain: not to command our stay in marriage with
an Infidel, that had been a flat renouncing of the religious and moral law;
but to inform the Corinthians that the body of an unbeleever was not defiling,
if his desire to live in Christian wedlock showed any likelihood that his heart
was opening to the faith: and therefore advices to forbear departure so long,
till nothing have bin neglected to set forward a conversion: this I say he
advises, and that with certain cautions; not commands: If we can take up so
much credit for him, as to get him believed upon his own word; for what is this
else but his counsel in a thing indifferent, to the rest speak I, not the Lord;
for though it be true that the Lord never spoke it, yet from St. Paul's mouth
we should have took it as a command, had not himself forewarned us, and
disclaimed; which, notwithstanding if we shall still avouch to be a command, he
palpably denying it, this is not to expound St. Paul, but to out face him.
Neither does it follow, but that the Apostle may interpose his judgment in a
case of Christian liberty without the guilt of adding to Gods word. How do we
know marriage or single life to be of choice, but by such like words as these, I
speak this by permission, not of commandment, I have no command of the Lord,
yet I give my judgment. Why shall not the like words have leave to signify a
freedom in this our present question, though Beza deny. Neither is the
Scripture hereby less inspired because St. Paul confesses to have writt'n
therein what he had not of command; for we grant that the Spirit of God led him
thus to express himself to christian prudence in a matter which God thought
best to leave uncommanded. Beza therefore must be warily read when he taxes St.
Austin of Blasphemy, for holding that St. Paul spoke here as of a thing
indifferent: but if it must be a command, I shall yet the more evince it to be
a command that we should heerin be left free: and that out of the Greek word
used in the 12. v. which instructs us plainly there must be a joint assent and
good liking on both sides; he that will not deprave the Text, must thus render
it; If a brother have an unbeleeving wife, and she join in consent to dwell
with him (which cannot utter less to us then a mutual agreement) let him not
put her away for the mere surmise of Judaicall uncleannes: and the reason
follows, for the body of an Infidel is not polluted, neither to benevolence,
nor to procreation. Moreover, this note of mutual complacency forbids all
offer of seducement; which to a person of zeal cannot be attempted without
great offense, if therefore seducement be feared, this place hinders not
divorce. Another caution was put in this supposed command, of not bringing the
believer into bondage heerby, which doubtless might prove extreme, if christian
liberty and conscience were left to the humor of a pagan staying at pleasure to
play with, or to vex and wound with a thousand scandals and burdens above
strength to bear: if therefore the conceived hope of gaining a soul come to
nothing, then charity commands that the believer be not wearied out with endless
waiting under many grievances sore to his spirit; but that respect be had
rather to the present suffering of a true Christian, then the uncertain winning
of an obdur'd heretic; for this also must appertain to the precept, Let every
man wherein he is called therein abide with God, v. 24. that is, so walking in
his inferior calling of marriage, as not by dangerous subjection to that
ordinance, to hinder and disturb the higher calling of his christianity. Last,
whether this be a command or an advice, we must look that it be so understood
as not to contradict the least point of moral religion that God has formerly
commanded, otherwise what do we, but set the moral Law and the Gospel at
civil war together: and who then shall be able to serve those two masters?

Now whether Idolatry or adultery be the greatest violation of marriage, if any
demand, let him thus consider, that among Christian Writers touching matrimony,
there be three chief ends thereof agreed on; Godly society, next civil, and
thirdly, that of the mariage-bed. Of these the first in name to be the highest
and most excellent, no baptized man can deny; nor that Idolatry smites directly
against this prime end, nor that such as the violated end is, such is the
violation: but he who affirms adultery to be the highest breach, affirms the
bed to be the highest of marriage, which is in truth a gross and borish
opinion, how common soever; as far from the countnance of Scripture, as from
the light of all clean philosophy, or civil nature. And out of question the
cherfull help that may be in marriage toward sanctity of life, is the purest and
so the noblest end of that contract: but if the particular of each person be
considered, then of those three ends which God appointed, that to him is
greatest which is most necessary: and marriage is then most brok'n to him, when
he utterly wants the fruition of that which he most sought therein, whether it
were religious, civil, or corporali society. Of which wants to do him right by
divorce only for the last and meanest, is a pervers injury, and the pretended
reason of it as frigid as frigidity it self, which the Code and canon are only
ser sible of. Thus much of this controversy. I now return to the former
argument. And having shown, that disproportion, contrariety, or numnesse of
mind may justly be divorc't, by proving already that the prohibition thereof
opposes the express end of Gods institution, suffers not marriage to satisfy
that intellectual and innocent desire which God himself kindled in man to be
the bond of wedlock, but only to remedy a sublunary and bestial burning, which
frugal diet without marriage would easily chast'n. Next that it drives many to
transgress the conjugall bed, while the soul wanders after that satisfaction
which it had hope to find at home, but has mis't. Or else it sits repining even
to Atheism; finding it self hardly dealt with, but misdeeming the cause to be
in Gods Law, which is in man's unrighteous ignorance. I have showed also how it
unties the inward knot of marriage, which is peace and love (if that can be
unti'd which was never knit) while it aims to keep fast the outward
formalitie; how it lets perish the Christian man, to compel impossibly the
married man.

The sixth place declares this prohibition to be as respectles of human nature,
and therefore is not of God. He teaches that an unlawful marriage may be
lawfully divorc't. And that those who having thoroughly discerned each others
disposition which ofttimes cannot be till after matrimony, shall then find a
powerful reluctance and recoile of nature on either side blasting all the
content of their mutual society, that such persons are not lawfully married (to
use the Apostles words) Say I these things as a man, or says not the Law also
the same? for it is writt'n, Deuteronomy. 22. Thou shall not sow thy vineyard with
diverse seeds, lest thou defile both. Thou shall not plow with an Ox and an
Ass together, and the like. I follow the pattern of St. Paul's reasoning; Does
God care for Asses and Oxen, how ill they yoke together, or is it not said
altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is writt'n. Yea the
Apostle himself in the forecited 2 Cor. 6. 14. alludes from that place of Deuteronomy.
to forbid mis-yoking marriage; as by the Greek word is evident, though he
instance but in one example of mis-matching with an Infidel: yet next to that,
what can be a souler incongruity, a greater violence to the reverend secret of
nature, then to force a mixture of minds that cannot unite, and to sow the
furrow of man's nativity with seed of two incoherent and uncombining
dispositions. Surely if any noysomnes of body soon destroys the sympathy of
mind to that work, much more will the antipathy of mind infuse it self into
all the faculties and acts of the body, to render them invalid, unkindly, and
even unholy against the fundamental law book of nature; which Moses never
thwarts, but reverences: therefore he commands us to force nothing against
sympathy or natural order, no not upon the most abject creatures; to show that
such an indignity cannot be offered to man without an impious crime. And when
he forbids all unmatchable and unmingling natures to consort, doubtless by all
due consequence, if they chance through misadventure to be miscoupl'd, he bids
them part asunder, as persons whom God never joined.

Seventhly, The Canon Law and Divines consent, that if either party be found
contriving against the others life, they may be severed by divorce; for a sin
against the life of marriage is greater then a sin against the bed: the one
destroys, the other but defiles: The same may be said touching those persons
who being of a pensive nature and course of life, have summed up all their
solace in that free and lightsom conversation which God and man intends in
marriage: whereof when they see themselves deprived by meeting an unsociable
consort, they ofttimes resent one another mistake so deeply, that long it is
not ere grief end one of them. When therefore this danger is foreseen that the
life is in peril by living together, what matter is it whether helples greef,
or wilful practice be the cause? This is certain that the preservation of life
is more worth then the compulsory keeping of marriage; and it is no less then
cruelty to force a man to remain in that state as the solace of his life, which
he and his friends know will be either the undoing or the disheartning of his
life. And what is life without the vigor and spiritfull exercise of life? how
can it be useful either to private or public employment? shall it be therefore
quite dejected, though never so valuable, and left to moulder away in heavines
for the superstitious and impossible performance of an ill driven bargain?
nothing more inviolable then vows made to God, yet we read in Numbers, that if
a wife had made such a vow, the mere will and authority of her husband might
break it; how much more may he break the error of his own bonds with an unfit
and mistak'n wife, to the saving of his welfare, his life, yea his faith and
virtue from the hazard of over-strong temptations; for if man be Lord of the
Sabbath, to the curing of a Fevor, can he be less then Lord of marriage in such
important causes as these?

Eighthly, It is most sure that some even of those who are not plainly
defective in body, are yet destitute of all other mariagable gifts; and
consequently have not the calling to marry; unless nothing be requisite thereto
but a mere isntrumental body; which to affirm, is to that unanimous Covenant a
reproach: yet it is as sure that many such not of their own desire, but by
persuasion of friends, or not knowing themselves do often enter into wedlock;
where finding the difference at length between the duties of a married life, and
the gifts of a single life; what unfitnes of mind, what wearisomnes, what
scruples and doubts to an incredible offense and displeasure are like to follow
between, may be soon imagined: whom thus to shut up and immure in an unequal
and mischosen match, is not a course that christian wisdom and tenderness ought
to use. As for the custom that some parents and guardians have of forcing
marriages, it will be better to say nothing of such a savage inhumanity, but
only this, that the Law which gives not all freedom of divorce to any creature
endu'd with reason so assasinated, is next in cruelty.

Ninthly, I suppose it will be allowed us that marriage is a human society, and
that all human society must proceed from the mind rather then the body, else it
would be but a kind of animal or beastish meeting; if the mind therefore cannot
have that due company by marriage, that it may reasonably and humanly desire,
that marriage can be no human society, but a certain formalitie, or gilding over
of little better then a brutish congresse, and so in very wisdom and pureness
to be dissolved.

But marriage is more then human, the covenant of God, Pro. 2. 17. therefore man
cannot dissolve it. I answer, if it be more then human so much the more it
argues the chief society thereof to be in the soul rather then in the body, and
the greatest breach thereof to be unfitnes of mind rather then defect of body;
for the body can have left affinity in a covenant more then human, so that the
reason of dissolving holds good the rather. Again, I answer, that the Sabbath
is a higher institution, a command of the first Table, for the breach whereof
God has far more and oftener testified his anger then for divorces, which from
Moses till after the captivity he never took displeasure at, nor then neither,
if we mark the Text, and yet as often as the good of man is co^cern'd, he not
only permits, but commands to break the Sabbath* What covenant more contracted
with God, and less in man's power then the vow which has once past his lips?
yet if it be found rash, if offensive, if unfruitful either to Gods glory or
the good of man, our doctrine forces not error and unwillingnes irksomly to keep
it, but counsels wisdom and better thoughts boldly to break it; therefore to
enjoin the indissoluble keeping of a marriage found unfit against the good of
man both soul and body, as has been evidenc't, is to make an Idol, of marriage,
to advance it above the worship of God and the good of man, to make it a
transcendent command, above both the second and the first Table, which is a
most prodigious doctrine.

Next, Whereas they cite out of the Proverbs, that it is the covenant of God, and
therefore more then human, that consequence is manifestly false; for so the
covenant which Zedeckiah made with the infidel King of Babel is called the
covenant of God, Ezech. 17. 19. which would be strange to hear counted more then
a human covenant. So every covenant between man and man, bound by oath, may be
called the covenant of God, because God therein is attested. So of marriage he is
the author and the witness; yet hence will not follow any divine astriction more
then what is subordinate to the glory of God and the main good of either party;
for as the glory of God and their esteemed fitnes one for the other, was the
motive which led them both at first to think without other revelation that God
had joined them together: So when it shall be found by their apparent unfitnes,
that their continuing to be man and wife is against the glory of God and their
mutual happiness, it may assure them that God never joined them; who has
revel'd his gracious will not to set the ordinance above the man for whom it
was ordained: not to canonize marriage either as a tyranness or a goddess over
the enfranchiz'd life and soul of man; for wherein can God delight, wherein be
worshipped, wherein be glorified by the forcible continuing of an improper and
ill-yoking couple; He that loved not to see the disparity of several cattle
at the plow, cannot be pleased with any vast unmeetnes in marriage. Where can be
the peace and love which must invite God to such a house, may it not be feared
that the not divorcing of such a helples disagreement, will be the divorcing of
God finally from such a place? But it is a trial of our patience they say: I
grant it: but which of Jobs afflictions were sent him with that law, that he
might not use means to remove any of them if he could. And what if it subvert
our patience and our faith too? Who shall answer for the perishing of all those
souls perishing by stubborn expositions of particular and inferior precepts,
against the general and supreme rule of charity? They dare not affirm that
marriage is either a Sacrament, or a mystery, though all those sacred things
give place to man, and yet they invest it with such an awful sanctity, and
give it such adamantine chains to bind with, as if it were to be worshipped like
some Indian deity, when it can confer no blessing upon us, but works more and
more to our misery. To such teachers the saying of St. Peter at the Council of
Jerusalem will do well to be applied: Why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the
necks of Christian men, which neither the Jews, Gods ancient people, nor we are
able to bear: and nothing but unwary expounding has brought upon us. To these
considerations this also may be added as no improbable conjecture; seeing that
sort of men who follow Anabaptism, Famelism; Antinomianism, and other fanatic
dreams, be such most commonly as are by nature addicted to a zeal of Religion,
of life also not debausht, and that their opinions having full swinge, do end
in satisfaction of the flesh, it may come with reason into the thoughts of a
wise man, whether all this proceed not partly, if not chiefly, from the
restraint of some lawful liberty, which ought to be given men, and is denied
them. As by Physic we learn in menstruous bodies, where natures current has
been stopped, that the suffocation and upward forcing of some lower part, affects
the head and inward sense with dotage and idle fancies. And on the other hand,
whether the rest of vulgar men not so religiously professing, do not give
themselves much the more to whordom and adulteries; loving the corrupt and
venial discipline of clergy Courts, but hating to hear of perfect reformation:
when as they foresee that then fornication shall be austerely censut'd,
adultery punished, and marriage the appointed refuge of nature, though it hap to
be never so incongruous and displeasing, must yet of force be worn out, when it
can be to no other purpose but of strife and hatred, a thing odious to God.
This may be worth the study of skilful men in Theology, and the reason of
things: and lastly to examine whether some undue and ill grounded strictnes upon
the blameles nature of man be not the cause in those places where already
reformation is, that the discipline of the Church so often and so unavoidably
brok'n, is brought into contempt and derision. And if it be thus, let those who
are still bent to hold this obstinate literality, so prepare themselves as to
share in the account for all these transgressions; when it shall be demanded at
the last day by one who will scanne and sift things with more then a literal
wisdom of enquiry; for if these reasons be duly pondered, and that the Gospel
is more jealous of laying on excessive burdens then ever the Law was, lest the
soul of a Christian which is inestimable, should be over-tempted and cast away,
considering also that many properties of nature, which the power of
regeneration it self never alters, may cause dislike of conversing even between
the most sanctified, which continually grating in harsh tune together may breed
some jarre and discord, and that end in rancor and strife, a thing so opposite
both to marriage and to Christianity, it would perhaps be less scandal to
divorce a natural disparity, then to link violently together an unchristian
dissension, committing two ensnared souls inevitably to kindle one another, not
with the fire of love, but with a hatred inconcileable, who were they disseverd
would be straight friends in any other relation. But if an alphabetical
servility must be still urged, it may so fall out, that the true Church may
unwittingly use as much cruelty in forbidding to divorce, as the Church of
Antichrist does wilfully in forbidding to marry.

But what are all these reasonings worth, will some reply, when as the words of
Christ are plainly against all divorce, except in case of fornication; let such
remember as a thing not to be denied, that all places of Scripture wherein just
reason of doubt arises from the letter, are to be expounded by considering upon
what occasion every thing is set down: and by comparing other Texts. The
occasion which induc't our Savior to speak of divorce, was either to convince
the extravagance of the Pharisees in that point, or to give a sharp and vehement
answer to a tempting question. And in such cases that we are not to repose all
upon the literal terms of so many words, many instances will teach us: Wherein
we may plainly discover how Christ meant not to be taken word for word, but
like a wise Physician, administering one excess against another to reduce us to
a perfect mean: Where the Pharisees were strict, there Christ seems remiss;
where they were too remiss, he saw it needful to seem most severe: in one
place he censures an unchaste look to be adultery already committed: another
time he passes over actual adultery with less reproof then for an unchaste
look; not so heavily condemning secret weakness, as open malice: So here he may
be justly thought to have given this rigid sentence against divorce, not to cut
off all remedy from a good man who finds himself co^suming away in a
disconsolate and uninjoy'd matrimony, but to lay a brid^e upon the bold abuses
of those overweening Rabbis; which he could not more effectually do, then by
a countersway of restraint, curbing their wild exorbitance almost into the
other extreme; as when we bow things the contrary way, to make them come to
their natural straitnes. And that this was the only intention of Christ is most
evident; if we attend but to his own words and protestation made in the same
Sermon not many verses before he treats of divorcing, that he came not to
abrogate from the Law one jot or tittle, and denounces against them that shall
so teach. So that the question of divorce following upon this his open
profession, must needs confirm us, that what ever else in the political Law of
more special relation to the Jews, might cease to us, yet that of those
precepts concerning divorce, not one of them was repealed by the doctrine of
Christ; for if these our Saviors words inveigh against all divorce, and
condemn it as adultery, except it be for adultery, and be not rather understood
against the abuse of those divorces permitted in the Law, then is that Law of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. not only repealed and wholly anull'd against the promise of
Christ and his known prfession, not to meddle in matters judicial, but that
which is more strange, the very substance and purpose of that Law is
contradicted and convinced both of injustice and impurity, as having authorized
and maintained legal adultery by statute. Moses also cannot escape to be guilty
of unequal and unwise decrees, punishing one act of secret adultery by death,
and permitting a whole life of open adultery by Law. And albeit Lawyers write
that some political Edicts, though not approved, are yet allowed to the scum
of the people and the necessity of the times; these excuses have but a weak
pulse: for first we read, not that the scoundrel people, but the choicest, the
wisest, the holiest of that nation have frequently used these laws, or such as
these. Secondly, Be it yielded that in matters not very bad or impure, a human
lawgiver may slacken something of that which is exactly good, to the
disposition of the people and the times: but if the perfect, the pure, the
righteous law of God, for so are all his statutes and his judgments, be found
to have allowed smoothly without any certain reprehension, that which Christ
afterward declares to be adultery, how can we free this Law from the horrible
endightment of being both impure, unjust, and fallacious. Neither will it serve
to say this was permitted for the hardness of their hearts, in that sense, as it
is usually explained, for the Law were then but a corrupt and erroneous
Schoolmaster, teaching us to dash against a vital maxim of religion, by doing
foul evil in hope of some uncertain good. We cannot therefore with safety thus
confine the free simplicity of our Saviors meaning to that which merely
amounts from so many letters; whenas it can consist neither with his former,
and cautionary words, nor with the scope of charity, commanding by his express
commission in a higher strain. But all rather of necessity must be understood
as only against the abuse of that wise and ingenuous liberty which Moses gave,
and to terrify a roaving conscience from sinning under that pretext.

Others think to evade the matter, by not granting any Law of divorce, but only
a dispensation; which is contrary to the words of Christ, who himself calls it
a Law Mark. 10. 5. But I answer, admitting it to be a dispensation, yet this is
a certain rule, that so long as the cause remains, the dispensation ought: Let
it be shown therefore either in the nature of the Gospel, or of man, why this
dispensation should be made void. The Gospel indeed exhorts to highest
perfection, but bears with weakest infirmity more then the Law. The nature of
man is as weak, and yet as hard: and that weakness and hardness as unfit, and as
unteachable to be harshly dealt with as ever. I but, say they, there is a
greater portion of spirit powered upon the Gospel which requires perfecter
obedience. But that consequence is deceavable; for it is the Law that is the
exacter of our obedience even under the Gospel; how can it then exact
concerning divorce, that which it never exacted before? The Gospel is a covenant
reveling grace, not commanding a new morality, but assuring justification by
faith only, contented if we endeavor to square our moral duty by those wise
and equal Mosaic rules, which were as perfect as strict and as unpardonable to
the Jews, as to us; otherwise the law were unjust, giving grace of pardon
without the Gospel, or if it give allowance without pardon, it would be
dissolute and deceitful; saying in general, do this and live; and yet
deceaving and damning with obscure and hollow permissions. We find also by
experience that the Spirit of God in the Gospel has been always more
effectual in the illumination of our minds to the gift of faith, then in the
moving of our wills to any excellence of virtue, either above the Jews or the
Heathen. Hence those indulgences in the Gospel; All cannot receive this saying;
Every man has his proper gift, with strict charges not to lay on yokes which
our Fathers could not bear.

But this that Moses suffered for the hardness of their hearts he suffered not by
that enacted dispensation, far be it, but by a mere accidental sufferance of
undiscovered hypocrites, who made ill use of that Law; for that God should
enact a dispensation for hard hearts to do that whereby they must live in
priviledg'd adultery, however it go for the received opinion, I shall ever
dissuade my self from so much hardihood as to believe: Certainly this is not
the manner of God, whose pure eyes cannot behold, much less his perfect Laws
dispense with such impurity; and if we consider well, we shall find that all
dispensations are either to avoid wors inconveniences, or to support infirm
consciences for a time; but that a dispensatio^ should be as long lived as a
Law to tolerate adultery for hardness of heart, both sins perhaps of like
degree, and yet this obdurate disease cannot be conceav'd how it is the more
amended by this unclean remedy, is a notion of that extravagance from the sage
principles of piety, that who considers thoroughly, cannot but admire, how this
has been digested all this while. What may we do then to salve this seeming
inconsistence? I must not dissemble that I am confident it can be don no other
way then this.

Moses, Deuteronomy. 24 1. established a grave and prudent Law, full of moral equity
full of due consideration toward nature, that cannot be resisted; a Law
consenting with the Laws of wisest men and civilest nations. That when a man
has married a wife, if it come to pass he cannot love her by reason of some
displeasing natural quality or unfitnes in her, let him write her a bill of
divorce. The intent of which Law undoubtedly was this, that if any good and
peaceable man should discover some helples disagreement or dislike either of
mind or body, whereby he could not cherfully perform the duty of a husband
without the perpetual dissembling of offense and disturbance to his spirit,
rather then to live uncomfortably and unhappily both to himself and to his
wife, rather then to continue undertaking a duty which he could not possibly
discharge, he might dismiss her whom he could not tolerably, and so not
conscionably retain. And this Law the Spirit of God by the mouth of Solomon,
Pro. 30. 21. 23. testifies to be a good and a necessary Law; by granting it,
that to dwell with a hated woman (for hated the hebrew word signifies) is a
thing that nature cannot endure. What follows then but that Law must remedy
what nature cannot undergo. Now that many licentious and hard hearted men took
hold of this Law to cloak their bad purposes, is nothing strange to believe. And
these were they, not for whom Moses made the Law, God forbid, but whose hardness
of heart taking ill advantage by this Law he held it better to suffer as by
accident, where it could not be detected, rather then good men should loose
their just and lawful privilege of remedy: Christ therefore having to answer
these tempting Pharisees, according as his custom was, not meaning to inform
their proud ignorance what Moses did in the true intent of the Law, which they
had ill cited, suppressing the true cause for which Moses gave it, and
extending it to every slight matter, tells them their own, what Moses was forced
to suffer by their abuse of his Law. Which is yet more plain if we mark that
our Savior in the fi^th of Matthew. cites not the Law of Moses, but the
Pharisaical tradition falsely grounded upon that law. And in those other places,
Chap. 19. and Mark. 10. the Pharisees cite the Law, but conceal the wise and
human reason there expressed; which our Savior corrects not in them whose pride
deserved not his instruction, only returns them what is proper to them; Moses
for the hardness of your hearts sufferd you, that is, such as you to put away
your wives; and to you he wrote this precept for that cause, which (to you)
must be read with an impression, and understood limitedly of such as covered
ill purposes under that Law; for it was seasonable that they should hear their
own unbounded license rebuk't, but not seasonable for them to hear a good man's
requisite liberty explained. And to amaze them the more, because the Pharisees
thought it no hard matter to fulfill the Law, he draws them up to that
unseparable institution which God ordaind in the beginning before the fall when
man and woman were both perfect, and could have no cause to separate: just as
in the same Chap. he stands not to contend with the arrogant young man who
boasted his observance of the whole Law, whether he had indeed kept it or not,
but skrues him up higher, to a task of that perfection, which no man is bound
to imitate. And in like manner that pattern of the first institution he set
before the opinionative Pharisees to dazzle them and not to bind us. For this is
a solid rule that every command given with a reason, binds our obedience no
otherwise then that reason holds. Of this sort was that command in Eden;
Therefore shall a man cleave to his wife, and they shall be one flesh: which we
see is no absolute command, but with an inference, Therefore: the reason then
must be first considered, that our obedience be not mis-obedience. The first
is, for it is not single, because the wife is to the husband flesh of his
flesh, as in the verse going before. But this reason cannot be sufficient of it
self; for why then should he for his wife leave his father and mother, with
whom he is far more flesh of flesh and bone of bone, as being made of their
substance. And besides it can be but a sorry and ignoble society of life, whose
unseparable injunction depends merely upon flesh and bones. Therefore we must
look higher, since Christ himself recalls us to the beginning, and we shall
find that the primitive reason of never divorcing, was that sacred and not
vain promise of God to remedy man's lonelines by making him a help meet for him
though not now in perfection, as at first, yet still in proportion as things
now are And this is repeated ver. 20. when all other creatures were fitly
associated and brought to Adam* as if the divine power had bin in some care and
deep thought, because there was not yet found a help meet for man. And can we
so slightly depresse the all-wise purpose of a deliberating God, as i^ his
consultatio^ had produc'^ no other good for man, but to join him with an
accidental companion of propagation* which his sudden word had already made
for every beast? nay a far less good to man it will be found, if she must at
all aventures be fastened upon him individually. And therefore even plain sense
and equity, and, which is above them both, the all-interpreting voice of
Charity her self cries loud that this primitive reason, this consulted promise
of God to make a meet help, is the only cause that gives authority to this
command of not divorcing, to be a command. And it might be further added, that
if the true definition of a wife were asked in good earnest, this clause of
being a meet help would show it self so necessary, and so essential in that
demonstrative argument, that it might be logically concluded, therefore she who
naturally and perpetually is no meet help, can be no wife; which clearly takes
away the difficulty of dismissing such a one. Hence is manifest, that so much
of the first institution as our Savior mentions, for he mentions not all, was
but to quell and put to nonplus the tempting Pharisees; and to lay open their
ignorance and shallow understanding of the Scriptures. For, says he, have ye
not read that he which made them at the beginning, made them male and female,
and said, for this cause shall a man cleave to his wife? which these blind
usurpers. of Moses chair could not gainsay: as if this single respect of male
and female were sufficient against a thousand inconveniences and mischiefs to
clogge a rational creature to his endless sorrow unrelinquishably. What if they
had thus answered, Master if thou intend to make wedlock as inseparable as it
was from the beginning, let it be made also a fit society, as God intended it,
which we shall soon understand it ought to be, if thou recite the whole reason
of the Law. doubtless our Savior had applauded their just answer. For then they
had expounded this command of Paradise, even as Moses himself expounds it by
his laws of divorce, that is, with due and wise regard had to the premises and
reasons of the first command, according to which, without unclean and
temporizing permissions he instructs us in this imperfect state what we may
lawfully do about divorce.

But if it be thought that the Disciples offended at the rigor of Christ's
answer* could yet obtain no mitigation of the former sentence pronounced to the
Pharisees, it may be fully answered, that our Savior continues the same reply
to his Disciples, as men leavened with the same customary license, which the
Pharisees maintained; and displeased at the removing of a traditional abuse
whereto they had so long not unwillingly bin used: it was no time then to
contend with then flow and prejudicial belief, in a thing wherein an ordinary
measure of light in Scripture, with some attention might afterward inform them
well anough. After these considerations to take a law out of Paradise given in
time of original perfection, and to take it barely without those just and equal
inferences and reasons which mainly establish it, nor so much as admitting
those needful and safe allowances wherewith Moses himself interprets it to the
fallen condition of man, argues nothing in us but rashness and contempt of those
means that God left us in his pure and chaste Law, without which it will not be
possible for us to perform the strict imposition of this command: or if we
strive beyond our strength, we shall strive to obey it otherwise then God
commands it. And lamented experience daily teaches the bitter and vain fruits
of this our presumption, forcing men in a thing wherein we are not able to
judge either of their strength, or their sufferance. Whom neither one vice nor
other by natural addiction, but only marriage ruins, which doubtless is not the
fault of that ordinance, for God gave it as a blessing, nor always of man's
mis-choosing; it being an error above wisdom to prevent, as examples of wisest
men so mistaken manifest: it is the fault therefore of a pervers opinion that
will have it continued in despite of nature and reason, when indeed it was
never truly joynd. All those expositers upon the fifth of Mat. confess the Law
of Moses to be the Law of the Lord, wherein no addition or diminution has
place, yet coming to the point of divorce, as if they feared not to be called
lest in the kingdom of heaven, any slight evasion will content them to
reconcile those contradictions which they make between Christ and Moses,
between Christ and Christ.

Some will have it no Law, but the granted premises of another Law following,
contrary to the words of Christ Mark 10. 5. and all other translations of
gravest authority, who render it in form of a Law; agreeable to Malach. 2. 16.
as it is most anciently and modernly expounded. Besides the bill of divorce
declares it to be orderly and legal. And what avails this to make the matter
more righteous, if such an adulterous condition shall be mentioned to build a
Law upon without either punishment or so much as forbidding, they pretend it is
implicitly reproved in these words, Deuteronomy. 24. 4. after she is defiled; but who
sees not that this defilement is only in respect of returning to her former
husband after an intermixed marriage; else why was not the defiling condition
first forbidden, which would have saved the labor of this after law; nor is it
seemly or piously attributed to the justice of God and his known hatred of sin,
that such a heinous fault as this through all the Law should be only wiped with
an implicit and oblique touch (which yet is falsely supposed) and that his
peculiar people should be let wallow in adulterous marriages almost two thousand
years for want of a direct Law to prohibit them; it is rather to be confidently
assumed that this was granted to apparent necessities, as being of
unquestionable right and reason in the Law of nature, in that it still passes
without inhibition, even when greatest cause is given us to expect it should be
directly forbidd'n. But it was not approved, so much the wors that it was
allowed, as if sin had over masterd the law of God, to conform her steady and
strait rule to sins crookednes, which is impossible. Besides, what needed a
positive grant of that which was not approved? it restrained no liberty to him
that could but use a little fraud, it had bin better silenc't, unless it were
approved in some case or other. Can we conceave without vile thoughts, that
the majesty and holiness of God could endure so many ages to gratify a stubborn
people in the practice of a foul polluting sin, and could he expect they should
abstain, he not signifying his mind in a plain command, at such time especially
when he was framing their laws and them to all possible perfection? But they
were to look back to the first iustitution, nay rather why was not that
individual institution brought out of Paradise, as was that of the Sabbath, and
repeated in the body of the Law, that men might have understood it to be a
command? for that any sentence that bears the resemblance of a precept, set
there so out of place in another world at such a distance from the whole Law,
and not once mentioned there, should be an obliging command to us, is very
disputable, and perhaps it might be denied to be a command without further
dispute: however, it commands not absolutely, as has bin cleared, but only
with reference to that precedent promise of God, which is the very ground of
his institution; if that appear not in some tolerable sort, how can we affirm
such a matrimony to be the same which God instituted! In such an accident it
will best behove our sobernes to follow rather what moral Sinai prescribes
equal to our strength, then fondly to think within our strength all that lost
Paradise relates.

Another while it shall suffice them, that it was not a moral but a judicial
Law, and so was abrogated. Nay rather was not abrogated because judicial; which
Law the ministry of Christ came not to deal with. And who put it in man's
power to exempt, where Christ speaks in general of not abrogating the least jot
or tittle, and in special not that of divorce, because it follows among those
Laws which he promised expressly not to abrogate, but to vindicate from abusive
traditions. And if we mark the 31. ver. of Mat. the 5. he there cites not the
Law of Moses, but the licencious Gloss which traduc't the Law; that therefore
which he cited, that he abrogated, and not only abrogated but disallowed and
flatly condemned, which could not be the Law of Moses; for that had bin foulely
to the rebuke of his great servant. To abrogate a Law made with Gods allowance,
had bin to tell us only that such a Law was now to cease, but to refute it with
an ignominious note of civilizing adultery, casts the reprooff, which was meant
only to the Pharisees, even upon him who made the Law. But yet if that be
judicial which belongs to a civil Court, this Law is less judicial then nine
of the ten Commandments; for antiquaries affirm that divorces proceeded among
the Jews without knowledge of the Magistrate, only with hands and seals under
the testimony of some Rabbis to be then present. And it was indeed a pure
moral economical Law, too hastily imputed of tolerating sin; being rather so
clear in nature and reason, that it was left to a man's own arbitrament to be
determined between God and his own conscience. And that power which Christ
never took from the master of family, but rectified only to a right and wary
use at home, that power the undiscerning Canonist has improperly usurpt into
his Court Leet, and bescribbl'd with a thousand trifling impertinencies, which
yet have filled the life of man with serious trouble and calamity. Yet grant it
were of old a judicial Law, it need not be the less moral for that, being
conversant, as it is, about virtue or vice. And our Savior disputes not here
the judicature, for that was not his office, but the morality of divorce,
whether it be adultery or no; if therefore he touch the law of Moses at all, he
touches the moral part thereof; which is absurd to imagine that the covenant of
grace should reform the exact and perfect law of works, eternal and immutable;
or if he touch not the Law at all, then is not the allowance thereof disallowed
to us.

Others are so ridiculous as to allege that this license of divorcing was given
them because they were so accustomed in Egypt. As if an ill custom were to be
kept to all posterity; for the dispensation is both universal and of time
unlimited, and so indeed no dispensation at all; for the over-dated
dispensation of a thing unlawful, serves for nothing but to increase hardness
of heart, and makes men but wax more incorrigible, which were a great reproach
to be said of any Law or allowance that God should give us. In these opinions
it would be more Religion to advise well, lest we make our selves juster then
God, by censuring rashly that for sin which his unspotted Law without rebuke
allows, and his people without being conscious of displeasing him have used.
And if we can think so of Moses, as that the Jewish obstinacy could compel him
to write such impure permissions against the rule of God and his own judgment,
doubtless it was his part to have protested publicly what straits he was driven
to, and to have declared his conscience when he gave any Law against his mind;
for the Law is the touchstone of sin and of conscience, must not be intermixed
with corrupt indulgences; for then it looses the greatest praise it has, of
being certain and infallible, not leading into error, as all the Jews were led
by this connivence of Moses, if it were a connivence. But still they fly back
to the primitive institution, and would have us re-enter Paradise against the
sword that guards it. Whom I again thus reply to, that the place in Genesis
contains the description of a fit and perfect marriage, with an interdict of
ever divorcing such a union; but where nature is discovered to have never
joined indeed, but vehemently seeks to part, it cannot be there conceav'd that
God forbids it; nay he commands it both in the Law and in the Prophet Malachy,
which is to be our rule. And Perkins upon this chap. of Mat. deals plainly that
our Savior here confutes not Moses Law, but the false glosses that depraved
the Law; which being true, Perkins must needs grant, that something then is left
to that law which Christ found no fault with; and what can that be but the
conscionable use of such liberty as the plain words import? So that by his own
inference, Christ did not absolutely intend to restrain all divorces to the
only cause of adultery. This therefore is the true scope of our Saviors will,
that he who looks upon the Law concerning divorce, should look also back upon
the first institution, that he may endeavor what is perfectest: and he that
looks upon the institution should not refuse as sinful and unlawful those
allowanees which God affords him in his following Law; lest he make himself
purer then his maker; and presuming above strength, slip into temptations
irrecoverably. For this is wonderful, that in all those decrees concerning
marriage, God should never once mention the prime institution to dissuade them
from divorcing; and that he should forbid smaller sins as opposite to the
hardness of their hearts, and let this adulterous matter of divorce pass ever
unreprov'd. This is also to be marvell'd at, that seeing Christ did not condemn
whatever it was that Moses suffered, and that thereupon the Christian Magistrate
permits usury and open stews, and here with us adultery to be so slightly
punished, which was punished by death to these hard-hearted Jews, why we should
strain thus at the matter of divorce, which may stand so much with charity to
permit, and make no scruple to allow usury, esteemed to be so much against
charity. But this it is to embroile our selves against the righteous and all
wise judgments and statutes of God; which are not variable and contrarious, as
we would make them, one while permitting and another while forbidding, but are
most constant and most harmonious each to other. For how can the incorrupt and
majestic law of God, bearing in her hand the wages of life and death, harbor
such a repugnance within her self, as to require an unexempted and impartial
obedience to all her decrees, either from us or from our Mediator, and yet
debase her self to faulter so many ages with circumcised adulteries, by unclean
and slubbe^ing permissions.

Yet Beza's opinion is that a politic law, but what politic law I know not,
unless one of Matchiavel's, may regulate sin; may bear indeed, I grant, with
imperfection for a time, as those Canons of the Apostles did in ceremonial
things: but as for sin, the essence of it cannot consist with rule; and if the
law fall to regulate sin, and not to take it utterly away, it necessarily
confirms and establishes sin. To make a regularity of sin by law, either the
law must straiten sin into no sin, or sin must crook the law into no law. The
judicial law can serve to no other end then to be the protector and champion of
Religion and honest civility, as is set down plainly Romans 13. and is but the
arm of moral law, which can no more be separate from Justice then Justice from
virtue: their office also in a different manner steares the same course; the one
teaches what is good by precept, the other unteaches what is bad by punishment.
But if we give way to politic dispensations of lewd uncleanness, the first
good consequence of such a relaxe will be the justifying of papal stews, joined
with a toleration of epidemick whordom. Justice must revolt from the end of her
authority, and become the patron of that whereof she was created the punisher.
The example of usury, which is commonly alleged makes against the allegation
which it brings, as I touched before. Besides that usury, so much as is
permitted by the Magistrate, and demanded with common equity, is neither
against the word of God, nor the rule of charity, as has been often discus't
by men of eminent learning and judgment. There must be therefore some other
example found out to show us wherein civil policy may with warrant from God
settle wickedness by law, and make that lawful which is lawless. Although I
doubt not but upon deeper consideration, that which is true in Physic, will be
found as true in polity: that as of bad pulses those that beat most in order,
are much wors then those that keep the most inordinate circuit, so of popular
vices those that may be committed legally, will be more pernicious then those
which are left to their own course at peril, not under a stinted privilege to
sin orderly and regularly, which is an implicit contradiction, but under due
and fearles execution of punishment. The political law, since it cannot
regulate vice, is to restrain it, by using all means to root it out: but if it
suffer the weed to grow up to any pleasurable or contented higth upon what
pretext soever, it fastens the root, it prunes and dresses vice, as if it were
a good plant. Lastly, if divorce were granted, as he says, not for men, but to
release afflicted wives, certainly it is not only a dispensation, but a most
merciful Law: and why it should not yet be in force, being wholly as
needful, I know not what can be in cause but senseless cruelty. Esteeming
therefore to have asserted thus an injured law of Moses from the unwarranted and
guilty name of a dispensation, to be again a most equal and requisite law, we
have the word of Christ himself, that he came not to alter the least tittle of
it; and signifies no small displeasure against him that shall teach to do so.
On which relying, I shall not much waver to affirm that those words which are
made to intimate, as if they forbad all divorce but for adultery (though Moses
have constituted otherwise) those words taken circumscriptly, without regard to
any precedent law of Moses or attestation of Christ himself, or without care to
preserve those his fundamental and superior laws of nature and charity, to
which all other ordinances give up their seals, are as much against plain
equity, and the mercy of religion, as those words of Take, eat, this is my
body, elementally understood, are against nature and scuse.

And surely the restoring of this degraded law, has well recompenc't the
diligence was used, by enlightening us further to find out wherefore Christ took
off the Pharisees from alleging the law, and referred them to the first
institution, not condemning, altering, or abolishing this precept of divorce,
which is plainly moral, for that were against his truth, his promise, and his
prophetic office; but knowing how fallaciously they had cited, and concealed
the particular and natural reason of the law, that they might justify any
froward reason of their own, he lets go that sophistry unconvinc't, for that
had bin to teach them else; which his purpose was not. And since they had taken
a liberty which the law gave not, he amuses and repells their tempting pride
with a perfection of paradise, which the law required not; not thereby to oblige
our performance to that whereto the law never enjoined the fallen estate of man;
for if the first institution must make wedlock, whatever happen, inseparable to
us, it must make it also as perfect, as meetly helpful, and as comfortable as
God promised it should be, at least in some degree, otherwise it is not equal
or proportionable to the strength of man, that he should be reduced into such
indissoluble bonds to his assured misery, if all the other conditions of that
covenant be manifestly altered.

Next he says, they must be one flesh, which, when all conjecturing is don,
will be found to import no more but only to make legitimate and good the carnal
act, which else might seem to have something of pollution in it: And inferrs thus
much over, that the fit union of their souls be such as may even incorporate
them to love and amity; but that can never be where no correspondence is of the
mind; nay instead of being one flesh, they will be rather two carcasses
chained unnaturally together; or as it may happ'n, a living soul bound to a
dead corpse, a punishment too like that inflicted by the tyrant Mezentius; so
little worthy to be received as that remedy of lonelines which God meant us.
Since we know it is not the joining of another body will remove lonelines, but
the uniting of another compliable mind; and that it is no blessing but a
torment, nay a base and brutish condition to be one flesh, unless where nature
can in some measure fix a unity of disposition.

Lastly, Christ himself tells us who should not be put asunder, namely, those
whom God has joined. A plain solutio^ of this great controversy, if men would
but use their eyes; for when is it that God may be said to join, when the
parties and their friends consent? No surely; for that may concur to leudest
ends, or is it when Church-rites are finished? Neither; for the efficacy of
those depends upon the presupposed fitnes of either party. Perhaps after carnal
knowledge? lest of all: for that may join persons whom neither law nor nature
dares join; it is left, that only then, when the minds are fitly disposed, and
enabled to maintain a cherfull conversation, to the solace and love of each
other, according as God intended and promised in the very first foundation of
matrimony, I will make him a help meet for him; for surely what God intended
and promised, that only can be thought to be of his joining, and not the
contrary. So likewise the Apostle witnesses 1 Cor. 7. 15. that in marriage God
has called us to peace. And doubtless in what respect he has called us to
marriage, in that also he has joined us. The rest whom either disproportion or
deadnes of spirit, or something distasteful and avers in the immutable bent of
nature renders unco^jugal, error may have joined; but God never joined against
the meaning of his own ordinance. And if he joynd them not, then is there no
power above their own consent to hinder them from unjoyning; when they cannot
reap the soberest ends of being together in any tolerable sort. Neither can it
be said properly that such twain were ever divorc't, but only parted from each
other, as two persons unconjunctive, and unmariable together. But if, whom God
has made a fit help, frowardnes or private injuries have made unfit, that
being the secret of marriage God can better judge then man, neither is man
indeed fit or able to decide this matter; however it be, undoubtedly a
peaceful divorce is a less evil and less in scandal then a hateful hard
hearted and destructive continuance of marriage in the judgment of Moses, and
of Christ, that justifies him in choosing the less evil, which if it were an
honest and civil prudence in the law, what is there in the Gospel forbidding
such a kind of legal wisdom, though we should admit the common Expositers.

Having thus unfoulded those ambiguous reasons, wherewith Christ, as his wont
was, gave to the Pharisees that came to sound him, such an answer as they
deserved, it will not be uneasy to explain the sentence it self that now
follows, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and
shall marry another, commits adultery. First therefore I will set down what
is observed by Grotius upon this point, a man of general learning. Next I
produce what mine own thoughts gave me, before I had seen his annotations.
Origin, says he, notes that Christ named adultery rather as one example of
other like cases, then as one only exception. And that it is frequent not only
in human but in divine Laws to express one kind of fact, whereby other causes
of like nature may have the like plea: as Exodus 21. 18, 19, 20. 26. Deuteronomy. 19.
5. And from the maxims of civil Law he shows that even in sharpest penal laws,
the same reason has the same right: and in gentler laws, that from like causes
to like the Law interprets rightly. But it may be objected, says he, that
nothing destroys the end of wedlock so much as adultery. To which he answers
that marriage was not ordained only for copulation, but for mutual help and
comfort of life; and if we mark diligently the nature of our Saviors commands,
we shall find that both their beginning and their end consists in charity:
whose will is that we should so be good to others, as that we be not cruel to
our selves. And hence it appears why Mark and Luke and St. Paul to the Cor.
mentioning this precept of Christ, add no exception; because exceptions that
arise from natural equity are included silently under general terms: it would
be considered therefore whether the same equity may not have place in other
cases less frequent. Thus far he. From hence, is what I add: first, that
this saying of Christ, as it is usually expounded, can be no law at all, that
man for no cause should separate but for adultery, except it be a supernatural
law, not binding us, as we now are: had it bin the law of nature, either the
Jews, or some other wise and civil Nation would have pres't it: or let it be
so; yet that law Deuteronomy. 24. 1. whereby a man has leave to part, whenas for just
and natural cause discovered he cannot love, is a law ancienter, and deeper
ingrav'n in blameles nature then the other: therefore the inspired Lawgiver
Moses took care that this should be specified and allowed: the other he let
vanish in silence, not once repeated in the volume of his law, even as the
reason of it vanished with Paradise. Secondly, this can be no new command, for
the Gospel enjoins no new morality, save only the infinite enlargement of
charity, which in this respect is called the new Commandment by St. John; as
being the accomplishment of every command. Thirdly, It is no command of
perfection further then it partakes of charity, which is the bond of
perfection. Those commands therefore which compel us to self-cruelty above our
strength, so hardly will help forward to perfection, that they hinder and set
backward in all the common rudiments of Christianity; as was proved. It being
thus clear, that the words of Christ can be no kind of command, as they are
vulgarly taken, we shall now see in what sense they may be a command, and that
an excellent one, the same with that of Moses, and no other. Moses had granted
that only for a natural annoyance, defect, or dislike, whether in body or mind,
(for so the Hebrew words plainly note) which a man could not force himself to
live with, he might give a bill of divorce; thereby forbidding any other cause
wherein amendment or reconciliation might have place. This law the Pharisees
depraving, extended to any slight contentious cause whatsoever. Christ therefore
seeing where they halted, urges the negative part of that law, which is
necessarily understood (for the determinate permission of Moses binds them from
further license) and checking their supercilious drift, declares that no
accidental, temporary, or reconciliable offense, except fornication, can
justify a divorce: he touches not here those natural and perpetual hindrances
of society, which are not to be removed: for such, as they are aptest to cause
an unchangeable offense, so are they not capable of reconcilement, because not
of amendment. Thus is Moses law here solidly confirmed; and those causes which
he permitted, not a jot gainsaid. And that this is the true meaning of this
place, I prove also by no less an Author then St. Paul himself, 1 Cor. 7. 10,
11. upon which text Interpreters agree, that the Apostle only repeats the
precept of Christ: where while he speaks of the wives reconcilement to her
husband, he puts it out of controversy, that our Savior meant only matters of
strife and reconcilement; of which sort he would not that any difference should
be the occasion of divorce, except fornication.

But because we know that Christ never gave a judicial law, and that the word
fornication is variously significant in Scripture, it will be much right don to
our Saviors words, to consider diligently, whether it be meant here, that
nothing but actual fornication, proved by witness, can warrant a divorce; for so
our Canon Law judges. Nevertheless, as I find that Grotius on this place has
observed, the Christian Emperors, Theodosius the second, and Justinian, men of
high wisdom and reputed piety, decreed it to be a divorsive fornication, if
the wife attempted either against the knowledge, or obstinately against the
will of her husband, such things as gave open suspicion of adulterizing; as the
wilful haunting of feasts, and invitations with men not of her near kindred,
the lying forth of her house without probable cause, the frequenting of Theaters
against her husbands mind, her endeavor to prevent, or destroy conception.
Hence that of Ierom, Where fornication is suspected, the wife may lawfully be
divorc't; not that every motion of a jealous mind should be regarded, but that
it should not be exacted to prove all things by the visibility of Law
witnessing, or else to hood-wink the mind: for the Law is not able to judge of
these things but by the rule of equity, and by permitting a wise man to walk
the middle-way of a prudent circumspection, neither wretchedly jealous, nor
stupidly and tamely patient. To this purpose has Grotius in his notes. He
shows also that fornication is taken in Scripture for such a continual
headstrong behavior, as tends to plain contempt of the husband: and proves it
out of Judges 19. 2. where the Levites wife is said to have played the whoor
against him; which Josephus and the Septuagint, with the Chaldaean, interpret
only of stubbornnes and rebellion against her husband: and to this I add that
Kimchi and the two other Rabbis who gloss the text, are in the same opinion.
Ben Gersom reasons that had it bin whoordom, a Jew and Levite would have
disdained to fetch her again. And this I shall co^tribute, that had it bin
whoordom she would have chosen any other place to run to, then to her fathers
house, it being so infamous for an hebrew woman to play the harlot, and so
opprobrious to the parents. Fornication then in this place of the Judges, is
understood for stubborn disobedience against the husband, and not for adultery.
A sin of that sudden activity, as to be already committed, when no more is don,
but only looked unchastly: which yet I should be loath to judge worthy a
divorce, though in our Saviors language it be called adultery. Nevertheless,
when palpable and frequent signs are given, the law of God Number. 5. so far gave
way to the jealousy of a man, as that the woman set before the Sanctuary with
her head uncovered, was adju^'d by the Priest to swear whether she were falls or
no; and constrained to drink that bitter water with an undoubted curse of
rottenness, and tympany to follow, unless she were innocent. And the jealous
man had not bin guiltles before God, as seems by the last ver. if having such a
suspicion in his head he should neglect this trial, which, if to this day it be
not to be used, or be thought as uncertain of effect, as our antiquated law of
Ordalium, yet all equity will judge that many adulterous demeanors which are of
lewd suspicion and example, may be held sufficient to incur a divorce; though
the act it self has not bin proved. And seeing the generosity of our Nation is
so, as to account no reproach more abominable, then to be nicknam'd the husband
of an adultresse, that our law should not be as ample as the law of God to
vindicate a man from that ignoble sufferance, is our barbarous unskilfulnes,
not considering that the law should be exasperated according to our estimation
of the injury. And if it must be suffered till the act be visibly proved,
Solomon himself whose judgment will be granted to surpass the acutenes of any
Canonist, confesses Prove. 30. 19, 20. that for the act of adultery, it is as
difficult to be found as the track of an Eagle in the air, or the way of a ship
in the Sea: so that a man may be put to unmanly indignities, ere it be found
out. This therefore may be anough to inform us that divorsive adultery is not
limited by our Savior to the utmost act, and that to be attested always by
eyewitness: but may be extended also to diverse obvious actions, which either
plainly lead to adultery, or give such presumtion whereby sensible men may
suspect the deed to be already don. And this the rather may be thought, in that
our Savior chose to use the word fornication, which word is found to signify
other matrimonial transgressions of main breach to that Covenant besides actual
adultery. Thus at length we see both by this and by other places, that there
is scarce any one saying in the Gospel, but must be read with limitations and
distinctions, to be rightly understood; for Christ gives no full comments or
continued discourses, but scatters the heavenly grain of his doctrine like pearl
here and there, which requires a skillful and laborious gatherer; who must
compare the words he finds, with other precepts, with the end of every
ordinance, and with the general analogy of Evangelick doctrine: otherwise many
particular sayings would be but strange repugnant riddles; and the Church would
offend in granting divorce for frigidity, which is not here excepted with
adultery, but by them added. And this was it undoubtedly which gave reason to
St. Paul of his own authority, as he professes, and without command from the
Lord, to enlarge the seeming construction of those places in the Gospel, by
adding a case wherein a person deserted which is something less then divorc't,
may lawfully marry again. And having declared his opinion in one case, he leaves
a further liberty for christian prudence to determine in cases of like
importance; using words so plain as are not to be shifted off, that a brother
or a sister is not under bondage in such cases; adding also, that God has
called us to peace in marriage. Now if it be plain that a Christian may be
brought into unworthy bondage, and his religious peace not only interrupted now
and then, but perpetually and finally hinderd in wedlock by mis-yoking with a
diversity of nature as well as of religion, the reasons of St Paul cannot be
made special to that one case of infidelity, but are of equal moment to a
divorce wherever Christian liberty and peace are without fault equally
obstructed. That the ordinance which God gave to our comfort, may not be pinned
upon us to our undeserved thraldom; to be coop't up as it were in mockery of
wedlock, to a perpe^tual betrothed lonelines and discontent, if nothing wors
ensue. There being naught else of marriage left between such, but a displeasing
and forced remedy against the sting of a brute desire; which fleshly
accustoming without the souls union and commixture of intellectual delight, as
it is rather a soiling then a fulfilling of mariage-rites, so is it anough to
imbase the mettle of a generous spirit, and sinks him to a low and vulgar pitch
of endeavor in all his actions, or, which is wors, leaves him in a dispairing
plight of abject and hard'n'd thoughts: which condition, rather then a good man
should fall into, a man useful in the service of God and mankind, Christ
himself has taught us to dispense with the most sacred ordinances of his
worship; even for a bodily healing to dispense with that holy and speculative
rest of Sabbath; much more then with the erroneous observance of an
illknottedmariage for the sustaining of an overcharged faith and perseverance.

And though bad causes would take license by this pretext, if that cannot be
remedied, upon their conscience be it, who shall so do. This was that hardness
of heart, and abuse of a good law which Moses was content to suffer rather then
good men should not have it at all to use needfully. And he who to run after
one lost sheep left ninety nine of his own flock at random in the Wilderness,
would little perplex his thought for the obduring of nine hundred and ninety
such as will daily take wors liberties whether they have permission or not. To
conclude, as without charity God has given no commandment to men, so without
it, neither can men rightly believe any commandment givn. For every act of true
faith, as well that whereby we believe the law, as that whereby we endeavor the
law is wrought in us by charity: according to that in the divine hymn of St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 13. Charity believes all things: not as if she were so credulous,
which is the exposition hitherto current, for that were a trivial praise, but
to teach us that charity is the high governesse of our belief, and that we
cannot safely assent to any precept writt'n in the Bible, but as charity
commends it to us. Which agrees with that of the same Apostle to the Ephesians. 4.
14, 15. where he tells us that the way to get a sure undoubted knowledge of
things, is to hold that for truth, which accords most with charity. Whose
unerring guidance and conduct having followed as a loadstarre with all
diligence and fidelity in this question, I trust, through the help of that
illuminating Spirit which has favored me, to have don no every days work: in
asserting after many ages the words of Christ with other Scriptures of great
concernment from burdensome and remorsles obscurity, tangl'd with manifold
repugnances, to their native luster and consent between each other: heerby also
dissolving tedious and Gordian difficulties, which have hitherto molested the
Church of God, and are now decided not with the sword of Alexander, but with
the immaculate hands of charity, to the unspeakable good of Christendom And let
the extrem literalist sit down now and revolve whether this in all necessity be
not the due result of our Saviors words; or if he persist to be otherwise
opinion'd, let him well advise, lest thinking to gripe fast the Gospel, he be
found in stead with the canon law in his fist: whose boistrous edicts
tyrannizing the blessed ordinance of marriage into the quality of a most
unnatural and unchristianly yoke, have given the flesh this advantage to hate
it, and turn aside, oft-times unwillingly, to all dissolute uncleanness, even
till punishment it self is weary and overcome by the incredible frequency of
trading lust, and uncontroull'd adulteries. Yet men whose Creed is custom, I
doubt not but will be still endeavoring to hide the sloth of their own timorous
capacities with this pretext, that for all this it is better to endure with
patience and silence this affliction which God has sent And I agree it is true;
if this be exhorted and not enjoined; but withal, it will be wisely don to be
as sure as may be, that what man's iniquity has laid on, be not imputed to Gods
sending; least under the color of an affected patience we detain our selves
at the gulphs mouth of many hideous temptations, not to be withstood without
proper gifts, which as Perkins well notes, God gives not ordinarily, no not to
most earnest prayers. Therefore we pray, Lead us not into temptation. a vain
prayer, if having led our selves thither, we love to stay in that perilous
condition. God sends remedies, as well as evils; under which he who lies and
groans, that may lawfully acquitt himself, is accessory to his own ruin: nor
will it excuse him, though he suffer, through a sluggish fearfulnes to search
thoroughly what is lawful, for fear of disquieting the secure falsity of an
old opinion. Who doubts not but that it may be piously said to him who would
dismiss frigidity, bear your trial, take it as if God would have you live this
life of continence: if he exhort this, I hear him as an Angel, though he speak
without warrant: but if he would compel me, I know him for Satan. To him who
divorces an adulteress, Piety might say; Pardon her; you may show much mercy,
you may win a soul: yet the law both of God and man leaves it freely to him. For
God loves not to plow out the heart of our endeavors with over-hard and sad
tasks. God delights not to make a drudge of virtue, whose actions must be all
elective and unconstrained. Forced virtue is as a bolt overshot, it goes neither
forward nor backward, and does no good as it stands. Seeing therefore that
neither Scripture nor reason has laid this unjust austerity upon divorce, we
may resolv that nothing else has wrought it, but that letter-bound servility of
the Canon Doctors, supposing marriage to be a Sacrament, and out of the art they
have to lay unnecessary burdens upon all men, to make a fair show in the
fleshly observance of matrimony, though peace and love with all other conjugal
respects fare never so ill. And indeed the Papists who are the strictest
forbidders of divorce, are the easiest libertines to admit of grossest
uncleanness; as if they had a design by making wedlock a supportles yoke, to
violate it most, under color of preserving it most inviolable, and with all
delighting, as their mystery is, to make men the day-labourers of their own
affliction; as if there were such a scarsity of miseries from abroad, that we
should be made to melt our choicest home-blessings, and coin them into crosses,
for want whereby to hold commerce with patience. If any therefore who shall hap
to read this discourse, has bin through misadventure ill engaged in this
contracted evil here complained of, and finds the fits and workings of a high
impatience frequently upon him, of all those wild words which men in misery
think to ease themselves by uttering, let him not open his lips against the
providence of heaven, or tax the ways of God and his divine Truth; for they
are equal, easy, and not burdensome; nor do they ever cross the just and
reasonable desires of men, nor involve this our portion of mortal life, into a
necessity of sadness and malecontent, by Laws commanding over the unreducible
antipathies of nature sooner or later found: but allow us to remedy and shake
off those evils into which human error has led us through the midst of our
best intentions; and to support our incident extremities by that authentic
precept of sovran charity; whose grand Commission is to do and to dispose over
all the ordinances of God to man; that love and truth may advance each other to
everlasting. While we literally superstitious through customary faintnes of
heart, not venturing to pierce with our free thoughts into the full latitude of
nature and religion, abandon our selves to serve under the tyranny of usurpt
opinions, suffering those ordinances which were allotted to our solace and
reviving, to trample over us and hale us into a multitude of sorrows which God
never meant us. And where he set us in a fair allowance of way with honest
liberty and prudence to our guard, we never leave subtilizing and casuisting
till we have straitn'd and pared that liberal path into a razors edge to walk
on between a precipice of unnecessary mischief on either side: and starting at
every falls alarm, we do not know which way to set a foot forward with manly
confidence and Christian resolution, through the confused ringing in our ears,
of panick scruples and amazements.

Another act of papal encroachment it was, to pluck the power and arbitrament
of divorce from the master of family, into whose hands God and the law of all
Nations had put it, and Christ so left it, preaching only to the conscience,
and not authorizing a judicial Court to toss about and divulge the
unaccountable and secret reasons of disaffection between man and wife, as a
thing most improperly answerable to any such kind of trial. But the Popes of
Rome perceaving the great revenu and high authority it would give them, even
over Princes, to have the judging and deciding of such a main consequence in
the life of man as was divorce, wrought so upon the superstition of those ages,
as to divest them of that right which God from the beginning had entrusted to
the husband: by which means they subjected that ancient and naturally domestic
prerogative to an external and unbefitting judicature. For although differences
in divorce about dowries, jointures, and the like, besides the punishing of
adultery, ought not to pass without referring, if need be, to the Magistrate,
yet for him to interpose his jurisdictive power upon the inward and
irremediable disposition of man, to command love and sympathy, to forbid
dislike against the guiltles instinct of nature, is not within the province of
any law to reach, and were indeed an uncommodious rudenes, not a just power.
For if natures resistles sway in love or hate be once compelled, it grows
careless of it self, vicious, useles to friend, unserviceable and spiritles to
the Commonwealth. Which Moses rightly foresaw, and all wise Lawgivers that ever
knew man, what kind of creature he was. The Parliament also and Clergy of
England were not ignorant of this, when they consented that Harry the 8th might
put away his Q. Anne of Cleve, whom he could not like, after he had bin wedded
half a year; unles it were that contrary to the Proverb, they made a necessity
of that which might have bin a virtue in them to do. For even the freedom and
eminence of man's creation gives him to be a Law in this matter to himself,
being the head of the other sex which was made for him: whom therefore though
he ought not to injure, yet neither should he be forced to retain in society to
his own overthrow, nor to hear any judge therein above himself. It being also an
unseemly affront to the sequestered and veiled modesty of that sex, to have her
unpleasingnes and other concealements bandied up and down, and aggravated in
open Court by those hired masters of tongue-fence. Such uncomely exigences it
befell no less a Majesty then Henry th 8th to be reduced to; who finding just
reason in his conscience to forgo his brothers wife, after many indignities of
being deluded, and made a boy of by those his two cardinal Judges, was
constrained at last for want of other prooff, that she had bin carnally known
by Prince Arthur, even to uncover the nakedness of that virtuous Lady, and to
recite openly the obscene evidence of his brothers cha^berlain. Yet it pleased
God to make him see all the tyranny of Rome, by discovering this which they
exercised over divorce; and to make him the beginner of a reformation to this
whole Kingdom by first asserting into his familiary power the right of just
divorce. It Is true, an adultres cannot be shamed anough by any public
proceeding; but that woman whose honor is not appeach't, is less injured by a
silent dismission, being otherwise not illiberally dealth with, then to endure
a clamouring debate of utterles things, in a business of that civil secrecy and
difficult discerning, as not to be overmuch questioned by nearest friends.
Which drew that answer from the greatest and worthiest Roman of his time Paulus
Emilius, being demanded why he would put away his wife for no visible reason,
This Shoo, says he, and held it out on his foot, is a neat shoo, a new shoo,
and yet none of ye know where it wrings me? much less by the unfamiliar
cognizance of a fee'd gamester can such a private difference be examined,
neither ought it.

Lastly, All law is for some good that may be frequently attained without the
admixture of a wors inconvenience; but the Law forbidding divorce, never
attains to any good end of such prohibition, but rather multiplies evil. If it
aim at the establishment of matrimony, we know that cannot thrive under a
loathed and forced yoke, but is daily violated: if it seek to prevent the sin
of divorcing, that lies not in the law to prevent; for he that would divorce
and marry again, but for the law, has in the sight of God don it already.
Civil or political sin it never was, neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor by any
judicial intendment of Christ, only culpable as it transgresses the allowance
of Moses in the inward man, which not any law but conscience only can evince.
The law can only look whether it be an injury to the divorc't, which in truth
it can be none, as a mere separation; for if she consent, wherein has the law to
right her? or consent not, then is it either just and so deserved, or if
unjust, such in all likelihood was the divorcer, and to part from an unjust man
is a happiness, and no injury to be lamented. But suppose it be an injury, the
Law is not able to amend it, unless she think it other then a miserable
redress to return back from whence she was expelled, or but entreated to be
gone, or else to live apart still married without marriage, a married widow. Last,
if it be to chast'n the divorcer, what law punishes a deed which is not moral,
but natural, a deed which cannot certainly be found to be an injury, or how can
it be punished by prohibiting the divorce, but that the innocent must equally
partake? So that we see the Law can to no rational purpose forbid divorce, it
can only take care that the conditions of divorce be not injurious. But what?
Shall then the disposal of that power return again to the master of family?
Wherefore not? Since God there put it, and the presumptuous Canon thence bereft
it. This only must be provided, that the ancient manner be observed in presence
of the Minister, and other grave selected Elders; who after they shall have
admonisht and pressed upon him the words of our Savior, and he shall have
protested in the faith of the eternal Gospel, and the hope he has of happy
resurrection, that otherwise then thus he cannot do, and thinks himself, and
this his case not contained in that prohibition of divorce which Christ
pronounced, the matter not being of malice, but of nature, and so not capable
of reconciling, to constrain him surder were to unehristen him, to unman him,
to throw the mountain of Sinai upon him, with the weight of the whole Law to
boot, flat against the liberty and essence of the Gospel, and yet nothing
available either to the sanctity of marriage, the good of husband, wife, or
children, nothing profitable either to Church or Common wealth. But this would
bring in confusion. Be of good cheer, it would not: it wrought so little
disorder among the Jews that from Moses till after the captivity not one of the
Profets thought it worth rebuking; for that of Malachy well looked into, will
appear to be, not against divorcing, but rather against keeping strange
Concubines, to the vexation of their Hebrew wives. If therefore we Christians
may be thought as good and tractable as the Jews were, and certainly the
prohibiters of divorce presume us to be better, then less confusion is to be
feared for this among us then was among them. If we be wors, or but as bad,
which lamentable examples confirm we are, then have we more, or at least as
much need of this permitted law, as they to whom God expressly gave it under a
harsher covenant. Let not therefore the frailty of man go on thus inventing
needless troubles to it self to groan under the false imagination of a
strictnes never imposed from above, enjoining that for duty which is an
impossible and vain supererogating. Be not righteous overmuch, is the counsel
of Ecclesiastes; why shoulast thou destroy thy self? Let us not be thus
overcurious to strain at atoms, and yet to stop every vent and cranny of
permissive liberty: lest nature wanting those needful pores, and breathing
places which God has not debarred our weakness, either suddenly break out into
some wide rupture of open vice, and frantic heresy, or else inwardly fester
with repining and blasphemous thoughts, under an unreasonable and fruitles
rigor of unwarranted law. Against which evils nothing can more beseem the
religion of the Church or the wisdom of the State, then to consider timely and
provide. And in so doing, let them not doubt but they shall vindicate the
misreputed honor of God and his great Lawgiver, by suffering him to give his
own laws according to the condition of man's nature best known to him, without
the unsufferable imputation of dispencing legally with many ages of ratified
adultery. They shall recover the misattended words of Christ to the sincerity
of their true sense from manifold contradictions, and shall open them with the
key of charity. Many helples Christians they shall raise srom the depth of
sadness and distress, utterly unfitted, as they are, to serve God or man: many
they shall reclaim from obscure and giddy sects, many regain from dissolute
and brutish license, many from desperate hardness, if ever that were justly
pleaded. They shall set free many daughters of Israel, not wanting much of her
sad plight whom Satan had bound eighteen years. Man they shall restore to his
just dignity, and prerogative in nature, preferring the souls free peace before
the promiscuous draining of a carnal rage. Marriage from a perilous hazard and
snare, they shall reduce to be a more certain hav'n and retirement of happy
society; when they shall judge according to God and Moses, and how not then
according to Christ? when they shall judge it more wisdom and goodness to break
that covenant seemingly and keep it really, then by compulsion of la w to keep
it seemingly, and by compulsion of blameles nature to break it really, at least
if it were ever truly joined. The vigor of discipline they may then turn with
better success upon the prostitute loosenes of the times, when men finding in
themselves the infirmities of former ages, shall not be constrained above the
gift of God in them to unprofitable and impossible observances never required
from the civilest, the wisest, the holiest Nations, whose other excellencies in
moral virtue they never yet could equal. Last of all, to those whose mind still
is to maintain textual restrictions, whereof the bare sound cannot consist
sometimes with humanity, much less with charity, I would ever answer by putting
them in remembrance of a command above all commands, which they seem to have
forgot, and who spoke it; in comparison whereof this which they so exalt, is but
a petty and subordinate precept. Let them go therefore with whom I am loath to
couple them, yet they will needs run into the same blindness with the Pharisees,
let them go therefore and consider well what this lesson means, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice; for on that saying all the Law and Profets depend,
much more the Gospel whose end and excellence is mercy and peace: Or if they
cannot learn that, how will they hear this, which yet I shall not doubt to
leave with them as a conclusion: That God the Son has put all other things
under his own feet; but his Commandments he has left all under the feet of
charity.

The end.
Omitted pa. 19. lin. 28.
WHom thus to shut up and immure together, the one with a mischosen mate, the
other in a mistak'n calling, is not a course, etc.

Omitted pa. 24. lin. 22.
Uncertain good.] This only text not to be matched again throughout the whole
Scripture, whereby God in his perfet Law should seem to have granted to the hard
hearts of his holy people under his own hand a civil immunity and free charter
to live and die in a long successive adultery, under a covenant of works, till
the Messiah, and then that indulgent permission to be strictly denied by a
covenant of grace, besides the incoherence of such a doctrine, cannot, must not
be thus interpreted, to the raising of a paradox never known till then, only
hanging by the twined thread of one doubtful Scripture, against so many other
rules and leading principles of religion, of justice, and purity of life. For
what could be granted more either to the fear, or to the lust of any tyrant, or
politician, then this authority of Moses thus expounded; which opens him a way
at will to damme up justice, and not only to admit of any Romish, or Austrian
dispences, but to enact a Statute of that which he dares not seem to approve,
even to legitimate vice, to make sin it self a free Citizen of the
Commonwealth, pretending only these or these plausible reasons. And well he
might, all the while that Moses shall be alleged to have don as much without
showing any reason at all. Yet this could not enter into the heart of David,
Psalm 94. 20. how any such authority as endeavors to fashion wickedness by law,
should derive it self from God. And Isaiah lays woe upon them that decree
unrighteous decrees, 10. 1. Now which of these two is the better Lawgiver, and
which deserves most a woe he that gives out an Edict singly unjust, or he that
confirms to generations a fixed and unmolested impunity of that which is not
only held to be unjust, but also unclean, and both in a high degree, not only
as they themselves affirm, an injurious expulsion of one wife, but also an
unclean freedom by more then a patent to wed another adulterously? How can we
therefore with safety thus dangerously confine the free simplicity of our
Saviors meaning to that which merely amounts from so many letters, whenas it
can consist neither with his former and cautionary words, nor with other more
pure and holy principles, nor finally with the scope of charity, etc.


