Mr John Miltons CHARACTER OF THE Long Parliament AND ASSEMBLY of DIVINES In
MDCXLI.

Omitted in his other Works, and never before Printed, And very seasonable for
these times.



LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the Westend of St. Paul's, 1681.

TO THE READER.
THE Reader may take notice, That this Character of Mr. Miltons was a part of
his History of Britain, and by him designed to be Printed: But out of
tenderness to a Party, [whom neither this nor much more Lenity has had the luck
to oblige] it was struck out for some harshness, being only such a Digression,
as the History it self would not be discomposed by its omission: which I
suppose will be easily discerned, by reading over the beginning of the Third
Book of the said History, very near which place this Character is to come in.

It is reported (and from the foregoing Character it seems probable) that Mr.
Milton had lent most of his Personal Estate upon the Public Faith; which when
he somewhat earnestly and warmly pressed to have restored [observing how all in
Offices had not only feathered their own Nests, but had enricht many of their
Relations and Creatures, before the Public Debts were discharged] after a long
and chargeable Attendance, met with very sharp Rebukes; upon which at last
despairing of any Success in this Affair, he was forced to return from them
poor and friendless, having spent all his Money, and wearied all his Friends.
And he had not probably mended his worldly condition in those days, but by
performing such Service for them, as afterward he did, for which scarce any
thing would appear too great.

Mr. JOHN MILTONS Character OF THE Long Parliament In 1641.
OF these who swayed most in the late Troubles, few words as to this point may
suffice. They had Arms, Leaders, and Successes to their wish; but to make use
of so great an Advantage was not their skill.

To other causes therefore, and not to the want of Force, or Warlick Manhood in
the Britains, both those, and these lately, we must impute the ill Husbanding
of those fair Opportunities, which might seem to have put Liberty so long
desired, like a Bridle into their hands. Of which other causes equally
belonging to Ruler, Priest, and People, above has been related: which, as they
brought those Ancient Natives to Misery and Ruin, by Liberty, which, rightly
used, might have made them happy; so brought they these of late, after many
Labors, much Bloodshed, and vast expense, to Ridiculous Frustration: in whom
the like defects, the like Miscarriages notoriously appeared, with Vices not
less hateful or inexcusable.

For a Parliament being called, to Redress many things, as 'twas thought, the
People with great Courage, and expectation to be eased of what Discontented
them, chose to their behoof in Parliament, such as they thought best affected
to the Public Good, and some indeed Men of Wisdom and Integrity; the rest, [to
be sure the greater part,] whom Wealth or ample Possessions, or bold and active
Ambition [rather than Merit] had commended to the same place.

But when once the superficial Zeal and Popular Fumes that acted their New
Magistracy were cooled, and spent in them, straight every one betook himself,
setting the Commonwealth behind, his private Ends before, to do as his own
profit or ambition led him. Then was Justice delayed, and soon after denied:
Spite and Favor determined all: Hence Faction, thence Treachery, both at home
and in the Field: Every where Wrong, and Oppression: Foul and Horrid Deeds
committed daily, or maintained, in secret, or in open. Some who had been called
from Shops and Warehouses, without other Merit, to sit in Supreme Councels and
Committees, [as their Breeding was] fell to Huckster the Commonwealth. Others
did thereafter as Men could sooth and humor them best; so he who would give
most, or under Covert of Hypocritical Zeal, insinuate basest, enjoyed
unworthily the Rewards of Learning and Fidelity; or escaped the punishment of
his Crimes and Misdeeds. Their Votes and Ordinances, which Men looked should
have contained the Repealing of Bad Laws, and the immediate Constiturion of
better, resounded with nothing else, but new Impositions, Taxes, Excises;
Yearly, Monthly, Weekly. Not to reckon the Offices, Gifts, and Preferments
bestowed and shared among themselves: They in the mean while, who were ever
faithfullest to this Cause, and freely aided them in Person, or with their
Substance, when they durst not compel either, slighted, and bereaved after, of
their just Debts by greedy Sequestrations, were tossed up and down after
miserable Attendance from one Committee to another with Petitions in their
hands, yet either mist the obtaining of their suit, or though it were at length
granted, [mere shame and reason oft-times extorting from them at least a show
of Justice] yet by their Sequestratours and Sub-committees abroad, Men for the
most part of insatiable hands, and noted Disloyalty, those Orders were commonly
disobeyed: which for certain durst not have been, without secret compliance, if
not compact with some Superiors able to bear them out. Thus were their Friends
consiscate in their Enemies, while they forfeited their Debtours to the State,
as they called it, but indeed to the Ravening Seizure of innumerable Thieves in
Office: Yet were withal no less burdened in all extraordinary Assesments and
Oppressions, than those whom they took to be disaffected: Nor were we happier
Creditours to what we called the State, than to them who were Sequestered as the
States Enemies.

For that Faith which ought to have been kept as Sacred and Inviolable as any
thing holy, The Public Faith, after infinite Sums received, and all the Wealth
of the Church not better employed, but swallowed up into a private Gulf, was
not ere long ashamed to confess Bankrupt. And now besides the sweetness of
Bribery, and other gain, with the love of Rule, their own Guiltiness, and the
dreaded name of just Account, which the People had long called for, discovered
plainly that there were of their own number, who secretly contrived and
fomented those Troubles and Combustions in the Land, which openly they sat to
remedy; and would continually find such work, as should keep them from being
ever brought to that Terrible stand, of laying down their Authority for lack of
new business, or not drawing it out to any length of Time, though upon the Ruin
of a whole Nation.

And if the State were in this plight, Religion was not in much better; to
Reform which, a certain number of Divines were called, neither chosen by any
Rule or Custom Ecclesiastical, nor eminent for either Piety or Knowledge above
others left out; only as each Member of Parliament in his private Fancy thought
fit, so elected one by one. The most part of them were such, as had Preached
and cried down, with great show of Zeal, the Avarice and Pluralities of Bishops
and Prelates; that one Cure of Souls was a full Employment for one Spiritual
Pastor how able soever, if not a charge rather above humane strength. Yet
these Conscientious men (ere any part of the work done for which they came
together, and that on the Public Salary) wanted not boldness, to the Ignominy
and Scandal of their Pastor-like Profession, and especially of their boasted
Reformation, to seize into their hands, or not unwillingly to accept [besides
one, sometimes two or more of the best Livings] Collegiate Masterships in the
Universities, rich Lectures in the City, setting Sail to all Winds that might
blow Gain into their covetous Bosoms: By which means these great Rebukers of
Non-Residence, among so many distant Cures, were not ashamed to be seen so
quickly Pluralists and Non-Residents themselves, to a fearful Condemnation
doubtless by their own Mouths. And yet the main Doctrine for which they took
such pay, and insisted upon with more vehemence than Gospel, was but to tell us
in effect, that their Doctrine was worth nothing, and the Spiritual Power of
their Ministry less available than Bodily Compulsion; persuading the Magistrate
to use it, as a stronger means to subdue and bring in Conscience, than
Evangelical persuasion: Distrusting the Virtue of their own Spiritual weapons,
which were given them, if they be rightly called, with full warrant of
sufficiency to pull down all thoughts and imaginations that exalt themselves
against God. But while they taught compulsion without convincement, which not
long before they complained of, as executed unchristianly, against themselves,
these intents are clear to have been no better than Antichristian: setting up a
Spiritual Tyranny by a Secular power, to the advancing of their own Authority
above the Magistrate, whom they would have made their Executioner, to punish
Church-Dellnquencies, whereof Civil Laws have no cognizance.

And well did their Disciples manifest themselves to be no better principled
than their Teachers, trusted with Committeeships and other gainful Offices,
upon their commendations for Zealous, [and as they stickt not to term them]
Godly men; but executing their places like Children of the Devil, unfaithfully,
unjustly, unmercifully, and where not corruptly, stupidly. So that between them
the Teachers, and these the Disciples, there has not been a more ignominious
and mortal wound to Faith, to Piety, to the work of Reformation, nor more cause
of Blaspheming given to the Enemies of God and Truth, since the first Preaching
of Reformation.

The People therefore looking one while on the Statists, whom they beheld
without constancy or firmness, laboring doubtfully beneath the weight of their
own too high undertakings, busiest in petty things, trifling in the main,
deluded and quite alienated, expressed diverse ways their disaffection; some
despising whom before they honored, some deserting, some inveighing, some
conspiring against them. Then looking on the Churchmen, whom they saw under
subtle Hypocrisy to have Preached their own Follies, most of them not the
Gospel, Time-servers, Covetous, Illiterate Persecutors, not lovers of the
Truth, like in most things whereof they accused their Predecessors: Looking on
all this, the People which had been kept warm a while with the counterfeit zeal
of their Pulpits, after a false heat, became more cold and obdurate than
before, some turning to Lewdness, some to flat Atheism, put beside their old
Religion, and foully scandalized in what they expected should be new.

Thus they who of late were extolled as our greatest Deliverers, and had the
People wholly at their Devotion, by so discharging their Trust as we see, did
not only weaken and unfit themselves to be dispensers of what Liberty they
pretended, but unfitted also the People, now grown worse and more disordinate,
to receive or to digest any Liberty at all. For Stories teach us, that Liberty
sought out of season, in a corrupt and degenerate Age, brought Rome itself into
a farther Slavery: For Liberty has a sharp and double edge, fit only to be
handled by Just and Virtuous Men; to bad and dissolute, it becomes a mischief
unweildy in their own hands: neither is it completely given, but by them who
have the happy skill to know what is grievance, and unjust to a People, and how
to remove it wisely; what good Laws are wanting, and how to frame them
substantially, that good Men may enjoy the freedom which they merit, and the
bad the Curb which they need. But to do this, and to know these exquisite
proportions, the Heroic Wisdom which is required, surmounted far the
Principles of these narrow Politicians: what wonder then if they sunk as these
unfortunate Britains before them, entangled and oppressed with things too hard;
and generous above their strain and temper? For Britain, to speak a truth not
often spoken, as it is a Land fruitful enough of Men stout and courageous in
War, so is it naturally not over-fertile of Men able to govern justly and
prudently in Peace, trusting only in their Mother-Wit; who consider not justly,
that Civility, Prudence, love of the Public good, more than of Money or vain
Honor, are to this Soil in a manner Outlandish; grow not here, but in minds
well implanted with solid and elaborate Breeding, too impolitick else and rude,
if not headstrong and intractable to the industry and virtue either of
executing or understanding true Civil Government. Valiant indeed, and
prosperous to win a field; but to know the end and Reason of winning,
unjudicious and unwise: in good or bad Success alike unteachable. For the Sun
which we want, ripens Wits as well as Fruits; and as Wine and Oil are Imported
to us from abroad: so must ripe Understanding, and many civil Virtues, be
imported into our minds from Foreign Writings, and examples of best Ages, we
shall else miscarry still, and come short in the attempts of any great
Enterpise. Hence did their Victories prove as fruitless, as their losses
dangerous; and left them still conquering under the same grievances, that men
suffer conquered: which was indeed unlikely to go otherwise, unless men more
than vulgar bred up, as few of them were, in the knowledge of Ancient and
Illustrious Deeds, invincible against many and vain Titles, impartial to
Friendship and Relations, had conducted their Affairs* but then from the
Chapman to the Retailer* many whose Ignorance was more audaciou* than the rest,
were admitted with all their fordid Rudiments to bear no mean sway among them,
both in Church and State.

From the confluence of all their Errors, Mischiefs, and Misdemeanous, what in
the eyes of Man could be expected, but what befell those Ancient Inhabitants
whom they so much resembled, Confusion in the end?

But on these things, and this Parallel, having enough insisted, I return to
the story which gave us matter of this Digression.

FINIS.

