THE THOUGHTS OF A Private Person; About the JUSTICE OF THE Gentlemen's
Undertaking AT YORK. Nov. 1688.

Wherein is showed, That it is neither against Scripture, nor Moral honesty, to
defend their Just and Legal Rights, against the Illegal Invaders of them.

Occasioned then by some Private Debates, and now submitted to better
Judgments.

Printed in the Year 1689.

The present Undertaking of the Gentlemen at YORK, Nov. 88. taken into
Consideration; wherein is showed, That it is neither against Scripture, nor
moral Honesty, to defend their Just and Legal Rights against the Illegal and
Unjust Invaders of them, by way of Objection and Answer.
FIrst, That it is not against Scripture is showed, Obj. 1, 2, 3. 2. That it is
not inconsistent with the Frame of the Government in General, Obj. 4. 3. Not
against the Law, but the Law-breakers, Obj. 5. 4. Not Rebellion, Obj. 6. 5. No
Usurpation of the Power of the Sword, Obj. 7. 6. No unlawful Act in a moral
Sense, Obj. 8. 7. Not against true Allegiance, Obj. 9. 8. Not against the
Declaration in a Legal Sense, Obj. 10. 9. Not against Political Power, but
Force without Political Power, Obj. 11. 10. Not against any Royal Prerogative
in general, Obj. 12. 11. Not against the Supremacy, Obj. 13. 12. Not Criminal
Disobedience, Obj. 14. 13. Not incommodious or unsafe for the Public in
respect of the present and approaching Evils in removes, Obj. 15, 16. 14. No
disparagement to the Frame of the Government that cannot otherwise decide at
obstinate difference between King and People, Obj. 17. Lastly, The Conclusion,
showing, That Nonresistance of illegal Force, does in effect make all Monarchs
Arbitrary, and the People Slaves.
The Thoughts of a Private Person, etc.
MEN have three Rules to walk by, which we may call Laws, that is, Nature,
Reason, and Religion; and and answerable to these three a Christian has three
Principles, that is, Sensitive, Rational, and Spiritual, which I take to be the
distinction that St. Paul makes, 1 These. 5.23. I pray God your whole Spirit,
Soul and Body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Nature considers all Men as single Persons, and directs them to Self-interest
and Self-preservation, as the chief end. Reason considers Men as sociable
Creatures, and directs them to unite the Government for the public Good
(inclusive of their own Safety) as the chief End. And the Spirit considers Men
as Candidates for Heaven, and directs them to live according to the Word of
God, that they may attain Eternal Happiness, the chief End of Man. All these
have the divine Warrant, and are of force where the Lower is not superseded by
the Higher. A single Person is not to expose himself to ruin, unless it be for
the Public good; and the Public are not to expose themselves to Beggary and
Slavery, unless it be for the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now though these Rules may be considered separate, and apart, yet they all
ought to be in a Christian Government. Laws for the public Good do not destroy
the Law of Nature, but supersede it for a greater Good; and the Laws of God do
not destroy the Law of Reason, but supersede it for a higher end, and so makes
it still more Reasonable to do so. Nothing therefore can justify a Private
Injury but the Public Good, and nothing can hinder the Public Good for being
carried on but Sin. For these Laws are not destructive but supportive of one
another, and all supportive of Man. When a Man cannot defend himself, by the
Method and Measures of the Public, (as in case of sudden Assaults) he may by
the Law of Nature, break the Peace and smite his Adversary to save his own
life, because humane. Laws can reward no Person's obedience with so good a
thing as life, and therefore, the public good excepted, his life is to be
preferred before all forms of Law. But it is not so with the Laws of God; for
if I be urged to deny my Faith, or dye, I must dye rather than break God's Law,
because God will give me a better Life, and an infinite Reward. Necessity can
suspend a positive Law of Man, that is merely such, but it cannot supersede
what is established by God or Nature; an Act therefore that is civilly
Unlawful, may notwithstanding be Lawful, because it is not Lawless, but under a
more extensive Law. If it be according to the Laws of God, or sound Reason, the
Conscience is safe, and the Act commendable before God and good Men, though it
be against the form of Political Law: For though it be against the Form, it is
not against the Reason of that Law; and the Form not being extensive enough of
Man's safety, it must give place to necessity, and absolve him of his duty,
when his duty would destroy him.

The Safety of Man shows us both the Necessity and End of humane Government;
for when private Persons found they could not be Safe, they were willing to
enter into Compacts and Associations, and reposite their private Safety in the
public Interest: And therefore if after this Association some of their Fellows
will break the Covenants, and go about to destroy the Rest, it is lawful, both
by the Laws of God and Man, for the injured to defend themselves; and by the
Laws and Compacts by them made, and consented to, on both sides, for the
public Good. Otherwise it would be unlawful to resist Injustice, and
consequently a Thief or a Robber.

Objets. 1. But you will say in all Governments there are Superiors and
Inferiors, and God has made Obedience a part of Religion, and consequently
conducive to a higher end than the Public Good, and therefore if the
Governors break the Laws, and introduce a Public Evil for a Private Interest,
they must not be resisted upon pain of Damnation.

Answ. This were a good Plea, if it were true, but God is not the Patron of
Injustice; and therefore he gives no Prince or Potentate more Authority over
the People than the Tables of the Government express, and of these there are
diverse degrees. Those that are Governed by the Will of their Prince, whose
Word is a Law, if he command their Persons for Slaves, or their Estates to
serve his Ambition, they must obey, and God requires it of them, because it is
the Prince's Right. Arbitrary Princes have a Political Power to treat a Subject
cruelly and inhumanely; their Immortality is an offense against God, not in
justice to the Subject who had given himself up to be used at their discretion.
But those that are to rule by Laws made for the Public Good, and such as
render the Subjects Freemen, not Slaves; such as secures their Religion,
Liberty and Property; if these Princes contrary to Law imprison their Persons,
or seize their Estates, they do it unjustly, without God's Warrant, or any
Political Authority, and may be resisted; or else we might not resist the
Devil, should he creep into the Court in a Jesuits habit, and Haman-like, get a
Commission to cut all our Throats.

If I be called to suffer for my Religion, or the Faith of Christ, I am bound
to suffer upon a mighty reasonable account: For first, It is the best way to
overcome, my Faith can Triumph so by no other Victory as by Death, for that is
a Victory never to be lost again* 2. Though I dye, the Tyrant has not his end,
but is by that means utterly defeated of it. And 3. I shall be an infinite
gainer by it, for I shall have an infinite Reward for what I suffer, and what I
lose.
But there is a vast difference between suffering for the Faith of Christ, and
for the frame of a Political Government; for if I may not resist I am overcome.
2. If I am overcome, the Tyrant gets his End; namely, an Arbitrary Power. And
3. He has promised no Reward for such Voluntary entering into Bondage, or
owning an usurped Authority.
The Church and the frame of the State stand upon Two several Bottoms, God has
promised to support the Church, and there needs no Arm of flesh to defend it
under the worst of Governments: But the frame of every Government is a Humane
Structure; and though God does empower and authorize every Government, yet he
has left the Choice of the several kinds to the Parties, and has promised to
bless them in the just Administration of their several Choices; but no where
has he promised to support the particular frame they chose, that as their
Prudence raised it, so their Prudence must defend it, or it must fall at every
King's pleasure, and when they have chosen out the Frame, God that approves it,
grants neither the King nor the People greater Privileges than the Frame it
self expresses, which in diverse Nations is different, some submitting to be
governed by the will of him they Voluntarily chose. Others to one that will
Govern by Laws of their own making, and his approving. Others to one of their
preceding Kings Race or Line. Others to a multitude. Others to a few of the
best and presumptively wisest Persons, and every Peoples choice must be the
measure of their Obedience, if they have made an ill Bargain they must stand to
it, and if they have made a good one they may stand for it. If therefore any
Governor challenge more of the Subject than is in the Submission, That Subjects
may by the Laws of God and Man deny to yield it. And if the Prince deny to give
the Subject as much as in the Grant, the Subject may challenge his Right, and
if by Force or Fraud, contrary to the Frame of the Government, the Governor
will force the Governed from his Right, the Obligation of subjection ceases so
far, and he may defend himself from the oppression and injustice as well as he
can.

Obj. 2. But he must defend himself in God's way, his defense must be without
Sin. And that is either by Prayers to God, or Entreaties to the Prince, or by
Suffering; for the Scripture says, all Power are of God, and they that resist
the Power, resist the Ordinance of God. Romans 13.2. And St. Peter gives
Christians in Charge, that they submit to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake.

Answ. All Powers indeed are of God, that is, every Government has God's
Warrant to proceed according to the Frame of the Government, to the End of the
Government, which is the public Good. The Power is of God, but the Restraint
of the Power is in the Frame of the Government, and the Frame is an humane
Ordinance or Structure, as the Apostle, elegantly Expresses it, (...) he
therefore that resists the Government, proceeds according to the Frame of
the Government, resists the Ordinance of God. But if the Governor proceed
neither according to the Frame of the Government, nor to the End, but against
it, such Process cannot be the Ordinance of God, unless God have two
contradictory Ordinances of Force, at one time in the same Government, and then
the command may be true and false, and the Subjects duty good and evil, and men
would be perpetually distracted with serving two Masters. This would make the
Government God's and the Devil's, and as no less than to put a Blasphemous
Juggle upon the Ordinance of God: which is always simple, and at one with it
self. These Scriptures therefore cannot tie us to obey the Governor contrary to
the Government, because they tie us to obey the Government; and that this is
all they tie us from resisting, is evident by the Reason, St. Paul gives, which
is, because the Resisters resist the Ordinance of God; and therefore it is
warily expressed, if it were but as warily read, for it is not whosoever
resists the person or the will of the Governor, but whosoever resists the
Power (and that Power is neither more nor less than the Frame of the Government
expresses) resists the Ordinance of God, and to this Resistance the Penalty
is annexed.

But it does not follow, because I may not resist the Ordinance of God, that I
may not resist the powerless and inauthoritative, unjust, Attempts of Superiors
upon me, for then a Soldier might not resist his Captain that would rob him,
nor a Married Manservant his Master that would force his Wife.

This I think evidences, That to resist a Superior and his evil Instruments
and Accomplices, while they Act contrary to the Frame of the Government, is not
to resist the Power of God, or the Ordinance of God, but to keep off those who
usurp upon the Power of God, and the Frame of the Government, and the just
Rights of others. For I would fain know of the Doctors of Non-resistance,
whether the Act that contains the Test, have the stamp of God's Authority upon
it or no; if it have not, the Power of the King and Parliament is no Power of
God; if it have, then to resist, that is to resist the Ordinance of God: And
those Commissions that are contrary to it, have no Power from God: If the
affirmative be true the negative is of no force. And therefore to resist such
Commissions, is not to resist the Ordinance of God, unless God's Ordinances be
contradictory, and that would render God guilty of double dealing, as well as
the Jesuits. Which being utterly impossible, it must be concluded, That the
resisting such Commissions, and the Instruments acting by them, is not to
resist Lawful Authority, but to remove Unlawful; not to do evil, but to hinder
it; not to sin, but to prevent Sinners for doing mischief; and it would be very
hard measure for a Man to be damned for doing such a good Office. Bishop
Bilson, therefore speaking of this Text, says, It is not resisting the King's
Will against Law, but according to Law that is forbidden. And both Barclay, and
Grotius affirm, That the People may in diverse Cases resist Kings that are tied
to govern by Law, which they could not do, did they think these Scriptures
forbad all resistance.

Much indeed is said from the Practice of the Jews, and the Primitive
Christians, and the Subjection of Servants, but nothing to the purpose; for
their Case is not ours, more than their frame of Government is ours; their
Servants were Slaves, and their Kings and Emperors Wills were their Laws;
their People had no Magna Chartaes to show, nor Fundamental Compacts, and so
could plead no injustice in any command, the frame of the Government. Warranted
all those commands that had the Royal pleasure: Their Political Power was more
extensive than their Moral Power. The People were wholly at the Mercy of the
Prince: All their Laws were Acts of Grace, not fundamental Reserves and
inherent Rights, and therefore in Spirituals they had no Cause to resist, and
in Temporals they might not, as was observed above. If they had been under
limited Governments as we are, we might have heard of Blows as well as Words,
St. Paul was never so virulent with his Tongue, as when he was smitten contrary
to Law.

Obj. 3. But the Person of the King is Sacred, and must not be touched.

Answ. I say so too; but it is his just Power that makes him so. And therefore
in dangerous times, he is to be counseled and persuaded to secure himself, by
keeping within the Sanctuary of the Laws, and holding them forth for the
Public Good, by gaining the Affections of the People, and being content with
that measure of Power that is proper to the Government. For if he do not, Right
may and ought to be defended, and resistance (for the Public Good) of Illegal
Commissioned Forces, is not resisting the King's Person, but his Forces; not
his Power, but his Force without Power. If none would execute the King's
contradictory Commands, none would resist; and if he will against all Justice,
Prudence and Persuasions, joys with wicked Men, and wilfully expose himself to
the mercy of blind Bullets, charge is to be given to all, that none kill him
wittingly or wilfully; the hand that lifted him up may not pull him down: God
forbid that any should think of killing him de industria, or despair of his
repentance before God does, nothing past can prejudice a Penitent before God,
and I hope not before Men; thus the King's Person and Power will be safe in the
midst of a Civil War, not so safe as in peaceable times, but as safe as can
consist with the Subjects Right, when their Religion and Laws, Liberty and
Property, are Violently invaded. And therefore if any thing befall his Person
by their hands, it is but a chance and accidental thing, which may happen also
in peaceable times.

This shows that Resisting the King's illegal commissioned Forces, in defense
of their own Rights, is not Resisting the Ordinance of God, and consequently no
Sin; and then the Conscience is not tied otherwise than the Laws of the Land,
and the particular Frame of the Government ties it.

Obj. 4. But to resist the King, or his Commissioners, is against the Frame of
the Government, it being a Monarchy, and against the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm.

Answ. If it be so, it is a great Sin; but as it is certain this is a Monarchy,
so it is certain that it is limited in the Foundation, otherwise the King would
have all the Legislative Power, and the Parliament no Authority or Right but
derived from him, and then he must be Arbitrary, and we Slaves, and all our
Laws must be Acts of Grace, not Fundamental Rights: Not from any inherent Power
refereed at the Institution to our selves, and never submitted to the Prince,
but from the Gracious condescension of an Absolute Monarch, which is contrary
to the Story of all times, which shows that the People ever claimed Liberty and
Property, according to their Ancient Laws and Customs, not as a Gift, but as a
Right inherent in themselves, and never Transferred, Aliened, or Conveyed to
any King, but Declared, Recognized and Confirmed to them by many.

I shall therefore suppose (what I thick none can upon sufficient grounds deny)
that the King is bound by all the sacred Ties of God and Man, to Govern by the
Laws, and not otherwise, neither by a Foreign Law, nor by one of his own
framing, nor by any Word or Will contrary to Law, seeing nothing can have the
force of Law here, but what has the joint Consent of King and Parliament, and
that in a Parliamentary way, and this shows us in Terms of Submission that are
sworn to on both sides. The King and the People by a joint consent makes Laws,
and make them the common Rule betwixt them, the King swears to observe the
Laws, and the People swear to obey the King, and to leave the Execution of the
Laws to the King to be managed for the public good.

Therefore as long as he Governs by Law, he and all his Ministers are safe
enough from Resistance, the Resister being liable to be punished both by God
and Man; and the sole administration being left to the King, Subjects all but
himself to Criminal Process, and even himself to Civil, but his Person and
Power are safe in both, he may be severe in the Execution of the Laws many
times, but not unjust; As, if he will not suspend a Burthensom Law, or Revive
an Antiquated one, when the Public good requires it, This may render him
uncharitable or imprudent, but he is safe yet; For though he be bound to
proceed according to Law, yet he is not tied to proceed always according to the
best Methods, when there are diverse. But if he stop the Courts of Justice,
erect new ones, or proceed contrary to Law, he Acts without Authority and
against his own Authority, and puts on a kind of a Vizard, that his Subjects
can neither know him nor their Duty; for it is the Laws that direct them to the
Person of the King, and their own Duty, without which they could know neither:
And if the End be not the Public Good it is downright Injustice, as well as
politically Powerless. Necessity indeed may justify a Political, unlawful Act
for the Public Good. As in case of an Invasion to burn a Garrison rather than
it should be a refuge for the Enemy, or to open Sluices and to drown a part of
the Country, for though these things have not the form of Law, they have the
reason, and that is Public Good: And therefore it is not Law but Necessity,
not the King's Command but Public Good, that warrants these Acts. And when
Peace returns, the Injured are to have satisfaction made by the Public, not as
of Charity, but as of Justice, which shows that the Law looks upon it as a
Trespass, justified only by Necessity and the Public Good. And the particular
Persons here, have reason to be quiet and make no resistance, because they
shall reap double benefit by it, one in the Public Good, and another from the
Public Treasure. But it does not follow, that if the King in an angry mood,
should command his Guards to fire Newmarket, because he had lost an Horse-race
there, or had a mind to have a Bonefire, because he had won one, that the
Inhabitants might not resist them.

Obj. 5. By what Law? Not by the Law of the Land?

Answ. Yes, By the Law of the Land a Petty Constables Word would justify
Resistance, better than the Kings Commission could justify the illegal
Attempt. But suppose there were no Person that had the least Authority, and
that the resistance could not be within the prescribed Form of Government; yet
because the force is an unauthoritative force, and because there is greater
necessity of the End of the Government than of the Form; Men may by the Law of
Nature and the Law of Reason proceed to the End, not without all Form, but
without the Political Form, for those proceedings that are according to Reason,
are not simply under no Law, but under a more extensive Law; and that Law
justifies resistance, even of Superiors, when there is no other way of defense
left the People. If the Case will admit of Entreaties, or sober Counsels, or
legal Appeals, they are to be used; but if there be no rooms for these, or if
they take no place, but illegal force be used, that force may, nay must be
resisted, or evil is consented to. For he that will not serve the Public by
that means when there is no other, does actually consent to the ruin of it. He
that has his House on fire, and will not stir to quench the flames though he be
able, is willing sure it should be burnt. The Rules of Prudence indeed are to
be observed, for if there be no probability that resistance will prevent the
Evil, the attempt is Folly, and if resistance will do more harm than good it is
inserviceable; and if there be any other means effectual it is unreasonable,
for it ought to be the last refuge, and then if the Cause be Good, Necessity
justifies proceeding to the End: Not by illegal Means, but by suspending the
Political Form, and appealing to the Reason of Mankind, and introducing the Law
of Nature: And this is no more then when Judgment at Common Law is reversed in
Chancery, the Form of the Law gives place to Equity and sound Reason.

Obj. 6. But is it Rebellion?

Answ. I Answer, Rebellion is resisting the just Power of the Government, and
if so, then it is no Rebellion to resist the unjust and usurped Power, for then
it would be Rebellion to resist Rebellion, and there could be no such thing as
a just defense against the exorbitant Power of Princes; and then the King might
Commission a Captain, or a Colonel, to role up and down in the Country and
Plunder, and it would be Rebellion in the Posse Com. (at least in any Private
Family) to resist them. And a private Commission to cut our Throats would tie
our Hands till the business were done. But the resisting such Force, as has
neither Moral nor Political Power, is no more Rebellion than to fight against a
Wild Beast, that came with Strength, but no Authority to devour them. The
Papists indeed have taken up Arms, without and against the just Power of this
Land, not only against the Form of Law, but to the overthrow of the Laws, and
Fundamental Rights of this Government, directly against the Letter, the Power,
and the End of the Law, which is as inslaving to the Subjects as an usurping
Conquest; and it is no more Rebellion to resist them, than Wat Tyler or Jack
Cade: They are Rebels who Arm against the Government, not they that defend it
by Arms.

Obj. 7. But this is to usurp the Power of the Sword, which by the Frame of the
Government is wholly in the King's Hand.

Answ. The Political Power of the Sword indeed is in the King, but that does
not divest the Subject of all defense by Arms, but only of such defense as is
against or inconsistent with the Political Power. If force be offered that
wants Political Power, whoever does it, does it but in the Nature of a private
Person, and private Persons may resist such. The Right of Self defense is a
precedent Right to all Policy; and every Man has so much of it still, as is not
given up unto the Political Power he lives under. They therefore that have
given themselves up to be governed by Law only, have Right to defend
themselves, not only against the private Assailant, which is allowed in all
Governments, but also against illegal Force. And this Resistance is no
Usurpation upon the Magistrates Power, because it is not an Act of Civil
Authority, but of Natural Right: And if thousands join in the Attempt, they are
all Volunteers; a Multitude, but no body Corporate; and such as challenge no
Authority over those they resist, but deny Subjection to such unauthoritative
Force: For such Force wanting Political Power, has no Power but Strength, and
Strength authorizes none to injure, but Natural Right authorizes every one to
defend himself; so that in this case, the Resister has a moral Power or
Warrant, but the illegal Invader none at all.

Obj. 8. But the Resisters ought not to do an unlawful Act to suppress such
illegal Force.

Answ. I Answer, That Act is not simply Unlawful that wants Political Power;
the Law is made for the public Good as the End, and therefore if the
prescribed means be not sufficient for the End, the Law permits that other
reasonable means be used, otherwise People might dwell upon the Shadow till
they have lost the Substance. The Posse Com. ought not by the prescribed form of
Law to go into another County; but if the other County at that time had no
Sheriff, whereby the power of that County could not be raised to defend it
self; or if there were Ships in the Borders of the next County, to which the
Plunderers might escape if they were not hotly pursued, I question not but the
Posse Com. might do a commendable Act to pursue them, and take them in the next
County. The Law was made for the public Good, and not the Public Good for the
Law; and therefore when the Law cannot answer its own End, or prescribes
ineffectual Means, any just and honest Means may be used; and this is not
destructive of the Law, but suppletory; not a violating the Form prescribed,
but an improving it: And though a Man may be called to account for doing a Good
Act in such a manner, I suppose it is but to know the Truth of the Matter, and
to preserve the Reverence of the Laws; for he is already cleared in his own
Conscience, and in the Breasts of all Good Men; and a Pardon in that case does
but declare it is so, and ought of Right (not of Grace) to be granted. For it
is not necessary in respect of any Crime, but in respect of some defect in the
Law, which had not made sufficient provision for the Public Good.

Obj. 9. But it is against true Allegiance, and an Oath must be kept though it
be to our own hurt.

Answ. True Allegiance must be proportioned to the Frame of the Government, and
the end of that Frame. Therefore if the Frame be to restrain Arbitrary Power,
the Subject cannot owe Arbitrary Allegiance. Allegiance is more in some places,
and less in others; but no Man can owe so much Duty to his Prince, as not to
have a Salvo for God and his Life, and here we can owe none that is against our
Laws and the Public Good, for that would destroy the Government. Our
Allegiance therefore must be bounded by our Laws, and not by the King's Word,
or Will: No Man can swear to obey the King's Word or Will simply, but according
to Law. It would be Sin to tie our selves to think, or speak, or do, what he
would have us at large. Our Allegiance therefore must be such as will consist
with the Frame of our Government, and that must be such as is couched in the
Body of our Laws. Other Allegiance there can be none, but what is wrapped up in
Courtesies and Formalities. For it seems the King, as well as the People, is
under the Law in some Sense, under the direction of it, though not under the
constraint; and therefore at his Coronation, he does a kind of Fealty to the
Laws and Government, and swears Allegiance to them, as to a Supreme Lord. The
Oath is not only, Will you grant the Laws, but will you grant and keep the Laws
and Customs of England; and the Answer is, I grant and promise to keep them. It
is certain therefore, no Allegiance to the King can be against Law, to which he
himself owes Allegiance.

The Case being thus far clear, That the Allegiance sworn to, is no other but
our Legal Duty; it does not hinder but that we may resist Illegal Force. When
the King of the Scots swore Allegiance to our King, it did not deprive him of a
just defense of his just Right, by taking up Arms if he were oppressed. And the
King of England when he swore Allegiance to the King of France, made no scruple
to take up Arms against his Liege Lord, in defense of his just Rights: And the
Old Lawyers tells us, That the very Villain might in case of Rape and Murder
Arm against his Lord; and if the Law Arm a Villain against his Lord, Subjects
are worse than Villains, if they may not Arm against their Sovereign Lord's
Illegal Forces, in defense of their Laws, Lives, Estates, and the Public Good;
but what makes it most evident is the Clause in King Henry's Charter, which
says, If the King invade those Rights, it is Lawful for the Kingdom to rise
against him, and do him what injury they can, as though they owed him no
Allegiance; The Words are these (if my Author fail me not) Licet omnibus de
Regno nostro, contra nos insurgere, and omnia agere quae gravamen noster
respiciant, ac si nobis in nullo tenerentur. Much to the same purpose is in
King John's Charter, which I find thus quoted. Et Illi Barons, cum communa
totius terrae, distringent and gravabunt Nos. Modis omnibus quibus poterunt;
scilicet per captionem Castrorum, terrarum, possessionum, etalis modis quibus
potuerint, donet fuerint emendatum, secundum Arbitrium eorum, salva persona
nostra and Reginae nostrae and Liberorum nostrorum. Much may be said of this
Nature about the Old Allegiance, which was all couched in Homage and Fealty;
but this enough to show that true Allegiance does not tie us from resisting
Illegal Force, and Intolerable Encroachments upon our just Rights.

Obj. 10. But such Resistance would be against the Declaration, which says, It
is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King,
etc.

Answ. The Latitude of the Word Lawful causes the Scruple, which at first View
seems to tell us, That it is sinful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take up
Arms against the King, etc. But it is no good consequence to say, That it is
sinful because it is unlawful, unless the Discourse be restrained to the Laws
of God. I must confess it is Politically unlawful for Subjects in any Case, or
for any Cause whatever, to take up Arms against the King, and those
Commissioned by him; because such a taking up Arms here can have no Political
Authority: But it is Morally lawful in all limited Governments to resist that
Force that wants Political Power. The Regal Power is Irresistible in all
Persons, from the King to the Petty Constable; but it does not hinder but that
all these Persons may be resisted, when they do what they have no Political
Power to. They that have a limited Power, and a prescribed Duty, may either
Act against, or beyond their Commission; and when they so do, they may be
resisted: For such Acts have no Political Power in them, though the Persons
have to other Purposes. If a Commission should be granted to a Company of
Ruffians to Plunder and Massacre, they might have something more of the King's
Affections, but no more of his Authority than private Robbers had; and
consequently might be resisted with equal Honesty. None therefore can make this
Declaration in its full Latitude, but upon this presumption, That the King and
his Ministers keep perpetually within the Bounds of the Law; otherwise they
declare the King has an Arbitrary Power, which is against the Fundamental Laws
of this Land, and a kind of Treason against the State: For if he may not be
resisted in any Case, he may be under some Moral restraint, but under no
Political restraint; and consequently the Political Frame of the Government
must be Arbitrary. The meaning therefore of this Declaration can be no other,
but that a Man can have no Civil Power or Authority in any Case to take up Arms
against the King, etc. But this does not debar any Man of the Natural Right of
Self-defence, by Private Arms against Inauthoritative Force.

Obj. 11. To this some reply, that seeing God has placed the Governing (though
limited) Power in the King's Hand, no Man may, by any Natural Right or Private
Defense, resist his illegal Force; God's Power must not be resisted, though
abused.

Answ. There is a great difference between the abuse of Power, and the want of
Power; and therefore this Argument either supposes the Power greater than it
is, or concludes ill. The King and Parliament have indeed an Arbitrary Power (I
do not say Infinite, but as Extensive as the Frame of the Government will bear)
and therefore if they make a very grievous Law (though they ought not, for they
are under a Moral restraint though no Political) neither the King nor any of
his Ministers may be resisted in the due Execution of it. But the King has no
Power to burden us beyond or against Law; and we may thank our own Weakness if
ever we have Strength to do it. This shows us there is a great difference
betwixt the abuse of Political Power and the want of it. Abused Power must not
be resisted, but Force without Power may. The Political Power of Arbitrary
Princes, is more extensive than their Moral Power: And this ties the Subject to
Non-resistance, when he is Immorally or Unchristianly used. They that subject
themselves to another Discretion, divest themselves of all defense. But they
that reserve Property and Liberty to themselves, may justly defend them, when
they are unjustly invaded. Had the King an Arbitrary Power, which he did abuse
to vex the Protestants, I for my part should think my self obliged to suffer
and not resist, as I believe did all the Primitive Christians; but seeing he
has no Political Power to use me as he lists, and the most Absolute Monarch has
no Moral Power to do an unjust Act to his Subject: I should be a senseless
Fool, it without any Obligation either from God or Man, I should stand Blows
rather than withstand them. The Truth is, Non-resistance stretched thus far,
under this Government, would make us like the Two Fools that went to the Field
to fight with one Staff, with which Vice Versa, he that had it, cudgelled the
other, who stood all the while with his Hands in his Pocket Valiantly bearing
all the Blows his Brother Fool thought good to lay on.

2. Others conclude otherwise against this Doctrine, and say, The King having
the Sacred Power Lodged in him, may not be resisted, though he Act without, or
against that Power, for reverence of that Just Power of God that is in him.

This looks like a piece of Courtship to God, and smells more of Superstition
than Divinity: God requires no Honor to the prejudice of Justice, or the
Advancement of Injustice; but this too Devout kind of Reverence would enable a
bad Prince to injure the Innocent, and would leave Justice defenseless on
Earth. Just Power is a Sanctuary indeed, but the Sanctuary is of no larger
extent than the Power. This is evident by the Tenor of all Commissions, the
Granter must have a competent Power of what he Grants, and that Warrants the
Executor to proceed to the and of the Grant; but the having Power to one
Purpose, cannot protect a Man from Resistance, if he proceed to another. The
Chimneyman that is Irresistible in his Office, is Resistable if he gather the
Corn in the Town-fields: And the King that Receives his Commission from the
King of Heaven to execute the Law, and is therefore Irresistible in the
Execution of it, is yet Resistable, if he shut up all the Courts of Justice,
and abuse his Subjects contrary to Law: In this case he Acts not by the Power
of God, but his Own; by an Arm of Flesh, or the Strength of Wicked Men (not by
any Political Power, or Moral Power) but by the Savage Power of a Beast, or the
Malicious Power of Hell. And how any Honor should accrue to God by a Voluntary
submitting to such a Power, is beyond my comprehension; they are most likely to
Honor God, that stand up most for his Power, and will submit to no other.

I have brought in these Two Objections here, because the Declaration is the
most specious and obvious Plea for Nonresistance, and is usually backed with
one of these Conceits; that either want of Political Power, is but abuse of
Political Power; or that a limited Political Power is a Sanctuary for
unlimitted Actions in whomsoever it rests.

Obj. 12. But to resist such Forces as are Commissioned by the King, is against
the Royal Prerogative of the Crown.

Answ. The King has no Prerogatives (except such as are wrapped up in honorary
Formalities) but what the Law gives him, we must not therefore presume a
Prerogative, and then conclude it Law; but first find the Law, and by it prove
the Prerogative; and when we have found the Prerogative, it must be measured by
what the Public Good will bear, and not by what the Absoluteness of the
Prerogative will admit: For no Prerogative can be used that is against the
Frame of the Government, or the Public Good. Interpretations of Law therefore
ought rather to favor Liberty and Property than Prerogative; because the
benefiting of the Subject comes nearer to the End of the Government, than the
excessive Honoring the Prince. Honorary Prerogatives are in their Degree
necessary, and not superfluous; there must be something to maintain the
Reverence of Magistrates, but they ought to give way to Public Interest; and
the rest are nothing but Powers placed in the King to do Good with, and not
Good or Ill as he pleases. A Prerogative therefore cannot destroy a Law, but it
may supply its Defects, pardoning a Condemned Innocent, or a hopeful Penitent,
or dispensing with a Law, to one, that by particular Accident, the Law in its
Rigor would undo: But no Prerogative can Empower the King to destroy the
Peoples Liberty or Property. That dispensing Power, that like a State Opium,
casts all the Laws asleep, and is an Engine of Public Mischief, is no
Prerogative belonging to the Crown of England, but a Vice that does not belong
to it. For it brings Guilt upon the King, and Damage upon the Subject, and is a
real diminution of the Dignities of the Crown: For it, and such like, serve
only to Empower the King to do Mischief with securely; that is, they give an
Immunity from Punishment, but not from Guilt. As suppose the King by such a
claimed Prerogative, should shut up all the Courts of Justice, so that none
should be had; he might be free from Punishment, but not from Guilt; he is
clear by Necessity only, not by Right; the Case Transcends the Frame of the
Government, none can Judge him that has neither Equals nor Superiors, and so
he escapes; because he cannot be Punished, not because he deserves it not. Thus
the pretended Prerogative bespatters him, and so leaves him.

Obj. 13. But it is against the Supremacy; for the Supreme ought to have the
Supreme credit, both in judging what is Law, and what is for the Public Good.

Answ. As the King is Supreme in the Executive part, so the Parliament have a
share in the Legislative, which I take to be the very Apex of Supremacy, and
therefore they ought to have their share in interpreting Laws as well as the
King, or his Judges; because none knows the meaning so well as the Makers, if
they be alive; and if they be dead, none knows the public Necessities so well;
none so unlikely to deceive, or be deceived, being so numerous; none likely to
be so faithful, and so unlikely to be corrupted, having so great an interest in
the public Good; none like to be so effectual in working a compliance in the
Peoples hearts, seeing it is in effect their own Determination: But yet they
cannot do it without the King, for that would place his Parliament above
himself.

The King indeed is Supreme in the Legislative part as well as in the Executive
part, but he has not the whole Supremacy in the Legislative part as he has in
the Executive: He is the Head of that Body in which it rests, but the Power
(like the Soul of Man) is in the whole Body, though most eminently in the Head.
The Parliament have their Existence, but not their Essence from him. When they
are called together, they Act by a proper and inherent Right of their own, and
not by the King's Commission and Direction. It may be good Manners to fall upon
what he directs them to first, but if any thing of greater Moment require
dispatch, they must wave a Complement to do a real Kindness to the public
Interest; which they could not do, were they his Commissioners, and received
their power to Act by from him: It is unnatural for the Stream to stop the
Fountain head. But seeing they Act by their own inherent Power, when met, they
can restrain in the King that he cannot make a Law without them, or give such
an interpation of any, either by himself or his Judges, as shall bind the
Subjects to follow, or is not Reversible in Parliament; for such Interpretation
is part of the Legislative Power, and that rests in the King and Subjects
Conjunctim. Had the King Authority to bind his Interpretations for Law upon the
Subject, he might at Pleasure elude any Law, and Law would be but a Sconce for
Arbitrary Power. The Opinion indeed of the Judges is reverend, but not
irreversible. None can finally bind an Interpretation on the Subject but those
that can make Law: Therefore if the King and Parliament differ about the sense
of a Law, it is not legally decided till both agree in one sense. But that
sense that is really for the Public Good has the Right of a Law, though not
the Form, and they that justify such an Interpretation, are justifiable by the
Law of Nature; for though it transcend the Process of Courts, and cannot have
the force of a political Law, yet Reason (Mankinds prime Law) justifies Men to
prefer a public Good before a private Interest; and what is for the Public
Good, they that feel are best able to Judge.

Obj. 14. But it is Disobedience.

Answ. Disobedience to a Lawful Command is a Grievous Crime, and a great Sin;
but it may be a great duty to disobey an unlawful Command. Obedience is due as
far as the Law requires, and something farther; a particular Person must suffer
rather than the Honor and Majesty of the Prince should be brought into
Contempt; for though the Law does not bind to this, yet Conscience and Reason
do, the public Interest must be promoted, Scandal prevented, and the
Government secured from Contempt, though it prejudice some particular Person;
for such Contempt may arise from a just refusal of Obedience in some small and
single Instances, and may be of worse consequence to the Public than a private
Injury, but if the thing commanded tend to destroy the Government, or introduce
a general Calamity, Disobedience becomes a Duty, and such commands (in this
Government) are Morally, Politically, and Divinely Powerless; and the
Disobedient, in such a Case, does the King as good Service, as he that
discovers Treason; for he gives him Notice that his Foot is entering into a
Snare, and that his Preservation stands in desisting, and repenting if he would
but heed it: And if the Disobedience be once Good, the higher it goes the
better it is, continuing still Good; it is absurd to go from Good to Worse
extensively. Disobedience that is Good, is still better as it is more likely to
prevent the Evil: And then Disobedience Defensive, is doubtless better than
Passive; for that would introduce the Evil Voluntarily, that is, they that were
not willing to do it themselves, were yet willing to let others do it; and how
far that can clear them I see not. For though it is not a downright consenting
to subvert the Government, yet it is a consenting that it shall be done, rather
than they will run the hazard to defend it, or prevent it; which is but
Pilate-like, to wash the Hands of what their Hearts tell them they are
Accessory to.

Obj. 15. But War is hurtful to the State.

Answ. The Arm that is broke cannot set it self, nor can he that sets it, set
it by any Natural Power derived from the Spirit: but by a Violent disturbing
them again, the Bone-setter is often forced to pull them further asunder ere he
can join them well; and so it is when Wicked Men have disjoynted and broken the
Bones of State, the languishing Law cannot restore it self, nor can those that
seek to restore it, restore it without doing Violence to its broken part; but
it is better to do that Violence than to let them grow Crooked or Gangreen. He
that has taken Poison must suffer the Violence of a Vomit; and they that are
Sick must be made Sicker often before they can be made Well. The prejudice
therefore the Government receives, by those that go about to restore it, does
no more denominate them Enemies to the State than the little griping of Physic
can denominate Physicians Enemies to Nature. The Evil proceeds from the
Disease, not the Remedy, and the Guilt is upon them that gave the Wound, not
those that dressed it; all the Anguish and Smart that follows the Skilful
Surgeons Hand, is not to be attributed to the Surgeon, but to the Wicked
Assasline; and therefore though this Restoration have the Evil of a Civil War,
yet the Guilt of all that Evil lies upon the Causers. Men are not bound to lose
their Right for fear of harming Wicked Men, nor to save a less Good, by loosing
a greater; a short Evil is to be chosen rather than a perpetual one: Men had
better drudge to preserve their own Freedom, than to enter into Bondage to
drudge for others; and the Patriots of our Country do well to bear the Burden
of a War, rather than to become Slaves themselves, and leave Popery, Beggary,
and Slavery to their Posterity.

Obj. 16. But it is an unsafe and dangerous Medicine, it opens a gap to the
People to rebel at Pleasure, and may endanger the change of the Government.

Answ. A desperate Disease must have a desperate Cure, but doing right can no
way open to do wrong; resisting illegal Forces, is hedging up a Gap, not making
one. Raising of Men to take a Fellon, will not excite the same Men to rise and
seize an honest Man: We must not therefore forbear to take up Arms in a just
Cause, lest it should encourage others to take up Arms in a bad Cause; for then
some that were breaking the Peace, and would not be quieted with Words might
not be resisted, lest it should teach the People to break the Peace; but Blows
bestowed on such Malefactors is no breach of Peace, and therefore can teach the
People no such thing; if they do ill by that Example it is not long of the
Copy, but of those that do not heed to write by it.

2. I know Men in Passion, and heightened with Success, and backed with
Strength, are apt to soar with high, and fall in love with new Inventions. But
this hazard must be run, rather than a certain change admitted. Resisting
Illegalities, and Misgovernment, is the way to preserve Government; and as long
as the King is safe, and his just Power and Prerogatives, the Government is in
no danger; and there is not the least Color imaginable that those that have
surrendered their Offices and Honors, the Court and the King's Favor, for
preserving the Government, and are now ready to hazard their Lives in defense
of it, will ever alter it: No, their design is to preserve it; a greater
Evidence of which they could not give at present than to petition for a Free
Parliament.

Obj. 17. But this casts dirt upon the Frame of the Government, leaving room
for perpetual quarrelling.

Answ. Neither this, nor any other Government that I know of, affords absolute
means of Peace and Preservation: The Government is effectual enough so far as
it reaches, but it is not extensive enough. If the Monarch were Arbitrary, then
no Cause could introduce Resistance; the Nation might be at Peace, but the
Subjects is could not be safe, and Liberty and Property would be lost:
Therefore if Safety, Liberty and Property be worth the preserving, they must be
defended when Wicked Men would wrest them from us. The Constitution of this
Government is such, That if the King and Parliament, or the King and the
Subjects differ about Fundamental Rights, they have no way to reconcile the
difference but by their own Consent. If the King without the Parliament could
determine the difference, he would be Arbitrary; and if the People of the
Parliament could determine it without him; they would be Supreme, and then it
could be no Monarchy; and if the Judges had the determining Power, they would
get the Supremacy from both; and if a Foreigner were to decide the Matter, he
would seek his own Advantage; so that they must either condescend for Peace
sake to one another Proposals, so as not to destroy the Government, or they
must suffer the Grievance, and let the Quarrel fall for a time, till the
injurious can be worn to a compliance, or they must fight it out; for that is
their going to Law, the Soldiers are their Jurymen, and Victory is their
Verdict. For the Question is not about breach of Government, but whether that
be the Government, or no; and seeing this Cause transcends the Executive part
of the Government, it cannot be decided by Legal Process, but by Lawmakers,
and if they cannot agree, Men are at liberty to join with that side they judge
in the right: Reason and Conscience must be their Guide, the Law cannot, and
they that proceed on this ground are their own Warrants on either side, for
neither have a Legal Power to determine the other: Therefore the Power of
Judging is neither Authoritative nor Civil, and so argues no Superiority in
those that Judge, but only a Power residing in reasonable Creatures, or judging
of their own Act, of which they never were divested by any Lawful Authority,
and therefore may lawfully use upon such Occasions; and though the Government
does not warrant a Civil War, in such a case, yet the End and Reason of this
Government does. For it being framed to prevent the exorbitant Power of the
Prince, for the public Good; he that fights for the public Good, againg an
Usurped Power, or an Arbitrary Invader of the Governments Rights, is justified
by the design and intendment of the Frame, and consequently by the equity of
the Government, though not by any Prescribed Form. For seeing many things are
morally Honest and Profitable, that are not reduced into positive Laws, Men
cannot proceed to those things (if at any time they become necessary) by
prescribed Forms of Law, because they have none; and so, in this case, the
question being not about Breach of Law, but what is Law. And the Law not able
to satisfy both King and People, each claiming contrary Rights from the same
Laws, the Decision of this Case, though it be very Good and Profitable for this
Nation, yet has no prescribed form of Law to direct us to; and therefore both
King and People are to proceed according to moral Honesty, to the end of the
Government, that is, the public Good.

The conclusion of all which is, That seeing resisting of Illegal and Arbitrary
Forces, in defense of the Laws and Public Interest of the Land, is not against
the Scriptures, and consequently no Sin; nor against moral Honesty, and
consequently no Crime (not against Law but Law-breakers, not against true
Allegiance or any Prerogative of the Crown, no Rebellion, no Usurpation of the
Sword, nor Criminal Disobedience, and not incommodious or unsafe for the
Public, in respect of the impendant Injuries and Hazards it remove) nor
inconsistent with the Frame of Government, which cannot otherwise decide and
Obstinate difference betwixt King and People. I cannot but conclude it is a
very Worthy and Virtuous Act to be in Arms for defense of the Laws, the King's
just Rights and the public Good; and consequently that those Gentlemen, who
are in Arms for defense of our Laws, Liberties, and Lives, against Illegal
Forces, Arbitrary Commands, and Usurped Powers, are in a Virtuous Post. For if
the Subjects Rights might not be defended by this means, it would be all lost;
it being all one, in these days, to have no Right, and to have no sufficient
means to defend it. The Doctrine of Nonresistance plainly puts all we have into
an ill King's Islands, and the good Ones will scarce part with what they are apt
to love so dearly, and we parted with so freely; should we therefore Preach
this Doctrine to our Princes, and tell them that they might take what we have
without danger or opposition, we should teach them to try our Patience, if all
must be referred to their Consciences, they will soon (without the help of a
Jesuit) find case enough and cause enough to secure that, and leave the
examination of them to the latter Day; hatred of our Persons, love of our
Estates, disgust at our Words, or Actions, or dislike of our Religion, will
soon judge us unworthy of our Liberty and Property, as well as i^ has already
done of our Offices, Honors, and Preferments: Passion and Scorn, Pride and
Ambition, Covetousness and Prodigality, would all prey upon what we had, with a
quiet (though not with a good) Conscience; but especially if the King were Poor
and Necessitous, either by wilful Profuseness or Negligence; for Nature would
even tell him in such a Case, That we had all better want than he, and then
farewell Property; the worst you could do him was but to pet and cry a bit, and
perhaps that might become a Pleasure to him too; and then you had nothing to;
rest on, but that God would give you the Kingdom of Heaven, for beggering your
Selves, impovershing the Church, and giving what you had to the Devils Service*
an ill ground for such costly hopes to stand upon.

2. This Doctrine renders Government prejudicial to the greatest part of
Mankind, depriving them of all just defense: For the Illegal Force bars them of
Legal Defense; and the Doctrine of Non-resistance bars them of Corporal, and so
Man (under one of the best Governments in the World) is left Naked in the midst
of Savage Beasts, (for homo lupus) and must not, though be able, make any
defense for himself. Thus all the Rights of Society and Nature, are sacraficed
to the lust and age of a Wicked King, and his Evil Instruments; and the Body
Politic is really in a worse condition than an unlimitted Multitude, for they
may defend themselves (if they will) against any Enemy; but these have an
Enemy, and may not defend themselves, though in never so just a Cause; and what
is worst of all, must hold their own Hands whilst others cut their Throats.

Lastly. This Doctrine would make all Monarchs Arbitrary Monarchs, and a like
in effect; for if the Subjects may not (nor ought if they were able) resist the
Prince any further than by refusing to join with him, then he were Arbitrary,
and might do what he pleased without opposition, he had but a Moral restrant,
and the most absolute Monarch had that upon him; and all limitations in the
Fundamentals of Government would be idle and superfluous, because they
contained only such Rights as others might take faom us at Pleasure, and we
might not defend or oppose. But the end of limited Monarchies is, not that the
Monarch might not Lawfully or Rightfully oppress; for an Arbitrary Monarch is
bound to all that. But the end of all limitations in Government is, that the
Prince may want Means as well as Right to oppress, that he may not be able to
injure the Subject at all, either Lawfully or Unlawfully; they are limited to
govern by Laws, that they may want Means as well as Right to include the
Subjects Property. But the Doctrine of Non-resistance gives them Means for a
Temptation, and is indeed but a fair Bait to draw them into a Snare.

FINIS.

