A BRIEF ACCOUNT CONCERNING Several of the AGENTS OF New England, THEIR
NEGOTIATION at the COURT OF ENGLAND: WITH Some REMARKS on the NEW CHARTER
Granted to the Colony of MASSACHVSETS.

SHOWING That all things duly Considered, Greater Privileges than what are
therein contained, could not at this Time rationally be expected by the People
there.

LONDON, Printed in the Year (...)

A BRIEF ACCOUNT CONCERNING Several of the AGENTS OF NEW ENGLAND, THEIR
NEGOTIATION at the COURT of ENGLAND.
I May rationally suppose that an Account of my Negotiation in England, where I
have been attending the great Affair of New England for more than Three Years,
will be expected from me.

When I began my Voyage from Boston for London (which was in April, 1688.)
New England was in a very deplorable Condition. He that was then Governor
there, acted by an Illegal and Arbitrary Commission; and invaded Liberty and
Property after such a manner, as no man could say any thing was his own. Wise
men believed it to be a necessary Duty to use all Lawful means to obtain some
Relief and Remedy against those growing Evils. This could not be done, without
first acquainting him who was then in the Throne, with the miserable State of
his Subjects in that Territory. No man of common Prudence could be insensible
of the Hazard and Danger that would ^^tend his Person and Family, in appearing
at Court as a Complainant against a Governor that was King James his Creature.

Nevertheless, being encouraged by many of the principal Gentlemen in
New England, I resolved to venture, tho I perished in the Attempt, rather than
to see my Country ruined.

In June following, I had the favor of waiting on the late King: I must
acknowledge he was very kind and Obliging in his Expressions, giving me Liberty
of Access in private to him whenever I desired it; seeming to wonder at the
things I acquainted him with, and professing that no man in the World should be
more ready to relieve the People Interceded for, than he would. Notwithstanding
which, nothing was done for them all that Summer. And indeed, good words were
as much as any one under my Character had reason to expect in King James his
Court.

At the time of the happy Revolution in England, (being introduced by the Right
Honorable my Lord Wharton, of whose kindness all New England has cause to be
sensible; his Lordship having upon all Occasions concerned himself for them) I
made my humble Addresses to his present Majesty (then Prince of Orange) in
behalf of that Country. There was a Circular Letter drawn up to be sent to all
the Plantations, and in particular to New England, to confirm those Governors
in their Places till further Order. Mr. Jephson (the then Princes Secretary)
showed me the Letter. I assured him that New England would be undone, if that
Letter should come to them: Within a few days he told me that he had
acquainted His Highness with what I said to him: Who had thereupon Ordered him
not to transmit that Letter to New England; But to all the other Plantations
where there were Protestant Governors. This was certainly an happy turn for
New England. How would their Oppressors have insulted over them, had such a
Letter come into their hands! I knew that whilst that People enjoyed their Old
Charter they prospered wonderfully: But that since they were deprived of the
Privileges therein contained, their ruins were multiplied; and that the
Inhabitants were generally desirous of being resettled as in the days of Old:
for which cause I resolved to do what was in me that it might be so.

Whenever I had the Honor of speaking to the King, whether at White Hall,
Hampton Court, or Kensington, I still mentioned the Charter, and always found
that the King (although he judged it would be for the Advantage of New England,
to have a Covernor Commissioned by his Majesty, yet that he) was graciously
inclined to Restore Charter-Priviledges unto his Subjects in that Territory.
Once, at Hampton Court, his Majesty was pleased to bid me rest assured, that it
should be so, if it were in his Power to cause it to be done. I advised with
many wise Men about this momentous Affair, whose Judgment was, That the best,
and most effectual Course would be, to endeavor a Reversion of the Judgment
against the Charter of the Massachusetts, by an Act of Parliament; and after
that, to Petition the King for such additional Privileges as should be thought
needful. I prayed Sir Henry Ashurst, whom I knew to be a worthy Member of the
Convention (as well as of this present) Parliament, to concern himself for the
good People in that Country: Which he did without much entreaty, being of
himself forward to do Good: Nor is it possible for New England ever duly to
Recompense him for his sincere Intentions, and assiduous Endeavors to serve
them. We both of us spoke to many of the principal leading Men in that
Parliament: The Issue of which, was, The Commons of England Voted the Taking
away the Charters belonging to New England (as of those in England) to be
Illegal, and a Grievance, and that they ought to be Restored. A Bill was drawn
up accordingly, which Passed the House of Commons, and was sent to the House of
Lords for their Concurrence, on January the Tenth, 1689. A great Interest, in
behalf of New England, had been made amongst the Lords; but that Parliment
being unexpectedly Prorogued and Dissolved, a whole Year's Sisyphean Labor
came to nothing.

When this present Parliament met, it was, for some Reasons, thought not
advisable to trouble them with the Affair of New England. Some Essays were
then made, to see if by a Writ of Error in Judgment, the Case relating to the
Massachusetts might be brought out of Chancery into the King's Bench. But an
unexpected Providence rendered an Attempt of that Nature vain. Never did I see a
more signal Hand of Heaven in any Matter, than in Disappointing all Designs,
and Frustrating all Hopes for Obtaining the so much desired full Restitution of
all Charter-Priviledges, by a Reversion of the Judgment entered against them.
There was now but one way left for the Settlement of New England, sc. To
implore the King's Royal Favor.

It was not in the King's Power to Reverse the Judgment against the Old
Charter; nevertheless, his Majesty had Power to Re-incorporate his Subjects,
thereby granting them a New Charter, which should contain all the Old, with
New, and more Ample Privileges.

This, Three of the Agents of the Massachusetts Colony Petitioned for; the Right
Honorable the Earl of Monmouth condescending to deliver that Petition with his
own Noble Hand. After which, through the Intercession of a Great and Worthy
Personage, the King was graciously pleased to referr the Affair of New England
to the Consideration of the two Chief Justices, with his Majesty's Attorney,
and Sollicitor-General. They Four met three or four times: They were so kind as
to give me leave to be present with them at all their Consultations. The Heads
of the Charter belonging to the Massachusetts Colony, and of that granted to Sir
Ferdinando Gorges, were presented in Writing; together with what additional
Privileges we did at present pray for. They all thought there was nothing
Unreasonable or Prejudicial to the King's Interest in what was requested. These
things were presented to the King by my Lord Chief Justice Holt. The King
ordered him to present them to the Council; which was done on the First of
January last; when they were referred to the Consideration of the Right
Honorable the Lords of the Committee for Foreign Plantations.

Immediately upon this, the King began his Royal Voyage for Holland; until
whose Happy Return nothing could be effected as to the Settlement of
New England. In the mean time, I drew up several Reasons for the Confirmation
of Charter-Priviledges granted to the Massachusetts Colony; which I dispersed
among the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council; and did
particularly address my self to the greatest part of them, humbly praying their
Lorships Favor to New England, in a Matter which seemed so Just and Equitable:
And had assurance from many of them, that whenever the Affair of New England
should come before the Council Board, they would do what in them was, that
Ancient Rights and Privileges might be Restored.

Moreover, a Noble Personage did me the Honor to introduce me to the Queen,
that so I might have an Opportunity to solicit Her Majesty's Royal Favor
toward her Subjects in New England. I assured her Majesty, That there are none
better affected to their Majesty's Government, and that on that account they
had been exposed to the Rage of the French, and other Enemies to the present
Government in England; and that the King having referred the Consideration of
the Affair of New England to the two Chief Justices, with the Attorney and
Sollicitor-General; we only prayed, that what they thought was reasonable,
might be granted to us.

The Queen graciously replied, That that was a reasonable Request, and that she
hoped it would be done for us, only it could not be done but by the Council.
Her Majesty moreover assured me, That she had diverse times spoken to the King
in behalf of New England; and that, for her own part, she desired that that
People might not only have what was Just done for them, but that something of
Favor might be shown to them. -- I the rather mention this, that so all
New England may be excited to Pray for so Gracious a Queen.

When the King returned to England, he stayed not there above a Fortnight: In
which time I had twice the Honor to wait on his Majesty in behalf of
New England. The First time I only delivered the last Address from the
General-Court at Boston, viz. that of December. 16. 1690. and a Petition from
many Merchants in London, praying, That Charter-Priviledges might be restored
to New England; and that some Frigates might be sent for the Security of those
Coasts. The Second time, I humbly prayed the Continuance of his Royal Favor to
his Subjects in that Territory. The King was then pleased to ask me, What I
would have to be done for New England? I humbly put his Majesty in mind of our
Old Charter-Priviledges: And that if they should, by his Royal Favor and
Goodness, he restored, that would make his Majesty's Name Great in those Ends
of the Earth, as long as the World should stand: That none of his Subjects
prayed more for his Royal Person, and for the Success of his Arms, than they
did: That they were all of them Protestants, and that they differed in lesser
Matters from some others, being of those that were called Presbyterians, and
Congregational-Men: That his Majesty, in his great Wisdom, had considered the
Circumstances of England, and the Circumstances of Scotland: That, according to
his Royal Wisdom, he would consider the Circumstances of New England also; and
that such Rulers would not be agreeable to them, as were very proper to the
other English Plantations. The King replied to me, That within two or three
days he expected a Report from the Committee of Lords, for Foreign Plantations,
and that he should then see what could be done.

Two days after this, ( viz. on April the 30th. 1691.) it was by the Lords of
the Committee proposed to the King, Whether he would have the People in
New England make what Laws, and appoint what Officers They pleased? Or, Whether
He would not appoint a Governor of his own, who should have a Negative Voice
on all Acts of Government? The King was very inquisitive to know whether he
might, without any Breach of Law, set a Governor over that Colony: (For we have
a King now that will not Act contrary to Law.) The Lord Chief Justice, and some
other of the Council, answered, That whatever might be the Merit of the Cause,
inasmuch as the Charter of Massachusetts Colony, in New England, stood vacated
by a Judgment against them, it was certainly in the King's Power to put them
under what Form of Government he should think best for them. The King then
said, That he was desirous to promote the Welfare of New England, as well as of
England; and that he believed it would be for the Good and Advantage of his
Subjects in that Colony, to be under a Governor appointed by himself:
Nevertheless, That he would have the Agents of New England Nominate a Person
that should be agreeable to the Temper and Incllnations of the People there;
only that, at this time, it was necessary that a Military Man should be set
over them; and that this notwithstanding, he would have Charter-Priviledges
Restored and Confirmed to them.

The next day, the King began his Second Royal Voyage for Holland; but an Order
of Council was drawn up, intimating, That it was the King's Pleasure to have a
Governor of his own Appointing sent to New England, who should have a Negative
Voice in all Acts of Government: And, That the Massachusetts Colony should be
settled on the same Foundation with Barbados, etc. And that a Charter should
be prepared accordingly. As soon as I had a Copy of this Order of Council, I
went with it to four or five of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council: Every one of which, said, That as it was worded, it did not (in
their Opinion) agree with the King's Expressions or Intentions. Moreover, I
caused a Copy of this Order to be transmitted to my Lord Sidney, one of his
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, then with the King in Flanders;
praying, That if that Order, Signed by one of the Clerks of the Council, was
not according to the King's Mind, His Majesty would graciously please to
signify his Dis-approbation thereof: But no such Signification ever came.

The Attorney General, in the mean time, prepared a Draught of a Charter,
according to what he took to be the King's Mind, as expressed when his Majesty
was last in Council. In that Draught, the Free men (and not all Freeholders,)
had Power to Choose the Deputy Governor, and the other General Officers: And
the King's Governor had not a Negative Voice allowed him in any Case.

This Draught was presented at the Council Board on the Eighth Day of June
last; when it was by some objected, That by such a Charter as this, the King's
Governor would be made a Governor of Clouts; and Order was given to prepare
new Minutes, or Heads, for another Draught: Which indeed made the Charter
designed to be no Charter of Incorporation, and did deprive the Massachusetts of
some Essential Privileges in their former Charter. When those Minutes were
agreed on by the Lords, the Secretary of the Committee gave me a Copy of them;
with an Order from their Lordships, That if the Agents of the Massachusetts
Colony were not satisfied therewith, they should bring in their Objections to
Mr. Attorney General. I showed the Order to the other Agents. Sir Henry Ashurst
went with me to the Attorney General. I expressed my Dissatisfaction, perhaps,
with a greater Pathos than I should have done, earnestly protesting, that I
would sooner part with my Life, than Consent to the Minutes, or any thing else
that did infringe any Liberty or Privilege of Right belonging to my Country.
The like I said to some Ministers of State: Who replied, That our Consent was
not expected nor desired: For they did not think the Agents of New England were
Plenipotentiaries from another Sovereign State; but that if we declared we
would not submit to the King's Pleasure, his Majesty was resolved to settle the
Country, and we must take what would follow.

I drew up some Reasons against the Minutes proposed; Sir Henry Ashurst joined
with me therein; we argued, That the King had graciously promised a Restoration
of Charter-Priviledges to New England; and that Charter-Priviledges might with
as much and more reason be withheld from any, or all the Corporations in
England which were never legally Restored, as from New England; with several
other Arguments too large to be here inserted. Those Reasons we delivered in
Writing to the King's Attorney General, who presented them to the Lords at the
Council Board. I likewise caused a Copy of them to be sent over to the King in
Flanders: Moreover, some Great Ones at Court wrote to several of the Ministers
of State who were with the King, entreating them to use their Interest with his
Majesty, that nothing might be Imposed on New England, which would be grievous
to his good Subjects there.

Some were apt to think, that if the King were in England, we might prevail
with his Majesty to signify his Disallowance of those Minutes which were so
grievous to us; and that therefore it might not be amiss to write to the King
in Flanders, praying that a stop might be put to any further Proceedings about
the Charter, until his Majesty's happy Return to England. I desired a Great
Person (whom I knew the Queen had an high Esteem of) to pray her Majesty to
write to the King, That he would graciously please to Command that the Charter
should Pass, as drawn up by the Attorney General; or else that it should be
Deferred until his Majesty's coming. The Queen was so kind as to do this for
New England. I now concluded that nothing more would be done for some Months.

By continual Attendance on this arduous Affair, I had broken my Natural Rest,
and neglected my Necessary Food, insomuch that my Health was greatly impaired:
Physicians advised me to recede into the Country, and use Mineral Waters for
my Recovery.

Before I had been there long, I had (and was surprised at it) notice that the
King had signified his Approbation of the Minutes which we were so much
concerned about; and that it was his Royal Pleasure that New England should be
forthwith settled accordingly.

Likewise, a very great Man, and a great Friend of New England, desired a
Person of Quality to advise me to take up with what was proposed; withal
adding, that if the King were in England, as Matters were now circumstanced,
nothing more or better could be expected. I immediately returned to London.

His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State assured me, that he had received
such a Signification of the King's Pleasure as has been mentioned; and was
pleased to let me see the Letter; wherein it was expressly declared, not only
that the King did approve of the Minutes agreed unto by the Lords of the
Committee; but that he did by no means approve of the Objections which the
Agents of New England had made against them.

We then resolved however to get as much Good, and prevent as much Hurt to the
Country as possibly might be. A Petition was Signed by Sir Henry Ashurst and
my self, praying, That no Property belonging to that Colony, or to any therein,
might by the New Charter be taken from them, nor any Privileges which they had
a Right unto: That the Province of Mayn might be Confirmed: Nova Scotia added
to the Massachusetts: And, That New Hampshire might be put under that
Government. As to what concerns Hampshire, we were told, the People there
desired to be under any Government in the World, rather than that of
Massachusetts. Great Opposition was made against what was proposed concerning
the Province of Mayn, but at last it was granted; and Nova Scotia, so far as in
the Charter is expressed. Just at this time, Letters came to my hand from
Plymouth Colony, giving me the Thanks of the General Court there, for that I
had prevented their being annexed to New York, (which was by some Persons of
Interest designed above a Year ago:) And intimating, That the generality of
People there desired to have a distinct Charter, and be confirmed as a distinct
Government amongst themselves: But if that could not be obtained, that then,
for the Lord's sake, I would endeavor that they might be united to Boston,
rather than to New York.

When I understood the Charter was finished, and had been read before the
Lords, I prayed that I might see it, and carry it to Council; because there
might be some Clauses in it which their Lordships might have such Reasons
suggested to them, as they would think meet to expunge them, or to add some
Particulars which might be Beneficial to his Majesty's Subjects in that Colony,
and no ways Prejudicial to the King's Interest, nor yet inconsistent with those
Minutes which they would not suffer to be contradicted. This Request was
granted, only I must return the Copy within a few days: An Eminent Councellor
perused it two or three times, and made his Remarks on it.

That Phrase of Corporal Oath was altered, that so no Snare might be laid
before such as scruple Swearing on the Book. A Clause was added, Confirming
Grants made by the General Court, notwithstanding any defect that might attend
the Form of Conveyance, that so Men's Titles to their Lands might not be
invalidated, only for that the Laws which gave them their Right, had not passed
under the Public Seal in the time of the former Government. Some other
Alterations we prayed for, but we could not obtain them.

The Question now, was, Whether we should submit to this New Settlement? Or, in
hopes of obtaining a Reversion of the Judgment against the Old Charter,
signify to the Ministers of State, that we had rather have no Charter at all,
than such an one as was now proposed to acceptance? I knew that in the
multitude of Counselors there is safety, and did therefore advise with many,
and with Persons Unprejudiced, and of the greatest Wisdom and Ability to judge;
with Noblemen, Genlemen, Divines, and Lawyers: They all agreed, that it was not
only Lawful, but, all Circumstances considered, a Duty to submit to what was
now offered. Some said, They were very weak Men, and unfit to appear as Agents
for a Colony, that should make any Question of it. Others said, That a
peremptory Refusal would bring not only a greater Inconvenience, but a fatal
Ruin on New England; and then Mankind would lay the blame on the Weakness and
Wilfulness of the Agents, who when they could not have what they would, ought
to submit to what they could get. The Opinion of the Lawyers, was, That such a
Passive Submission was not a Surrender, inasmuch as nothing was done under Hand
and Seal: Nor could there be a Surrender in this case, since Judgment was
already Entered and Recorded against the Old Charter: Nor were the Agents
capable of Surrendering, as not being Plenipotentiaries; and that their taking
up with this, did not make the People in that Colony, in Law, incapable of
obtaining all their Old Privileges, whenever a favorable Opportunity should
present it self; for the World knew, that in a present parting with any of
their ancient Rights, they were forced to yield unto Necessity. I remember, an
Honest Lawyer, and a Well-wisher to New England, told me, That if we were put
to our Choice, whether to enjoy our Old Charter (which he was well acquainted
with) again, just as it was, or to take up with this, (all things duly
considered,) we were not wise if we did not choose this rather than that. It was
considered, That a Judgment (right or wrong) not in Court of King's Bench, but
in Chancery, standing on Record against the Charter of the Massachusetts,
whereby it was vacated and annihilated, that Colony was fallen into the Kings
Hands; so that he might put them under what Governors, or what Form of
Government he should please. Their Agents might beg for a full Restitution of
all Ancient Privileges, but they might not either Choose or Refuse as to them
should seem best. It was considered, That there was no probability of obtaining
a Reversion of the Judgment against the former Charter. We saw it was in vain
to attempt to bring it out of Chancery into the Court of King's Bench. There
were thoughts of bringing the Matter into the House of Lords by a Writ of Error
in Judgment; but it was believed that no Cursitor would now venture to Sign a
Writ of Error; and that if he should, the Lords would not be forward to concern
themselves in this Affair.

Although the Archbishop of Canturbury that now is, and many of the present
Bishops, are Friends to New England, (as well as to all good Men,) and I have
cause to acknowledge the personal Respect I have received from many of them:
And although a great Interest has been made for New England amongst the
Temporal Lords; nevertheless, when they should understand that the King was
desirous to have that Country put under another Form of Government, which his
Royal Wisdom judged would be better for them than what they formerly enjoyed,
the Lords would be very slow in doing any thing that they knew would be
dissatisfactory to his Majesty. And if they should see cause to take the Case
of New England into their Consideration, though they would not Justify the
manner of Proceedings; yet when they should hear all that was to be Objected
against the Governor and Company, on the Account of their having exceeded the
Powers of their Charter in several Particulars, and in a very high degree, they
would certainly judge that they had merited a Condemnation thereof. It was also
Considered, That the Old Charter was, in more respects than one, very
defective: For by that, the Government in New England had no more Power than
Corporations in England have. But those Corporations have not Power in Capital
Cases. Both the Judges and Eminent Lawyers have assured me, that though Power
was given to Corporations in Criminal, except Capital Cases be particularly
expressed, their Power does not reach so far: Nor was there any thing in the
Old Charter concerning an House of Deputies, or Assembly of Representatives:
Nor had the Governor and Company Power to impose Taxes on the Inhabitants: Nor
to Erect Courts of Admiralty, etc. The King's Attorney General (who is no Enemy
to New England) declared, the two Chief Justices, and Sollicitor-General,
concurring with him, That supposing the Judgment against the Charter of the
Massachusetts to be Reversed, if the Government should exert such Powers as
before the Quo Warranto against their Charter they had done, there would now be
a Writ of Scire facias issued out against them in Westminster Hall, and their
Charter-Priviledges would undoubtedly be taken from them. And it was
Considered, That if the Judgment against the Old Charter had been Reversed by
Act of Parliament, the Massachusetts Colony would, for all that, have been in a
far more miserable Condition than by the present Settlement they are reduced
unto: For then the Province of Mayn, as to Government, would have been taken
from them, since Government is a Trust that cannot be sold; and Hampshire
(which would have been made to extend as far as Salem,) and Plymouth, would
have been put under a Governor sent from England; which Governor would have
had the Command over the Militia, and the Power of Admiralty, etc. in the
Massachusetts Colony: So that, in fine, Boston would have been deprived of
Trade, and the whole Colony made very insignificant: And if they had exerted
Powers necessary for the Supportation of their Government, perpetual Conplaints
would have been made against them. It was moreover Considered, That if the
Agents of that Colony had signified to the Ministers of State, that they had
rather have no Charter at all, than this which the King was pleased to grant to
them, the Consequence would have been, that they should have had a Governor
wholly a Stranger to New England, and a Deputy Governor not acceptable to the
People there; and many of his Counselors Strangers, and others of them such as
were Andross's Creatures; and that this Governor should have had the same
Power which the Governors in other Plantations have, to Appoint the General
Officers. They are very weak Men that doubt of this; and if they will look no
further than their Neighbors at New York and Virginia, they may see
Demonstrations before their Eyes sufficient to convince them. It was likewise
Considered, That some Persons in London were endeavoring to get a Pattent for
all Mines, Minerals, Gums, etc. in New England: Which Design was, of late,
likely to have taken effect, only the New Charter has most happily prevented
that which would have been of pernicious Consequence to all that Territory. It
was further Considered, That by this New Charter great Privileges are granted
to the People in New England, and, in some Particulars, greater than they
formerly enjoyed: For all English Liberties are restored to them: No Persons
shall have a Penny of their Estates taken from them; nor any Laws imposed on
them, without their own Consent by Representatives chosen by themselves.
Religion is secured; for Liberty is granted to all Men to Worship God after
that manner which in their Consciences they shall be persuaded is the most
Scriptural way. The General Court may by Laws Encourage and Protect that
Religion which is the general Profession of the Inhabitants there. They may
still have Judges, as at the first; and Counselors, as at the beginning, if
the fault be not their own. As long as their Principal Magistrates, Judges,
Justices of the Peace, are such as will encourage Virtue and Piety, and punish
Vice, Religion will flourish: And if they have not such, the fault will not be
in the New-Charter, but in themselves; since no bad Councellor, Judge, or
Justice of the Peace, can now be imposed on them. These things are as a Wall of
Defense about the Lord's Vineyard in that part of the World. The General Court
(now that the Massachusetts Colony is made a Province) has, with the King's
Approbation, as much Power in New England, as the King and Parliament have in
England; which is more than could be said in the time of the former Government
there, which had only the Power of a Corporation. The General Court has now
Power to impose Taxes upon all the Inhabitants; and to make Laws which shall
Incorporate Towns, or Schools of Learning, etc. which by the First Charter they
had not Power to do. That Country may now expect Protection and Assistance
from England, as the Matter shall require, more than formerly. And although
there are some things in this New Charter which are not desirable, yet nothing
that is intolerable. Take it with all its Faults, and it is not so bad, but
that when I left New England, the Inhabitants of that Territory would gladly
have parted with many a Thousand Pound to have obtained one so good. The great
fear, is, that though at present there be a good Governor (appointed by the
King,) who wishes well to New England; yet he will quickly be removed, and
perhaps an Enemy come in his room. But I am morally certain of it, that if they
hearken to the Advice of their best Friends, no Person not agreeable to
New England, in respect of Religion, and the Temper of that People, will be set
over them, during their present Majesty's Reign, whom the God of Heaven send
long to Live and Reign. Yet suppose it should be otherwise: Suppose a Person as
bad as Andross (and the New-Englanders think there can hardly be a worse,)
should come amongst them, What can he do? He cannot without the Consent of the
Council Chosen by the Representatives of the People, appoint a Sheriff to pack
Juries to serve his turn; nor Judges that will act against their Consciences,
rather than displease him. Nor can he now send Men out of the Country, without
their own consent. Nor can he and his Creatures make Laws, or Leavy Taxes; nor
Invade any Man's Property, under pretense that it is the King's; and that they
must come to him for Patents, that so they may have a true Title to their Lands
and Estates. Nor can he, without violating the Magna Charta of New England,
disturb any Man for his Religion. The King's Governor has a Negative Voice in
all Acts of Government; which may be thought a great Infringement of the
Peoples Liberty; and indeed, makes the Civil Government of New England more
Monarchical, and less Democratical, than in former Times. Nevertheless, the
People have a Negative on him. In which respect, New England is by this Charter
more privileged than Ireland, and than any English Plantation whatsoever, or
than they that live in England it self are. Appeals to England are allowed of
by this New Charter; but only in Personal (not in Real or Mixed) Actions, where
the matter of difference is above Three hundred Pounds Sterling in value. So
that as to Titles of Land there cannot be any Appeal to England, but those
Controversies are to have a final Determination in Courts of Judicature amongst
themselves. And Laws Enacted by the General Court, are to be transmitted to the
King for his Royal Approbation: Nevertheless, those Laws, when made, are to be
in force as soon as made, until such time as disallowed of by the King: And if
within the space of Three Years the King's Disapprobation be not signified,
those Laws are to be Perpetual, except by the General Court they shall be
Repealed. By the Old Charter, the Governor and Company might not make any Laws
contrary to the Laws of England: And such reasonable Laws as are not contrary
thereto, will no doubt be Confirmed by his Majesty, if the People in
New England be not wanting to themselves as to due Endeavors that it may be
so. All these things duly considered, the Best and Wisest Men in England
thought that the Persons who were concerned for New England, would do an ill
Service for their Country, if they should peremptorily decline a Submission to
this Settlement, and thereby bring upon themselves that which would be more
undesirable.

I must beg leave (for it is a Truth) to say this further, That whereas the
People in New England have not obtained all the Charter-Priviledges which they
have at several times Petitioned Their Majesty's for; they have more reason to
blame themselves, than those of their Agents, who did their utmost to procure
every thing for them which they prayed for. Had they at the time of the
Revolution, entered upon the full Exercise of their Old Charter-Government, and
then humbly signified to the King that they had so done; and that they were
persuaded, His Majesty, who declared, when Prince of Orange, That Charters and
Ancient Privileges should be restored to the English Nation in general, would
not be offended at them on the account of their adhering to what was their
undoubted Right; wise Men are of Opinion that they might have gone on without
disturbance, until such time as new Complaints should be exhibited against
them, on the account of doing things which by their Charter they were never
empowered to do. But in an Address to the King, they assure his Majesty, That
they had not entered upon the full Exercise of their Charter-Government; but
that not having received Directions from England, which they humbly waited for,
they entered upon the Government for the Preservation of the Peace, until such
time as they should receive an Orderly Settlement from England; which they
prayed might be according to their Old Charter, that had been unrighteously
taken from them.

Now when wise Men in London saw this: Will you (said they) who are Agents for
the Massachusetts Colony, refuse to submit to a Settlement of your Government
from England, when your Principals have signified to the King that they will do
it? Who gave you that Power of Refusal? Has the General Court, in an Address to
the King, declared, They have not entered on the full Exercise of their
Charter-Government, but that they wait for the King's Pleasure, as to their
Settlement; then surely they have not given you private Instructions not to
submit? And if they have not, you cannot answer your Refusal to your
Principals, nor to the King, nor to Mankind. Have not your Magistrates caused a
new Clause to be added to the usual Oath taken by the Assistants, viz. That if
contrary Orders arrive from England, that Oath shall not oblige them to serve
as Assistants until the Year be expired? Shall then their Agents protest
against such Orders?

Such as these have been the Reasonings of wise Men in London. Moreover, the
Government in New England Petitioned the King to assist them with Frigates, and
Supplies of Arms and Ammunition; which was, in effect, to pray for a Governor.
They could not be so weak, to think the King would send the one without the
other.

When I wrote to this purpose to a principal Person in Government there; the
Answer returned to me, was, That I, and other Persons that were employed as
Agents for that Colony, ought to look on it as the principal thing committed to
our Care and Trust; and that, preferrable to all other things whatsoever: To
endeavor the obtaining Assistance from their Majesty's, against the French,
and other Enemies; and that this was the sense of the generality of the sober
People in New England. So that if these two came in Competition, either to have
the Old Charter just as it was, or to get Assisance from England; we were told
we should be Unfaithful to our Trust, if we did not prefer the latter to the
former.

Yet further: The Country was so impoverished by the Wars made upon them, as
that they could not send a competent Supply to their Agents for the management
of their Affair.

Besides what was sent to me out of New England, I expended upwards of Two
Hundred Pounds of my own Personal Estate, out of Love to that People. And I
did, for their sakes, borrow of a Merchant in London above Three Hundred Pounds
more, which was Two Years before care was taken for the Repayment of it.

The last Year, some who were hearty Well-wishers to New England, wrote
thither, That they must consider, their Life, their Religion, the Welfare of
their Posterity for ever, depended on a suitable Suppy for their Agents that
were concerned in Transacting their great Affairs at Court. This,
notwithstanding, for more than a Twelvemonth, not one Penny was returned: So
that I was necessitated, either to suffer Ruin to come upon the Country where
I had spent the greatest part of my Life, or else must borrow Money again to
serve them: Which I did, and Engaged all the Estate I have in the World for the
Repayment thereof: This is more than ever any man did before me, and perhaps
more than any Person so Circumstanced as I have bin, will do after me.

And what was I able to do more? I do humbly affirm, That there is not a man in
this World, that has done more, nor so much, toward the obtaining of a full
Restitution of all Charter-Priviledges to New England, as I have done. And as
to the undesirable Minutes in the New Charter, there is no person living that
has manifested his dissent therefrom, or more opposed, or done more to prevent
them, than I have: But to reject all the Good therein, because of some things
inconvenient, is that which I dared not to be guilty of. As Day and Night have
seen it, so I can, and I do appeal to Heaven and Earth, that I have served that
People with all Fidelity to the very utmost of my Power.

And now they must give me leave to give them the best Advice I can. I shall
not need (for they will do it of themselves) to persuade them to send an
Address of Humble Thanks to their Majesty's, for their Royal Favor in
Restoring Property, and in Conferring greater Privileges on New England, than
have bin granted to any other English Plantation. And for that their Majesty's
have been graciously pleased to put the present Government of New England into
good hands. The Person Nominated for Governor (Sir William Phipps) is one that
has ventured his Life to serve his Country. When Gideon did so, the Children
of Israel were desirous that he should Rule over them: The Deputy Governor,
Mr. Stoughton, is one whose worth is known in both Englands. One of more than
ordinary Accomplishments, both as to parts Natural and Acquired, and as to
Virtue and Integrity. And as for the Twenty Eight Assistants, who are appointed
to be of the Governors Council, every man of them is a Friend to New England,
and to the Churches and Interest of Christ therein. To be in the hands of such
Rulers is an invaluable Mercy.

As for me, whom the Lord Jesus has made use of as an Instrument in his Hand,
for obtaining this Mercy for New England; I desire no Acknowledgment, nor any
Reward in the least, for the Difficult and Expensive Service I have for their
sakes gone through. Let me wait for my Recompense till the Resurrection of the
Just. But if that People be not thankful to God, and to the King and Queen, for
what has been done for them; not only the King and Queen, but the Majesty of
Heaven, may justly be incensed against them. To be thankful for what is given,
is the way to receive more from God and Men.

But let me Propose,

1. That the General Court do, without delay, agree upon a Body of Good Laws.
They may make such Laws for the Settlement of the Militia, and for the securing
of Liberty to the Subject, as shall be better than their Old Charter. And as to
what concerns the Upholding of Religion in that Country, there are especially
Two things which may be done. The one, is, By Laws to Encourage an Able and
Faithful Ministry. The other, is, To take care that the College be Confirmed
in such Hands, as will make it their Concern to Promote and Propagate Virtue
and Learning. It was in a special manner with respect thereunto, that I did
undertake a Voyage for England above Three Years and an half since. As long as
that Country lay unsettled, as to the Civil Government, I could not do much
for the College; only I prevailed with a Gentleman of my Acquaintance, to
bequeath a Legacy of Five Hundred Pounds to that Society. And now, in this
New-Charter, all Donations or Revenues granted to that Academy, are by the
King, under the Great Seal of England, Confirmed. I humbly proposed to some
great Ministers of State, That a particular Charter might be granted for the
Incorporating that School for Academical Learning. Answer was made, That it
should be so, if I desired it: But that a better way would be, for the General
Court of the Massachusetts Colony, by a Law, to Incorporate their College; and
to make it an University, with as ample Privileges as they should think
necessary; and then transmit that Act of the General Court to England, for the
Royal Approbation; which would undoubtedly be obtained. I look upon this
Particular alone, to be well worth my going to England, and there serving half
an Apprenticeship; for that no small Concernment of Religion, and the Happiness
of future Generations, are comprehended in this Matter respecting the College.

2. I take it to be good Advice, That Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
should be Established throughout the Province, of such as are Men fearing God;
and that their Commissions continue, Quam diu se been gesserint.

However it shall be, whether my Counsels be followed or not, or whether my
sincere Intentions, and unwearied Endeavors to serve New England, find
Acceptance with them or no, I have this to comfort my self with, That God has
been so gracious to me, as to make me instrumental in obtaining for my Country
a MAGNA CHARTA, whereby Religion, and English Liberties, with some peculiar
Privileges, Liberties, and all Men's Properties, are Confirmed and Secured
(Allowance being given for the Instability of all Humane Affairs) to Them and
their Posterity for evermore.

LONDON, November. 16. 1691. INCREASE MATHER.

AN EXTRACT of a LETTER (WRITTEN By some of the most Eminent Nonconformist
Divines in London,) Concerning the NEW CHARTER Granted to the Colony of
Massachusetts in NEW ENGLAND.
To the much Honored General Court Assembled at Boston, in New England.
Much Honored Gentlemen,
WE must give this true Testimony of our much Esteemed and Beloved Brother, Mr.
Increase Mather, That with inviolate Integrity, excellent Prudence, and
unfainting Diligence, he has managed the great Business committed to his Trust.
As he is instructed in the School of Heaven, to minister in the Affairs of the
Soul; so he is furnished with a Talent, to transact Affairs of State. His
Proceedings have been with that Caution and Circumspection, as is correspondent
to the weight of his Commission. He with Courage and Constancy has pursued the
Noble Scope of his Employment; and understanding the true Moment of things, has
preferred the Public Good to the vain Conceits of some, that more might have
been obtained, if peremptorily insisted on. Considering the open Opposition,
and secret Arts, that have been used to frustrate the best Endeavors for the
Interest of New England, the happy Issue of things is superior to our
Expectations. Your present Charter secures Liberty and Property, the fairest
Flowers of the Civil State: And which is incomparably more valuable, it secures
the enjoyment of the blessed Gospel in its Purity and Freedom. Although there
is a restraint of your Power in some things that were granted in your former
Charter; yet there are some ample Privileges in other things, that may be of
perpetual Advantage to the Colony.

We doubt not but your faithful Agent will receive a gracious Reward Above; and
we hope his successful Service will be welcomed with your entire Approbation,
and grateful Acceptance.

LONDON, October. 17. 1691. We are, Your very Humble, And Faithful Servants,
William Bates, Thomas Woodcock, Matthew Mead, Matthew Barker, Richard Stretton,
Vincent Alsop, John How, John James, Samuel Annesly, George Griffith, Richard
Mayo, Isaac Chauncey, John Quick.


THE END.

