THE LAST Dying Speeches And Confessions of the Three Notorious Malefactors who
were Executed at TYBVRN; on the 4th. of this Instant March, 1681. Giving an
Account of the several Crimes for which they suffered: which are as follows;
John Sadler, For Whipping a Girl to Death at Ratcliff. Roger Maiden, For Eight
FELLONIES and BURGLARYS. Elizabeth Brown, alias White-head, For Robbing the Two
Cocks on London Bridge, and endeavoring to Cut the Maids Throat. With their
penitential Confessions as well in Prison, as at the place of EXECVTION.
BEfore we enter upon the Confessions, it has been thought fit to give the
Reader a particular account of the Crime for which every Offender suffers, the
first of which deplorable Wretches we shall begin withal, is, one John Sadler,
who was by his Employ a Bailiffs Follower, lodging at one Latice VVigingtons
house, a School-mistris or Sempstress, living in the Parish of Ratcliff, the
said VVigington keeping many Apprentices and Scholars to work, amongst which,
was one Elizabeth Holton, a Girl about Thirteen years of Age, whom as they
affirmed, had at several times purloyned things out of the House, amongst
which, was some Linen of the Prisoners, which he did not charge her with till
about the 24 of December. last; When as her Mistress to whom she was Apprentice,
having sent her of an Errand to carry some things home which had been bought
there, did charge her with defrauding of two shillings or some such
inconsiderable Sum, which the Girl utterly denying, she got the Prisoner, (who
as the Evidence in Court did affirm was her Gallant) to assist her in giving
the Girl Correction, when they shuting all the doors, got several Whip-cords
which they knoted and tied to a stick, by most called a Cat of Nine-Tails, then
tying her by the Wrist, hung her up upon a Hook, where they having stripped
her, the Prisoner with the aforesaid Cords, beat her upon the bare flesh for
the space of an hour, all which time the woman (who for the same Fact was the
Sessions before condemned, and pleaded her Belly) stopped her mouth least the
neighbors should hear her cry; then being weary of his cruel usage, he
desisted, and fell to it again about half an hour afterward, and so continued
at several times, for the space of four hours, and as often as the Blood poured
down, they rubbed the Wounds with Salt: This was sworn to in Court, and himself
could not deny it, the Girl Dying three days afterward; for which Heinous fact
he received Sentence of death on the 26th. of February last, and from the
Sessions House conveyed back to Newgate, where he continued very pensive, much
bewailing his sad state, saying; That he had lived a most Notorious and Wicked
Life, not only in all manner of Debaucheries, as Whoring, Drunkenness, and the
like; but that he had been a great Oppressor of poor People, and a continual
Sabbath-breaker, for which Sins he supposed God had given him up to commit this
Barbarous Murder for which he now suffered; saying, That the woman had been a
great Instrument to prompt him on to wickedness, and that she was the cause he
had committed so foul a Murder which now stuck sore upon his conscience, yet
he hoped God would at the last except of his returning to him, and that he
would wash away the Innocent blood which he had shed, with the meritorious
death and passion of his Redeemer, and that he hoped to be cleansed in his
blood, with many other pious expressions which he used to several that came to
see him during the intervene of time, and on this day when he was put into the
Cart, in order to be drawn to the place of Execution, he desired all to pray
for him, and so continued till the Executioner did his office.

The next in this shameful and untimely suffering, was one Roger Maiden, who
formerly lived in Acorn-Alley near Spittle-fields, his Crimes for which he
suffered, were numerous, for he was Indicted no less then Eight times for
several Fellonies and Burglaries, which were all committed in the space of 6
weeks, in Shadwell, Stepney, and White Chapel; the names of the persons that
he in the company of one John Maiden, Aiden, and John Motly, were these, James
Porter, Jane Harris, William Addams, Samuel Banfield, Phillip Story, Thomas
Hopkins, Anthony Fowler, and Mary Clark, from either of them stealing
considerable quantities of Goods to a great value: Of Seven Fellonies and
Burglary he being found Guilty, and only acquitted, of one Felony he received
Sentence of death, after which he seemed very melancholy and stupifi'd for a
considerable time, but finding that Death was certain, and that no Reprieve
could be expected, he began to enquire of several Ministers that came to see
him, how he might obtain a pardon for his sins, desiring that they would offer
up their Prayers to God for to give him the Spirit of Prayer, which by reason
of his former wicked Life he had lost; saying that he had been in above Forty
Robberies, and helped to undooe many poor and honest people, for which he hoped
God would forgive him: These and many other expressions he used to the last,
desiring all to take warning by his wretched fate, and not to give their youth
and strength to serve the Devil as he had done, but he hoped God would forgive
him all his offenses, and he hoped his downfall would be a warning to all that
were spectators of the same.

Elizabeth Whitehead, alias Brown, who about half a Year since was Condemned,
for that she in the Company of one Thomas Brown, alias More, executed, knocking
at the Door of one Mr. King, at the Two fighting Cocks on London Bridge, it
being on a Sabbath Day, when they were all (the Maid only excepted) gone to
Church, under pretense of being Cousin to the Gentleman of the House, got so
much credit with the Maid as to let them in, when she ceasing on her,
endeavored to still her outcry by Cutting of her Throat, which she
endeavoring to hinder, they cut her Hands and Face most miserably, then
binding her, took in Plate and Moneys to the value of Four Hundred pounds, but
e're they got out of the House she got loose, and shutting her self into a
Room, eryed out, whereupon help coming, the Prisoner got down upon the Piles
and there was taken, the which upon her Trial she not denying, she was found
Guilty, and received Sentence of Death, but pleading her Belly, was respited
till this day, and during the said interview, she showed great Contrition, and
much Lamented her Lost and Deplorable Condition, desiring all people to pray
for her, saying; That she had been a grievous Sinner, and that she had been the
cause of many Man's Ruin, and especially of the aforesaid More, (alias) Browns,
whom she had drawn into the Robbery, for which she desired God would pardon her
Offenses, and Dyed very penitently.

FINIS.
Printed for T. B. in the Year, 1681:


