THE French King's MEMORIAL TO THE POPE.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh. 1688.

LETTRE DU ROY, A MONSIEUR LE CARDINAL D'ESTREES.

Ecrite a Versailles le 6. Septembre 1688.

LETTRE DU ROY, etc.
MON COUSIN,
QUoyque j'aye toujours cru que les preventions du Pape contre ma Couronne
etoient plutot les effets des suggestions de mes Ennemis, que de son
inclination and de son penchant naturel pour la Maison d'Austriche; neanmoins
il vient de me donner des preuves si evidentes de sa partialite pour elle, and
de son grand eloignement a retablir avec moy une bonne intelligence, qu'il ne
me rest plus aucune esperance de le porter a reprendre les sentimens de Pere
commun, and a concourir avec moy a ce qui peut and doit affermir le repos de
l'Europe. Il y a meme bien de l'apparence, que la conduite que Sa Saintete
tient a present, produira bien tossed une guerre generale dans toute la
Chretiente. Et comme la prudence ne me permet plus d attendre de justice de luy
dans tous les differends qui peuvent avoir rapport a mes interests, je sais
bien aise, pour n'avoir rien a me reprocher, que vous luy fassiez connoitre
encore une fois les justes sujets qu'il me done de ne le plus considerer, que
comme un Prince engage avec mes Ennemis: and puisque mon Ambassadeur ne peut
avoir aucun acces aupres de luy, and que la dignite de Cardinal vous oblige a
garder des mesures qui ne conviennent pas avec la force des verites, don't il
est necessaire qu'il soit inform, vous luy ferez la lecture de cette depeche,
and vous luy en laisserez meme l'original, qui le doit fair souvenir, que
depuis son elevation a la Chair de Saint Pierre, je n'ay rien obmis de tout ce
qui le pouvoit persuader de mon respect filial pour luy, and du desir sincere
que javois de contribuer a la gloire de son Pontificat, par toutes les mesures
qu'une parfaite intelligence enter Nous pouvoit etablir pour l'augmentation de
nostre Religion.

Que tous les ordres don't j'ay charge le feu Duc d'Estrees vostre friar, ne
tendoient uniquement qu' a une fin si salutaire au bien general de la
Chretiente.

Qu'elle a fait aussi le seul sujet de vostre envoy and de vostre sejour aupres
de Sa Saintete.

Que c'est dans cette vue que je vous avois permis de consentir a des
temperamens sur la Regale, infiniment plus avantageux aux Eglises de mon
Royaume, que ne pouvoient estre les pretentions mal fondees de quelques
Eveques, quand mesme j'y aurois acquiesce.

Que quelque satisfaction que m'ayent done les insinuations and les
remontrances respectueuses que vous avez faites a Sa Saintete, and toute la
sagesse de vostre conduite and de vos negociations, neanmoins les preventions
du Pape contre ma Couronne ont toujours rendu inutile toute la force de vos
raisons.

Que je n'ay pas laisse neanmoins, pour reduire cette affair aux terms qui
pouvoient plaire a Sa Saintete, d'accorder aux tres-humbles prieres du Clerge
de mon Royaume, par ma derniere Declaration du 24. Janvier 1682. tous les
avantages don't je voulois qu'ils fussent redevables a Sa Saintete mesme, par le
moyen du retablissement d'une bonne intelligence enter Elle and moy.

Que j'avois raison de croire que cet eclaircissement de mes intentions devoit
contenter Sa Saintete, and la disposer au moins a avoir pour moy les sentimens,
que la qualite de Pere commun luy devoit inspirer.

Que cependant bien loin de trouver en Elle cette affection paternelle, qui me
devoit faciliter les moyens de ramener au giron de l'Eglise tous ceux de mes
sujets qui avoient eu le malheur d'estre elevez and nourris dans l'erreur, Elle
s'est opiniatree par une durete inflexible a refuser les Bulls a ceux que j'ay
nommez aux Eveschez vacans de mon Royaume, and que j'ay reconnus les plus
capables de travailler avec succez a l'instruction and a la conversion des
Heretics; Qu'Elle a fond son refus sur des moyens qui n'ont jamais empeche
aucun Pape de pourvoir ceux que les Rois mes Predecesseurs, and moi, avons
nommes en virtue du Concordat. Mais comme vous lui avez asses fait voir, and a
ses Ministres, tous les in conveniens de ce refus, and que les Eveques de mon
Royaume, qui ont acquis le plus de reputation dans toute la Chretiente, ont
suivi les memes maxims, qui font aujourd'hui le pretexte d'une pretendue
incapacite dans ceux que la Cour ou vous etes, qualify n'etre pas d'une saine
doctrine; il est inutile de rebatre toutes les raisons qui ont ete si souvent
dites sur ce sujet, and que vous avez si bien explique, qu'elles ne peuvent
laisser aucun lieu aux foibles excuses and aux pretendus scrupules de
conscience, don't Sa Saintete, and ses Ministers se sont toujours servi pour
colorer l'injustice du retardement qu'Elle apporte depuis plusieurs annees a
l'expedition de ses Bulls, pour des Prelates d'un merit distingue.

Que les Catholics anciens and nouveaux sont scandalises de voir, que pendant
que j'employe mes soins, mon autorite, and mes finances a la destruction and a
l'entiere extirpation de l'heresie, non seulement je ne puis obtenir de Sa
Saintete les graces qui peuvent contribuer a l'affermissement de ce grand
ouvrage, mais qu'au contraire Elle se fait un point d'honneur d'oster a mon
Ambassadeur les franchises, don't ses predecesseurs ont toujours joui
paisiblement, and qui leur ont este confirmees par le Traite de Pise.

Qu'au lieu de se servir pour cet effet des voies de douceur, de negotiation
and d'accommodement pratiquees en pareils cas enter Princes amiss, and qui
veulent observer les regles de la bienseance, il a commence par le refus de
toute audience au Marquis de Lavardin mon Ambassadeur, don't les instructions ne
tendoient qu'a retablir un bon concert enter Sa Saintete and moi; and dans une
affair purement temporelle, il s'est servi des arms spirituelles, pour le
declarer notoirement excommunie, contre l'avis, meme de ceux qui sont les plus
devoues a ses sentimens, and les plus emportes contre mes interests.

Que tous les soins que vous and le Marquis de Lavardin avez pris pour luy
fair connoitre, qu'on pourroit trouver des temperamens capables de concilier
sa satisfaction avec la mienne, ont ete inutiles: Qu'il en a rejette toutes les
propositions avec hauteur, faisant meme entendre par tout, que vostre
entremise, ni celle du Marquis de Lavardin, ne pouvoient jamais lui estre
agreables.

Que c'est ce qui m'a enfin oblige, pour lever tous les obstacles qui pouvoient
l'embarasser, de lui depescher secretement un homme de confiance, auquel
j'avois done une lettre de ma main en creance pour Sa Saintete.

Qu'il s'est d'abord address a Casoni, and ensuite au Cardinal Cibo, auquel il
a fait voir ma lettre, en sort que le Pape n'a pu ignorer, que je l'avois
choisi pour l'informer de mes plus secrets intentions, sans vous en rien
communiquer, ni a mon Ambassadeur. Que cependant toutes les diligences qu'il a
pu fair n'ont servi qu'a lui fair donner une exclusion formelle, avec plus
d'indignite, que s'il eut este envoie par le moindre Prince de la Chretiente.
Que le deplaisir de s'en revenir sans avoir execute mes ordres l'avoit enfin
oblige de se decouvrir a vous and au Marquis de Lavardin; mais que toutes vos
remontrances par ecrit and de vive voix a Sa Saintete, sur le blame qu'Elle
s'attireroit dans toute la Chretiente, du refus si injurieux d'une person de
confiance autorisee d'une lettre de ma propre main, avec order de ne
s'expliquer qu'a Sa Saintete meme, sans l'interposition d'aucun Ministre,
n'avoient pu rien obtenir, qu'une espece de menace de se porter bien-tot a de
plus grandes extremites.

Que cependant, non seulement je n'ay jamais refuse d'entendre le Nonce de Sa
Saintete, lors qu'il a eu quelque chose a me representer de sa part, mais meme
que pour marquer encore davantage mon zele and ma veneration pour le saint
Siege, je voulus bien donner plusieurs audiences secrets dans mon Cabinet, au
nomme Carlo Cavari Pretre Napolitain, du moment qu'il m'eut fait entendre qu'il
avoit une mission secret de Sa Saintete, and qu Elle l'avoit charge de fair
des propositions tres importantes, qui pouvoient retablir une parfaite
intelligence enter nous, quoy qu'il n'eut en effet aucune autre marque de la
confiance du Pape, que quelques Lettres de Dom Livio son Neveu, and que je lui
eusse asses fait connoistre, que s'il me faisoit voir un mot de Sa Saintete qui
l'autorisat, je l'ecouterois toutes les fois qu'il le desireroit. Je laisse au
Pape a fair la comparaison de ce traitement, a celui qu'il a fait a mon
Envoye, reconnu par ses Ministres, and par Sa Saintete meme, sur les assurances
que le Cardinal Cibo lui en a du donner, and que vous lui aves confirmees.

Je suis bien persuade, qu'il n'y auroit point d'ennemy declare de ma Couronne,
qui refusat d'ecouter celui qui lui porteroit une lettre de ma main, and je
m'assure aussi qu'il n'y a point eu de Pape, and qu'il n'y en aura jamais qui
se port a une extremite si peu convenable a la qualite de Pere commun.

Mais on peut dire, que Sa Saintete a fait paroitre sa haine personnelle contre
ma Couronne, and sa partialite pour la Maison d'Austriche, encore plus
ouvertement, dans tout ce qui s'est pass touchant la Postulation du Cardinal
de Furstemberg a la Coadjutorerie, and ensuite a l'Electorat de Cologne.

On n'auroit pas pu croire, qu'un Doien du Chapitre, qui en a si long-temps
administre les plus importantes affairs avec toute la sagesse and la bonne
conduite qui lui ont acquis l'estime de tous ses Confreres, qui a este postule
a la Coadjutorerie du consentement, tant du feu Electeur, que de tous les
Chanoines, and qui est de plus honor de la dignite de Cardinal, n'ait pu
obtenir sa confirmation du meme Pape qui l'en a revetu.

Sa Saintete assuroit par ce moien le repos de toute l'Europe, and ne donnoit
aucun just sujet de plainte a ceux qui sont les plus opposes a l'elevation
dudit Cardinal; Elle n'auroit pas meme eu besoin de se servir des graces, don't
la divine providence l'a rendu le dispensateur; il suffisoit seulement de luy
accorder la permission de se demettre de l'Eveche de Strasbourg, and il
n'auroit eu besoin ni de Bref d' Eligibilite, ni de faveur, ni de
recommandation. Cependant Sa Saintete ne s'est pas contentee de luy refuser
cette justice, mais on peut dire qu'entrant aveuglement dans tous les interests
de la Maison d'Austriche, Elle s'est depouillee tout d'un coup de cette
rigidite qui lui avoit done jusqu'alors un si grand eloignement pour toutes
les graces, and Elle en a fait une profusion si extraordinaire, en faveur d'un
jeune Prince, age seulement de dix-sept ans, qu'il ne faut que lire le Bref
qu'Elle luy a accord, pour voir qu'il ne peut avoir ete dicte que par ceux qui
ne reconnoissent aucune regle que celle qui convient a leurs passions and a
leurs interests, and non pas par un Pape qui s'est toujours fait un scruple de
conscience d'accorder la moindre grace a mes prieres.

C'est cependant ce Bref qui a done la force and le mouvement a toutes les
intregues, cabales, corruptions and injures, don't le Comte de Kaunitz s'est
servy pour gagner trois ou quatre voix, and troubler l'union du Chapitre qui
avoir paru dans la Postulation dudit Cardinal a la Coadjutorerie; ce qui n'a
pas empesche neantmoins, que la plus grande and la plus considerable party ne
se soit declaree en faveur dudit Cardinal, and ne l'ait proclaim.

C'est enfin cette conduite du Pape, and tout ce que je viens de vous ecrire,
qui port les affairs de l'Europe a une guerre generale, qui done au Prince
d'Orange la hardiesse de fair tout ce qui peut marquer un dessein form
d'aller attaquer le Roy d Angleterre dans son propre Royaume, de prendre pour
pretexte d'une enterprise si hardy le maintien de la Religion Protestante, ou
plutost l'extirpation de la Catholic, and le renversement entier de la
Monarchy: Qui done a ses Emissaires and aux Ecrivains de Hollande l insolence
de traitter de supposition la Naissance du Prince de Galls, d'exciter les
Sujets du Roy de la grande Bretagne a la revolte, and se prevaloir de la
necessite ou me mettent la partialite du Pape and les violences de la Cour de
Vienne contre le Cardinal de Furstemberg, and la plus saine party du Chapitre
de Cologne, a fair avancer mes troops pour leur donner tout le secours and la
protection don't ils peuvent avoir besoin pour se maintenir dans leurs droits
and dans leurs libertes.

Sa Saintete peut bien croire aussi, que quelque attachement que j'aye, and que
j'auray toujours pour le saint Siege, je ne puis plus m'empescher de separes la
qualite de Chef de l'Eglise, de celle d'un Prince temporel, qui espouse
ouvertement les interests des Ennemis de ma Couronne: Que l'obligation qu'elle
m'impose, ne me permet plus d'attendre de sa part aucune justice sur les
differends qui me regardent: Que je ne puis plus le reconnoitre pour Mediateur
des contestations qu'a fait naistre la succession Palatine enter ma Belle-soeur
and la Maison de Neubourg: Que je scauray bien fair render a cette Princess
la justice qui luy est due, par les moyens que Dieu m'a mis en main contre les
violentes usurpations de l'Electeur Palatin: Que d'ailleurs je ne pretens pas
laisser plus long-temps le Duc de Parme mon allie, depouille de ses Etats de
Castro and de Ronciglione, dans lesquels il doit estre retably, en execution de
l article premier du Traite de Pise, don't je suis garant. Ainsi je veux, que
pour ne laisser a Sa Saintete aucun lieu de douter de la resolution qu'Elle m'a
oblige de prendre, vous luy demandiez en mon nom, qu'Elle fasse incessamment
remettre ledit Duc de Parme en possession de ses Etats de Castro and de
Ronciglione, comme il est stipule par ledit premier article, luy declarant
qu'au moindre retardement qu'Elle y apportera, je feray entrer mes troops en
Italy, pour y demeurer, jusqu' a ce que ce Prince mon allie soit rentre dans
la jouissance de sesdits Etats; and que je me mettray dans le mesme temps en
possession de la ville d Avignon, soit pour la render a Sa Saintete, apres
l'entiere execution du Traite de Pise, ou pour la retenir, and donner audit Duc
de Parme le prix pour lequel elle a este engagee, en deduction des interests
and des dommages qu'il pourroit souffrir d'une plus longue privation de sesdits
Etats.

Que je continueray cependant a donner au Cardinal de Furstemberg and au
Chapitre de Cologne, toute la protection don't ils pourront avoir besoin pour la
manutention de leurs droits, sans refuser a ma Belle-soeur le secours qui luy
sera necessaire, pour le recouvrement de ce qui luy appartient de la succession
des Electeurs Palatins ses Pere and Friar.

Je m'assure que tous les Princes and Etats de la Chretiente, qui considereront
sans passion la conduite que le Pape a tenue envers moy depuis son elevation au
Pontificat, and qui connoitront d'ailleurs les soins and les impressemens que
j'ay toujours eu a rechercher son amity, tout ce que j'ay fait pour le bien
and l'avantage de nostre Religion, mon attachement sincere and ma veneration
pour le saint Siege, mon application a maintenir le repos de l'Europe, sans me
prevaloir des conjonctures favorables and de la puissance que Dieu m'a mise en
main, s'etonneront plutost que j'aye souffert tant d'injures and de mauvais
traitemens de la Cour de Rome, and que j'aye laisse en mesme temps agrandir
l'Empereur contre toutes les regles d'une bonne Politic, que de la just
protection que je suis resolu de donner a des Princes and a un Chapitre, que le
Pape and l'Empereur veulent depouiller de leurs possessions and de leurs
droits, contre toute justice, and seulement a cause qu'ils les croyent
reconnoissans des marquis qu'ils ont toujours recues de mon estime and de mon
affection. Je suis mesme persuade que si le Pape fait de serieuses reflections
sur ce que je vous ecris, il tombera d'accord en lui-meme, que ma patience ne
pouvoit aller plus loin sans blesser ma reputation, and qu'il ne doit imputer
qu'a sa partialite, and aux conseils que lui ont done les Ennemis de ma
Couronne, tous les malheurs que peut causer la necessite ou il me met de fair
passer des troops en Italy, and de maintenir les droits and les libertes du
Chapitre de Cologne.

Mais parce que je n'ay pas lieu d'esperer que ce que je vous ecris fasse
changer de sentiment au Pape, je vous ordonne de voir apres vostre audience
chacun des Cardinaux, and de leur laisser copy de ma Lettre, afin qu'ils
fassent aussi leurs reflections sur les suites d'une affair si importante, and
a laquelle le sacre College a un si notable interest. Sur ce je pry Dieu qu'il
vous ait, Mon Cousin, en sa saint and digne guard.

Ecrit a Versailles le 6. Septembre 1688. Sign LOUIS.
Et plus bas, COLBERT.

THE French King's LETTER TO Monsieur the CARDINAL D'ESTREES, Written from
VERSAILLES, September. 6. 1688.

THE French King's LETTER, etc.
MY COUSIN,
THough I always believed that the Prejudices of the Pope against my Crown,
were rather the Effects of the Suggestions of my Enemies, than of his own
Inclination, and of his natural Love to the House of Austria; nevertheless he
has at length given me such evident Proofs of his Partiality for It, and of his
strong aversion to reestablish a good correspondence with me, that there now
remains no longer to me any hopes of inclining him to resume the sentiments of
a common Father, and to concur with me in doing what he can and ought, for the
establishing of the Peace of Europe. So that it appears plainly that the
Conduct his Holiness at present makes use of, will soon produce an universal
War through all Christendom. And as Prudence permits me not any longer to wait
for Justice from him amidst all the Differences which may have an influence
upon my Interests, I am content (that nothing may be left to reproach me) that
you shall once more represent to him the just Reasons he has given me of
considering him no longer otherwise than as a Prince engaged with my Enemies;
and forasmuch as my Ambassador cannot have any access to his presence, and
whereas the Dignity of Cardinal obliges you to Rules, which consist not with
the force of those Truths of which it is necessary he should be informed, you
shall offer to him the reading of this Dispatch, and you shall leave with him
the Original, which is to put him in mind, That since his Promotion to S.
Peter's Chair, I have omitted nothing that could possibly persuade him of my
filial respect for him, and of the sincere desire I have to contribute to the
Glory of his Pontificate by all those Measures which a right understanding
between us can establish for the propagation of our Religion.

That all those Orders with which your deceased Brother the Duke d' Estrees was
charged, did only aim at that single end so beneficial to the universal good of
Christendom.

That the same has been the sole Subject of your Embassage, and of your stay at
his Holinesses Court.

That it was to this end that I permitted you to consent to such temperaments
upon the Regale, which was infinitely more advantageous to the Churches of my
Realm, than the ill-grounded Pretenses of some Bishops could be, though I
should have complied with them.

That how great soever the Satisfaction may be which has been given me by the
respectful Insinuations and Remonstrances you have made to his Holiness, and by
all Prudence of your Conduct and your Negotiations; nevertheless the Prejudices
of the Pope against my Crown have always rendered successless all the force of
your Arguments.

That however, in order to reduce this affair to terms which might please his
Holiness, I have not neglected to grant, (at the humble Request of the Clergy
of my Realm, by my last Declaration of the 24. of January, 1682.) all those
advantages which I was willing should belong to his said Holiness, in order to
the resettling a good Correspondence between him and me.

That I had reason to believe, that this Manifestation of my Intentions ought
to satisfy his Holiness, and at least to dispose him to entertain such
sentiments for me as the Quality of a Common Father ought to inspire into him.

That in the mean while, far from finding in him that Paternal Affection, which
ought to have facilitated the Methods of reducing into the Bosom of the Church
all those my Subjects who had the ill fortune to be bred and educated in error,
He continues obstinate with an inflexible stiffness to deny his Bulls to those
whom I had nominated to the vacant Bishoprics in my Kingdom, and whom I knew
to be most capable to labor successfully for the Instruction and Conversion of
the Heretics:

That he has grounded his refusal upon reasons which never before hindered any
Pope from making use of such as the Kings my Predecessors, and my self have
nominated by virtue of the Concordat. But as you have sufficiently given him
and his Ministers to understand, all the Inconveniences of this denial, and
that the Bishops of my Realm, who have acquired the greatest Reputation through
all Christendom, have followed the same Maxims, which at this time make the
Pretense of a pretended Incapacity among those which the Court where you are
qualifies not to be of sound Doctrine, It is in vain to urge again all those
Arguments that have been so often made use of upon this Subject, and which you
have so plainly laid open, that they could leave no room for those feeble
excuses and pretended scruples of Conscience, of which his Holiness and his
Ministers have always served themselves, to color the injustice of the delay
he has put for many years upon the expediting of his Bulls for Prelates of
signal merit.

That the Catholics both ancient and new are scandalized to see that whilst I
employ all my Care, my Authority, and my Treasure, for the destruction and
entire extirpation of Heresy, I am unable not only to procure from his
Holiness such favors as may contribute to the accomplishment of this great
Work; but on the contrary he makes it a point of Honor to take away from my
Ambassador the Franchises which his Predecessors have always peaceably enjoyed,
and which were confirmed to them by the Treaty of Pisa.

That instead of making use to this effect of the softer methods of Negotiation
and Accommodation practiced in like cases between Princes who are Friends, and
who are willing to observe the Rules of Decency, he has begun with a positive
refusal of Audience to the Marquess Lavardin my Ambassador, whose Instructions
aim at nothing but to the establishment of a good understanding between his
Holiness and my self; and in an affair merely Temporal he has served himself of
Spiritual Arms to declare him notoriously Excommunicate, against the advice
even of those who are most devoted to his Sentiments, and who have the greatest
aversion to my Interests.

That all the endeavors that you and the Marquess of Lavardin have used to
give him to understand, that Temperaments might be found capable of giving
satisfaction both to him and me, have been without effect: For that he has
rejected those Propositions with disdain, at the same time letting me know in
the whole, that neither your Mediation, nor that of the Marquess of Lavardin
can ever be acceptable to him.

That this is it which at last did oblige me, in order to remove all the
obstacles which may lie in the way, to dispatch privately a person in whom I
might confide, to whom I had given a Letter of Credence under my own hand for
his Holiness.

That he is immediately addressed to Casoni, and afterward to Cardinal Cibo, to
whom he has showed my Letter, so that the Pope cannot be ignorant that I made
choice of him to give him information of my most secret Intentions, without
communicating any thing to you or to my Ambassador: That all the diligence he
could use pursuant hereunto, had no other effect than to procure a formal
Exclusion with more indignity than if he had been Commissioned from the meanest
Prince in Christendom. That the displeasure upon being put off without having
executed my orders obliged him to discover himself to you and to the Marquess
of Lavardin; but that all your Remonstrances either by writing to, or by
discourse with his Holiness, upon the blame which he drew upon himself through
all Christendom, by so injurious a denial to a person of Trust, authorized by a
Letter under my own hand, with order not to discover himself but to his
Holiness without the interposition of any Minister, have had the power to
obtain nothing but a kind of Menace that he would speedily come to the highest
extremities.

That in the mean while, I have not only not denied Audience to his Holiness
his Nuncio, whenever he has had any thing on his part to represent to me, but
also to show yet farther my Zeal and my Veneration for the Holy Sea, I was
ready to give frequent private Audidiences in my Closet to Carlo Cavari the
Neapolitan Priest, as soon as ever he gave me notice that he had a secret
message from his Holiness, and that he had given him in charge to make
propositions of very great importance, which might re-establish a perfect
understanding between us, though in effect he had no other mark of the
confidence the Pope put in him, but some Letters from Dom Livio his Nephew; and
though I had sufficiently given him to understand, that if he would but let me
see one word from his Holiness which would authorize him, I would hear him at
any time when he should desire it. I leave it to the Pope to make a comparison
of this way of Teatment with that which he has showed to my Ambassador, who is
acknowledged for such by his Ministers and by his Holiness himself, upon the
assurances which Cardinal Cibo was obliged to give him, and which you have
confirmed to him.

I am well assured that there is not a declared Enemy to my Crown, who would
refuse to give Audience to one who brings a Letter under my own hand; and I
assure my self also, that there never yet was any Pope, nor ever will be one
again, who will carry things to an extremity so little consistent with the
character of a common Father.

But it may still be said, that his Holiness has made appear his personal
hatred to my Crown, and his Partiality for the House of Austria, yet more
manifestly, in what has passed with respect to the Postulation of the Cardinal
of Furstemberg to the Coadjutorship, and after that to the Electorate of
Cologne.

It can hardly be credited, that a Dean of a Chapter, who had so long had the
Administration of athe most important Affairs with so great prudence and good
conduct, that he has procured to himself the esteem of all the Brethren of the
Chapter; who has been postulated to the Coadjutorship with the consent, as well
of the deceased Elector, as of all the Canons, and who is moreover honored
with the Dignity of Cardinal, has not been able to obtain a Confirmation from
that Pope who invested him with that Character.

His Holiness might by this means secure the Peace of all Europe, without
giving any just subject of complaint to those who are most earnest against the
promotion of the said Cardinal. He would not have any occasion to serve himself
of those favors of which the Divine Providence has made him the Dispenser; it
would alone suffice to grant him leave to lay down the Bishopric of
Strasbourg, and then he would have no need of the Breve of Eligibility nor of
any favor or recommendation. In the mean time his Holiness is not content to
deny him this Justice, but, as it may be said, he engaging himself blindly in
all the Interests of the House of Austria, he has despoiled himself at once, of
that rigor, which had hitherto given him so great an aversion for all
particular kindnesses; and he has been so extraordinary profuse in favor of a
young Prince, of the age but of seventeen years, that it needs only to read the
Breve granted to him, to show that it could not be dictated but by those who
acknowledge no other Rule but such as agrees with their Passions and their
Interests, and not by a Pope who has always made it a scruple of Conscience to
grant the least favor at my request.

But in the mean time it is this Breve which has given force and motion to all
the Intrigues, Cabals, Corruptions and Wrongs which the Count de Kaunitz has
made use of to gain three or four Voices, and to disturb that Union of the
Chapter, which did appear in the Postulation of the said Cardinal to the
Coadjutorship; which nevertheless hindered not, but that the greatest and most
considerable declared part in favor of the said Cardinal, and proclaimed him
accordingly.

In fine, it is this Conduct of the Pope, and what I have written to you, which
inclines the Affairs of Europe to a general War, which inspires the Prince of
Orange with the boldness to do whatsoever may show a Design formed to go and
attack the King of England in his own Realm, and to take for pretext of so
hardy an Enterprise, the Defense of the Protestant Religion, or rather the
extirpation of the Catholic, and the entire Overthrow of that Monarchy; which
gives his Emissaries and the Writers of Holland the insolence to treat the
Birth of the Prince of Wales as supposititious, to excite the Subjects of the
King

of Great Britain to a Revolt, and to take advantage of the necessity I lie
under, by the Pope's Partiality, and the Violences of the Court of Vienna
against the Cardinal of Furstemberg, and the most considerable part of the
Chapter of Cologne, to cause my Troops to advance for the affording them all
the Succor and Protection they may stand in need of, for the maintenance of
their Rights and Liberties.

His Holiness may likewise be well assured, that whatsoever respect I have, and
always shall have for the Holy Sea, I cannot now forbear any longer to
distinguish his Quality of Head of the Church from that of Temporal Prince, who
openly espouses the Interests of the Enemies of my Crown; that the obligation
he imposes on me does not permit me any longer to expect on his part any
justice in relation to the Differences that concern me: That I cannot any
longer look upon him as a Mediator of the Contests which the Succession to the
Palatinate has raised between my Sister in law and the House of Newbourg: That
I well know how to do that Princess the Justice which is due to her, against
the violent Usurpations of the Elector Palatin, by the means which God has put
into my hands: That besides I do not pretend to leave any longer the Duke of
Parma my Ally, deprived of his States of Castro and Ronciglione, wherein he
ought to be reestablished, by execution of the first Article of the Treaty of
Pisa, whereof I am Guarantee. Also I will, that not to leave his Holiness any
opportunity of making any doubt of the Resolution he has forced me to take, you
would demand of him in my name, that he immediately restores the Duke of Parma
to the Possession of his States of Castro and Ronciglione, as it is agreed by
the said first Articles, letting him know, that upon the least delay he shall
make herein, I will cause my Troops to enter Italy, and to remain there till
this Prince my Ally shall be restored to the perfect enjoyment of his said
Dominions; and that I shall at the same time take possession of the City of
Avignon, either to restore it to his Holiness after the entire execution of the
Treaty of Pisa, or to detain it, and give the said Duke of Parma the value for
which it was engaged, deducting the Interests and Damages he may suffer by
being any longer deprived of the enjoyment of his said States.

That I shall continue in the mean time to give the Cardinal of Furstemberg,
and the Chapter of Cologne, all the Protection they may stand in need of for
the preserving their Rights, without refusing my Sister-in-law the Succors that
shall be necessary for her, for the recovery of what belongs to her of the
Succession of the Electors Palatin both Father and Brother.

I am very confident that all the Princes and States of Christendom, who shall
consider without Passion the Conduct which the Pope has used toward me since
his Promotion to the Pontificate, and besides shall take notice of the care and
earnestness I have always had to gain his good will, all that I have done for
the good and advantage of our Religion, my sincere affection and veneration for
the Holy Sea, my earnest endeavors to preserve the Repose of Europe, without
taking advantage of those favorable Conjunctures and the Power which God has
put into my hands, will rather admire that I have endured so many Injuries and
ill Treatments from the Court of Rome; and that I have at the same time
permitted the Emperor to grow Great, contrary to all the Rules of good
Politics, than at the just Protection which I am resolved to give those
Princes, and to a Chapter, which the Pope and Emperor would deprive of their
Rights and Possessions, contrary to all Justice, and only because they believe
them sensible of the marks they have always received of my esteem and
affection. And I am verily persuaded, that if the Pope shall seriously reflect
on what I write to you, he will be fully satisfied that my Patience could not
last any longer, without injuring my Reputation, and that he ought only to
impute to his Partiality, and to the Counsels given him by the Enemies to my
Crown, all the Misfortunes that may be occasioned by the necessity he puts upon
me to cause my Troops to enter Italy, and to maintain the Rights and Liberties
of the Chapter of Cologne.

But because I have no great reason to expect that what I now write to you,
should make the Pope change his Sentiments, I order you, after your Audience,
to make a visit to every one of the Cardinals, and to leave with them a Copy of
my Letter, that so they may make their Reflections upon the Consequences of so
important an Affair, and in which the Sacred College has so great Interest.

Hereupon I pray God, my Cousin, to preserve you. Given at Versailles the Sixth
of September, 1688. Signed LEWIS:
and underneath COLBERT.

With Allowance.

