EARLY PIETY, EXEMPLIFIED IN THE Life and Death OF Mr. Nathanael Mather, WHO
Having become at the Age of Nineteen, an Instance of more than Common Learning
and Virtue, Changed Earth for Heaven, Oct. 17. 1688. Whereto are added, Some
Discourses on the true Nature, the great Reward, and the best Season of such A
WALK WITH GOD as he left a Pattern of.

The Second Edition. With a Prefatory Epistle by Mr. Matthew Mead.

LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the
Poultrey, 1689.

To the READER.
OF all Reading, History has in it a most taking Delight, and no History more
delightful than the Lives of good Men, it being not only pleasant, but
profitable; and so while other Pleasures become a Bait to Vice, this becomes a
Motive to Virtue. It may be said of such Lives as that Excellent Mr. Herbert
said of Verses, A Life may find him who a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.


Thou have here a rare History of a Youth, that may be of great use and
advantage both to Old and Young: That the Aged seeing themselves outdone by
Green years, may gird up their loins, and mend their pace for Heaven; and that
Young ones may be so wrought into the love of Religion, as it is Exemplified in
this holy Person, as to endeavor with all diligence to write after his
excellent Copy.

It is a great Work to die, and to die well is a greater; and no Work calls for
greater diligence than this, because the Errors of the first work can never be
corrected in a second. One great reason why this duty is seldom well done, is
because we grudge Time to do it in, and leave it to be done at once. It is
never like to be well done, unless it be always doing; and therefore we should,
in Conformity to that great Apostle, die daily.

This was the practice of this young Disciple, who among all his other Learning
(wherein for his time he excelled most) had in Nineteen years so perfectly
learned this Lesson, that the wise God saw it fit he should take out.

About Fourteen years old he did dedicate himself wholly to God and his
Service, and entered into a Solemn Covenant with God to that purpose: which as
he did not begin rashly, and without great deliberation; so he did not transact
it slightly, but with great sense and seriousness: The Matter and Form of which
Covenant you have in this ensuing Narrative, signed with his own Hand,
according to that word of the Prophet, (Isa. 44. 5.) One shall say, I am the
Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall
subscribe with his hand to the Lord. And with what care and Conscience he
p^^^formed this Covenant, in Fasting, in Prayer, in Watchings, in
Self-Examination, in Meditation, in Thanksgiving, in Walking with God in all,
is fully witnessed in what follows, which shows that he was a true Nathanael,
an Israelite indeed in whom was no guile. Not like those Israelites which the
Prophet reproves, for that they flattered God with their Mouth, -- lied to him
with their tongues, their hearts not being right with him, nor steadfast in his
Covenant. For having once given up himself to God, He kept the ways of the
Lord, and did not wickedly depart from his God.

When his worthy Father (my dear Friend) was pleased to send this Narrative to
me, I confess I could not read it without great Reflection and Shame: Thought
I, God will not gather his Fruit till it is ripe, and therefore I live so long;
nor will he let it hang till it is rotten, therefore Nathanael dyed so soon. We
are not sent into the World merely to fill up a Number of years, but to fill up
our Measures of Grace, and whenever that is done, our time is done, and we have
lived to Maturity, and so did this Youth, and therefore came to his Grave in a
full Age (tho at N^^^teen) like as a Shock of Corn comes in in his season.

The following History is written by his own Brother, (a worthy Minister) the
fittest of any for such a Province, the nearness of Relation occasioning that
In^^^acy which others could not easily have. In what he has done herein, he
has deserved highly of all who love Goodness and Virtue, having used great
Faithfulness, and great Modesty: Great Faithfulness, and that both to the Dead
and to the Living; To the dead, in raising up the Name of such a Brother; and
to the living, in giving us a Narration of his Life, without an Oration in his
Praise; which indeed was altogether needless, when it was so fairly written by
himself, for his own works praise him in the Gates. And he has used great
Modesty, in speaking for the most part out of the Journal of the Deceased, so
that it is the dead who speak^ while the living writes. And since his End is
more to provoke to Imitation than to bespeak Admiration, How greatly does it
concern them into whose hands this Narrative shall happily fall, to join
earnest Prayer and diligent Endeavor together in following this great Example,
otherwise he that gave it, and he that writes it, will both rise up in judgment
against an unteachable Generation.

Matthew Mead.
London, June 17. 1689.
To the READER.
IT is not for me to say much of the Person who is the Subject of the ensuing
History, for that I am his younger Brother. I have read a Letter (dated October
25. 1688.) written to his and my ever honored Father, wherein are these
Expressions.

Never could Parent have cause of more comfort in a Child, than you have in
that Son of yours. I have seen his private Papers, and in them such an Instance
of a Walk with God, as few ancient Ministers perhaps have Experience of,
especially for the three last years of his Life, I find that he maintained a
course of wonderful Devotion, Supplication and Meditation every day; that
solemn Humiliations and Thanksgivings in secret, were no strangers to his
Practice, that he would be often thinking with himself, What shall I do for
God? And in a word, that Dr. Owen's Book about Spiritual-Mindedness, has been
in a very rare manner transcribed into his Conversation.

He has bin for his years a great Scholar, but a better Christian. The Life of
the famous young Janeway, I think, has not more of Holiness illustrious in it,
than that of your dear Nathanael's.

I write these things, because I judge you have no greater Joy. Some Eminent
Ministers here, have maintained a pleasant, intimate, familiar Conversation
with him, and the Character which they gave of him, is very Extraordinary. Thus
that Letter.

I have likewise heard my Father say, that he was more grieved for the loss
which the Church of God has sustained in the death of that my Brother, than for
his own loss thereby.

When I parted from him not a year ago, I hoped that would not have been my
Ultimum Vale; but I now lament my unhappiness, in that I gained no more by him:
And yet must acknowledge, that the little understanding which God has given me
in the Hebrew or Greek Tongues, was by that my Brother as the instrument: So
that I have cause whilst I shall live, to honor his Memory. His Death makes me
remember the Poets words, (...).

I cannot but know, that if I should not fear and serve the God of my Brothers,
and of my Fathers, and of my Grandfathers, the nearest Relations I ever had in
the World, will be Witnesses against me at the last day. The Lord give us a
joyful meeting in the day of Christ.

London, February, 5th. 1689. Samuel Mather.

THE INTRODUCTION.
MY Reader will quickly discern what it is that I attempt the doing of; and I
suppose he will then see no occasion of enquiring Why. The Apology's wherewith
Writers usually fill the Prefaces of their Books, Do come of Evil; either the
Vanity of the Composers is discovered, or the Candor of the Perusers
questioned in them. That I Write the Life of a Christian, cannot be faulted by
any one who Considers, That the Lives of Pious Men have been justly esteemed
among the most useful Histories which the Church of God Enjoyes; or that the
best Pens in the World have been employed in thus helping the Just unto Eternal
Memory. Our Lord will have as mean a thing as one Act of Devotion and Charity,
in a poor Woman, to be mentioned wherever His Gospel comes. That I write the
Life of a Brother, will not be reckoned absurd by them who understand what
Patterns I have, both Ancient and Modern, for my doing so. James Janeway among
the rest has had our Thanks for what an Account he has given of his Brother
John. Indeed; if I should not thus Raise up for my departed Brother a Name in
Israel, I were not worthy to Wear a Shoo, or to have a Face unspit upon. My
Natural Relation to him does oblige me to bestow an Epitaph upon his Grave;
that the Survivers may not forget whose Dust they tread upon: But I am by (that
which Ambrose calls) a Greater and Better Fraternity, concerned to Embalm the
Memory of One, who maintained such a Walk with God, as he did until God took
him to Himself. It has been observed, That they who Live in Heaven while they
are on Earth, often Live on Earth after they are in Heaven. It were lawful for
me to desire and Study such a thing on the behalf of my Brother, whose Early
Piety is at once my own Shame and Joy: But I pursue an higher End than this,
designing rather to procure Followers, than to bespeak Admirers of this good
Example: That this is my Main Scope, in what I am now doing of, I declare
sincerely and very solemnly. And hence I have not here made an Oration in his
Praise, but given barely a Narrative of his Life, and this mostly by
Transcribing of his own Memorials, in all affecting the plain style of a Just
Historian. I do therefore Address this Exemplary Life unto the young People of
New England, and especially unto those of North-Boston, who are the Lambs that
I have Received a peculiar Charge from the Lord Jesus about the Feeding of. To
you do I present this Mirror, wherein you may see the Exercises of a Virtuous
Youth, not only prescribed, but also practiced before your Eyes: You shall see,
as what should be done, so what may be done by a Young Person, in order to
Everlasting Felicity; see him and hear him as One come from the Dead, saying,
Do as I have done. The Father of him whom I describe has Labored exceedingly
for the Conversion of the Rising Generation in New England; and his CALL to
them has been Printed and Reprinted here among us. Tho the News of a Sons Death
must needs be afflictive to him, when he shall have the Report of it arriving
to him in the other England, yet I make no doubt, but his Parental Griefs will
be not a little Mitigated, when he shall hehold that Son thus Renewing his CALL
by speaking after he is Dead. This Young Man did pray much for you, while he
was Alive, that you might be truly Converted unto God; he does preach now to
you, from the Grave, or rather from the Sky, that you would Remember your
Creator in the days of your Youth. I wish that he may (to use Chrysostoms
Phrase) become a Brother to you by Faith, as he is to me by Blood: And I extend
this my wish with a most Affectionate Application to the Young Gentlemen, who
belong to the College which he was a Member of. As you have had in his Father
a Rector, whose Generous and Expensive Cares have not been for your
disadvantage; so you have in his Diligence and his Devotion, a Copy which is
not altogether unworthy of your Imitation: I am setting before you the
Exercises and Accomplishments of a Scholar, whose chief Study it was, to be
Wise unto Salvation; a Scholar, who Labored while he was Learning all other
things, not to be Ignorant of Him, Whom to know is Life Eternal. I am not
without Hope, that some of you will now resolve as Jerome did when he had read
the Life of Hilarion, shutting up the Book and saying, Well, here shall be the
Champion whom I will follow: When you come to Dye, you will certainly commend
such a Life as his; god grant that none of you may then have cause to sigh,
Qualis Artifex pereo! Or to complain, Surgunt Indocti and rapiunt Coelum; Nos
cum nostris Doctrinis mergimur in Infernum. That Great Man Hugo Grotius near
his End professed, That he would gladly give all his Learning and Honor for
the Integrity of a poor Man in his Neighborhood, that spent Eights Hours of
his Time i^ Prayer, Eight in Labor, and Eight in Sleep and other Necessaries;
and unto some that applauded his Mavelous Industry he said, Ah, Vitam perdidi
operose nihi Agendo! But unto some that asked, the be^^ Counsel which a Man of
his Attainment could give, he said, Be serious. It Is with this Counsel that I
humbly offer you the ensuing History.

Advertisements.
THere is just now published a Treatise entitled, Reformed Religion, or Right
Christianity described, in its Excellent and Usefulness in the Whole Life of
Man. Written by (...) Barker Minister of the Gospel. Price bound 1 ^.

There will in a few days be published A new Martyrology, (...) the Bloody
Assizes, now exactly methodized in one Volume, comprehending a complete History
of the Lives, Sufferings an^ Deaths of all those Excellent Persons who fell in
the West (...) elsewhere, from 1678. to 1689. with the Pictures of several
(...) the Chief of them in Copper Plates. To which is added, (...) Life and
Death of George Lord Jefferys. -- Both sold (...) John Dunton at the Raven in
the Poultrey.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. NATHANAEL MATHER.
I Write the Life and Death of a Young Man, whose Ornament will awaken in the
Reader, an Enquiry like that which the Atchievments of David, produced
concerning him, Whose Son is this Youth?

To Anticipate that Enquiry:

Nathanael Mather had for his Grandfathers Two of New-England's Fathers, the
Famous Richard Mather, and the not less Famous John Cotton; whose Names have
been in the Church of God, as an Ointment powered forth, and whose Lives bear no
little Figure in the Ecclesiastical Histories of our English Israel. His (...)
being yet living, it is too* soon, to gi^^ them their Character; yet I may
ventu^^ to say, It Is no disgrace unto him in the Opinion of Men that love
Learning and Virtue, that he was the Son of Increas^ Mather, the well known
Teacher of a Church in Boston, and Rector of Harward College in New England.
What Gregory Nazianzen judged not improper (...) be said about his yet
surviving Father in his Funeral Oration upon his Decea^^ed Brother, I may
without any culpa^^^ Adulation on this occasion, say of him He is another Aaron
or Moses in the (...) of his God.

Our Nathanael was born on July 6* 1669. which I find him Recording (...) his
Diary, when he was fourteen Year^ Old, with such an humble Reflection
ther^^upon, How little have I improved this tim^ to the Honor of God as I
should have (...) He wanted not the Cares of his Father to bestow a good
Education on him, which God blessed for the Restraining him from the lewd and
wild Courses by which (...) many Children are betimes resigned (...) to the
possession of the Devil, and (...) the Furnishing him with the Accomplishments
as give an Ornament of Grace (...) the Head of Youth. He did Live where he
might Learn, and under the continual Prayers and Pains, of some that looked
after him, he became an Instance of unusual Industry, and no Common Piety; so
that when he dyed, which was October. 17th. 1688. he was become in less than
twenty years, An Old Man without Gray hairs upon him.

To those two Heads, with a sorrowful Addition of a Third, I shall consine my
account of this Young Man; in which the Picture to be now drawn, has nothing
but the Truth, and at least so much of Life in it, as to look upon every
Reader, yea speak unto him, saying, Go and do likewise.

I. His INDUSTY.
He was an hard Student, and quickly became a good Scholar. From his very
Childhood, his Book was perhaps as dear to him as his Play, and hence he grew
particularly acquainted with Church History, at a rate not usual in those that
were above thrice as Old as He. But when he came to somewhat more of Youth, his
Tutor (who now writes) was forced often to Chide him to his Recreations, but
never that I remember for them. To be Bookish was natural unto him, and to be
plodding easy and pleasant rather than the contrary. Indeed he afforded not so
much a Pattern as a Caution to young Students; for it may be truly written on
his Grave, Study killed Him. The marks and works of a Studious Mind were to be
discerned in him, even as he walked in the Streets; and his Candle would burn
after Midnight, until, as his own Phrase for it was, He thought his bones would
all fall asunder. This was among the passages once noted in his Diary.

10 M. 26 D. three quarters of an hour after 12 at Night.

After the many wearisom hours, days* months, nay, years, that I have spent it
humane Literature; and after my many toilsom Studies in those Hours when the
General silence of every House in Town, proclaimed it high time for me to put a
stop unto my workin^ Mind, and urged me to afford some Re^ unto my Eyes, which
have been almo^^ put out by my Intenseness on my Studies; after these, I say,
and when (...) am ready to do it: Oh how unwilling am I to do it, considering;
How litt^^ I have served God in the day! While he thus devoured Books, it came
to pass that Books devoured him. His weak Body would not bear the Toils, and
Hours, which he used himself unto; and his Neglect of Moderate Exercise, joined
with his Excess of Immoderate Lucubration, soon destroyed the Digestion which
his Blood should have had in the last Elaboration of it: by that time sixteen
Winters had snow'd upon him, he began to be Distempered, with many Pains and
Ailes, especially in some of his Joints, which at last were the Gates of Death
unto him; not without such very afflictive touches of Melancholy, too, as made
him sometimes to Write himself, Deodatus Melancholicus. This was his way of
living, shall I say, or of Dying? And the success of this Diligence was
according to the Temper of it Great. When he was but Twelve Years Old he was
admitted into the College, by strict Examiners: And many Months after this
passed not, before he had accurately gone over all the Old Testament in Hebrew,
as well as the New in Greek, besides his going through all the Liberal
Sciences, before many other designers for Philosophy do so much as begin to
look into them. He Commenced Batchelour of Arts, at the Age of Sixteen, and in
the Act entertained the Auditory with an Hebrew Oration, which gave a good
Account of the Academical Affairs among the ancient Jews. Indeed the Hebrew
Language was become so Familiar with him, as if (to use the Expression which
one had in an Ingenious Elegy upon his Death) he had apprehended it should
quickly become the only Language which he should have ocasion for. His Second
Degree after seven years being in the College, he took just before Death gave
him a Third, which last was a promotion infinitely beyond either of the former.
He then maintained for his Position, Datur Vacuum; and by his Discourse upon it
(as well as by other Memorials and Experiments left behind him in Manuscripts)
he gave a specimen of his Intimate Acquaintance with the Corpuscularian (and
only right) Philosophy. By this time he had informed himself like another
Mirandula, and was admirably capable of arguing about, almost every Subject
that fell within the Concernments of a Learned Man. Not only Philosophy but
also Divinity did he now own a Body of: The Difficulties of the Mathematics he
had particularly overcome, and the abstruse parts both of Arithmetic and
Astronomy, were grasped in his Knowledge.

His Early Almanac, and Calculations do something, but the MSS. Adversaria,
left behind him in his Closet, much more, speak such seize in him: His
Cronology was exact unto a wonder, and the State of Learning with the Names and
Works of Learned Men, in the World, this American Wilderness has few that
understand as well as he. Besides all this, for the vast Field of Theology,
both Didactick and Polemick, it is hardly Credible how little of it his Travel
had left unknown. Rabbinick learning he had likewise no small measure of; and
the Questions referring unto the Scriptures which Phylology is conversant
about, came under a very Critical Notice with him. Indeed he was a Person but
of few words, and his Words with his Looks made the Treasure in him wholly
unsuspected by Strangers to him; yet they that were intimately Acquainted with
him, can attest unto the Veracity of him that gives this Description; and
there are no mean Persons who will profess with Admiration, That they could
scarce encounter him in any Theme of Discourse which he was not very notably
acquainted with.

But the Bark is now split in which all these Riches were stowed. A Spanish
wrack has not more Silver than the Grave of such a Young Man has Learning
buried in it. Indeed these things, Mort^ Erunt; perhaps they dyed with him: Bu^
there is a more Immortal thing to be observed in him; and that is,

II. His PIETY.
Though a fine Carriage was the least thing that ever he affected, yet a Good
Nature made him dear to those that were familiar with him. He was always very
obliging and officious, and more ready to do, than others could be to ask a
good turn at his hands: But he was above all happy, by being Early in pure
Religion.

The Common Effects of such a Piou^ Education, as the Family in which he lived
afforded unto him, were seen even in his Childhood; and secret Prayer became
very betimes one of his Infant Exercises. He does in his MSs. particularly take
notice of a Scripture Copy set for him when he learned to Write, as a thing
that had much Efficacy on him; but when he was Twelve (or more) Years old, more
powerful Convictions did the Spirit of God set home upon him than he had been
used unto; some Records therefore I find in his Papers, with this Clause in the
Head of the Account, Rejoice O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee. Now it was that he allowed his Pen to write these, among other
Expressions of his Trouble about his Estate.

Feb. 19. 1682.
What shall I do? What shall I do to be saved? Without a Christ I am undone,
undone, undone for Evermore! O Lord, let me have Christ, though I lie in the Mire
for ever! O for a Christ! O for a Christ! a Christ! Lord, Give me a Christ or I
dye!

It was now another of his Registered Meditations.

I have been in a Great Hesitancy, whether I should choose Jesus Christ, for my
Prophet, Priest and King, with all his Inconveniences, to take up my Cross and
follow him: Wherefore I do now take him as mine; my whole Christ, and my only
Christ; and I am resolved to seek him. All that I have shall be at his Service,
and all my Members, and all my Powers, shall endeavor his Glory. And yet again
there were these Considerations in his Mind.

Had I not better seek the Lord Christ, while I have a Time of Prosperity and
Peace, while he offers himself to me, saying, Come unto me, and I will save
thee, and lay all thy Burdens upon me, and I will sustain thee: Than in
Affliction to cry, and not be heard? when he stretches forth his Hand and
says, Believe on me and thou shall be saved; and now to Day he offers himself,
shall I refuse, and say, Lord, To Morrow? No surely. And these pathetical
Groans then likewise got a Room in his Papers.

O that I had a Christ! O that I had Him who is the Delight of my Soul! Then, O
then I should be perfectly Blessed, and want no food that would make me so!
This is a Copy of the Passages then Recorded in this Young Believers Diary.

Thus did he now Labor to affect his own Soul with his own State, and leave
things no more at peradventures between God and him. He read many savoury Books
about Faith, and Repentance, and Conversion, and he Transcribed many Notes
therefrom, not resting satisfied within himself, until he had some experience
of a true Regeneration. Among other workings of his Heart at this Age, his
Papers have such things as these.

Reasons for my speedy closing with Jesus Christ.

First, It Is the Command of Jesus Christ, that I should come unto him.

Secondly, Jesus Christ Invites me also in Matt. 11. 28. Come unto me.

Thirdly, He has laid me under many Obligations, to turn unto him, in that he
has recovered me from Sickness so often, and now given me a curious Study.

Fourthly, In that I have vowed unto the Lord, if he would do so and so for me,
I would make a solemn Covenant with him, and endeavor to serve him.

And again elsewhere.

O that God would help me to seek Him while I am Young! O that he would give
unto me His Grace! However, I will lay my self down at his Feet. If he Save me,
I shall be happy for ever; if he Damn me, I must Justify him. O thou Son of
God, have mercy on me! I know not what to say, but I will take thee at thy
Word: Thou say, Come unto me; my Soul answers, Lord, at thy Command I will
come. He thus continued following hard after God, enjoying and answering many
striveings of his Holy Spirit until he was about Fourteen Years Old.

In this time he did not a little acquaint himself with profitable Godliness,
being frequent and fervent in his Prayers to God upon all occasions, and
careful not only to hear Sermons, but also to consider after them what
Improvement he should make of what he heard. Not only his Prayers, but his
Praises too now took notice of even the smallest Affairs before him. I know not
whether you can see any thing Childish, I am sure I see something serious, in a
passage or two that I shall fetch out of his Diary, written when he was about
Thirteen years old: On March 13. he wrote, This day I received of my Father,
that famous Work, The Biblia Polyglotta, for which I desire to praise the Name
of God: Again on June 29 he wrote, This day my Brother gave me Schindlers
Lexicon, a Book for which I had not only longed much, but also prayed unto God:
Blessed be the Lords Name for it. The Thoughts of Death also now found a
Lodging in his Heart, and he Rebuked himself because he had been so much
without them. Though at this Age for the most part, Persons think of any thing,
every thing more than of their dying day. And his writings discovered him to be
pec^liarly affected with that Ancient History (or Apologue) of him who after a
dissolute and ungodly Youth, going to repent in Age, heard that Voice from
Heaven to him, Des illi Furfurem cui dedisti Farinam: The Devil had thy Flower,
and thou shall not bring thy Bran to me.

Self-Examination was also become one of his Employments; and once particularly
in one of his Diaries, he does thus express himself.

April 8. 1683.
This Morning I was much cast down with the sense of my Vileness. I Examined,

I. What Sins I had that were not Mortified: 1. My sin of Pride. 2. My sin of
Unthankfulness. 3. My not improving the means of Grace, as I ought to do.

II. What Graces I find need of. 1. Converting and Regenerating Grace. 2.
Humiliation for my many Sins against such a good God as the Lord is.

III. What Mercies I had received, for which I desire to bless the Lords Name.
1. He has given me to be born of Godly Parents. 2. I have always had the means
of Grace lengthened out unto me. 3. The Lord has graciously pleased to give me
some answers of Prayer. 1. As to the lengthning out of my Health. 2. As to the
Increase of my Library, What shall I render to the Lord for all his loving
kindness toward me? I resolved to Dedicate my self wholly to God and his
Service.

And he did accordingly.

This Year did not roll about, before he had in a manner very solemn entered in
to Covenant with God. This weighty and awful thing was not rashly done by him,
or in a sudden Flash and Pang of Devotion: He Thought, he Read, he Wrote, and
he Prayed not a little before this Glorious Transaction between God and him,
and upon Mature Deliberation, he judged it most advisable for him to make his
Covenant with God as Explicit as Writing and Signing could render it; that so
it might leave the more Impression upon his Heart and Life, and be an Evidence
likewise, which in Temptation or Desertion he might have recourse unto:
Wherefore he set apart a Time for (I think) secret Fasting and Prayer before
the Lord, and then behold how this Young Man counting it high time for him to
be bound out unto some Service, took a course for it: He subscribed an holy
Covenant, of which this was the Matter, this the Form.

The Covenrnt between God and my Soul, renewed; confirmed, and signed, Nov. 22.
1683.
Whereas not only the Commands of God, [who has often called upon me, by his
Word Preached, to give up my self, both Body and Soul, to be at his Disposal,
which calls by the public Ministry, were enough to engage me unto this] but
also the Christian Religion which I profess, and my Baptism in which I took the
Lord to be my God, and promised to Renounce the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, and to dedicate my self unto the Service, Work, and Will of God, do bind
me hereunto; In that God is such a God as deserves this, yea infinitely more
than this, at my hands; my Creator, the Fountain of my Being; my Preserver, my
Benefactor, my Lord, my Sovereign, my Judge; He in whose Hands my Life, my
Breath, and all my concerns are; He that does protect me from all Dangers, and
supply me in all wants, support me under all Burdens, and direct me in all
streights; He alone that can make me happy or miserable; He alone that can save
me or damn me; He alone that can give inward Peace and Joy, that is my Friend,
my God; In that, Self-Dedication is the Creatures Advancement* these
First Fruits, if in Sincerity, putting upon me a Gloriousness and Excellency.

In that Felicity hereafter depends upon my dedicating of my self unto God now.

In that this is the highest piec^ of Gratitude I am capable of expressing unto
God, and I know no better way to Obey the Will of God, than first to give up my
self unto him.

And whereas the Mercies which the Lord has been pleased graciously to bestow
upon me, are so many, that even bare Morality, does show me that I can never
enough requite one that has done so much for me, except by giving up my self
wholly to him.

[1669] Whereas God has given me a Godly Father and Mother. [1674] In that
when I was like to dye, being twice sick of a Fever, God was pleased to bless
means for my Recovery, and lengthen out the Thread of my Life* [1675] Whereas,
when I by an Accident fell down, and had like to have been deprived of the use
of my Tongue, God was in his good Providence graciously pleased to give me the
use of it. [1678] Whereas, when I was sick of the Smallpox, God was pleased to
bless means for my Recovery.

Whereas, then I made Promises unto God, that if he would give me my Health, I
would endeavor to become a New Creature, and he has done so for these five
Years: And whereas God has of late been bestowing many and wonderful mercies
upon me, What can I do less than give up my self wholly to him?


Which now I do.

And, O Lord God, I beseech thee to accept of thy Poor Prodigal, now
prostrating of himself before thee. I confess, O Lord, I have fallen from thee
by my Iniquity, and am by nature a Son of Hell; but of thy Infinite Grace thou
have promised Mercy to me in Christ, if I will but turn unto thee with all my
Heart: Therefore upon the Call of thy Gospel, I come in, and from the bottom of
my Heart I renounce all thy Enemies; with whom I confess I have wickedly sided
against thee, firmly Covenanting with thee, not to allo^ my self in any known
Sin, but co^scientiously to use all means which ^ know thou have prescribed,
for the u^ter destruction of all my Corruptions.

And whereas I have inordinately I out my Affections upon the World, here
resign my Heart unto thee th^^ made it; humbly Protesting before t^^ Glorious
Majesty, that it is the fin^ Resolution of my Heart (and that I (...)
unfeignedly desire Grace from thee, th^^ when thou shall call me thereunto, ^
may put in practice my Resolution through thine Assistance, to forsake (...)
that is dear unto me in the World, r^ther than to turn from thee to t^^ ways of
sin; and that I will watch again^ all it is Temptations, whether of Prosperty or
Adversity, lest they should wit^draw my Heart from thee, beseechi^^ thee to
help me.

I renounce all my own Righteousnes^ and acknowledge that of my self I a^
helpless and undone, and without Rig^teousness.

And whereas, of thy bottomless Mercy, thou have offered to accept of (...) and
to be reconciled to me, and (...) be my God, through Christ, if I would accept
of thee, I do this day avouch thee to be the Lord my God. I do here take the
Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my portion and chief Good, and
do give up my self Body and Soul for thy Servant, promising to endeavor to
serve thee in Righteousness and Holiness. I do here also on the bended knees of
my Soul, accept of the Lord Jesus Christ as the only and living Way, by which
sinners may have access to thee, and do here join my self in a
Marriage-Covenant with him. O Lord Jesus, I come to thee, hungry, poor,
miserable, blind, and naked, and a most loathsome Creature, a condemned
Malefactor: Who am I, that I should be Married unto the King of Glory!

I do accept of thee for my Head and Husband, and embrace thee in all thy
Offices. I renounce my own Worthiness, and do choose thee the Lord my
Righteousness. I do renounce my own Wisdom, and do take thine for my Guide. I
take thy Will for my Will, and thy Word for my Law. I do here willingly put my
Neck under thy Yoke; I do subscribe to all thy Laws as Holy, Just, and Good;
and do promise to take them as the Rule of my Thoughts, Words, a^ Actions; but
because I am subject (...) many failings, through frailty; I do he^ protest,
here before thee, that unallo^ed miscarriages, contrary to the consta^bent of
my Heart, shall not disan^^ this everlasting Covenant.

Nathanael Mathe^

It may justly be taken for granted, the such a work as this, would have an
infl^ence into his Conversation afterward and so it had, producing in him, a
Conve^sation which became the Gospel of Christ. H^ kept waiting upon God, not
only in t^^ Family, but also under the Ministry of t^^ that were near a-Kinn
unto him; namely his Father and his Brother, whereby the Grace thus begun in
him was not a little cherished and promoted: And unt^ all known sins he now
kept saying, as^ find once in Shorthand written by him.

To my Lusts.
I have had Communion with you all th^^ while, but I dare not have so any
longer Wherefore I renounce all Communion with y^^ any more; I will cleave to
the God that made m^

But a Year or two after this, it was wit^ him, as I have observed it is too
commonly with such as are Converted betimes unto God. An unhappy gradual
Apostasy carried him aside from those degrees of seriousness and intenseness in
divine things, which he had been used unto: It Is possible an entanglement in a
Familiarity with some that were no better than they should be, did abate of the
good savor which had been upon him, and decoy him by insensible steps to some
vanities (though not to any scandalous immoralities) that were disadvantageous to
him. For diverse Months he seemed somewhat, yet not totally, much less finally,
forsaken of that Wisdom and Virtue which he had before been an example of; but
the good Spirit of God will not let go his Interest in a Soul of which he has
taken a saving hold. This Young Man soon entertained just resentments of his
own declensions, and it was impossible for the most Badger-tooth'd malice in
the World to aggravate any of his Errors half so much as he did himself in his
own Repentance for them. In the Year 1685. God visited him with sore Terrors
and Horrors in his wounded Soul, the anguish whereof he thought intolerable;
yet he made not his condition known to any Body all the while. He could say, My
complaint is not to man, but he made it unto the Lord; This poor man cried and
the Lord heard, and delivered him out of his distresses. He arrived in time
unto some settlement and renewal of his Peace with God: He confessed and
bewailed his own sins before the Lord, and declared his detestation of them,
and applied himself unto the Lord Jesus Christ for Salvation from them all.
Good terms being thus established between the Almighty Lord and this Immortal
Soul, he maintained, I think, a constant and an even Walk with God, until he
dyed. I find now that Language in his MSS: Let me be as active a Servant of
Christ, as I was of Satan heretofore. For more than the three last years of his
Life, he lived at a strange rate for Holiness and Gravity* and retired
Devotions. He read Mr. Scudders Christians daily walk, and Dr. Owen of
Spiritual Mindedness, and had a restless raging Agony in his Mind unti^ the
Methods of Religion advised by thos^ worthy Men, were Exemplified in his own
Behavior. It Is a note in one o^ his Diaries,

O my great unprofitableness under the means of Grace! I have cause to bless
God for ever for the Writings of that never enough to be admired and loved by
me, Dr. Reynolds, and for the Light I have received thereby, concerning the
sinfulness of Sin; as also that excellent Book of him whom I shall always
honor, Dr. Owen of Spiritual-mindedness, and Mr. Scudders Christians daily
Walk, by which three Books I have profited more than by any other (S.
Scripturis exceptis) in the World. He was at first surprised, at the measure of
Spiritual-mindedness, without which that great Saint, Dr. Owen! apprehends the
Life and Peace of Souls to labor under prejudice; and he thought a Mind
swallowed up in such Heavenly Frames and Works as were needful thereunto,
almost wholly to be despaired of; until (as himself a few hours before he dyed
said unto me) he deemed he saw an Instance of such a Walk with God, not very
far from the place of his abode: To which purpose his reserved Papers have a
large Discourse, of which this is in the Conclusion: There might be a greater
Progress in Religion, than is commonly thought for. What have I Examples for,
but to imitate them? Abraham is famed for believing so strongly, when he had no
Example before him: Let me try and see, whether I having such opportunities may
not arrive to as high a pitch in Christianity, as any that I have known. He
then in the strength and through the Love of God set himself into a way of
strict, secret, laborious Devotion whereby tho none but God and He filled the
Theater, which he acted upon, he would be in the Fear of the Lord all the day
long. He withdrew from the delight of this World, and gave himself up to an
assiduous Contemplation of God and Christ, and a sedulous endeavor after
utmost conformity unto him: Thus (...) kept abounding in the Work of the Lord
until three Years of wonderful Holiness had ripened him for eternal Happiness.

My Account of him will be an unfinished Piece, unless all the ensuing stroke
go to make it up. These things he was Exemplary for.

First, He was one that walked by RVLE He was very Studious to learn the wa^ of
conversing with God in every Duty and there was a Rule which he attended still
unto.

In his private Papers, I find a wi^^ Collection of Rules, by which he gover^ed
himself in the several Duties of Chr^stianity, and in all the Seasons and
Stations of his Life. He consulted the best Authors for Instruction in the
Affairs of practical Religion, and not into Paper only, but into Action to be
transcribed what he most approved; in all which The Will of God was the bright
Pole Star by which he steered his Course.

The Reader shall enjoy (and O that he would follow) two of this Young Man's
Directories: One of them was this.

I. O that I might lead a spiritual Life! Wherefore let me regulate my Life by
the Word of God and by such Scriptures as these.

1. For regulating my Thoughts, Jer. 4. 14. Isa. 55. 7. Mal. 3. 17. Psalm. 104.
34. Phil. 4. 8. Prove. 23. 26. Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Eccles. 10. 20. Prove. 24. 9. Mat. 9.
4. Zech. 8. 17.

2. For regulating my Affections, Col. 3. 2, 5. Gal. 5. 24.

For my Delight, Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm. 37. 5. For my Joy, Phil. 4. 4. Psalm. 43. 4.
My Desire, Isa. 26. 8, 9. Ezekiel. 7. 16. My Love, Mat. 22. 37. Psalm. 119. 97. My
Hatred, Psalm. 97. 10. My Fear, Luke 12. 4, 5. My Hope, Psalm. 39. 7. My Trust,
Psalm. 62. 8. Isa. 26. 4.

3. For regulating my Speech, Ephesians. 4. 29. Col. 4. 6. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. Psalm. 119.
46. Psalm. 71. 8, 24. Prove. 31. 26.

4. For regulating my Work, Tit. 3. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 10. Titus 2. 14.
Mat. 5. 47. 1 Timothy 6. 8. Rev. 3. 2. Romans 13. 12. Act. 26. 20.

Another of them was formed into an^ Hymn, the singing of which might produce
fresher and stronger Efforts of Sou^ toward the thing that is good.

It shall be here inserted.

Lord, what shall I return unto
Him from whom all thy mercies flow?
(I.) To me to live, it Christ shall be
For all I do I Will do for Thee.
(II.) My Question shall be often beside,
How thou may most be Glorified?
(III.) I will not any Creature Love,
But in the love of Thee above.
(IV.) Thy Will I will embrace for mi^^
And every management of thine
Shall please me. (V.) A Conformity
To Thee shall be my Aim and Eye.
(VI.) Ejaculations shall ascend
Not seldom from me. (VII.) I Will attend
Occasional Reflections, and
Turn all to Gold that comes to hand.
(VIII.) And in particular among
My Cares, I Will try to make my Tongue
A Tree of Life, by speaking all
As be accountable who shall.
(IX.) But last, nay first of all, I will
Thy Son my Surety make, and still
Implore him, that he would me bless
With strength as well as Righteousness.
Besides these Rules which concerned his whole Walk, he Treasured up many more,
that referred to this and that step in it; and it was the predominant care and
watch of his Heart, not to tread awry: Thus one might see a skilful Christian
in him. And as he was desirous to live by Precept, so he was to live by Promise
too.

He fell into a particular consideration, how to improve the Promises of God in
all the Occasions of life; which is indeed one of the most sanctifying
Exercises in the World.

It was a Proposal which I find he mad unto himself.

Let me salute these Promises once a day.

1. For supplying the wants of the day, Phil. 4. 19.

2. For Growth in Grace, Hos. 14. 5*

3. For subduing my sins, Mic. 7. 19*

4. For success in my undertakings Psalm. 1. 3.

5. For turning all the Events of the day for good, Romans 8. 28.

6. For Audience of my Prayers, Job* 14. 13, 14.

7. For strength to manage all the work of the day, Zech. 10. 12.

8. For direction in difficulty, Psalm 32. 8.

9. For Life Eternal, Luke 12. 31. Job* 3. 16.

Besides these two, Mat. 11. 28. an^ Isa. 44. 3.

Certainly that Man must quickly gro^ another Enoch, who does thus Walk wi^^
God.

Secondly, He was one that lived (...) PRAYER. He was often and long in the
Mount with God: It was his Custom every day to enter into his Closet, and sh^^
his door, and pray to his Father in secret. And I guess from some of his
Writings, that he did thus no less than thrice a day, when he met with no
Obstruction in it: Nor did he Slubber over his Prayers with hasty Amputations,
but wrestle in them for a good part of an hour together.

It was a most refreshing Communion with God, which his Devotions brought
him sometimes unto. Thus in one of his Diaries.

Dec. 10.
I prayed earnestly unto God, In the Margin he wrote, Remember this.
earnestly Petitioning that Jesus Christ might be my complete Redeemer. There
was immediately something that did as it were persuade me it should be so.

Again, Aug. 19.
My Thoughts were some little while busied about the condescension of Christ
in taking of humane Nature on him; but for the most part in Ejaculations, and
Acts of Faith on a crucified (ah! svveet Word) Jesus. I saw I gained not much
by those: Wherefore I addre^sed my self to solemn Prayer, and ha^ some
Assurance in it.

Once more, Aug. 20.
I was much affected in Prayer, an^ exercised (I hope) many Acts of Faith and
Love, and Delight in God. I sev^^ral times was breaking off, but I was ^ it
were constrained to go on in the Du^ with much enlargement. Lord, ans^^ me for
the sake of Christ.

Thus under the Fig Tree did our Lord Jesus often behold this Nathanael; yea
unto Prayer he became so habituated, th^^ while others can Sleep in Prayer, he
some times would pray in sleep. He records (...) among his Experiences, that
upon assault of imagined Temptations, when he has bee^ asleep, he has quickly
been at Prayer; an^ so caused the Phantasms to leave annoy^ing of him.

And Extraordinary prayer was also wit^ him not altogether extraordinary. Th^^
he were a Bottle that seemed incapabl^ of holding it, yet this Wine agreed wit^
him very well. As Young as he was, (...) knew the Mystery of a Soul fatning
(...) fasting, and thriving by hungring and thirsting after Righteousness. He
was very inquisitive after the right way to manage a Day of Fasting and Prayer,
and he would sometimes keep such a day. On such a day it was his Custom to make
a very particular and penitent Confession of all the Sins that he could
perceive himself guilty of; and renew his Covenant with the Holy One of Israel;
to this End, he had by him in writing a large Catalogue of things forbidden and
required in the Commandments of God, which was the Glass in which he then
viewed his ways; and having found what Achans might procure trouble to him, he
then fell to stoning of them. One may shape some conjecture at his
Humiliations, by the Indignations with which he spoke, and wrote of the
Vanities which his Childhood had. I came into the World (says he in one of the
Papers penned by him on a day of secret Fasting and Prayer, October the 17th
1685.) without the Image of the Holy God on my Soul; my Understanding, my Will,
my Affections, and my whole Soul were altogether depraved, and wounded. When
very Young I went astray from God, and my Mind was altogether taken with
vanities and follies; such as the remembrance of them does greatly abase my
Soul within me. Of the manifold Sins which then I was guilty of, none so sticks
upon me, as that being very young, I was whitling on the Sabbath Day; and for
fear of being seen, I did it behind the door. A great Reproach of God! A
Specimen of that Atheism that I brought into the World with me!

This was more than the more meagre and feeble sort of Christians, though much
older than he, are used to do. But paulo majora! There was a Sublimer way of
drawing near to God, which he was not willing to leave unattempted. He
understood that secret days of Thanksgiving had not been unpractised by some
whom he designed to imitate; and therefore he would make some Essays for such
an Intimate Fruition of God, and generous Devotion to him, as would fill such
days as these.

Hence this I find among the Records of his Soul: --

Resolved, To set apart every two Months, a Day for solemn Examination and
Meditation, to humble my self; and every two Months to keep a Day of private
Thanksgiving. But though his Prayers were chiefly in, yet they were not
confined to his Closet. There were diverse Private Praying Meetings of younger
People in North-Boston, which he visited as often as he could; and one of
those might peculiarly be called His. Yea, it was his desire, though with as
little aim to be seen of men as could be, to support all such opportunities of
Good among them, that were of the same age with him.

Wherefore I find this among the Notes in his Diary:

Quest. What shall I do for God?

Ans. It was suggested to me, to get some of my Acquaintance to spend some
while every Friday night in Prayer, for the Success of the Work of Grace in
New England, especially in Boston, on the Souls of the Rising Generation.

Let me propound this to some serious devout young Persons.

Thus was his Prayer as it were his Breath, and thus he was always fetching
of it, untll at last it expired in Praise, Praise for evermore.

Thirdly, He was one that Thought much of his GOD, and his END. There was a
sort of Heaven formed in the just Soul of this Young Man, by the Thoughts that
were continually sparkling there. He had an unpacifiable Dissatisfaction at
himself until good Thoughts were lodged in him, and vain ones were forced to
gnash their teeth, and melt away: Nothing would content him, but the bringing
of his Thoughts into a Subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore he chewed
much on the excellent Sermon of Mr. Charnock, about Thoughts; which he wrote
out not only with his hand, but in his heart, and made it the very Mould of his
gracious Mind. There are none, but very Renewed Souls, that are at great pains
in a course of Meditation on the things of God. Yet this Young Man, like
another Isaac, was grown very expert at it, and frequent in it. It was his
manner in the Morning to meditate very seriously and fixedly upon some Truth,
or some Text, for a good part of an hour together. He had collected a good
variety of Subjects and Scriptures to handle in thus communing with himself,
and went over more than a little Divinity in this transcendent Exercise.
Sometimes, when thus he separated himself to intermeddle with all wisdom, I
find him committing his Thoughts, or some breviate of them, unto the durable
custody of his Papers; from which Memoirs I will produce but an Instance or
two of many.

August 16. 1685.
Med. about, The reason I have to love God; because of what he has been to me,
and what he is in himself. And I thought, Is not God the Best Good? Surely then
he is worthy to be my Last End. Has he not been showing many Mercies to me? and
what! shall I not resign up my self to Live unto God, because of his goodness
to me? Much affected with the thoughts of these things: And, I hope, I closed
with the Motion.

Again, October 1.
Meditated on that; If a Man does intend to be truly Religious, he must expect
nothing but to save his Soul?

But how can this be true?

Must I lose my Body altogether?

Must I be vvilling that the Union between my Body and Soul should for evermore
be loosed?

Must I be willing to be for ever without a Body? No, no.

All that the Lord requires of me, is, to have my Body for a few days or years
(a few I say, for they cannot be many,) to be wholly at the service of my Soul,
and to be willing that the Union between those two Mates, then should be
dissolved; the Soul first taking its progress into everlasting Bliss; the Body
being laid in the Dust, to rise at the Resurrection, accompanying the Soul into
its eternal Felicity.

My present Notion of this thing is this:

This Dissolution of the Union between the Soul and Body, is but a Dismission
of the Spirit into its happiness, after a wearisom conflict here. And as long
as it shall be best for me to be here, here I shall continue. Infinite Wisdom
is to be the Orderer of this; and it will be a grievous and shamefu^ reflection
thereupon, for me to say, It will be better for me to live, than to dye, at
such a time when I am called thereunto.

With my Body I must expect to lose all the pleasant Enjoyments of this World,
Liberty, Library, Study, and Relations. But yet neither shall I lose these. As
for my Liberty, by True Religion, and by Dying for it too, when need requires,
I shall gain the only Liberty, even from the body of sin.

As for my Library, if I die for Christ, or in the Lord, I shall have no need
of it. My Understanding shall be enough enlarged, and I shall not need to turn
over Books for Learning. As for my Study (my Paradise) I shall have a better, a
larger, and a more complete than this.

As for my Relations, those of them that are truly pious, I shall only go
before them; and if there should be any of them not pious, the longer I should
stay with them here (if they continue impenitent) it would but make my Grief
more intolerable, to think when I leave them, that I shall have no hopes to
see them again for ever.

But this is not all neither. --

My Body must be used as the Souls Instrument; and here all that strength and
^ase which I have, must be used for the Soul: And truly there is reason enough
for it, that so there may be eternal happiness for both together.

In Marriage, the Husband and Wife should have the same design. Would it not be
inhumane, for the one to have a design which tends to the ruin of the other?
Just so my Soul and Body should have the same design; and the Body being the
more vile of the two, should be subordinate to the Soul. And it is a necessary
disjunction, either the Body, the strength, and ease, and members of it, must
be used for the good, or for the hurt of the Soul; there is no medium here.

Let me then herein make my Body useful to my Soul, in accomplishing all the
good-designs of it, which it is capable of being interested in.

Nor is there any thing else worth speaking of that must be foregone, except
health, and the momentaneousness of all bodily Torments, will make them very
tolerable.

My Resolutions be, That I will not expect, by devoting my self unto the Fear
of God, to gain any thing as to my Body in this World.

That through the Grace of Christ, I will use the strength, ease, health of my
Body, yea my whole Body, in Subordination to my Soul, in the Service of the
Lord Jesus.

With such Meditations as these, he kept mellowing of his own Soul, and
preparing it for the state wherein Faith is turned into Sight.

But there was yet a more delightful and surprising way of Thinking, after
which he did aspire. He considered, that the whole Creation was full of God;
and that there was not a Leaf of Grass in the Field, which might not make an
Observer to be sensible of the Lord. He apprehended that the idle Minutes of
our Lives were many more than a short liver should allow: That the very Filings
of Gold, and of Time, were exceeding precious; and, that there were little
fragments of hours intervening between our more stated businesses, wherein
Thoughts of God might be no less pleasant than frequent with us.

The Elegant and Excellent Meditations of Sir William Waller, had particularly
affected him unto a commendable Emulation of them; and hence he did attempt to
make even the more common and more trivial occurrents of humane Life, the
occasions of Great Thoughts within him. He would with the Chemistry of
Occasional Reflections, Distill sublime Spirits from earthly Bodies; and from
the view of mean things, fill his nobly employed Mind with Lessons and Prayers,
which only the Father of Spirits was a Witness to.

Some of these his Occasional Reflections I find in his private Papers; and one
or two, for a taste, I will bespeak the Reader's acceptance of.

Jan. 8. A. M.
Being about to rise, I felt the cold in a manner extraordinary; which inclined
me to seek more warmth in my Bed before I rose; but so extreme was the cold,
that this was not feasible: Wherefore I resolved to dress my self without any
more ado; and so going to the Fire in my Clothes, I soon became warm enough.

Turn this, O my Soul, into an useful Meditation. There is a necessity of my
rising out of my Bed, the Bed of Security which I am under the power of, and to
live unto Christ, and to walk in the Light.

In order hereunto, I must put on my poor Soul the Garments which are to be had
from the Lord Jesus. To awaken me out of my sleep, and my security, I am to set
before me the Sun, the Gospel of the Sun of righteousness does inlighten my
Mind, and tell me, that I was before muffled up in darkness; and that if I
continued therein, I should starve and perish. I am also taught, That when Men
are convinced of their miserable condition, they will rather endeavor to Ease,
and comfort and cherish themselves by something in themselves, than put on the
spiritual Garments which the Lord Jesus Christ has provided for them. An Evil
to be by me avoided.

Again, another time.
Upon Water taken from the Fire, I saw a lukewarmness quickly seize; like the
frame of Spirit, which many Pretenders to Religion have after a glorious and
affectionate Profession of it. Of this sort were some among the Laodiceans of
old; which is exceedingly displeasing to the Lord Jesus Christ: Whence it is
that he says, I will spew thee out of my mouth. Let me endeavor to beware of
this hateful and odious frame of Spirit; and let the contrary thereto be my
desire, my endeavor.

Once more.
Among some Gentlemen that were sitting in a Room illuminated with a Candle,
one beginning to read unto us, there was another Candle brought unto him, for
his assistance in it. Which afforded me such a Meditation as this:

That those who are to be Teachers of others, have need of as much light again
as ordinary Christians have. They, if any, need a double Portion of the Gifts
that are in other Men; and the helps of Knowledge that other Persons have, they
much more should be furnished withal.

It was not because they had better Eyes than him whose Office it was to Read,
that they needed but one Candle, when he had two provided for him; but the Work
incumbent on him, and expected from him was the occasion of it.

But I design little more than a Confirmation with an Illustration of my
History, for which, a touch or two upon every Article will serve. I am now to
add, That this Young Man had a Principal regard unto the Scriptures for the
Subjects of his Meditations, and he was very expensive of his Thoughts on the
Book of God. He was daily digging in the sacred Mines, and with delight he
fetched thence Riches better than those of both the India's; and he could say,
O how I love thy Law! it is my Meditation every day!

Even in the time of his mortal Sickness, he was very angry at himself if he
had not heard a Portion of the Bible read unto him from day to day.

Once when he was near his End, a good part of a day having passed before he
had enjoyed his Meal of Scripture; he said unto his Sister with some
impatience, Alas! what an ungodly life do I lead! pray come and read my Bible
to me; and read me the forty ninth Psalm. Indeed he read the Scripture not
cursorily, but very deliberately, and considerately; and as an effect of his
doing so, he could give such an account of the Difficulties in it, as the most
not only of Christians, but of Divines too, would judge an Attainment
extraordinary. Not long before he dyed, he had read over all the large and
great Annotations on the Bible, lately published by Mr. Pool, and some other
Nonconformist Ministers; but having dispatched those two noble Folios, he said
unto one that was intimate with him, Thus have I read the Bible, but I have now
learnt a better way! And that way was this. He would oblige himself in reading
to fetch a Note and a Prayer out of every Verse in all the Bible; to dwell upon
every verse until it had afforded at least one Observation, and one Ejaculation
to him.

He imagined that an incredible deal both of Truth and Grace, would in this way
make its impression upon his Mind, (besides what Exercise of Wit it must have
called for) and so most certainly it would have done; but before he had made
much Progress in it, the Chariots of God fetched him away to that place in which
a Jesus is a Bible to the there perfect Spirits of the Righteous.

Such a thinking Person was he; and yet after so many kind of Thoughts in the
day, he could not rest a Night quietly, unless he composed himself for sleeping
by thinking a little more.

He knew that no better a Man than one of the Moral Heathens propounded a
Nocturnal Self-Examination, as a part and cause of no little Wisdom, and that
much more a sober Christian should endeavor to maintain a good understanding
of himself, by such Nightly Recollections. Wherefore before the Slumbers of the
Evening, this Young Man would put three General Questions to himself, with
diverse particular ones that were subordinate thereunto. The Questions were,

Question 1.
What has God's Mercy to me been this day?

Here he considered what favors God had newly smiled upon his inward, or his
outward man withal.

Question 2.
What has my Carriage to God been this day?

Here he considered what frames, and words and works, and what snares and sins
he had newly been concerned with.

Question 3.
If I dye this night, is my Immortal Spirit safe?

Of this he judged by his Closure wit^ God, as his best good, and last end, and
wit^ Christ as his Prophet, and his Priest, an^ his King, and by his Resolution
alway^ to be a Witness for the Lord, and an En^my to every Sin: Tho sometimes
he would with a more large and long Attention Examine his own Hopes of Eternal
Happiness, for which purpose he had in writing by him, his Bundles of Marks and
Signs, which testify a Man to be born o^ God. When he had thought on these
things, he was able to lay himself down (...) peace and sleep; but this was a
way to keep a Soul Awake.

I begin to suspect that my Readers patience is almost expired; and therefore I
shall cause the Remainder of this Narrative to omit where it cannot contract,
what yet is well worthy to be the matter of it.

Fourthly, He was one that mortified and conquered the SINS which were a
Vexation to him. There were some Sins which gave to this Young Man a more
violent, and outrageous disturbance that he could without much passion bear^
These did he contrive and conflict much in his Oppositions to, and gave not
over till he had a certain Prospect of a Victory.

Of all the things which ever troubled him, I know not whether any were more
grievous than the Blasphemous Injections which like fiery venomous darts
inflamed sometimes his very Soul within him.

It may be some Testimony of Sincerity, when Persons are not a little afflicted
for, as well as assaulted with, Blasphemous Imaginations about God; which rise
within us in contradiction to all that Reverence of him, which we know not how
to lay aside.

This Person on his Deathbed complained to me, that Horrenda de Deo, Horrible
Conceptions of God, buzzing about his mind, had been one of the bitterest of
all his Trials: and I find his private Papers making sad Lamentations over the
miseries of this annoyance. You shall read how he did encounter these Fiends,
as one that was no Stranger to the Wars of the Lord.

Once in his Diary, he says;

Troubled exceedingly with Blasphemons Suggestions, my Soul bleeds at the
thoughts of them.

O that Christ would deliver me from them! they make my Life unpleasant. I do
believe that Satan never struggled so hard to keep any one from Christ, as he
has done to keep me!

From hence I learn, 1. My great Enmity to, 2. My great need of, the Lord Jesus
Christ.

At another time:
Troubled with Blasphemous Thoughts, I learn from hence,

1. Seeing these would have me to entertain a low Esteem of Christ and God,

I will endeavor to have a more high and eminent Esteem of God and Christ.

2. Seeing these do so perplex me continually,

I learn, that I am unable of my self to raise good Thoughts, much less to
perform Good Acts of Obedience. I would be deeply humbled, that my Soul should
be thus defiled.

Seeing, I have often so much Experience and stirrings of Enmity in my Soul to
God, I would be excited thereby more heartily to cleave unto him.

Once more,
I hope I have now got strength over my Blasphemous Thoughts, after this manner.

1. Humbling my self under a sense of my own vileness and wretchedness.

2. Praying earnestly for the removal of the Enmity that is in my Soul to the
things of God; especially as to this matter.

Thus discreetly did he manage the Shield of Faith against those barbed Arrows
of Hell: Nor did his other Corruptions escape the Offensive, as well as the
Defensive Weapons of his Soul.

Under the most furious of their Assaults, I find this to be one of his
honorable Retreats.

For the Relief of my Soul under the Power of Corruption; Let me by Faith apply
these Scriptures.

First, Romans 6. 14.

Secondly, Ezck. 36. 26.

Thirdly, Mic. 7. 19.

Fourthly, Zech. 13. 1.

Besides Zech. 9. 12. Mat. 16. 18. John 12. 31. and Romans 16. 20. and these
Considerations:

First, Christ is a complete Redeemer, Heb. 7. 25. 1 John 1. 7. Heb. 9. 14.

Secondly, God's Infinite Power is engaged on my behalf, if I be in Covenant
with him.

Thirdly, God will perfect Holiness where he has begun it.

In such Engagements as these against his Invisible Adversaries he continued,
until he is now a Conqueror, and more than a Conqueror.

Fifthly, He was one that wisely prepared for the CHANGES that were before him.
It is a Remark in one of his Papers: I think it convenient for me to observe
the Temptations, I am, ^or shall be obnoxious to, and get suitable Remedies
against them.

He seemed indeed to have a strange Presage of what he was to meet withal, and
O how he laid in that he might not be unprovided for it! A prudence rarely seen
among the Children of Men, whose Misery is great upon them because they know
not their Time.

There were especially two Calamities which he had a fore-boding of, Dismal
Pain, and Early Death. As for his Pain, he was it seems to undergo exquisite
Anguishes, for many Months before his Dissolution; but before ever it came upon
him, how strangely did he fortify himself against it! He said in his Diary
some Years before he left the World,

Sept. 2.
I had not in the morning time enough for solemn Meditation: Great deadness and
dullness was in my Heart, as to Spiritual Thoughts afterward; the Reason was,
because I did not perform my solemn Meditation as I should.

I had now apprehensions that I must undergo sore Trials, and Conflicts, and
great Afflictions.

Wherefore it did highly become me to get as great a measure of Grace, as the
opportunities which I enjoy may afford, and therefore I purpose to be more
serious in my Meditations, not omitting other Duties therewithal.

I see my Resolutions must every day be renewed, as to great diligence in my
serving God.

And since I must expect great Afflictions, I must make it my daily work by
solemn Meditation to go over the whole Body of Christianity, and particularly
to have daily Thoughts on the Condescension of Jesus Christ: I must also
endeavor to get a large measure of sanctified knowledge; wherefore,

First, There is need of Earnest Prayer; and

Secondly, Of very holy walking.

Thirdly, Of entertaining the Truth with greatest Affection; and

Fourthly, Looking on it as it is in Jesus; and

Fifthly, Solemn Meditation; and

Sixthly, Much Reading; and

Seventhly, Living upon the Truths which I know, and Thankfulness for the
Knowledge which I have already.

And at another time there was this written in his Diary.
This Morning I meditated about a part of Self-denial; Namely, the denial of
Bodily Health, and of ease from Torment.

My Resolution was, that it was better to part herewithall, than to sin. I hope
there is a thorough purpose in my Heart to perform accordingly, when I shall be
called thereunto.

I do feel the stirrings of self in my self this day: It would fain be in the
Throne of God within me; but I am resolved Christ shall be my King.

And as he thus put on the whole Armor of God, that he might be able to stand
when he should be tried, so he found the benefit of it when he came into the
Field. Few in the World ever bore such Dolors with such a silent and a quiet
and composed Temper as he. Some that were intimate with him, would say, He was
one of an Iron Patience, and they had rarely if ever seen such a patient
Patient. But his Death he seemed all along most careful to be ready for.

In his Papers.
Meditations on the four last things, was a Title mentioning a Subject of his
most solicitous Contemplations. Above three Years before his Translation, his
Diary has such a Note as this.

Speaking to Day something concerning my Commencement, In the Margin he wrote,
Deceived.
I was strangely surprised, and had many Thoughts, yea Persuasions, That I
should not live. He then --.

Rest. What may be the Import hereof I cannot tell; yet I gather thus much:
That it is incumbent on me without further delay, to make my Calling and
Election sure.



He has also left behind him, some Meditations, tending to the Exercise of
Repentance, and Faith, and Preparation for Death, as he has himself entitled
them; but the Reader by this time will easily pardon my forbearing the
Communication of them.

Indeed, Preparation for Death, in one word, contains the substance of what he
had been doing diverse years before the King of Terrors took his Clay House away.

And as he was desirous to prepare for what Passive Obedience he might be put
upon, so he was loath to have his Heart not well ordered or furnished, when
active Obedience might be called for at his hands. Tho he never lived to preach
any other than some private Sermons, yet he was not unthoughtful of the Time
when public ones might be expected from him. It may not be unuseful for me to
insert one of his Meditations here; it runs in such terms as these.

Whether I should be a Minister?
I considered all Objections which Persons might make against it, and answered
them every one. But one Objection startled me more than the rest, to wit,
Personal Unfitness, from my Hebetude, or want of Invention. To which I
answered, with minding that Promise in Exodus 3. 12. Certainly I will be with
thee. And the beginning of ver. 18. They shall hearken to thy voice. And where
God finds work, there he will give strength. I likewise considered 1 Chronicles. 28.
10, 20. and Mat. 28. 19, 20. and Josh. 1. 9. and Judge. 6. 12, 14.

And then I thought with my self, That as for living in a remote part of the
Country, I should be willing thereunto, if so I might do Service for God, and
bring Glory to his Name. And whilst I was musing on these things, I was melted
into a frame, that I thought heretofore I should never be in, namely, humble
Submission to the good Pleasure of God, however he should dispose of me. I
knew, that though I were Reproached for what meanness I should this way be
exposed unto, there is an Answer in Romans 1. 16. and in Mark 8. 38. and in Psalm.
31. 19. and in Prove. 16. 7. and in Pfal. 37. 5, 6. So were the Apostles, 1 Cor.
4. 3, 9. If I serve Christ, God will honor me, Joh. 12. 26.

Every one must own, that however such things as these, in an old Man, may be
below our Admiration; yet in a young Man, that outlived not the Years which
the Nodes of the Moon take to dispatch a Revolution, they deserve a Memory
among them that may be Edified by such Exemplary Pr^ctices. Indeed, he was
himself Extremely unsensible of the least worth or shine adorning of him; and
in his whole Deportment he discovered a modest, an humble, and a deserved mein;
which might be reck^ned to bear little proportion with his other
Accomplishments, were it not that the more gracious Men are, the more humble
they always are; and they are the Fullest and Richest Ears of Corn, which most
hang down toward the Ground. But while he in a sort wronged himself, to escape
the bane and blame of Pride; it is a piece of pure Justice in the Survivers, to
Embalm the Name of a Person thus desirable, since he is gone thither where he
has no Chaff to take fire at the sparks of our Praises.

Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat? Such a young Man as this it is
that the Church of God is now deprived of! What a Blessing might his Living
have proved unto the World! But as the Long-lived* Patriarchs, before the
Flood, have still that Clause introduced of them, And he lied; which Clause
awakened and Converted a Person of Quality, who came in occasionally while the
Minister was reading the Fifth Chapter of Genesis to the Congregation; so must
I now say of the Short-lived Person, whom we have been paying out last Respect
unto, He lived thus long in a little time, And he died.

Before I break off, I must relate,

III. His DEATH.
Too soon and too sad a thing for me to mention without Sighing, Ah my Brother,
in my Lamentation over it. He had contracted an universal Ill Habit of Body;
which was attended with a particular generation of Ill Humors, where the Os
Ileon and Os Sacrum join; from whence it fell into his Thigh, until there was a
very large collection of it there.

There was an Incision, with mature Advice made into the Tumor, about a Month
before his Expiration, which gave good hopes of his Recovery into a capacity of
serving the Church of God; but the Circulation, which was now given unto the
putrid Juices which his Blood, through his continual and sedentary Studies, had
been annoyed withal, soon enkinded a Fever, which burnt asunder the thread of
this pious Life.

One might suppose, that such a Walk with God as the Reader has newly had
Pourtrayed before him, should End in Raptures, and Ecstasies of Assurance; but I
am to tell him, That this young Person had them not. And there wanted not
Reason for it. For his Natural Distemper disposed him to what is contrary to
Joy; but his Deep Humility had a greater share in the Jealousies and Suspicions
which he would still cherish of himself. He was indeed so afraid of being an
Hypocrite, that he would scarce allow himself to be called a Christian, and he
did not care so much as to tell any of his own Experiences, no, nor his
Inclinations, unless to one or two Divines, who kindly refreshed him with their
daily Visits; and with them too he would uphold his Discourse only in Latin, if
any one else were by.

Never did I see more Caution against Hypocrisy, than what was in him; and a
certain Self-abhorrence accompanying of it, caused to proceed from him no
Expressions, but those of an Abased Soul. When his Brother having recited the
Terms of the Gospel to him, with a design to obtain from him a Renewal of his
Explicit Consent thereunto, asked him, Whether he did not judge himself Sincere
in that Consent? He only replied, I should think so, if it were not for the
Seventeenth of Jeremiah, and the Ninth.

He was Dejected, yet not Despairing; and he discovered a wonderfully Gracious,
when he had not a Joyful Frame. He was all made up of Longings and Breathings
after all the fullness of God, when he could not or would not pretend unto any
Confidence of his Acceptance with the Lord.

In the time of his Health, he had not been without the comfortable Persuasions
for which he followed hard after God. In one place, I find him saying (on such
a day) I had Fears lest I did not love the Blessed God; but yet I was sure I
desired to keep his Commandments. Another time so; For Three quarters of an
Hour, I pleaded earnestly for assurance of the Love of God unto me, and I said,
As many as received Christ Jesus, to them he gave power to become the Sons of
God; And I did receive Jesus Christ, as the Free Gift of God; and received him
to save me on his own Terms: I chose him to be my Priest, and Prophet, and
King. Now I begged of him that he would manifest his Acceptance of me, and give
me the Spirit of Adoption: I had then, I hope, some Assurance. But when
Sickness came, he was loath to own a clear Title to the Rest of God: Yet before
he died, he suffered some sober Intimations of his hopes to fall from him.
There was a good Man in this Land, whose last words yet were, It had been good
for me that I had never been born. The words of this humble Self-loathing
Young Man, were of another strain. In the last Night, that we had him with us,
he would have his Watcher to read, The Song of Simeon, unto him, Now let
thou thy Servant depart in Peace: And in the Morning after, he said, I have now
been with Jesus Christ! which, from such a little Speaker as he, we could not
have his Explication of.

In one of his last Minutes, a faithful Minister said unto him, Find you not
Comfort in the Lord Jesus Christ? To which he made only this discreet and
humble Answer, I Endeavor to do those things which will issue in Comfort; and
then he quickly surrendered up his Redeemed and Renewed Soul unto him who had
loved him, and washed away his sins in his own blood.

Thus he went away to the heavenly Society, where he is beholding the Face of
God in Righteousness, and solacing himself in the Company not only of his
blessed Grandfathers, and Uncles, and all the Spirits of the Just; but of the
amiable Jesus himself, which is by far the best of all. His Tears are all dried
up, his Fears vanished away, and his Hopes more than answered in Joys
unspeakable, and full of glory.

His Elder Brother having thus written of him, now satisfies himself in the
Duty therein done to God and Man; and would keep waiting for his own Change,
until, Thy Free Grace, O my God, shall give unto the most miserable Sinner in
the World, an admission into Emanuel 's Land.

Cotton Mather.
Finished October. 29. 1688.
One that had an Acquaintance with him, did him the Justice of weeping over his
Grave such an Epitaph as this.
Enclosed in this sable Chest,
The Host once of an heavenly Guest
Here lies: Upright Nathanael,
True Offspring of God's Israel.
Him Dead, how term we, from his Birth,
Who lived in Heaven whilst on Earth?
His Head had Learnings Magazine,
His Heart the Altar, whence Divine
Whole Hecatombs, which Love had fired,
Of high Praise, and warm Prayer aspired:
His Life, the Decalogue unfolded;
A Meat-off'ring, his Speech well molded;
His rare Devotion, such now seen,
A sign of Ninety at Nineteen.
Years but in Bloom, Grace at full growth;
Angels, you Know and Think his Worth.
Thus Time, Youth's Glass, Turned e're 'twas Run,
And Ages too, before begun.
Rest, glorious Dust, and let thy perfumed Name
Sound in the Trumpets of Immortal Fame.
For tho Times Teeth Mausolaean Monuments deface,
They Will never gnaw thy Name which with the Stars has place.
Pos uit, R. Hale

FINIS.
SEVERAL SERMONS CONCERNING WALKING WITH GOD, AND THAT In the Days of Youth:
PREACHED At Boston in New England. By Cotton Mather, Pastor of a Church there.

1 King. 18. 12. -- But I thy Servant fear the Lord from my Youth. 1 Chronicles. 34.
3. -- While he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his
Father. LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for I. Dunton, at the Black Raven in the
Poultrey, over against the Compter. 1689.

THE WALK OF HOLY and HAPPY MEN.
GENESIS V. 24. (...) And Enoch walked with God.
BEhold, in these words the Picture of a great and a good Man, which indeed,
like a well-made Picture looks upon, yea, more than so, speaks unto us all; nor
is it a common Picture for this also, that the Walk as well as the Face of the
Person is represented in it. This Chapter contains a Catalogue of those
Antediluvian Patriarchs, in whom the Church of God, and the Line of Christ was
continued from Adam to Noah. The ancient Heathens expressed their broken
Traditions of our Noah in rude Notions of one Janus, a Man, a god, and I know
not what, with two Faces on him, because Noah had the Prospect of two World^
before him: We may all share with Noah in this Privilege; the Affairs of the
Old World as well as of the New do arrive to our Notice; in this Chapter
particularly we have a Muster of renowned Men that lived before the Flood.
Indeed about the most of them, there is little recorded besides their Age and
their End. Ecclesiastical History relates, that a Person of Quality
accidentally coming into a Meeting House, where the Minister was reading the
fifth Chapter of Genesis, those words recurring so often in it, And he Dyed!
And he Dyed! they struck to, they stuck in the Heart of him, and caused him
that was a mortal to become a very serious Man: God grant that another clause
in the Chapter may have this day as good an effect upon us all.

One of the Worthies in this Roll (Enoch by Name) can have no Report made of
his Death; but instead thereof, we find a twofold Remark made upon him. First,
We have the Character of Enoch: It Is once and again said of him, He walked with
God; a peculiar sanctity-he seems therein to be set forth as an Instance of.
Secondly, We have the Blessedness of Enoch; it is said, He was not, for God took
him: A Translation is intended by that Phrase, as it is by the Apostle
elsewhere explained. It seems that this notable Preacher of Truth; and Witness
for God, at last withdrew from the sight of Men: They asked, they wondered, what
was become of him, and probably they sought in all corners for him, 'till they
understood that the Angels of God had carried him away. Not only the spirit,
but the body too of this excellent man, has now been among the Angels in Heaven
for some hundreds, above four thousand Years.

But it is now time to Observe,

Doct. To walk with God is the singular Commendation of Holy and Happy Men.
Prop. I.
To Walk with God is the Commendation and Attainment of some that live (...)
Earth: Here and there a Person is to be met withal, whose Privilege it is to
walk with God. It is to be enquired, What is it to walk with God? What is that
rare, mysterious, laborious thing? in short, we then Walk with God, when we
maintain Communion with God in all the motions of our Lives. Every Man has a
Walk in the World. The Life of Man is the Walk of Man. It may be said unto each
Man, as in Eccles. 9. 10. Man, Thou art going. A Walk is a progressive
continued thing, made up of many steps: Thus a Life; it is made up of many
thoughts, many words, many deeds. A Man is with God, when he sees God, and owns
God: Then therefore does a Man Walk with God, when he lives in multiplied Acts
of Respect and Homage unto the Lord. It is the Command in 1 Pet. 1. 15. Be ye
holy in all manner of Conversation; it may be rendered, Be Holy in every turn:
While we Walk, we Turn every day, now to one Object, now to another: Well, when
we are with God in every Turn, then we Walk with God. A Walk with God is in
short, that godly, that sober, that righteous Life which the Word of God
advises us unto. It was the speech of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 26. 11. I will
walk in mine Integrity; and in Psalm. 86. 11. I will walk in thy Truth; and in
Psalm. 116. 9. I will walk before the Lord: All this is to Walk with God. We
read in 2 Cor. 5. 7. of a Walk by Faith* and in Romans 8. 1. of a Walk after the
Spirit; and in Gal. 6. 16. of a Walk according to Rule; this is a Walk with
God. Two things are comprised in it.

First, In a Walk with God there is an uninterrupted performing of Worship to
God. We should be often with God in the Exercises of his Natural and Instituted
Worship. There are certain Mountains of Devotion, of which we should say as
Peter in the Mount, It is good to be here! and we should be ever now and then
Conversing with the Almighty there; this it is to Walk with Him! There is the
Duty of Praying to God, our Lives are to be filled with it: We should (may I so
say) Walk upon our Knees. To Talk much with God is to Walk much with him. The
Walker with God may say with Paul in 2 Timothy 1. 3. I serve God, and without
ceasing I have my prayers Night and Day. There is again the Duty of Hearing
from God, our Lives are to be filled with it. To Sit before God is to Walk with
him. We should often Go up to the House of the Lord; that is, to take a Walk in
his blessed Company. The Walker with God will upon every occasion say, as the
Psalmist in Psalm. 85. 58. I will hear what God the Lord will speak. There is
likewise the Duty of Thinking on God, that is a Walking with him. We should not
for any long while together have God out of our Mind, then he will not be out
of our Walk. The Walker with God may say as David in Psalm. 139. 17, 18. How
precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God! when I awake, I am still with thee.
In a word, all the appointments of God, wherein he vouchsafes to us a
Fellowship with Himself, our Walk it should be, that is, our Course and our
Trade to be therein waiting upon the Lord.

Secondly, In a Walk with God there is a continual Acting of Grace on God. A
Walk with God lies in a sense of God always upon the Soul. We should be able
to say as he in Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before me; so shall we
Walk with the Lord. We are to Walk always under the Awe; and under the Eye of
the great God. As now, the Walker with God will always be sensible of God as
his last End. It was because Asaph did Walk with God, that he said in Psalm. 73.
25. Whom have I but God? The Walker will always be sensible of God as his best
good: It was because Jeremiah did Walk with God, that he said in Lam. 3. 24.
The Lord is my portion, says my Soul, I will hope in him. The Walker with God
will always be sensible of God, as his only Helper. When a Man walks with God,
he is perpetually saying as the Psalmist in Psalm. 121. 2. My help comes from
the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth: His Ejaculations therefore particularly
are innumerable: And the Walker with God cannot but be sensible of God as his
omniscient and omnipresent Judge. It will be an apprehension always running in
the Soul of such a Man, which we have in Psalm. 139. 7. Whither shall I flee
from the presence of the Lord? In a Walk with God a Man has evermore his Heart
within him, admiring and adoring the God of Heaven on such accounts as these:
These Notions of God, these Visions of God accompany such a Man every where,
and influence all his Walk: Thus does he Acknowledge God in all his ways. It Is
said in Prove. 23. 17. Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long; even so
maintain thou a sense of the Lord all the day long: This it is to Walk with Him.

Prop. II.
They are both Holy and Happy Men that thus Walk with God: This is the
Prerogative of them that have God with them in all their Walk.

1. The Walker with God is a very Holy Man: What is true Holiness? Many
mistakes have there been about that glorious thing: A Man may be Orthodox in
his Persuasions, and yet not be Holy: A Man may be very Austere and Severe in
his Practices, and yet not be Holy: You may say of a Man, That he has a
Righteousness equal to that of the Scribes and Pharisees, and yet the Man may
be a stranger to true Holiness after all. O but when once it can be said of a
Man, He walks with God! then, then Holiness is to be seen upon him.

To Walk with God, is to Walk like God. Now the more like to God any Man is or
does, the more Holiness there is in such a Man. It Is the Attribute of God in
Exodus 15. 11. O Lord, Thou art glorious in Holiness: and in Heb. 1. 13. Thou
can not look upon Iniquity. The Nature of Holiness lies in a Dedication unto
God: A thing Dedicated unto God, by the Disposal of another, has a Relative
Holiness belonging thereunto. A Man Dedicated unto God by his own hearty
Resignation and Consecration of himself unto the Lord, such an one has in him
a real Holiness. Well, the Walker with God is an Enoch: Enoch is in English as
much as to say, A Dedicated Man: The Man that is with God, is also for God, and
him alone: This is Holiness in the Exaltation of it. The Holy Dr. Usher being
desired to write about Sanctification, with Tears lamenting the defect of it in
himself, gave this Description of it, -- It is for a Man to be in the offering
up of his Soul continually, in the flames of Love, as a whole burnt-offering to
God in Jesus Christ: Now in a Walk with God, a Man is every day doing so. In
fine, When Moses had been with God in the Mount, we read in Exodus 34. 35. It
made his Face to shine. A Man whose whole Walk is with God, must needs derive
much Grace from God, a shine, a glory, a luster of Holiness will be seen upon
such a Man.

2. The Walker with God is also a very Happy Man: The Psalmist has well
determined where Happiness is to be found, in Psalm. 73. 28. It is good for me
to draw near to God: By the same Reason we may every one say, It is good for me
to walk with God.

Happiness properly lies in the Conjunction of a Thing with such a good as the
Appetites and Faculties of that thing are suited unto. Well, Walking with God
cannot be without an having of God: God and Man do mutually possess each other
in this blessed thing. Now the Soul is in conjunction with such a good as
answers all the boundless Cravings of it. The Soul of Man has placed in it by
the Hand of God, a restless raging desire after an Infinite and an Eternal
good: Until it find this, it pines, it frets, it is all on a light fire, like
the Heart panting after the waterbrooks: When it has got this, it is then at
ease, and with a wonderful delight it cries out, This is all my Salvation, and
all my Desire. Behold then the Happiness of a Walk with God; it has no less
than that vast thing Satisfaction in it. All Men are seeking after satisfaction
every day; O but who finds this Pearl of great price? Where is it? The
voluptuous Epicure, he thinks with Belshazzar, It is to be found in Cups and
sensual Relishes: The Covetous Muckworm he thinks with Achan golden Wedges will
rive into the bowels of it: The Ambitious Hector he thinks with Haman, An high
Chair of state will help a man to reach unto it: And the contemplative Scholar
he imagines That it is folded up in the leaves of his Books, which he knows no
end of looking into: These are all deceived. In the mean time the Walker with
God says, I have found it. Enoch has it. For,

First, A Walk with God brings a Man to the enjoyment of an Infinite good. The
Man has God with him now, and one God is enough to supply all our Wants, to
relieve all our Woes: It is said in Phil. 4. 19. God shall supply all your
Need. When an Immortal Soul has tried all the Objects in the World, it yet
gapeth and gaspeth after more, it still cries, Give, Give, after all: But there
is enough in one God, enough to feed and fill that Soul, whose Desire is
enlarged like Heaven it self. There is Infinite Truth in God, there is Infinite
Good in God; he is the God of all Consolation. The Jews have a Fable of their
Manna, that whatever a Man had a mind to taste, the Manna still had the taste of
that thing: This is to be affirmed of our God; there is in God all that we can
ask or think, yea, and infinitely more. He that walks with God, walks with him
that says as in Genesis 17. 1. I am the Alsufficient God, walk before me.

Secondly, A Walk with God brings a Man to the Enjoyment of an Eternal good.
The Man has now the Portion of the Righteous; And what an one is that? We are
told in Psalm. 37. 18. Their Inheritance shall be for ever. A virtuous young Man
among the Primitive Christians, when there was Music and Feasting in his
Fathers House, retired from it, with such Thoughts as these, Here are delicate
things, but they are shortlived things, they will be at an end anon; I will
therefore go to my God, who is the good part can never be taken away. Truly
whatever Creatures we should content our selves in the Presence of, all those
Creatures are like the Moon in the Increase; they shine for a few Hours
perhaps, but they go down and all is dark before the Morning. The Soul of Man
is an Eternal thing, it shall stand like a Rock in the Sea of Eternity: The
things of this World shall perish, but thou, O Soul, shall endure; they shall
wax old like a Garment, but thy years have no end, O thou never-dying Soul. A
Soul must have a more enduring substance than any thing here below, for the
refreshment of it, otherwise it is most wretchedly provided for; it will
starve, and languish, and perish for evermore. Now he that Walks with God meets
with that; all other things that we Walk withal, will take their leave of us:
But God, our God has said, as in Heb. 13. 5. I will never leave thee nor for
sake thee.

So Happy is the Man that Walks with God. The excellent Minister of Nola, when
the Barbarians plundered him of all he had in the World, he lifted up his Eyes
to Heaven, and said, Domine, ne excrucier ob Aurum and Argentum, tu es mihi
omnia; Lord, I have All in Thee, so that I am still Happy enough, though I have
no Gold and Silver left unto me: This is the Blessedness of the Man that
walks with the Lord; his God and his Happiness is with him, though the World
be laid all in Ashes before his Eyes.

USE I.
A Great Rebuke hence falls upon ungodly Men: The Apostle could say, in Phil.
3. 18. Many walk, of whom I tell you weeping. Truly our Hearts are Flints, that
we do not with Tears from our Eyes reflect on the Walk of the most of Men. Do
they Walk with God? No: They have a Walk most opposite thereunto. Their Walk is
that in Ephesians. 2. 2. They Walk according to the course of this World, according
to the Prince of the Power of the Air. Their Walk is that in 2 These. 3. 11.
They walk disorderly. Alas! How common is it for men to leave the Blessed God,
and Walk with the World, yea with the Devil too instead of him? We read of some
in Dan. 4. 37. that Walk in Pride. We read of some in Jer. 23. 14. that Walk
in Lies. We read of some in 1 Pet. 4. 3. that walk in Lasciviousness: Do these
Walk with God? It Is declared of some, in Jer. 13. 10. that they walk in the
Imaginations of their own Hearts. Are there not many of those Walkers now
before the Lord: Conscience, do thine Office: Go and find out the Person that
seldom Prays in his Family, and more seldom in his Closet: Find out the Person
that has not God in all his Thoughts: Find out the Person that can indulge
himself in those abominable things which the Soul of the Lord hates: O tell
that Man, that he does not Walk with God, and set before him the dismal
Consequences of this ungodly Walk. Consider, O Man, the danger of all the wild,
lewd Courses, that vain Persons do Walk and Run into.

First, There is a Curse which thou do Walk under. Hear the loud Voice of
God, in Lev. 26. 23, 24. If you will not be Reformed, but will walk contrary to
me, then will I also walk contrary to you. All the Imipety, all the
Unrighteousness of thy Walk is contrary to God. The Curse of God therefore
inflicts a Damage and a Mischief upon thee, in all his Dispensations, that
horrible Curse accompanies thee like thy Garment, like thy very Shadow in all
thy ways.

Moreover, Secondly, There is an Hell, which thou do Walk unto. Methinks that
Speech of God is all Thunder, in Eccl. 11. 9. O Young man, walk in the ways of
thine Heart, but know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee into
Judgment. This, even this is the warning of the most High God, unto every
Unreclaimed Sinner; Well, if that be thy Walk take it; but know thou, that the
End of such a Walk is Death, and Shame, and Ruin for Evermore. Know thou, that
the Wrath, the Fiery Wrath of God comes upon the Children of disobedience for
such a Walk as thine.

Now, Consider of this, all you that forget God. The Psalmist could say, as in
Psalm. 119. 59. I thought on my ways and turned. Ah! Lord, That wandering Souls
may thus think and Turn! Poor Soul! Thou art out of the way! O Stop! O Turn!
come back from that hideous Walk, which leads down to the Congregation of the
Dead! Come back into the Walk, that through the Narrow way leads to Life world
without end. Hark! Thy God calls after thee: Return, Return, O Soul.

USE II.
And a good Advice is hence therefore given to every Man.

O Walk with God! What? would not we gladly be as Enoch was? It Is said of him
by Moses, He walked with God. When Paul comes to Paraphrase upon it, he so
expresses it, in Heb. 11. 5. He pleased God: O it is pleasing to God, when he
sees Men Walking with him. The Lord has showed thee, O Man! the thing that is
good; and what is it? It is, Walk humbly with thy God. It Is noted of Enoch,
That God took him: Men in their last Wills usually bequeath their Souls to God:
But many a Man may do well to examine, Will he take it? will he take it? Except
we are Walking with God while we Live, we shall not be taken by God when we
Die. It Is only the Walker with God, who can expire with that Confidence, in
Psalm. 49. 15. He will receive me. Let us Walk with God, and at our Dissolution,
we shall be Taken by him up to the matchless and endless Glories that are
above; He will send his Angels, our Guardians now, and our Champians then, to
take us unto the Rivers of Pleasures at Gods right Hand for evermore. Do thou
Walk with God? Behold, that is it that thy Walk tends unto. Soul, God and thou
shall never part. Yea, let us Walk with God, and we shall be taken by him, if
the Destruction of the World should now come upon it. There will a Day come,
when swift Lightnings and hot Thunderbolts will consume this lower World: God
knows when this direful horrid Conflagration shall begin. But whenever it is,
all that Walk with God shall becaught up to meet the Lord: He will take you
into the Clouds from the reach of the Sulphurous Flames. Enoch foretold the
coming of this Fiery Day: They that are like Enoch, shall even like Enoch with
a Translation escape the Terrors of it. O let us Walk as the People that
believed these awful things.

RULE I.
Let us Tread in the Steps of the Lord Jesus Christ, and we shall then walk
with God: Part of his Errand into the World, was to set us an Example of such a
Walk. Now we are told, in 1 John 2. 6. We ought so to walk, even as he walked.
O look upon the walk of him that kept close to God, without one wry Step, one
wrong Step, for above thirty Years together in the World. What a sort of a Walk
was His? We read in Act. 10. 38. He went about doing good. He walked in all
manner of Piety and Charity: He Walked in a perpetual endeavor to please and
serve His Father: Sic oculus, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat; That was his
Walk; and it is said, in 1 Pet. 1. 21. He has left us an Example, that we
should follow his Steps. Of late Years among the Mahometans, even among the
Barbarous Turks themselves, there are sprung up a vast Sect of Men, who are
called, The good Followers of the Messiah. These hold that Christ is God, and
that he is the Redeemer of the World; and they are of such Repute, that it is
an Applause among them, You are the Follower of the Messiah. What shall be said
of us then, if we are not the Followers of our Blessed Jesus? Verily, the Men
of Arabia and Anatolia will condemn us in the Judgment of the Lord.

RULE II.
Let us Walk with Good men, and we do it with God himself. If our Conscience be
not fearfully stupefied, it will tell us, What sort of men have most of God
among them. We are with God, when we Walk with such as Walk after the Lord. Let
us Walk with good Men in their Principles: It was wise Counsel, in Prove. 2. 12.
20. To deliver thee from the man that speaks froward things, walk in the way of
good men. There may happen a Controversy in some Article of Religion, which
perhaps thou have neither Time nor Skill to settle thy own Mind about. Observe
now, which way the generality of sober serious, praying People go: What
gratifies good men is most likely to be the Truth of God: Do thou see which
way the loose, vile, carnal sort of Men go? Then, Come not into their secret, O
my Soul.

Let us Walk with good Men in their practices too: Look upon their
Mortification, upon their Devotion, upon their Zeal, and be able to say, as in
2 Cor. 12. 18. Walked not we in the same Spirit? Walked nor we in the same
Steps? There has been a famous Tribe of Scholars in the World, known by the
Name of Walkers: It Is the Name that all Christians may lay claim unto; they are
Walkers. O be of their Society; say truly, I am a Companion of them that fear
God.

RULE III.
Let us Eat well, that we may Walk well. It Is written of Elijah, in 1 Kings 19.
8. He did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meat [eighty Miles]
unto the Mount of God. Would you engage in a Walk with God? Let me then say as
the Angel to the Prophet, Arise, and Eat, for the walk is too great for thee. A
twofold eating are we to be urged unto: Let us by a Contemplative Eating chew
upon the Word of God. Never do any Men Walk with God, like them that can say,
Meditation is sweet unto me. It Is said of Isaac, He walked in the Fields to
Meditate: And indeed, He walked with God, when he was alone at that Employment.

We should after a Sermon, retire to Ruminate thereupon. We should in an
Evening reflect upon God's Mercy to us, and our Carriage to him in the day
foregoing: We should often single out some Text or some Truth to Exercise our
Thoughts upon: This will strengthen us for our Walk.

Again, Let us by a Sacramental Eating Feed upon the Bread of God. It is
dreadful to see what multitudes do turn their backs upon the Table of the Lord.
Alas! that ever Men should break the Laws of God, yea and the Vows of God, as
they do by this Omission. Art not thou Baptized, and now Old enough to be
Confirmed? Then as often as thou withdrawest from the Supper of the Lord, he
sets that mark upon thee, There goes a Covenant-breaker out of Doors! Answer to
this, Have thou a sincere desire to Walk with God, or no? If thou have not, how
dare thou sleep in that horrible Perilous Unregeneracy? If thou have, then
come hither: Come lamenting all thy Infirmities: Let thy weakness quicken thee;
and not hinder. O come for thy Food; so thou shall Walk and not faint; yea, Run
and not be weary.

RULE IV.
Let us be with God, that we may Walk with Him. Be always on God's side
against Sins side: All other siding may be culpable, but this is Necessary,
this is Praiseworthy: Indeed Sin, that calls like Jehu, in 2. King. 9. 32. Who
is on my side? who? This is the outcry of Superstition and Profanity; Who is on
my side? who? But let me oppose that of Moses hereunto, in Exodus 32. 26. Who is
on the Lords side? Even so, Who is on the side of Godliness and Honesty? Who is
on the side of Holiness and Sobriety? Who will bear a Testimony to all the
Truths, and all the Ways of the Lord? Let us all be on that side, and Walk
accordingly.

RULE V.
Let us remember that we are Walking, and it will be with God.

Keep up the frame of Mortals, and the frame of Strangers in the World. O
Remember as Joshua, in Josh. 23. 14. I am going the way of all the Earth:
Remember thou art a Traveller. The Psalmist says, in Psalm. 39. 12. I am a
Sojourner with God. The way to be with God, is to remember, I am a Sojourner: O
Remember this, I am walking on the Borders of Eternity, every day I am walking
apace toward an eternal home. This will make our Walk more amiable than that
of the three things which go well, or than that of the four things which are
comely in their going.

THE GOOD END OF A GOOD WALK.
GENESIS V. 24. (...) And he was not, for God took him.
THe Walk of Holy and Happy Men, has been the Subject of our Discourse. Behold
the End of that Walk, now offering it self unto consideration with us. The
Psalmist has said unto us, in Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the perfect, and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace. In the blessed Enoch we may see such
an End of such a Man. Two little Clauses comprize the Account which Moses has
given of it; and the double Estate of this Great Saint is therein referred unto.

First, It is said, He was not. This points at that Estate which he passed
from. You may conceive what he was, in regard of his Condition and Employment
here: But now he was not that Sufferer, he was not that Preacher any more.

Secondly, It is said, God took him. This points at that Estate which he passed
into. Good took him to Himself, God took him unto all that Light, and Life, and
Heaven, which the Angels themselves had before the Ascension of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

All that we have hitherto been told, seems to be no more than what befalls
every godly Man. But no less an Interpreter than the Spirit of God himself, by
the Apostle Paul, has illustrated this Text with a more surprising
Interpretation of it. Consult Heb. 11. 5. and we have this Paraphrase hereupon:
Here it is said, He was not: There it is said, He was not Found. It seems that
this Famous Prophet suddenly ^^sappeared from the view of the World: All
Mankind with Wonder sought, and asked, and looked after Enoch, as they did
after Elijah at another time; but they could not find him. Why? What was
become of him? Here it is said, God took him: There it is said, God had
translated him, that he should not see Death. This was a very mavelous
Providence! He had born a zealous Witness for the Worship, and the Truths, and
the ways of God, against a wicked World. God would make them see that he owned
the Testimony, and the Conversation of this worthy Man. Hence, though Abel was
murdered for his Piety, Enoch shall be translated for his: He was immediately
fetched, and changed into the Circumstances of the Glorified. Thus he became,
as Tertullian says of him, A Candidate of Eternity.

The Doctrine which we are hence allowed an Application of, is,

DOCT. To be taken by God from a Mortal Estate on Earth, to a Glorious Estate
in Heaven, is the Priveledge of them that Walk with him.
PROP. I.
They that Walk with God, shall be Taken by God from their Mortal Estate on
Earth. The Scholars of the College at Bethel, said once unto Elijah, in 2
King. 2. 3. Know thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head
to day? And he said, Yea, I know it. In like manner it may be said unto the
Body of the Christian; Know thou that the Lord will take away thy Master,
thy Spirit from thy Head, into another state one day? Every Believer may reply,
Yes, I know that it will be so. Our Estate in this World, is an Estate of
Trial; God is here Trying, and Framing, and Shaping of us, in order to
everlasting Happiness or Misery. And it is an Estate of Trouble too: Our Fall
from God, is the occasion of the many Distresses that belong unto it. This
Mortal Estate of ours, the Lord will one day take us from. One day, but on what
day shall this Deliverance be? Truly at our last day, at the Day of our Death,
at the day that we are most ready to tremble at: On that Day the Lord will
deliver us from the hand of all our enemies, and from the hand of sin.

First, God will take the Believer from the state of a Sinner here. The
dolorous Anguishes of the best Men alive, are like those of the Apostle in Romans
7. 24. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? Soul, I will tell thee what shall do it; The Death of this Body shall.
That, that will do the deed. The Believer is now lamenting, My iniquities are
more than the hairs of my head; he is now lamenting, My wounds stink, and are
corrupt, because of my foolishness. But we shall not always be complaining so;
God will take us from all our Corruptions; God will take us from all our
Disorders; God will take us from the reach of so much as one vain Thought for
evermore. I may speak after Moses in Deuteronomy. 12. 8. Ye shall not do after all the
things that we do here this day; though ye are not as yet come to the rest
which the Lord your God gives you. When the Walls of this Clay Tabernacle are
battered down, all the Leprosy which now cleaves unto us, will be done away.
We shall shortly take an eternal farewell of every Lust, and say, Be gone, thou
vile thing, be gone, I will never see thee more. Indeed, it was the cursed Womb
of sin, from which Death at first came into the World. But O the Mystery of
Divine Wisdom! The Daughter destroys the Mother, and by Death shall sin go out
of the World again.

Secondly, God will take the Believer from the state of a Mourner here. There
are many and mighty Temptations, which now cause us to vex, as Rebeckah did at
her Annoyances, in Genesis 27. 46. I am weary of my life! Yea, but when thy life
is expired, they shall never weary thee any more. God will take us from all
seducing Temptations, and remove all Evil Counselors from our presence for
ever. The fiery Darts of the Devil shall not reach us and wound us as
heretofore. We shall not be put upon saying, Get thee behind me, Satan; for
Satan shall be far enough below us. The time will come, when we shall march as
Conquerors thorough these Territories of the Prince of the Power of the Air;
and at the utmost Borders thereof, we shall give such a triumphant Shout,
Adieu, foul Fiend, adieu! The Son of David will never let me come into thy
devouring Jaws again. We shall go likewise from the Intanglements of the World.
The things of this World, we shall turn our backs upon, as upon poor Trifles,
poor Nothings, and miserable Comforters; and we shall say, To the Fire I leave
you all. The Men of this World, we shall be no more flattered or terrified
vvithal; but laugh at all the Favor and all the Fury of those poor Worms, and
say, as our Savior to the Jews, Whither I go, you cannot come. God will take
us from all afflicting Temptations too. As for our Spirits, we shall not weep
as we do now, under our Doubts and our Fears, nor any more say, God counts me
for his Enemy. As for our Bodies, we shall drop them; and all the Ails, and all
the Pains of them, as Elijah did his Mantle of old. As for our Names, we shall
be gone from the scourge of the Tongue; there shall be no Shimei to curse us in
the New-Jerusalem which we go unto. No Losses, no Crosses will then affect us;
nor Cain's Club of Persecution ever lay a blow upon us any more.

Thirdly, God will take the Believer from the state of a Waiter here. It is the
Voice of all good Men, in 2 Cor. 5. 2. We groan earnestly desiring to be
clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven. Our last groans will put a
period unto those groans. God will take us from our Faith, and from our Hope;
it shall be turned into Sight, and Love, and Joy, World without end. We shall,
e're long, leave looking for the Rest which remains for the People of God:
Leave looking for that City, whose Builder and Maker is God: Leave looking the
Crown of Life, the Crown that fades not away. We shall have what we have been
looking for; and we shall be taken from our humble, prayerful, careful
Expectations of it. We shall no more be panting after the Promise, and saying,
O when will it come unto me! All the sure Mercies of the Covenant will say unto
us, We are come, we are come; we are now thine for evermore.

PROP. II.
They that Walk with God, shall be taken by God unto a glorious Estate in
Heaven too.

We shall be taken by God, when we are taken by Death. But unto what shall we
be taken? A New Sight will chiefly constitute the New State which God will
take us to. In short, we shall be taken to a Full, Refreshing, Transforming
sight of God in Christ, among the Righteous for ever. I shall give but a touch
at these things; we do but stammer and stumble when we attempt a Description
of them. Indeed, I know not whether I had best offer at any Description of
this glorious Estate; or instead thereof, only say as he said unto Nathanael
once, Go and see. Yet however, this little Cluster of Notions we may carry with
us to the heavenly Country, from whence they were brought unto us.

First, God will take the Believer unto a state wherein he shall be immediately
beholding of himself in Christ Jesus. We shall come into the Presence of our
Lord, and behold our Joseph, our Jesus, in all his glory. There shall then be
fulfilled that part of our Lord's Intercession, in Joh. 17. 24. Let them be
with me, where I am, that they may behold my glory. God will take us, where we
shall see the Countenance, and hear the Conference too of that Man, in whom
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily. God will take us into the Embraces of
him who has loved us, and washed us away from our sins in his own blood. And
when we see him, we shall see God in him. I suppose that he is the large Golden
Vessel full of God, from which the heavenly Visions of God are to be derived
for evermore. Our Felicity shall be that in Mat. 5. 8. They shall see God. God
will take us, where we shall be made sensible of his Attributes and
Perfections, in a measure that we are not used unto. God will take us, where
we shall not so much in any Creature as in the Mediator, see him that is
Invisible.

Secondly, God will take the Believer unto a State wherein he shall be
wonderfully Conformed to Himself and Christ Jesus. The Children of God have His
Nature, His Image now upon them, they shall hereafter arrive to the fullness of
it, and be filled with all the fullness of God: The Psalmist could say, in Psalm.
17. 15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake with the likeness of God. God will
take us where our Knowledge will be enlarged like the sands on the Seashore:
Where our Virtue shall be completed into an Heart after God's own Heart: God
will take us, where the Sun of Righteousness will replenish us with bright
Beams of Light and Love, until we be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

Thirdly, God will take the Believer into a State, wherein he shall enjoy the
best Society of most Righteous Ones. We shall be able to speak after the manner
of the Apostle, in Heb. 12. 22. I am come to an innumerable company of Angels,
and to the general Assembly of the firstborn. The Angels they are our
Guardians now: God will take us, where they shall be our intimate Companions.
We shall move and live among those morning Stars: The Firstborn, they are our
Familiars here; we covet their being so, notwithstanding all the Folly and
Error, and Ill humor that is often in them: God will take us, where we shall
associate our selves with all that ever feared God, and not one breach of
Charity, shall ever disturb our Conversation there.

Fourthly, The State which God will take the Believers into the Comforts of,
will be an Eternal State. God will take us to an House; but what a one? We read
in 2 Cor. 5. 1. It will be an eternal House. God will take us to a Glory: But
of what sort is it? We read in 1 Pet. 5. 10. It is an eternal glory. God will
take us to an Inheritance; But how long shall it last? We read in Heb. 9. 15.
It is an Eternal Inheritance. Truly it is a Life Eternal which our God will
take us to. We shall be in it as many Millions of Ages as there are Drops in
the Ocean, or Atoms in the Universe; yet Believer thou shall say, My Heaven
will infinitely outlast as many Ages more:

Prop. III.
There is a variety of Dispensation used by God in his thus taking of them that
Walk with him.

The Lords taking of Men is, in general by his changing of them, it is by
making that they shall not be: Not an Annihilation, but a vast Alteration
happens to Believers; when it shall be said of them, They are not! And then
they are taken by the Lord: And in particular it is managed three such ways as
these.

First, It is by Dying; when we Dye, then we are not. The Dying Man may say, as
in Psalm. 39. 13. I go hence, I am no more. The Dead Man is not a Man in such a
place, he is not a Man of such a Thought, he is not acting upon such Objects as
he was before. When a Man is ready to Dye, we perceive it by Changing, as we
call it, of the Man; much more, when a Man is dead he is a changed Man. Then it
is that we are taken by the Lord: Thus it is said, in Isa. 57. 1. The Righteous
is taken away. The Spirit is then taken to all the Delights and Pleasures that
a separate Soul can feed upon.

Secondly, It is by Rising. When we Rise at the last day, then we are not;
we are not such feeble vvretched things as we are this day. The Resurrection
will bring a mavelous Change on the Subjects of it: It is the Speech of Job,
in Chapter 14. 14. If a man dye, shall he live again? He seems to refute what he
did recite just before as the Opinion of too many Men, and say now, Yes, that
he shall find. And hence it is added, I will wait all the Days of my appointed
time until my Change come. What Change is that? I will not exclude or oppose
the common sense of it; yet I would humbly suggest, why may it not be the
Change which the next Words referr unto? Thou shall call and I will answer
thee; thou will have a desire to the work of thine Hands. At the Resurrection
it will be so; God will then have a Desire to see our once Curious, but now
Rotten Body, set in order again, he shall then call, Arise, ye Dead, where are
you? Arise! And we shall start out of the Dust, as it were, answering, Lord! I
come! This the Departed Soul is to keep waiting for. It seems more than a
Moment, it may seem a long while to the Soul 'till this be accomplished: Then
it is also that we are taken by the Lord: with some respect unto this our Lord
said unto his Disciples, in Joh. 14. 3. I will come again, and take you unto my
self: The Body is then also taken, to be an Incorruptible, a Spiritual, and a
Powerful Instrument of the Soul in all the motions of it.

Thirdly, There is another Taking that some have Experience of, and that is by
Translation. There are some Persons, in whom the Union between their spirits
and their bodies never is dissolved; by the Ministry of Angels they are both in
spirit and in body too made capable of a present entrance into the Kingdom of
God, and so those vvinged Messengers of Heaven carry them away, without any
more ado. This was the Prerogative of Enoch before the Law, and of Elijah
under it: I believe this would have been the Case of all Men, if Adam had not
sinned when he did; and there are many thousands of Pious People with whom
it will yet be so. At the second Coming of our Lord, there will be multitudes
of Christians in the World; what will become of them, when the Fire of God
shall be flaming and raging as far as Noah's Flood did extend of old? How shall
they get out of the way of that horrible Fire that shall consume and carry all
before (...)

be? Hear David's Answer to that Question, in 1 Chronicles. 28. 15. Our days on Earth
are as a Shadow, and there is none abiding: Let James answer it, in Jam. 4. 14.
What is your Life? it is even a Vapor, that appears for a little time, and
vanishes away: Let Jo^ answer it, in Job. 9. 25. My days are swifter than a
Post; they are passed away as the swift Ships; as an Eagle that hastens to the
Prey. Our Age is now contracted into Seventy Years, and how few reach to
Seventy, in comparison of them that never see Twenty of them! Besides, a big
part of our few days are already past and gone with many of us: How many may
sadly sit and sigh and say this day, I have been here but a little while, yet I
cannot now be so long more, as I have already been!

Consider, 2. If God then take us not, who will? I have read of a profane
Monster who on one side of his Sword had the Picture of Christ, on the other
side the Picture of the Devil; with this Motto under it, Si tu non vis, iste
rogitat: If He will not Take me, here is One that will. Horrid Creature! But that
Frenzy is almost equalled among us, by those that wish the Devil to take them
every day: Alas! that, that will be the horrible Destruction of them that shall
not be taken by the Lord. It is a fearful Curse upon the wicked Man, in Psalm.
109. 6. Let Satan stand at his right hand: Thus, O thus it will be. When the
Soul of a wicked Man is going away, a Devil, a Dragon stands by his Bedside,
and will take, and hold, and wound that miserable Soul. Yea, there is a more
astonishing Vengeance to come upon such a Man. If a Man be not taken by the
saving Hands, he will be taken by the damning Hands of God himself. The Hands
of the Great and Terrible God, will for ever take those that fall thereinto;
and smite them and slay them with immediate Impressions of his Fiery Wrath. But
what says the Apostle, in Heb. 10. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the
Hands of the living God.

What, what shall now be done by us? in short; let us be Walking with God, and
we shall be taken by God. Say now, every Soul, as in Mic. 4. 5. We will walk in
the Name of our God for ever and ever. Elijah was taken as he was walking: Let
us Walk thus, and God will take us: Be sure God will take us, if we take Him.
Let us take him as our Lord; take him as our End; take him as our exceeding
great Reward. Thus take Him in our Walk, and He will take us from our Walk to
our Crown.

USE II. Consolation.
Let it be our Joy, that when we are not, we shall be taken by the Lord.

Behold a Cordial here, against three sorts of Exercises.

First, Against all the Troubles of this Life.

We are apt to be discouraged at the Difficulties of this Evil World: But the
Voice of our God unto us, is that, in Luke 21. 28. Lift up your Heads, for your
Redemption draws nigh. E're long you shall not be; and then your Afflictions
too, they shall not be: God will take you from them all. And what says Paul's
Calculation, in Romans 8. 18. For I reckon (he speaks like an Arithmetician, or
an Accomptant) that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the Glory which shall be Revealed. When two English Protestants,
one that was Blind, another that was Lame, were leading to be Burned, they so
cheared one another, Well fare we, we shall need our Crutches and our Guides no
more after this. Thus let us in all our Trials think, When I am beyond the
Stars, I never shall be under the Clouds any more. Have you any Sorrows hard to
bear? Are you afflicted in your Friends? Have thou like David, a Son that makes
thee say, My life is spent with Grief? Have thou like Jephtah, a Daughter that
makes thee say, Alas! thou have brought me very low, thou art one of them that
trouble me? Have thou Job's or Abigail's Yoke upon thee? O think, I shall
shortly be gone from the Light and Sense of such things as these. Are you
afflicted in your Names? Are you like Elijah, counted a Troubler of Israel? or
like Jeremiah, a Man of Contention; or like Paul, a Pestilent Fellow, and a
mover of Sedition? O think, I shall meet with none of these Reproaches where I
am going? Are you afflicted in your Bodies, or your Estates? Are you like
Timothy, cruciated with often Infirmities? Or like Naomi, going out full, and
coming home empty of Temporal Goods? O think, I shall quickly be where a Spital
or an Almshouse, tbere never was any occasion for. Are there any snares that
you are too often trepan'd into? O think of the Time when all this Earth shall
be to you as an Invisible point; think, The (...) Died; and see how they
Covenanted, and Walked and Lived with the Lord. Methinks these do now call unto
us, as in Luke 23. 28. Weep not for me, but weep for your selves: Does Jacob
say, Joseph is not? Does Rachel say, My Children are not? Why, has God taken
them? they belo^^ed unto Him. It Is said, in Joh. 11. (...). Jesus wept over
Lazarus: One of the Ancients affirms, it was not because he was Dead, but
because he was about to be made Alive again. I do not justify the Gloss; but I
am sure our departed Ones, as it were call unto us, from the lofty Battlements
of Heaven, We would not be with you again for all the World.

Let us then rise, and wash and change our Apparel, and say, I will go to them,
they shall not return unto me.

THE DUTY AND INTEREST OF YOUTH: OR, The Thought of an Elder, on the Death of a
Younger Brother. Uttered October. 28. 1688.
Eccl. XII. 1. Remember Now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth.
THE great Emperor, Augustus, making an Oration to his mutinous Army, began it
with that surprising Expression, Audite senem, Juvenes quem Juvenem senes
audierunt; when I was a young Man, old Men counted me worthy to speak unto
them; now I am an old Man, methinks young Men should not refuse to mind what I
say: Truly, such might the Speech of our Solomon be, by way of Preface to the
Text now read unto us; surely this old Preacher deserves the attention of every
young Person among us all. It is a Passage uttered by this matchless and
inspired Prince, in Prove. 22. 20. Have not I written to thee excellent things?
It is by some rendered so, Have not I three times written for thee? He has
indeed so; we have three Books composed by that Royal and Renowned Pen; one of
which wears the Title of Ecclesiastes, because that such was the Author of it.
We are told of some in 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. They walked in the way of David and of
Solomon: What way is that? It was the way of David, that he sinned, he fell, he
dishonored God exceedingly, but he soon Repented and recovered, and then by
writing the fifty first Psalm he gave an Evidence of his doing so. This was the
way of Solomon too; he departed from God with a wonderful Apostasy, but being
reclaimed and reduced from his Wanderings, he now Publishes a Testimony of it
unto all the World.

This Book is a sacred and solemn Treatise, concerning the chief good of Man:
It contains the Holy and Humble Retractations of a famous Monarch, who had
sought where he could not find the satisfaction of an Immortal Soul; he had got
up to the top of all sublunary Felicity, and from thence beholding poor Men
toil and sweat unreasonably to get up the rocky ragged Hill after him, with a
loud Voice he now calls unto them all, You are mistaken, there is nothing but
Vanity and Vexation here: Upon this the wise Man assures us all, That in the
Acquaintance and the Enjoyment of God alone is all our Happiness; and in the
inculcation of it, Young Men are particularly applied unto: We have a
Dehortation given to them in the conclusion of the former Chapter, and an
Exhortation in the beginning of this: In the former is a sharp Sarcasm, but a
grave Counsel in the latter. Two things make up the Exhortation.

First, A Duty enjoined, Remember thy Creator; in the Hebrew it is Thy Creators,
which notes a plurality of Persons in the adorable Godhead.

Secondly, A Season advised, In the days of thy Youth: It intimates not that
Persons past their Youth are exempted from this Command, but that Persons in
their Youth are peculiarly engaged herein; wherefore the Doctrine before us, is,

Doctrine. It is the Duty of All Men, and peculiarly of Young Men, to Remember
their Creator, so as to acknowledge Him.
Prop. I.
The Blessed God, who is Father, and Son, and Spirit, is the Creator of Men:
Unto Man about God it may be said, He is thy Creators. Indeed in God there are
more Persons than one. In the New Testament that Mystery of a Trinity is more
particularly insisted on. Athanasius of old would say unto them that had any
Doubt about the Trinity, Go to Jordan, and you may see what you seek. On the
Banks of Jordan, at the Baptism of our Savior, in Matthew. 3. 16, 17. we have a
Glorious Representation of it. But in the Old Testament too, the Mystery of a
Trinity is not concealed from the Church of God; the History of the Creation
alone may be enough to give a mention of it: We find God the Creator, we find a
Creating Word, and we find a Creating Spirit there distinctly spoken of. The
very first Clause in the Bible is, In the Beginning God Created: The Name, God,
is in the plural Number, but the Verb, Created, is in the singular; which
intimates, that though there be but one God, yet there is more than one Person
in Him. The like Intimation is given to us, in Genesis 1. 26. Where God said, Let
us make Man in our Image. It is impious to suppose that the Angels are
consulted or invited for the making of Man; it is expressly said, God made him:
Nor in any Case would the Most High speak to Instrumentul Causes in the first
Person plural so. The fond and blind Jews are put unto wretched shifts, when
they would banish their Notice of a Trinity from Scriptures thus plain and
clear. Now this great God, who is thus Three in One, is the Creator of the
World. The most High God who is the Possessor, is also the Creator of Heaven
and Earth. It is true, that in some sort the Work of Creation belongs most
properly to the Father, but the Son and the Spirit also are not excluded from a
glorious concurrence in it: Unto him is every Man to ascribe his own Creation
and Original: We are thus called upon in Psalm. 100. 3. Know ye that the Lord he
is God, it is he that has made us, and not we our selves. That style, my
Maker, that is the style in which all Men that were not far worse than Devils
have ever spoken of the Lord.

Prop. II.
It is the Duty of All Men to Remember their Creator: It is a just matter of
Enquiry here, What it is to Remember God?

The Answer in short is this, To Remember God is to Acknowledge God. Or, Take
Solomon's own Explanation of it, in our Context here: It is to fear God, and
keep his Commandments. There is both Understanding and Affection implied in
this Remembrance: To Remember God is to Remember all the Respect which we owe
unto him, and to Render all that we Remember. The Phrase of Scripture is to be
Interpreted by such comprehensive Rules as this. It is the Character of wicked
Men, to forget God. It Is said in Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into
Hell, and all the Nations that forget God. So then, to Remember God, this is
the Character of Godly Men: To be sensible of God, that, that is to Remember
him. There is a twofold Remembering of a thing: There is a keeping of it in our
minds, and there is a calling of it to our minds: This Remembrance we are to
acknowledge God withal. In short, we may observe that Solomon much imitated his
Father, both in the matter and the manner of his Preaching to the World;
particularly, what Solomon here says to us, is but an Expression of the same
that his Father said to him, in 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. My Son, know thou the God of
thy Father, and serve him. In this manner we are to Remember God.

First, We should Remember God by our knowing of him: We are to Remember, That
God is, and, That he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. We are to
Remember, that there is a God who is Infinite in his Power, his Wisdom, his
Justice, and his Goodness, and that his Kingdom rules over all. It is said in
Jer. 51. 50. Remember the Lord afar off: Part of the meaning is, Know the Lord.
Strictly, it is impossible for a Man to Remember what he does not Understand. We
should know God in his sufficience, and Know God in his efficience; we should
know God as represented in his Words, in his Works, and above all, in the Lord
Jesus Christ. It was of old counted a needful Counsel, Know thy self; it is no
less important and pertinent, Know thy God: This Knowledge, it has Life
Eternal in it.

Secondly, We should Remember God by our Thinking on him. The Psalmist could
say in Psalm. 63. 6. I Remember thee upon my Bed, and Meditate on thee in the
Night-watches. We should have a Remembrance of, with a Meditation on the Holy
God; awful and serious Thoughts of God should come into our Hearts often in a
day: We should often be Thinking of God as our Judge, and we should Remember
with our selves, I am now under the flaming Eye of God, and I shall one day
stand before the Judgment Seat of God. We should often be Thinking of God as
our End, and we should Remember with our selves, God has formed me for himself,
I should show forth his praise. We should often be Thinking of God as our Good,
and we should Remember with our selves* The Lord is my portion, and I have a
goodly heritage. Briefly, what the Lord is in himself, the same is he to be in
our daily Thoughts of him.

Thirdly, We should Remember God by Turning to him: It is a Prophecy in Psalm.
22. 27. All the Ends of the World shall Remember, and turn unto the Lord. We
should have a Remembrance of God, that shall produce Repentance for sin: The
Psalmist has communicated this Experience of his unto us, I Remembered God, I
was troubled: O thus we should Remember God, and be troubled for our forsaking
of him; be troubled for our provoking of him; and when we are troubled for, we
should also be turned from all our evil ways. We are to Remember God, so as to
choose him, and to take him for our God, and sincerely say, Lord! What have I
any more to do with Idols? sincerely say, I will be now for the Lord, and not
for another.

Fourthly, We should Remember God by Living for him. It is the Profession of
that good man in Psalm. 119. 55. I have remembered thy Name, and have kept thy
Law: There should an Obedience accompany that Remembrance which we have of God.
The Prophet could say, I Remembered the Lord, and my Prayer came unto thee: Thus
we should be able to say, I Remembered the Lord, and I sought his Face: Be able
to say, I Remembered the Lord, and I heard his Word: Be able to say, I Remembered
the Lord, and with my whole care I pleased the Lord. An Honoring of the Lord,
is the best Remembering of Him.

Fifthly, We should Remember God by Trusting in him. It was an Holy Triumph, in
Psalm. 20. 7. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will remember
the Name of the Lord our God. A Remembrance of God should be with a Reliance on
him. That Believer could say, O my God, my Soul is cast down within me,
therefore will I remember thee. Are there Distresses on us, that cause
Dejections in us? We should then Remember that God who can do what he will;
then Remember that God who has bid us hope in him: And when we Remember him, we
should still joyfully say, My help is in the Name of the Lord.

Finally, Such a Remembrance of God as will procure an Interest in God; such a
Remembrance of God as will maintain a Communion with God: This is the
Remembrance that we are to endeavor for.

Prop. III.
To Remember their Creator is a thing that Young Men are very particularly
obliged unto. Indeed Young Men are apt to reckon this the most improper and
unpleasant Address that can be made unto them, Do thou Remember thy Creator:
They judge it fitter only for elder Men to hear of such a serious thing: But
the Voice of God is even to Thee and Thee, O Young Man! Do thou Remember me.
There are two Arguments here set before us, evincing this to be a most
reasonable thing.

Argument 1.
It Is thy Creator certainly: The Young Man, be he never so young, has cause to
Remember him. It was but a rational Proposal in Psalm. 95. 6. O come, let us
worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. If God be thy
Maker, it becomes thee to be his Servant: Thou art wholly beholden to God for
all the Powers of thy Spirit, for all the Members of thy Body: Whom should
thou then first use them for, but the Lord alone? It was a sharp Rebuke to
Belshazzar in Dan. 5. 22. The God in whose hands thy breath is, him thou have
not glorified: Even so, thy Breath and Being is from the Lord, and shall it be
said of thee, Him thou have not Remembered? this were a very vile thing indeed!
It is a similitude used, if I mistake not, by some of the Ancients, If any Man
could be so ingenious as to make an Engine able to think or speak, he might
justly expect the first work of that Engine should be to acknowledge the maker
of it. Thus, Young Man, it was but lately that thou camost out of the Hands of
God; the first rational Action of such an one, surely should be a Religious
Action. It cannot be too soon for thee to Remember him, in whom thy living, and
thy moving, and thy very being is.

Argument 2.
The Evil Days are coming, of which thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them. Old Age is not a Time for the Service of God to be begun in, or to be
delayed unto; Youth, Youth is the only Time.

First, Old Age is not a proper Time for us to defer the Remembering of God
unto. It is an unworthy thing to deal with the God of Heaven so: It is an
absurd as well as a wicked thing. The Lord complained of this, in Mal. 1. 13.
Ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick, thus ye brought an
Offering, should I accept this of your hands, says the Lord? In like sort,
Young Man, is it suitable that the Devil should have the Prime of thy Strength?
And that God should be put off with a few lame and sick Devotions after all? Is
it suitable that thou should wast all thy very Marrow and Spirit upon thy
cursed Idols, but bring unto God a few Torn crazy Howlings, at the last? Should
I accept this of your hands, says the Lord? There is a Story of one who did
attempt to Repent in Old Age, after a Dissolute and ungodly Youth; but heard
such a Voice from Heaven as that, Des illi Furfurem cui dedisti Farinam: The
Devil had thy Flower, and do thou think to bring thy Bran to me? In thy Youth
will thou continue a Traitor and a Rebel against the God of Heaven? And will thou imagine to be received and protected by him in the Age, when perhaps thou
have none else to go unto? When thou art scarce able to sin, at thy usual rate,
shall that be the only Time for thee to leave it off? Hear O Heavens, and give
ear O Earth; was there ever any thing so Disingenious?

Secondly, Old Age is not an easy Time for us to defer the Remembering of God
unto. Young Man, will thou not look unto the Lord, that thou may be saved;
Until thine Eyes are almost out? Until those that look out of the Windows be
darkened? Will thou not lay hold on Eternal Life, until thy Hands are shaking
with a Palsy? until the Keepers of the House do tremble? Will thou not Run the
Race that is set before thee, until thy Feet call for a Staff? until the strong
men do bow themselves? Alas, these things will not be easy then. Know, that
thy Sin will then be stronger: If it be hard for thee to part with a Lust now,
what will it be then? An old Tree, and an old Lust are not easily pulled up by
the Roots: It is said, in Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the Leopard his spots? then may you also do good that are accustomed to do
evil. An old Custom, and an old Disease are not easily cured. We read of a
Devil dispossessed with a wonderful Difficulty, in Mark 9. 25, 26. The Spirit
cried and rent him sore, and he was as one Dead: What was the cause of those
terrible convulsions? We are told, the foul Spirit had been in that Person, of
a Child. An unclean Spirit, a drunken Spirit, a profane Spirit, that has dwelt
in a Man from his Childhood unto Old Age, O it is not easily driven away: It is
said, in Heb. 3. 12. Exhort one another to day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. Deceitful Sin, tells the Young Man, To
morrow, to morrow will be soon enough to leave thy evil ways: But the Heart
grows harder and harder still, To morrow, than it was to day.

Know likewise, that thy strength will then be smaller. The Philosopher truly
called Old Age, the Winter of life: We commonly say of Old Age, It is it self a
Disease, and attended with a thousand more. Then it is that, Pallor in Ore
sedet, Macies in Corpore toto: A pale, a lean, and a feeble State of Body comes
upon us; and then also the Mind grows more heavy and listless: It is as much as
the Old Man can well do, to encounter the manifold Infirmities of his Age: And
will thou never obey the Lord until thou can not enjoy thy self? When David
said unto Old Barzillai, Come thou over with me: The Old Man answering, in 2 Samuel 19. 34. -- How long have I to live! can I discern between good and evil?
Can I taste what I eat or drink? No; let Chimham go. Thus our David, our Jesus,
when he says to an Old Man, Come over to me; the reply may be: Alas, I have but
a little while to live; the Force of all my senses is abated; let the Young man
go over to the Lord.

Thirdly, Old Age is no safe Time for us to adjourn our Piety unto. The Young
Man allots upon Old Age, as that which he may very seasonably grow sober in:
But Young Man, what if thou should never arrive to Old Age at all? That is
the Hap of multitudes, multitudes every day: The Sons of Job were all of them
Young Men, but they died suddenly, seven of them at once. We have that Warning
often repeated unto us, in Job 21. 23. One dies in his full strength. Young
Persons of both Sexes are liable to the Stroke of Death: We read in Luke, about
the Funeral of a Young Man, the Son of a Widow: We read in the same
Evangelist, about a young Woman, which lay a dying when she was but about
Twelve years of Age. The Arrest of Death likewise falls upon young Persons of
all Estates. The Son of Jeroboam was a Gracious Youth; but he dies. The Sons of
Eli were Vicious Youths, and they dye too: So does the young man, Absalom,
after his Brother Amnon. As young as thou art, and as lively and as lusty too;
it is possible thou may like Eutichus fall down dead, before the Congregation
be dismissed. Have thou a lewd Dream of an Old Age, to reserve all Virtue for?
Alas, there are more die before Twenty, than after Sixty Years of Age. A Child
once being observed to become a very prayerful and pensive Child, gave that
Account of it, I was in the Buryingplace the other day, and there I saw a Grave
shorter than my self. Let the youngest of us all go to such a place, and see
whether there be not Graves of our Dimensions there? And what if now thy Death
find thee before thy Peace be made with God? What if thy Death find thee a poor
Unconverted, Unregenerate Creature before the Lord? It may be written on thy
doleful Grave, It had been good for that Person, that he had never been Born.
Infinitely more than a thousand Ages of Woes and Plagues must be the Portion of
such a miserable Soul.

Fourthly, The young Man has many Conveniences to excite and assist his
Remembrance of the Lord. There seems to be a sort of Correspondence between
Youth and Grace: Youth seems mightily adapted and agreeable to the Exercise of
that lovely thing.

A quick Wit is one Prerogative of the young Man: Well, how can he lay it out
better, than by doing like that young Man, in Psalm. 119. 9. Taking heed unto
the Word of God? The Young man has a Tenacious Memory: What can he do better
with it, than fill it with Divine Treasures? Warm Affections are stirring in
the young man; where should he set them but upon the things which are above?
The Spirits of young men are mettlesome; why should they not be fervent,
serving the Lord? The Bodies of young men are vigorous; why should they not be
a living Sacrifice unto God? There is a brave Courage in Youth; how can it
better show it self, than by overcoming the Wicked One? Youth is a merry Age;
let it then rejoice in the Lord. O nothing is more comely, or natural, than
that young Men should remember God.

Prop. IV.
All the three Persons in God are to be distinctly considered by us, when we
remember him.

Not only our Creator, but also our Creators is to be remembered.

First, We are to remember God the Father. Him we are to remember under that
consideration in Ephesians. 1. 3. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Remember Him as the Fountain from whence all does proceed, and to which all
must Return. Remember Him as the first cause and so the last end of all things.
Remember Him as the Father of thy Lord, and go to Him for a Fathers Blessing in
His Name. O remember Him, and let the outery of thy Soul be; Let this Father be
my Father for evermore.

Secondly, We are to remember God the Son; Him we are to remember under that
Consideration, in Act. 5. 31. A Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance unto
Israel, and Remission of sins. Remember Him as the Savior in whom all fullness
dwells. Remember Him as the Jesus who delivers from Wrath to come. Remember Him
as a Redeemer able to save unto the uttermost, and go to Him for that
Salvation; entreat Him to be thy Prophet, and thy Priest, and thy King for ever.

Thirdly, We are to Remember God the Spirit. Him we are to Remember under that
Consideration, in Psalm. 143. 10. The good Spirit that leads into the land of
Vprightness. Remember Him as the Quickner of them that were dead in Trespnsses
and Sins. Remember Him as the Comforter of all that mourn. Remember Him as the
Inhabitant of the Contrite and the Humble Heart; and seek to be led by Him,
World without end.

Thus are we to Remember our Creator in the days of our Youth.

USE I.
Let them that have not Remembered their Creator in the days of their Youth, now
in the days of their Age be ashamed of it, and afflicted for it.

There are two sorts of Aged People to be now treated with: There are some that
are Converted unto God but late: They squandered away most of all their Youth,
before they turned their feet unto the Testimonies of the Lord. It becomes
these Persons now, as they Remember their God, so likewise to Remember their
Sin: You make that your daily Prayer, in Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not against me
the sins of my youth. Be assured that God's dealing with you will in many
regards be quite contrary to your dealing with your Sins. If you love them, he
will hate you: If you slay them, he will save you: If you would have God not
Remember them, O then do you remember them your selves: It Is said in 1 Cor. 11.
3. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. Well
then, every one of you, like Pharaoh's Butler, now say, I remember my faults
this day. O Remember all the lying, all the idleness; all the profuseness and
profaneness of thy Youth. When Paul was a young Man, he had an hand in Abusing
and Murdering an Eminent Minister of God, but he Remembered it with sorrow all
his days: O! said he many Years after; When the Blood of Stephen was shed, I
was consenting to it. Come now and sit down in the Dust this day before the
Lord; come, and lament it, and bewail it, that you so long lay out from God,
and that you so long did the things, for which the Wrath of God comes upon the
Children of Disobedience. Be able to say, My Soul has this in remembrance, and
is humbled in me. But perhaps there are some of you that never yet were
Converted unto God at all: As they said in Jer. 8. 20. The Harvest is past, the
Summer is ended, and we are not saved; thus may too many confess, Our youth is
past, and we are not Renewed. Surely it is Time, it is high Time for you to
Remember your, God, yet at last, before you go hence and be no more: Let this
encourage you, That it is not too late as yet for you so to do. The Lord said
in Jer. 3. 1. Though thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet return
unto me: Even so, tho thou have committed many sins; tho thou have been sinning
many years; yet return unto me, says the Lord. There was in this very Land,
one that had lived a carnal, stupid, ignorant Person for about an hundred
years, and yet became a serious Christian before he dyed. Unto the Oldest Enemy
of God among us all, I this day proclaim the mercy of the Lord: O let this
break thy heart, and cause thee to come and say, I will do Iniquity no more.

But let this also Terrify you, it will be too late for you e're long: It is
said in Psalm. 6. 5. In Death there is no Remembrance of thee. Thy Death, thy
Death is just ready to seize upon thee, and there is no work, no wisdom in the
Grave, whither thou art going. Then thy cry, will be like that of Despairing
Ones, All too late! All too late! God prevent such a miscarriage of thy
never-dying Soul.

USE II.
Let us that are in our Youth, Now Remember our Creator in it.

There are a multitude of young Persons, to whom the Word of God may reach
this day. Now the Almighty God make this Word of his, Quick and powerful, and
sharper than a two-edged Sword within their Souls! Hear, O Young People; Hear
that your Souls may live: It is reported of Jotham, in Judge. 9. 7. He stood in
the top of the Mount, and he lift up his voice and cried, and said, Hearken
unto me, that God may hearken unto you. Thus would I do, thus would I speak
this day. Here I stand in the Name of God that made you all: I would lift up my
voice, and cry, and say, O Remember your Creator now, in the days of your
youth. If you will not hear this Call of God now, God will not hear your cry to
Him another Day. God will be deaf to the Words of thy Roaring, in the days of
thy Age, and of thy Death, and of thy Wrath, if thou art now deaf to the Words
of his Counsel. The Counsel (and it is wholesome Counsel) of our God now unto
us, is, Remember me betimes: In order thereunto, these things are to be done.

Rule I.
Let us Remember that which will help us to Remember God.

First, Remember thy Death, and thou will Remember thy God. A Remembrance of
Death will produce in a Man a serious and godly frame of Spirit. One that was
Remarkable for his Devotions, gave that Reason of it, O I must Dye! I must Dye!
If a Young Man would awfully realize unto himself that thing, I must dye! it
would highly promote an Acquaintance between God and him: And young Man, it is
not too soon for thee to have the Apprehensions of it. There was a young Man in
this Land, that left behind him in Writing, Meditations to promote Preparation
for Death. O that every young man would be no Stranger to such prudent
Meditations!

Let every young Person Remember this: I shall dye very certainly: As Job could
say, in Chapter 30. 23. I know that thou will bring me to Death: So let the young
Person say, I know that I must e're long look the King of Terrors in the Face;
and I know that e're long I shall go thither, whence I shall not return. Often
look upon that Scripture, in Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto all Men once to
dye. Often look upon that Scripture, in Psalm. 89. 48. What man is he that
lives, and shall not see Death? And let these warnings make a deep Impression
upon thy Mind. There was a Prince who gave a Pension unto a Person, that he
might once a day come and say unto him, Remember that thou art a Mortal Man: Do
that office unto thy self every Day. Look upon Death as the way of all the
Earth; And Remember, I must go that Way: Look upon Death as the End of all men;
and Remember, I shall have that End. Remember, there is no discharge in that
War.

Let every young Person also Remember this, I shall dye very speedily. While we
are young, we strangely promise our selves to live long. Do not harbor that
mistake; but rectify it by that Premoniton, in Jam. 4. 14. What is your life?
It is even a Vapor, that appears for a little time, and vanishes away:
Rectify it by that Premonition, in 1 Chronicles. 28. 15. Our days on the Earth are
as a shadow, and there is none abiding. What are the poor Seventy years, that
the Life of Man is now contracted into! Remember, they are winged things, they
fly away, with a mavelous Velocity. We are truly told of them, in Job 9. 25.
that they are swifter than a Post; yea, more than so, swifter than a Ship; yea,
more than that, swifter than an Eagle hastening to the Prey. Besides, Remember,
it is possible, that half of those years may be all that thou shall ever see; it
has been well said, That an old Man has Death before his Face; but a young Man
has Death behind his Back: Perhaps, Death may strike thee down before him that
is old enough to be thy Father. Remember that there are Skulls of all sizes in
Golgotha.

Secondly, Remember thy Soul, and thou will Remember thy God: Thou have a
never-dying Soul within thee; a Spiritual and an Immortal Substance, able to
discern, and argue, and affect with a wonderful Apprehension. How frequently
and fearfully do young Persons forget that they are Owners of such a Jewel.

Let every young Person Remember this, The state of my Soul is miserable.
Remember the guilt and filth, which thy Soul, by it is becoming a constituent
Essential part in one of Adams Children, soon was defiled withal. Remember what
a dreadful Anger and Vengeance of God, thy Soul by thy sin is exposed unto.
Remember that Character of thy Soul, in Genesis 6. 5. Every imagination of the
thoughts of the heart, is only evil continually. Remember that condition of thy
Soul, in Ephesians. 2. 12. Without Christ, a stranger from the Convenant of promise,
having no hope, and without God in the World. Remember what thou have been
doing unto thy Soul, ever since thy Birth: It is said in Prove. 8. 36. He that
sins wrongeth his own Soul. O Remember what Wrongs, what Wounds, thy own
Soul has had from thy own hand; and Remember what an ever-gnawing Worm, what an
ever-burning Fire, is now ready to seize upon that poor Soul of thine: Thou art
mindful of thy Body, of thy Estate, of thy Credit, and mindful of almost every
Creature which thou art concerned in. Thy Soul now begs of thee, O Remember me!

Let every young Person likewise Remember this, The worth of my Soul is
invaluable. A Great Man was well advised once every day, to remember that
Sentence of our Lord, in Matt. 16. 26. What is a man profited, if he gain the
whole World, and lose his own soul? Thou can not Remember a more important
thing. Remember the Glorious Faculties and Endowments of thy soul. Remember
what a price, what a vast price, the Lord Jesus counted not too much for thy
soul. Remember how desirous the Angels are to assist, how desirous the Devils
are to destroy that soul of thine. Remember these things, when thy Enemies are
bartering for thy soul. When our Lord was betrayed for a little Money, He said
in Zech. 11. 13. A goodly price was I valued at of them! Remember that as the
voice of thy Soul, when thou art under Temptation to evil things. When thy
Tempters would have thee sell thy soul for a song: When they would have thee
pawn thy Soul for a Cup, or an Oath, or a Penny, or indeed for the best thing
in this World, now Remember that Expostulation of thy own soul; Am I worth no
more than so? A goodly price am I valued at!

Thirdly, Remember the Word, and thou will Remember the Lord: The Word of God
Written, the Word of God Preached, is vouchsafed unto us: Remember that, and be
able to say after the Psamist, in Psalm. 119. 16. I will not forget thy Word.
Let our Memories be full of Truth, and they will be full of God. Our Memories
are a costly, curious Cabinet; it is pity that there should be only vile rags
and shreds laid up therein: We can Remember too well, old songs, and old
wrongs. Our Memories are too like the Walls of the House which Ezekiel saw, in
Ezekiel. 8. 10. whereon the Forms of creeping things, and abominable Beasts, and
cursed Idols, were portrayed all round about. For these things we may say, as
one said unto his Friend, that offered to teach him the Art of Memory; Sir,
(said he) If you would teach me the Art of Forgetfulness, I should be more
pleased with it: But for the things of God, there our Memories should serve us,
there our Memories do fail us wonderfully. I have read of a young Man, whom all
the pains in the World would not make to Remember the letters of the Alphabet:
Such lamentable forgetfulness in the Sacred and Solemn things of another World,
are young people too subject unto. It is Recorded of Joseph, in Genesis 41. 51.
that he called his Firstborn Son, Menasseh, or Forgetfulness. Such, O such a
Name young Persons may often put on their own Souls, when the Word of God is
brought unto them; their Souls are so many Menasseh's, O how forgetful are
they, when God has been speaking to them! Our Lord said unto his Disciples, in
John 15. 20. Remember the word that I said unto you. Every time you read a
Chapter, or hear a Sermon, then Remember that the Lord says, Remember this: The
Apostle so speaks, in Heb. 2. 1. The things which we have heard, we should
not let them slip: It Is an allusion to a Leaky Vessel. Young People, the Great
God is pouring his Commandments, and Promises, and Threatenings into your Souls
every day; O do not suffer them to leak away. Retain in your own Souls, the
sense and use of the things that you hear from God the Lord: It is said in Rev.
3. 3. Remember how thou have received and heard. When thou have received and
heard a message from the God of Heaven; give thy Soul now that charge, Remember
this, O my Soul, Remember it.

Fourthly, Remember Eternity, and thou will Remember Him that inhabiteth
Eternity: It is said in Eccles. 11. 8. Let a man Remember the days of darkness,
for they shall be many: Thus would I say, Let a young man remember the days of
Eternity, for they shall be endless. The Psalmist has that Expression, in Psalm.
77. 5. I have considered the years of Ancient Times: There are who so render
it, I have considered the years of Eternity. O Remember that Eternity which
every hour brings thee a Step nearer to, than thou wast before. Remember that
Eternity wherein thou shall enjoy inexpressible Happiness, or endure
intolerable Misery World without end. A Person of Quality having spent some
Time in unlawful Games, at Night could not sleep; giving this Answer to one
that required the Reason of it; Yesterday, I cast my Eye occasionally on a
Book, wherein I saw that Word, ETERNITY; and that word has broke my Heart
within me: O that thing, Eternity, Eternity! the Remembrance of it will Awe thy
Heart, if it will not break thy Heart within thee. Remember that thou art going
to an Estate of Weal or of Woe; and that thou shall remain in that Estate,
fixed like a Rock, for infinitely more than a thousand Million of Ages.

RULE II.
Let us Abandon that which would hinder us to remember God. There are some
fatal things that are called in Job 13. 26. The Iniquities of youth: And in
Jer. 31. 19. Tbe Reproach of youth: An Entanglement in those, will spoil a
Remembrance of God. To all young Persons now is that Call of Heaven, in 2 Timothy
2. 22. Flee youthful Lusts.

To particularize,

(1.) Abandon the Sin of Ill Company-keeping, that you remember your Creator.
Be able to say with him, in Psalm. 26. 4. I have not sat with vain persons. Many
an hopeful young man has been ruined, by falling into the Society of the
Profane: Never was there a more bloody Murderer of Souls than that Society. The
very Heathen could observe, and the Apostle Paul quotes the Speech of an
Heathen Poet for it, That evil Communications corrupt good manners. Now they
are Evil Companions with whom those evil Communications are. Young man, do
thou see others, that will Drink, and Game, and Swear, and Scoff? I would call
upon thee, as Moses upon them in Number. 16. 26. Depart from the Tents of these
wicked men, lest ye be consumed in all their sins. Do not so much as begin a
needless familiarity with Wicked men: Don't Walk with the ungodly, lest you
come to stand with the sinners, and at last sit with the scornful: Remember
that bad Companions will cause you to sin with them. The Jews in Babylon grew
very cold in the matter of Building the House of God. Why so? Their dwelling
among the lewd and wild Babylonians, procured this indifferency. I have
thought, how came Corah, a Levite, to hook in Dathan, and Abiram, and the
Reubenites into a Conspiracy with him? I find that the Levites of Kohath, and
the Reubenites pitched their Tents near together, on the South Side of the
Tabernacle. So they infected one another: Remember, that bad Companions will
cause you to dye with them too. I pray how came Ahaziah to meet with his Death
before his Time? It was by visiting a debauched bigoted Idolater, the infamous
Jehoram. When you fall into a Knot of Impious Men, you are like the Man
Traveling to Jericho, who fell among Thieves that stripped him, and wounded
him, and departed leaving him half-dead. Some Persons going out of the World,
have comfortably pleaded that with God, Lord, let me not be with wicked men for
ever, for I never cared to be with them here: Sad is the Case of them who
cannot plead so. O that every young Man would remember that saying in Prove. 1.
10. My Son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not; walk not thou in the way
of them; and remember that saying in Prove. 13. 20. He that walks with the
wise shall be wise, but a Companion of fools shall be destroyed. What shall I
say more? In fine, Remember, young Man, that on thy Deathbed thou will gnash
thy Teeth at the sight of such Companions, thy groan will then be, O gather not
my soul with sinners! and one of them in thy Chamber would then be thy Torment
there. Well then, save your selves from this untoward Generation.

(2.) Abandon the Sin of Sabbath-breaking, that you may Remember your Creator.
It is the Command of God in Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it
holy: Men are like to Remember God himself, if they remember this day of the
Lord as they ought to do. If you look through the World, you shall see that
Men's Religion is as their Sabbath is. The Sabbath is the Engine by which, by
the Bible, true Remembrance of God is kept alive. It is the Description which
the Lord gives of all good Men, in Isa. 56. 4. They that keep my Sabbaths, and
choose the things that please me. Young Men, this is the Day, to which all
other days may say, Thou art worth Ten thousand of us: Of this Day it shall
evermore be said, O thou Day that is highly favored, the Lord is with thee,
blessed art thou among the Days, and cursed is he that despises thee! Young
Persons are apt on this day to be vain in their Thoughts and Words, and Idle in
their whole Behavior: But labor thou to spend this Day as a Market Day for
thy Soul; spend it in Holy Duties, and in those things that may prove both a
Cause and a Sign of thy Rest among the People of God for ever: Do according to
that in Isa. 58. 13. Call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, and
honorable. Do not abuse this high Day of God; as the Prophet said unto Gehazi,
Is this a Time to receive Money? so let me say, Is this a time to be making of
Bargains, or to be ordering of Journeys? Much more, Is this a time for Rioting
and Drunkenness, for Chambering and Wantonness? or for such things as are never
seasonable? No, it is not such a Time: To the young People that make it such a
Time, I would say as in Neh. 13. 18. You bring Wrath upon Israel by profaning
the Sabbath: Such Persons are the mere Achans of the Land they live in.

Finally, There are many other sins of Youth, especially that sin of
Uncleanness, which we must avoid, and forsake, if we would Remember God: Let no
Young Man allow himself in those cursed things.

RULE III.
Let us Remember the virtuous Example of them that have been good betimes,
especially the Holy Pattern of the Holy Jesus. It is said in Heb. 13. 7.
Remember them whose Faith is to be followed: So it may be urged, Remember them
whose Youth is to be followed: If we remember them, we shall remember God.
There have been young Persons that have had the Grace of Forty at the Age of
Twenty in them. Sometimes a young Man has given up himself to God by a Covenant
never to be forgotten. A young Man has maintained a course of daily
supplication, and besides often had his extraordinary Days of Prayer and
Praise; a young Man has upheld a course of daily Meditation, and besides
accustomed himself to read the Scripture with such Attention, as to fetch a
Note and a Wish out of every Verse before him, such an one I have lately
followed unto the Grave: Many more such Instances of Early Piety, perhaps a
Young Man here and there may afford unto us: O now, Go thou and do likewise.

But above all, the Lord Jesus Christ calls for our Imitation: It is said of
Him, in Psalm. 110. 3. Thou have the Dew of thy Youth: In his Youth it self a
Dew of Grace was to be seen upon him; in his Youth he fulfilled the whole will
of God; in his Youth he was always about his Fathers business: He now says to
Young Men, what he says to All Men in Joh. 13. 15. I have given you an Example,
that you should do as I have done. O then study Christ Jesus, observe Christ
Jesus, follow Christ Jesus; ask, What was the Behavior of Christ Jesus in his
Youth? and, Be as he was in the World.

RULE IV.
Let us remember the profitable Instruction of them that wish well unto us.

There is a twofold Instruction which young Persons among us are made partakers
of: There is Pastoral Instruction, and there is Parental Instruction, under
which you sit. Regard this Instruction, lest you mourn at last, and say, How
have I hated Instruction, and not obeyed the voice of my Teachers!

You enjoy Pastoral Instrnction, O despise it not! You have with Sermon after
Sermon been publicly and solemnly called upon to Remember God. Besides this, I
have personally treated with some scores of you, about your Eternal Welfare,
and I hope I may live to visit every one of you for this end, earnestly and
urgently beseeching of you to be Reconciled unto God. It was of old enjoined in
Deuteronomy. 31. 12. Gather the People together, Men and Women, and Children, that
they may hear, and learn, and fear the Lord: Behold, the Children as well as
the Adult have been advised here, to Remember the Lord. What is now the effect
of it? I will for once wax bold with you, and say as Dying Bolton said unto his
Children, Children, let any of you meet me at the day of Judgment in a
Christless unregenerate estate if you dare! I will testify against you, I say
again, I will testify against you before the Lord Jesus, if you do.

You enjoy Paternal Instruction too; O refuse it not! Does not thy Father, or
thy Master, or thy Mother, charge thee to Remember God? Did they never charge
thee to read the Word, and seek the Face of God, and to make Conscience of thy
Ways* Then, My Son, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the
Law of thy Mother. What befell the Sons of Eli, those Sons of Belial? in 1 Samuel
2. 25. They hearkened not to the Voice of their Father, because the Lord would
slay them. Art thou a young Person, counseled by a good Parent to Remember the
Lord? The Lord will slay thee; yea, The Lord will Damn thee, if thou do not
Hearken thereunto.

Thus are we to Remember God: And, O who among you are more than almost
persuaded hereunto? Let a few Considerations more add weight unto those that
have also bespoke it of you.

CONSIDER. I.
The God of Heaven has Commanded you to Remember him; you have this Command in
a shadow under the Law of old: It was required in Exodus 22. 29. Thou shall not
delay to offer the first of the ripe fruits unto me. The Lord thus calls, Bring
me the first of thy Age, and, Bring me the first of thy strength: How dare
thou then carry it unto the Devil instead of him?

This Command is yet more express, where the Lord calls for a present
Repentance, a present Obedience from us; says he not in Jer. 25. 5. Turn ye
now every one from his evil way? says he not in Psalm. 95. 7. O that ye would
hear his Voice to day? says he not in Psalm. 147. 12. Both young Men and
Maidens, old Men and Children, O Praise the Lord? Young Man, do not venture to
slight the Command of that God who can speak thee into Hell for slighting it:
Do not offend and provoke that God who can with hot Thunderbolts avenge thy
doing so.

CONSIDER. II.
It Is for your own Interest and Benefit now to Remember God. It is impossible
to reckon up all the Advantages of Early Religion: Indeed, Godliness is
profitable for all things; but Early Godliness, that, that is it which brings
most profit unto the Owners of it: It is truly said in Lam. 3. 27. It is good
for a man that he bear the Yoke in his Youth. Young Man, Remember God, and it
will please Him. It was very pleasing unto God, when Abel brought the
Firstlings of his Flock unto Him: The Lord said in Jer. 2. 2. I Remember the
kindness of thy Youth. If we Remember God in our Youth, God will Remember the
seriousness of our Youth, the savouriness of our Youth, and the kindness of our
Youth a great while afterward. It was the Speech of God in Hos. 11. 1. When
Israel was a child I loved him. When Persons are in their Childhood virtuous
and gracious, and such as Remember Him, such persons are loved exceedingly by
Him that loves the Righteous. When little Children were brought unto the Lord
Jesus, He blessed them: What will the Lord then do for them that Remember to
come themselves unto Him? He will bless them, for they please him exceedingly.

Remember God, and it will also save thee: O what a matchless Promise is there
set before thee, in Prove. 8. 17. They that seek me early shall find me! Thou
shall find Christ, and find God, and find the Pearl of great price by the Ea^ly
seeking thereof: Whoever does miss of mercy from God, yet unto the Young
Person, the Lord says, in 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. If thou seek him he shall be found
of thee. This is a certain way to find Grace, to find Glory, to find every good
thing; seek early for it. Indeed, they are not only centain Finders, but also
glorious Finders, Eminent and Transcendent Finders, that are Early Seekers of
the Lord; they are the Joseph's, and the Samuels, and the David's of the World.

CONSIDER. III.
Remember God Now, or there is Danger that you never will at all: As he said in
Joh. 3. 4. How can a Man be born when he is old? so, How can a Man be Newborn
then? It seldom is. Our Text says, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
Youth; It may be rendered, In the days of thy Choice. You now make your Choice:
If you choose God in your Youth, Well; but if you now choose Lust and Sin, a
thousand to one but God will confirm that Choice; the Lord may say, Let him
that is filthy be filthy still, and, Let him that is wicked he wicked for
evermore: Besides the Mortality, there is also an Obduration which thou art in
danger of: It is a direful Menace of God in Genesis 6. 3. My Spirit shall not
always strive. If thou do now resist the strivings of the Lord, thou do as
it were smother them and banish them; it is to be feared that they will take an
Eternal Farewell of thy forsaken Soul. Do not thou Tremble at this, O thou
Heart of Adamant? If this horrible thing should be the Portion of thy Soul,
Down, Down, Down thou go into the Pit, among them that cannot hope for the
Truth of God.

God prevent so great an Evil! God make every young Person among us a Josiah,
that While he is yet young, shall seek the Lord. God make every young Person
among us an Abijah, that while young shall have in him some good thing toward
the Lord. God enable every young Person to say as Obadiah did, I fear the Lord
from my Youth.

Now, unto thee, O God, I bend my knees, with my Prayers, that thy Converting
Grace may produce multitudes of such tender Grapes in this Vineyard of the Lord.

FINIS.

