SCOTLAND'S HERAULDRIE.
By Sr. GEORGE MACKENZIE of Rose-haugh Knight.



THE SCIENCE OF HERAULDRY, Treated as a part of the CIVIL LAW, AND LAW of
NATIONS: WHEREIN Reasons are given for its Principles, and Etymologies for its
harder Terms.

VIRGIL. -- Antiquam exquirite Matrem.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOMINI, M. DC. LXXX.

To my Contrymen.
HEaring, when I was beyond Seas, Herauldry looked upon as the Science of
Gentlemen, and finding it taught as such in the Academies, I resolved to know
somewhat of it, upon design, rather to serve my Country, then to satisfy my
Curiosity: For it was justly admired, that We only of all Nations had never
published any thing, to let the World know what marks of Honor our
Predecessors had gained. And having had great Intimacy with a most learned
Advocat at Bourge in France, who was admired over all Europe for his skill in
this Art, it was easy for me to find that there was one Book yet wanting upon
this Subject; for some had treated this Science as mere Law, without
understanding the practice of Blazoning, as Bartolus, Chassaneus, etc* whilst
others handled it as a part of the Civil Law, as Guilim, Menestrier, Colombier,
and others, without being bred to the Law, which requires a whole Man, and his
whole Age. To reconcile which two, I was induced to write some Observations,
whilst I was young, to join the Theory with the Practice, and to examine and
polish the Principles and Terms of that excellent Art: And if these serve to
Please or Instruct you my Countrymen, I have satisfied my Ambition, and got my
Reward. Having also designed to learn from our old Rights and Evidents, the
Origin and Progress of our Styles, and by what steps they arrived at their
present Perfection, (in which Work I have made considerable Progress) I did
from the original Papers I saw, and from the old Chartularies of our Abbacies,
draw an account of our Families; But because I want time to fit them for the
Press, I resolve to leave the Manuscript, as a new Testimony of my kindess, to
my native Country.

The Heads of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. THE Origin and Use of Arms, where of Seals. CHAP. II. Who can give or
bear Arms. CHAP. III. Of the Shield. CHAP. IV. Of Colors and Metals. CHAP. V.
Of Furs. CHAP. VI. Of the principal points of the Shield. CHAP. VII. Of Lines
used in Herauldry. CHAP. VIII. Of the partitions of the Shield. CHAP. IX. Of
the honorable Ordinary's in general. CHAP. X. Of the Chef. CHAP. XI. Of the
Pale. CHAP. XII. Of the Bend. CHAP. XIII. Of the Face, or Fess. CHAP. XIV. Of
the Cheveron. CHAP. XV. Of the Bordur and Orle. CHAP. XVI. Of the Cross. CHAP.
XVII. Of the Saltyr. CHAP. XVIII. Of such Figures, square and round, as are
only used in Herauldry. CHAP. XIX. Of living Creatures, Trees, Flowers, etc.
and the general Laws of Herauldry, relating to them. Where, 1. of Planets, etc.
2. of the parts of a Man; 3. of four-footed Beasts; 4. of Beasts, and their
several parts; 5. of Fowls; 6. of Fishes; 7. of Trees, and Plants, etc. 8. of
Castles, and Instruments of War; 9. of Vtensils, Crowns, and others, used in
Armory. CHAP. XX. Why Arms are changed. CHAP. XXI. Marks of Cadency, and
Differences. CHAP. XXII. Of Bastards. CHAP. XXIII. Of Abatements. CHAP. XXIV.
Of Marshalling. CHAP. XXV. Of Achievements in general. CHAP. XXVI. Of the
Helmet. CHAP. XXVII. Of Mantlings. CHAP. XXVIII. Of Wreaths. CHAP. XXIX. Of
Crests. CHAP. XXX. Of Crowns. CHAP. XXXI. Of Supporters, where likewise of
Compartments. CHAP. XXXII. Of Motto's, or Devises. CHAP. XXXIII. Of Slughorns,
or the Cry of War. CHAP. XXXIV. Of Devises. The Blazon of the Achievement of
the King of Scotland, and the reasons of that Bearing. The Blazon of the
Achievement of His Majesty of Great Britain.
ERRATA.
Though the Sheets were carefully revised, yet some Escapes have been
committed: The most material mistakes are to be corrected as follows; the
rest are obvious to the considerat Reader.

PAge 3. l. 20. for and Fife, r. in Fife. p. 5. l. 22. r. in pale for. p. 6. l.
2. r. for their Arms. p. 14. l. 16. dilatione, r. delatione. p. 15. add Chap.
3. p. 16. l. 3. j'escu, r. l'escu. p. 19. l. 1. r. Topaz. l. 8. for Taoyth, r.
Iacynth. l. 9. r. metellorum. l. 14. Cartwright, r. Carter. l. ult. for
pointeo, r. pointed. p. 23. l. 22. r. caeruleis. p. 24. Chapter 6. l. 25. for E, r.
F. p. 28. fig. 4. l. 2. r. counterchanged. p. 30. Chapter 9. l. 23. dele or. p. 40.
l. 37. r. diminutive. p. 43. l. 6. the r. an. p. 45. fig. 12. marg. r.
straloch. ibid. dele aliter. p, 47. l. 1, 2, and 3. for Argent, r. Or. Chapter 18.
l. 17. for obsturcir, r. obscurcir. l. 18. for ce, r. je. p. 48. l. 8. r.
besantee, l. 9. for bestanted, r. besanted. p. 54. marg. for lochcow, r.
lochnaw* fig. 11. l. 4. parting, r. pearcing. p. 57. fig. 6. l. 4. for hearts,
r. an hearts. p. 61. fig. 4. l. 2. for with, r. within. p. 66. fig. 11. l. 3.
for oars, r. raes. p. 68. fig. 6. l. 5. Bears, r. Boars. p. 70. l. 7. heir, r.
heirs. l. 37. Tailye, r. entail. p. 71. l. pen. its, r. ils. p. 72. l. 1.
their, r. these. p. 73. l. 48. r. convenire. p. 74. l. 32. Kings, r. King. p.
75. l. 10. r. arms of. p. 77. l. 33. r. nam. p. 79. l. 30. caur, r. caeur. l.
pen. for of two sex, r. two of sex. p. 81. l. 3. cressets, r. croslets. p. 84.
fig. 8. l. r. oars, r. raes, p. 88. l. 22. for shields, r. helmets. p. 90. l.
36. west, r. waist. p. 92. l. 21. r. Dolphins. l. 40. farm, r. favin. p. 94.
l. 11. for Baronet, r. Banneret. p. 98. l. 15. r. cry it out. p. 100. l. 16. r.
verberantem, and r. significantem. l. 41. r. thus, The Standard bearing the St.
Andrew 's cross, etc.

Nota, These three Ordinary's Chef, Band, Face, are (in compliance with the
received Customs) indifferently written and termed throughout this Treatise
Chef, Chief, or Chief; Face, Fasce, or Fesse; Band, or Bend.

Nota, The Arms of Straiton of Lowriston, and also the Arms of Stirling of
Keir, are blasoned in several parts of this Book by diverse ways, and that
conform to the old Records of Arms, where they are to be seen in all these
differing forms.

Errors in the Plates.
In the Royal Achievement of Scotland, the Lion in the Banner ought to look to
the Staff. In the Plate of the Partitions, third Coat, the parting of the Chef,
is contrary. In the Plate of the quartered Atchievments, the first and last
Coat of the Earl of Kelly, should be Gules. The Field of the Coat of Bruce, in
the same plate, should be Or.

THE SCIENCE OF HERALDRY. BOOK 1.
CHAP. 1. The Origin and Use of ARMS.
HERALDRY is that Science, which teaches us to give or know Arms; suitable to
the Worth or Intention of the Bearer.

Arms may be defined to be Marks of Hereditary honor, given or authorized by
some Supreme Power, to gratify the Bearer, or distinguish Families.

The first name given to such Bearings, was, Imagines, scutis qualibus apud
Troiam pugnatum est, continebantur imagines, Plin. lib. 35. c. 3. The Grecians
called them, (...). Conan. l. 9. com. jur. civil. c. 2. n. 3. (...), as Cujac.
observes, ad l. 13. f. ad l. Cor. de falls. The Civilians call them, Insignia;
l. 2. in princip. f. de his qui not. infam. l. eos. sect 2. f. defalsis. But
Bart. is taxed for, insigniis and insigniorum; whereas the true Latin is,
insignibus and insignium, used in the former texts. Some call them, Insignia
Armorum, the Latin of which is also doubted by Tiraquel. cap. number. 19. Others
call them, Tesserae Gentilitiae; and in the civil Law they are called, Tituli,
arg. Rub. and l. un. C. de his qui potent. nom. and ibi Bart.

The Germans call them Wappen, or Clenodia: The Italians, Carmas: The French,
Armoiries: The Scots and English, Arms; from the Latin, Arma, which was used
in this sense even amongst the Romans, Virgil, Et genti nomen dedit, armaque
fixit Troiae.

These Arms are distinguished from Hieroglyphics, Symbols, Emblems and
Devices, in that, these require no fixed colors, as Arms do.

The Emblem represents some moral lesson, but Arms are the testimony of some
noble action: Arms are Hereditary, but these are assumed, and altered at
pleasure.

Some think, that the giving of Arms arose from the example of Jacob blessing
his children; in which he gave them Marks of distinction; as Judah, a Lion,
etc. And certain it is, that the Tribes did bear these upon their Ensigns.
Others ascribe their invention to the Germans, and some to the Romans. Some
think, the Goths and Vandals gave the first Arms, to excite their Soldiers to
noble actions, upon their invading Italy. Others ascribe the exactness of this
Invention to Charles the Great; Aldrovan. l. 1. Others to Henry I. in Anno 986.
Hop. cap. 3. But by comparing all these opinions, it is clear, that the wearing
their Marks of distinction, is a Iure Gentium, and a part of the Law of Nations:
For even the barbarous Nations, such as the Cimbri, Teutones, etc. were
observed by Plutarch in vita Marii, gessisse in armis pictas ferarum imagines:
And Hopping asserts, That he has seen a shield from China, charged with a
Panther in a field, Orr: yet certainly, the digesting these Customs into an
Art, and the subjecting them to Rules, must be ascribed to Charlemaign and
Fredrick Barbarossa; for they did begin and grow with the Feudal Law, Paul,
Iov. and Mart. Crus. lib. 2. part. 2. cap ult. And I cannot here forget, that
some learned men have ascribed the first wearing of colored Shields, to the
Scots and Picts: And that the wearing of Clothes of diverse colors, rose from
their conforming their clothes to the variety of their shields, Limneus lib. 5.
de jur. pub. cap. 6. number. 6. Speidel in not. jurid. histor. verb. Wappen.

The reasons of inventing this Art, and giving such Marks of distinction, and
the advantages arising from the knowledge of Heraldry and Arms, are,

1. The great design that men had to perpetuate their own great Actions.

2. The desire that Governors had, to encourage others to do great things by
rewarding with a cheap kind of Immortality what their deserving Subjects did.
Thus Marshals predecessors got three Pales gules, on a chief, Orr, by the Kings
dipping his finger in Camus the Danes blood, and drawing three Pales gules upon
his shield, after that Camus was defeat in a battle, in which the first Keith
fought most generously, Anno 1006.

3. The advantage of distinguishing Friends from Enemies, who could not be
better known, then by their several Bearings, and thus Vegel lib. 2. de re
milit. tells us, That the Roman Legions were thus distinguished, Virgil. lib. 2.

Mutemus clypeos, Danaumque insignia nobis Aptemus. 4. To show a respect to
Religion. Thus the Christians bore the Cross, at their expeditions into the
Holy Land, which were therefore called, Croissads: And the Pringles and others,
bear Escalops, to show their devote Pilgrimages: Of which these shells were the
Badges, and for which Pilgrimage, the Pringles were first called Pilgrims, and
thereafter by corruption Pringle. For the same reason does the Dowglass carry a
Heart, in remembrance of the Pilgrimage to the Holy Land, with King Robert the
Bruce's heart; which was to be, and is buried there, at the special command of
that pious Prince, about the year, 1328.

5. To show from what Country the Bearers came: Thus the Maxwels and Ramsays
bear the Eagle, to show their descent from Germany. The Ruthvens the Arms of
Portugal; from which King they are said to be descended: And the name of
Marjoribanks bear the Cushion, to show that they were Iohnstouns originally.

6. To show their Alliances. Thus we quarter Arms; and by this means, the
memory of great Families, and even of Clans and Sirnames, are only preserved.
Thus Scotland, by bearing a double Tressour flori, and Contre flori, is
remembered of their League betwixt France and them in the Reigns of Achaius and
Charlemaign. Thus there is no Monument of the Randolphs, but by quartering
their Cushions with the Arms of the Dumbars; nor of the Pepdies, but by the
Pepingoes, born by the Earl of Hume: Nor of the Giffords, but by the three
Bars Ermine, born by the Earl of Tweddail, as their Arms: Nor would have any
known that there had been a Lord Brechin of the name of Wishart, if the
Marquess of Dowglass had not quartered his Arms, as having married the Heretrix.

7. To remember Princes of their obligations to some Families. Thus King Robert
the Bruce gave the house of Winton a falling Crown supported by a Sword; to
show, that the Seatons had supported the Crown when it was in a distressed
condition: which Seaton of Barns yet bears, because he got the Land which was
dispon'd, with the Arms: And to Veitch, a Bullocks head, to remember posterity,
that the Bearer had assisted that King with Aliment, in bringing some Bullocks
in His great distress.

8. To instruct descent by blood; and therefore Arms are called Tesserae
Gentilitiae. Thus the Weems and Fyfe, are known to be Cadets of Macduff, and
the Colquhouns and Mcfarlans Cadets of the Family of Lennox, by their Arms; and
these are surer Marks of Consanguinity than the Surname, as may be known by
many instances; and among others the Shaws in the North, are known to be
Mcintoshes by their Arms.

9. To show, that the Bearers possessed once great Employments. Thus the Earl of
Southesks Predecessors did bear a Cup in an Escotcheon, upon the Eagles
breast, to show, that his Predecessors were Cup-bearers, Regi olim a Pateris,
ut praelibaret and auro, Ista notis certis perhibent insignia gentis.

And Wood of Largo two Ships, to show, that his Predecessors were Admirals.
Thus Burnet carries a Hunting-horn in his shield, and a High-lander in a
hunting garb, and Grew-hounds for his supporters; to show, that he was His
Majesty's Forrester in that northern Forest, as Forrester of that ilk is in
the South: for which he also carries three Hunting horns. The Earl of
Holdernesse, Ramsay, carried a sword Pale-wayes, to show, that he and his
Successors had right to carry the Sword of State, the day of Gowries
Conspiracy, as a reward for killing Gowrie.

10. These show ofttimes to the Bearers, to whom they have been oblidged. Thus
the Dundasses bear for their Supporters, the Lion, which was the Arms of the
Earls of March, to show, their Support they got from that Nobleman; and they
show the intimacy and friendship of the Giver. Thus King Robert the Bruce
having carried as a private Badge three Laurel leaves, with this word, Sub Sole,
sub Vmbra virens: He gave to Irvin, Drum's Predecessor, who had been
constantly His Armor-bearer, the three Hollen leaves, which is a kind of
Laurel.

11. These show the Bearers Antiquity, and thus Macdowal (for though Macdougal
may be Macdonald, yet Macdowal is not) is known to be amongst the ancientest
Sirnames of Scotland, because he bears a Lion collard, with a broken Crown
about his neck, in remembrance of Dovallus, his Predecessors (as is alleged)
killing Nothatus, who was a Tyrant, and who lived many years before Christ:
which (if true) are the ancientest Arms I ever saw, belonging to any private
Family in Europe.

12. These let us know, if the Bearers be Noblemen or Gentlemen, and what their
Dignity is; as will appear by several Casques and Crowns.

13. The Shield, and ofttimes the Signet, made the Bearers, who were killed in
the crowd, to be known, that they might be honorably buried.

14. They being appended, inform us of the true Sirnames of the Granters, which
are become illegible; and thus by the Seals I have found some Charters to be
granted by Menzies of Weems, when we could hardly read the Name: and I have
been in Processes, wherein Charters were alleged to be false and forged,
because the Granters true Arms and Seal were not appended.

15. By these Arms, we are instructed of the right Originations, and writings
of Sirnames: And thus we know the name of Tarbet to be wrong writ; and that it
should be writ, Turbett, seeing they have three Turbetts, fretted proper, for
their Arms. And thus we find that Buchannan erred, calling the Winrams,
Viniramus; which gave occasion to some of that name lately, to take a Vine
branch for their Arms; for the old Arms is a Ram passant, and were given the
first of that name, for being incomparable at a Game wherein men were to wind
and turn a strong Ram from the sheep with one hand: whereupon he was also
called Winramme. Thus the Trumbles are Turnbulls to their names; and Boethius
says, That they were so called, because the first of that name, did turn and
divert a mad Bull from killing King Robert the Bruce. Of which Antiquities and
Games there is no Record but Heraldry.

16. These Arms show who have been Founders of Towns, Castles or Churches. Thus
the Church of Durham is known to be built by the Kings of Scotland, and the
Town of Erfort is known to be built by the French King, because it bears their
Arms, Dresser page 227.

17. These infer a presumptive right of Superiority, Quando Arma in Portis vel
Curiis pinguntur, Bart. tract. de insig. And thus when the Millaners did engage
to be Vassals to the Emperor Fredrick the first, they undertook to carry the
Arms of the Empire upon the Steeple of their chief Church, Limn. dejure publ.
cap. 6. number. 126. And when Orknay and Zetland were fully resigned to the Kings
of Scotland, it was agreed, that the Arms of Scotland should be affixt in their
public Courts: And thus the Dukes of Venice are known not to have an absolute
Jurisdiction, because they are not allowed to represent the Arms of their
Family upon the Coin of the public, Alberi. ad l. Si qui C. de oper. publ. And
one of their Dukes was severely censured by the State, for having contraveened
this rule in Heraldry, Tessaur. decis. 270. Arms do presume Propriety in
movables especially, to which men have only right by Possession, and not by
Writ, Hopping, cap. 13. And this is an ordinary Presumption in all Judicatures,
Nam sicut ex signis signatum, ita ex insigniis Domini rerum cognoscuntur, Tusk.
tom. 1. conclus. 516.

18. These Arms are also most necessar for signing Articles of peace amongst
Princes, and Contracts and other Writs amongst private persons; and by them
also Knights and Warriors did find out one another in Battles and Tiltings: An
example whereof our History gives, in the Lairds of Drum and Mclean at the
Battle of Harlaw.

19. By these the Ships of Enemies are known, and are accordingly confiscated,
if taken at Sea; which Lawyers extend so far, that if a Ship carry the Flagg of
an enemy, it will be declared Prize, though it belong to a Kingdom in amity
with the Taker, Jason. consit. 163. h. 19. Many likewise took a part of their
Superior or Over-lords Arms, as is observed in Camdens Remains, Page 157. And
thus most of the Sirnames in Annandale carry the Arms of the Bruce; in Murray,
some part of the Murrays Arms; and in Tevidale, the Dowglass Arms, or some part
thereof.

20. I confess that Arms are sometimes derived from the Names of the Bearer, as
Peacock bears a Peacock, Cockburn a Cock, etc. And these are called, Arma
cantantia, by the Latin; (...), by the Grecians; Des armoiries parlants, by
the French; rebus or canting Arms, by the English: and are never presumed to be
Noble Arms, because, it is presumed that if the Bearer had done any generous
actions, which deserved Arms, they had never recurred to their Names; yet this
Rule holds not still true: for of old, some men got their lands as rewards of
great Acts, and Sirnames came not in the mode with us, till the Reign of King
Malcolm Canmor, who gave Sirnames to all his Nobles, and then many took their
Sirnames from their Lands they possessed, as the Cockburns and others, and suited
their Arms to their names to the end it might be known that they were Heritors
of such places: For which cause likewise we find, that Chiefs of Families are
ordinarily of that ilk, that is to say with us, That their Names and Lands are
the same. Some also derive their Names as well as their Arms from some
considerable action: and thus a second son of Struan Robertson, for killing of
a Wolf in Stocket Forest by a durk in the Kings presence, got the Name of
Skein, which signifies a durk in Irish, and three durk-points in for Pale for
his Arms. Some likewise got Names from their Arms, for being strangers, the
people amongst whom they came, not knowing their Arms, gave them names from
their Symbols or Arms they did bear. Thus, the Fowllis were called, from the
leaves they carried: Monsieur Des Feules, and the Herrises or Herrisons, with
us got their names from the Porcupine, or Herrison in French, which was their
Arms, as Brothers of the House of Vendosm: And Historians observe, that the
French were called Galli, ex eo quod gallos in conis galeae, seu pro cristis
gerebant: And therefore, Limneus, cap. 6. number. 1. concludes, That Omnia arma
quae cantant, non sunt insignia illiberalia, sive vilium hominum. Arms are
ordinarily assumed by Kingdoms, and Towns, either to represent what they glory
most in: Thus the Kingdom of Granada, take a Pome-granate. Thus the Earl of
Buchan, took three garbs, or sheaves of corn, because Buchan was more fertile in
Corn than other places of Scotland; which though very fertile now in grain, yet
were then full of Woods: or else Kingdoms, and Towns take something which
resemble the Situations of their Country. Thus Holland takes a Lion, and Paris
a Ship, because the ground upon which it was built, represented the figure of a
ship: and ordinarily with us, Towns took for their Arms the most remarkable
thing belonging to their Towns; as, Edinburgh and Dumbarton, their Castles: or
else the Saint, which was their Patron, as Pittinweem, St. Adrian; and Tayn,
St. Duthacus; or else the badge of that Saint, as St. Iohnstoun, the Holy Lamb,
which is the badge of St. John: and Dundee, the Pot and the Lillies, which is
the badge of the Virgin Mary. Which invention was borrowed from the Ancients,
for we find that Diana was represented upon the coin of Massilium, now Marsels,
because that City was founded by Phocea. Alexandria, Napoli, (now Naples) and
other Towns built by the Romans had, in memory of Romulus and Remus, a wolf
sucking two young ones upon the reverse of their coin. In imitation of which
custom, I find, that not only the Roman Medals did thereafter bear reverses,
but some of even our Towns do bear them till now. Thus Aberdeen gives their for
Arms three Towers, triple towr'd; and for their reverse, St. Michael, standing
in the Porch of a Church.

I have seen the Books of Arms of most Nations, and I have in general observed,
that every nation has showed their humor, as much in Heraldry, as in their
other Characters: For the Arms of almost all the Families in Spain, are given,
to signify some undertaking for the Christian Religion, against its enemies,
the Moors, Turks, or other Heretics. And their Shields of late are filled with
Ave Maria's, I. H. S. and such other devote Characters. The Arms of the
Italians are ordinarily Emblems and witty Hieroglyphics. The German
Achievements consist of multitudes of Coats, marshalled in one, to gratify
the humor of their Country; who are vain of nothing so much, as of their
Pedegrees. Those of Poland and Denmark, are as wild and monstrous as the
People are who bear them. But the French, who are great Artists, wherever they
study, do suffer their natural volagenesse to be consigned and fixed by Rules of
Art. And the Scots, to express their friendship to the French, have of old,
imitated them in their Heraldry, as much, as we do the English, since we were
happily united with them under one Monarchy. The Turks take oftentimes Letters
of the Alphabet, as a cognizance; because their Religion discharges them to use
Images. And it is observed, that the Spaniards use oftentimes Letters, in
imitation of the Turkish Moors their Neighbors: or else, these have been left
with them since the Moors possessed their Country.

OF SEALS.
BY the Civil Law, Testaments and all Writs of importance were to be Sealed.
And by our Law, Quilibet baro, vel alius tenens de Rege habere debet sigillum
proprium, ad serviendum Regi, ut de jure tenetur. Stat. Rob. 3. cap. 7. number. 5.
and by the 130. Act. 9. Parl. I. 1. Every freeholder should compear at the
Head-court with their Seals; and if he cannot come, he should send his attorney
with the Seals of his Arms: and these who want such seals, are to be amerciat
by the foresaid Statute: Rob. 3. And therefore till of late, every Gentleman
sent his seal to the Clerk in Lead, which the Clerk kept by him; many of which
are yet in their hands. Examples whereof, I have set down, Chap. Supporters,
fig. 5. and 6. Of old, the appending of the seal was sufficient in Charters,
without the subscription of the party. Reg. Maj. lib. 3. cap. 6. Si recognoscit
sigillum suum in Curia, debet illum warrantizare, suae autem malae custodiae
imputetur, si damnum inde incurrat, per sigillum suum ex insolentia, aut
negligentia custodum: Whether the seal affixt be the Granters Seal, that then
the truth shall be searched; for by comparing many sealings together, per
comparationem plurium sigillorum, and alias chartas eodem sigillo signatas. It
was lawful amongst the Romans, for such as wanted seals, to append the seals of
others,. Possunt Inst. de test. And this was very ordinar with us; but then the
Nottar behooved to express, that this was so done. Thus I have seen an Charter
granted by the Lord of the Isles to the Abbacy of Aberbrothock, which says, Et
quia meum sigillum est minus notum in Scotia, ideo apposui sigillum Episcopi
Rossensis. Commissions from Shires, to their respective Commissioners in Parl.
were also to be sealed, Act. 101. Parl. 7. I. 1. and this custom of sealing
Papers without subscriptions, continued in vigor till March, 1540. At which
time, King James the 5. by the 117. Act. 7. Parl. did ordain, that because men
might lose their seals, or their seals might be counterfeited; that therefore
all Evidents should for the future be subscribed, as well as sealed. And yet
Queen Mary did thereafter, Parl. 6. Act. 29. appoint that all Reversions,
Bands, and Discharges of Reversions should be sealed: and thereafter, I. 6. by
the 80. Act. Parl. 6. appointed all papers importing heretable title, to be
both sealed and subscribed. And though by the 4. act. Parl. 9. James 6. Papers
which are to be registrated, need not be sealed, because the seal was supplied
by the Registration. Yet, I see no posterior Law dispensing (without
Registration) in other cases: and it would be a further check upon forgers of
Papers, that the Granters seal were to be appended. For many can forge a
subscription, who cannot forge a seal. So that each forger, behoov'd to
associat at least another with himself; which would discourage them before the
cheat, or help to discover the forgers after the cheat were perpetrat: But
Retours must yet be sealed with the seals of the inquest, Satut: Rob. 3. cap.
1.4. and Decreets of apprisings, with the seals of the Assizers and Verdicts of
the Justice-courts, are also to be sealed by the Regulations, 1670.

I cannot here forget to inform, that of old, Our Acts of Parl. had oftentimes
the Kings great seal appended to them: Upon the right hand were appended all
the seals of the Ecclesiastics, and upon the left, all the seals of the
Nobility; with which the whole Act was surrounded. Of these I have seen many,
and particularly, a ratification, granted by King James 4. to Hepburn, Earl of
Bothwel, upon the forfeiture of the Ramsay, Anno 1480. Which bears, In quorum
omnium fidem, ac corroborationem, and laudationem earundem praefatus supremus
Dominus noster Rex, and regni status per se singulariter requisiti sua sigilla,
quorum nomina sigilla representant, praesentibus appendi jusserunt.

I conceive that Seals, may very well represent, not only the bearing it self,
but the colors; which I first ordered to be practiced: for the Seal may be
varried in its cut as the other figures of this Book are, which may be very
useful, seeing many men's Arms differ only in the colors.

CHAP. II. Who can give, or bear ARMS.
OF old, Emperors, or Senats only gave Arms, Laz. lib. 9. cap. 17. But
thereafter they did choose an old expert Warrior, on whom they bestowed the
power of rewarding, with Coats of Arms, such as had deserved well: and these
were called Foeciales by the Romans: but now are called Heraldi, or Herawldi.
For Here, signifies an Army, and alt, an Elder, Senes in armis: or from here,
an Army, and Alda, which in the Hungarian tongue, signifies a common servant,
Hopping. cap. 6. part. 9. The ehief of that Society is called Lion, King of,
or, at Arms, with us: Rex armorum in Latin. Which name he bears from the Lion,
which is the Royal charge with us: and Konning, Van Wappen by the Germans.
Ibid. Garter in England; and Montjoy, St. Denis in France: and His Patent in
Scotland runs thus.

CAROLUS, Dei gratia, etc. tenoreque praesentium facimus, creamus, constituimus
and ordinamus memoratum Carolum Aereskin, Leonem, and nostrum Foecialem, Regem
armorum, etc. Dedimus and imposuimus, tenoreque praesentium damus, and
imponimus ei, nomen Leonis nostri Foecialis, Regis armorum. Una cum stilo,
titulo, etc. ac per praesentes ordinamus eum in dicto officio actualiter
investiri, and secundum praxin coronari, etc. and similiter, munimus
pranominatum CAE. tanquam Leonem, Regem armorum, plena potestate, liberate,
licentia and authoritate, personis, virtute praeditis, and de nobis been
meritis, diplomata armorum, secundum ordinem, and constitutiones eatenus
praescriptas, concedendi.


But though this power be bestowed upon Heralds, yet Princes have not so
denuded themselves of it, but that they may and do ordinarily grant Coats of
Arms: And thus, when Noblemen get their honors by Patent with us, there is
either a command given therein, to the Lion, King at Arms, to grant Arms,
Crest, Crown and Supporters, or else, they are specified in the Patent. And it
is a rule in the Heraldry of all Nations, and in use with us, that no part of
the Royal bearing can be bestowed by the Lion, without a special order from the
Prince, Colomb. cap. des brisurs, page 74. and this may reprehend the error of
some of our Heralds, who have given the Tressure-flori, Conter-flori to private
persons, without a warrant.

The Lion in Scotland did formerly direct his Patents thus.
TO all and singular, to whose knowledge these presents shall come: James
Balfour of Kinnaird, Knight, Lion, King of Arms, through the whole Kingdom of
Scotland, and Islands thereto adjacent: sends his due commendations and
greeting: Know you, That Sir James Galloway, Knight, Master of Requests to Our
dread Sovereign, CHARLES, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council
in this Kingdom, has requested me, by virtue of my Office, to give and assign
unto this his ancient Coat Armor, being arg. a Lion rampant, azure, langued,
and armed Gules; a Crest, with Escrol and Motto; which he may bear without
wrong doing to others. To whose reasonable request I have condescended, and for
Crest, does assign him to bear above his Helmet, upon an wreath arg. and Azure,
A mound Bespread, with the rays of the Sun proper, embraced betwixt two Corn
ears, Saltoir ways Or; and above all, in an Escrol this motto, Higher, as here
in the margent adjected is to be seen. All which Arms, Crest, Escrol and Motto,
I the said Lion, King of Arms, does by these presents ratify, confirm, give,
grant and assign, unto the said Sir James Galloway, Knight, and to his
posterity for ever, to use, bear and show forth the famine, in Signet, Shield,
Coat Armor, Ensign, or otherwise, at all times, and in all places, at his and
their free liberty and pleasure. In witness whereof, I have to their presents,
affixt my hand and seal of Office at Holy-rood-house, the nineteenth day of
December, in the sixth year of the Reign, of our Sovereign Lord, King Charles,
and of our Redemption, 1631.

James Balfour, Lion.


The Concessions by the Lion do now run thus.
TO all and sundry whom it effeirs. I Sir Charles Areskine of Cambo, Knight and
Baronet, Lion, King of Arms; Considering, That by several Acts of Parliament,
as well of Our dread Sovereign Lord, CHARLES the Second, By the Grace of God,
King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; as of His
Majesty's Royal Predecessors: especially, by the twenty one Act of the third
Session of this Current Parliament, I am empowered to visit the whole Arms and
Bearings within this Kingdom, and to distinguish them, and matriculate the same
in my Books and Registers, and to give Extracts of all Arms, expressing the
Blazoning thereof, under my hand and seal of Office: And which Register, is by
the forecited Act, ordained to be respected, as the true and unrepealable Rule
of all Arms and Bearings in Scotland, to remain with the Lions Office, as a
public Register of the Kingdom. Therefore, conform to the power given to me by
His Sacred Majesty, and according to the tenors of the said Acts of Parliament;
I testify and make known, that the Arms of old, belonging to the Royal Burgh
of Aberdeen, and now confirmed by me, are matriculate in my said public
Rigister, upon the day and date of their presents: And are thus blazoned, viz.
The said Royal Burgh of Aberdeen, Gives for Ensigns Armorial, Gules, three
Towers triple towered, within a double Tressure Counterflowred Argent:
Supported by two Leopards propper: The Motto in an Escrol above, Bon-Accord,
(the Word Bon-Accord was given them by King Robert Bruce, for killing all the
English in one night in their Town, their word being that night Bon-Accord.)
And upon the Reverse of the Seal of the said Burgh is insculped, in a Field
Azure, a Temple Argent, Saint Michael standing in the Porch mitered and vested
propper, with his Dexter hand lifted up to Heaven, praying over three Children
in a boiling Caldron of the first, and holding in the Sinister a Crosier, Or.
Which Arms above-blazoned, I hereby declare to have been, and to be, the true
and unrepealable Signs Armorial of the Burgh Royal abovenamed. In testimony
whereof, I have subscribed this Extract with my hand; and have caused append my
Seal of Office thereto.

Given at Edinburgh, the twenty fifth day of February, and of Our said
Sovereign Lords Reign, the twenty sixth Year, 1674. CHARLES ARESKINE, Lion.


The Concessions of ARMS, granted by the Emperor, called Wappen-Brief, run thus.
RUdolphus Secundus, etc. Fideli, nobis dilecto, Hieronymo Megiserio,
liberalium artium, and Philosophiae Magistro, gratiam nostram Caesaream and
omne bonum. Cum constet, ex liberalium artium and bonarum literarum cognitione,
tanquam font quodam perenni pulcherrimarum virtutum scaturientes rivulos in
animos hominum diffundi, quibus alioquin rudes naturae humanae sensus irrigati,
ad producendos utiles humanorum fructus feraciores efficiuntur. Nos sane
Caesareae benignitati nostrae omnino convenire arbitramur, ut musis and bonis
literis deditos atque addictos clementer suscipiamus fovendos atque ornandos,
tum ne ipsi frustra in arena Virtutis desudasse videantur, tum and alii honoris
and premii spe illecti, eundem vitae cursum alacrius ingrediantur. Edocti
itaque, te supra dictum Hieronymum Megiserum, adjecto ad literarum studia
animo, quod gnavi and strenui milites facere solent, omnibus nervis eo
incubuisse, ut reliquis commilitonibus neutiquam inferior, sed superior potius
videri, optatosque laborum tuorum fructus consequi posses, ac hac quidem spe,
te neutiquam frustratum, sed meritis tuis exigentibus juvenili etiamnum aetate
florentem magisterii gradu atque dignitate insignitum esse, nobisque persuasum
habentes, te deinceps etiam tui neutiquam dissimilem futurum, sed expectationi
concitatae undiquaque satisfacturum. His equidem rationibus adducti
pretermittere non potuimus, quin benignam nostri erga musarum alumnos animi
propensionem insigni aliquo argumento, quod aliquando posteris etiam tuis
honori atque ornamento esse possit, testatam redderemus. Motu itaque proprio ex
certa nostra scientia animo been deliberato, Ac de Caesareae potestatis nostrae
plenitudine, tibi supra dicto Hieronymo Megisero legitimisque liberis,
haeredibus, posteris and descendentibus tuis, utriusque sexus ex te perpetua
deinceps serie nascituris infra scripta armorum insignia clementer dedimus,
donavimus atque elargiti sumus, sicuti vigore presentium damus, concedimus,
donamus atque elargimur. Scutum sc. nigrum, a bas^ surgentem habens colliculum
tricipitem lutei coloris, quorum intermedio, reliquis duobus collateralibus,
aliquantulum eminentiori insistat cygnus croceus sive aureus ad dextram
conversus, rostro hiante, collo sinuoso ^^exu sursum porrecto, alisque late
explicatis ad plausum quasi compositus, ex utroque autem colliculorum
collateralium prodire videatur surculus, lauri foliis undiquaque virescentibus
insignis. Scuto imposita sit Galea clausa, ornata serto laureo, phalerisque seu
laciniis nigris and croceis sive aureis ab utroque latere mixtum circumfusis ac
molliter defluentibus. Ex cujus vertice promineat alius Cygnus itidem crocei
sive aurei coloris, ac per omnia similis illi, qui in clypeo descriptus
habetur, quemadmodum haec omnia in medio praesentis nostri diplomatis suis
coloribus rectius elaborata and ob oculos posita conspiciuntur. Volentes and
Caesareo Edicto nostro firmiter decernentes, quod tu supra dicte Hieronyme
Megisere, omnesque liberi, haeredes, posteri and descendentes tui, utriusque
sexus, legitimo conjugii foedere, perpetuis deinceps temporibus orituri, jam
descriptis armorum insigniis, eoque ut in superioribus habetur modo, in omnibus
and singulis honestis and decentibus and actibus tam serio quam joco, in
scutis, sepulchris, sigillis, monumentis, annulis, and supellectilibus, tam in
rebus spiritualibus, quam temporalibus and mixtis, in locis omnibus pro rei
necessitate and voluntatis arbitrio, libere uti possitis and valeatis. Aptique
sitis and idonei ad ineundem and recipiendum omnes gratias, libertates, feuda
and privilegia, quibus caeteri armigeri and feudorum capaces atque participes
utuntur, fruuntur, potiuntur and gaudent, quomodolibet consuetudine vel de
jure. Quocirca mandamus universis and singulis Principibus, tam Ecclesiasticis,
quam Secularibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus,
Baronibus, Militibus, Nobilibus, Clientibus, Capitaneis, Vice-dominis,
Advocatis, Praefectis, Heroaldis, Officialibus, Questoribus, Civium Magistris,
Iudicibus, Consulibus, Civibus, Communitatibus, and denique omnibus nostris and
sacri Romani Imperii subditis atque fidelibus dilectis, cujuscunque status,
gradus and conditionis exstiterint, ut te saepe nominatum Hieronymum Megiserum,
omnesque liberos, haeredes, posteros and descendentes tuos legitimos, utriusque
sexus, supra scriptis armorum insigniis perpetuis deinceps temporibus,
pacifice, quiet and sine impedimento aliqu^, uti, frui, potiri and gaudere
sinant, idemque etiam ab aliis fieri curent. Si quis autem praesens diploma
nostrum transgredi and temerario ausu violare conatus fuerit, praeter
gravissimam nostram and sacri Imperii indignationem, viginti quinque marchas
auri puri mulctam se noverit ipso facto incursum. Harum testimonio literarum,
manu nostra subscriptarum, and Caesarei sigilli nostri appensione munitarum.

Datum in Civitate nostra Vienna, die 21. mensis Januarii, Anno Domini, 1578.
Regnorum nostrorum, Romani tertio, Hungarici septimo, and Bohemici itidem
tertio. Rudolphus.


SOme Lawyers (though versed in Herauldry) have been of opinion, that every man
can assume Arms to himself at his pleasure, without authority, providing he
assume them not, in emulationem alterius, to the prejudice of another: and if
this judgment were, Bartol. tract. de arm. number. 5. and Panorm. c. delectis, de
exces. Prelat. because (said they) every man may choose a name for himself,
seeing this is not forbidden in any written Law. but Tiraquel and others, have
very justly maintained, that none can assume Arms, but that all must owe them
to Authority: For as Magistrates of old only bestowed, jus imaginum, ita hodie
Tantum illi jus insignium vel armorum confer possunt: Anno. Rob. lib. 3. Sunt
enim Arma Tesserae, and Symbola dignitatis, and nemo potest dignitatem sibi
arrogare sine Principis licentia, l. nemo f. de dignit. and licet hoc jure
scripto, non sit interdictum, est tamen rationabili consuetudine, and communi
Gentium consensu interdictum; and ideo observandum, per. l. quod non ratione f.
de legibus. But to quiet all debate in this controversy, most of Nations have
discharged the carrying of Arms to any, save Gentlemen, or such who have a
special warrant. Which is also done in Scotland, by the 125. Act. 12 Parl.
Jacob. 6. The words whereof are, OUR Sovereign Lord, and the Estates of this
present Parliament, considedering the great abuse that has been amongst the
Leidges of this Realm, in their bearing of Arms, usurpand to themselves such
Arms as belong not unto them; so that it cannot be distinguished by their Arms,
who are Gentlemen of blood by their Antecessors, nor yet may be discerned what
Gentlemen are descended of noble Stock and Lineage: For remeid whereof, his
Highness, with advice of the said Estates, has given and granted, and by this
present Act, gives and grants full power and commission to Lion King of Arms,
and Brethren Heralds, to visit the whole Arms of Noblemen, Barons and
Gentlemen, born and used within this Realm; and to distinguish and discern them
with congruent differences, and thereafter to matriculat them in their Books
and Registers, and put inhibition to all common sort of People, naught worthy
by the Law of Arms to bear any signs Armorial; that none of them presume to
take upon hand, to bear or use any Arms in time coming, upon any their insight
and houshold-gear; under the pain of escheating their Goods and Gear, so often as
the samine shall be found, graven or painted, to our Sovereign Lords use: and
likewise, under the pain of one hundred pounds, to the use of the said Lion,
and his Brethren Heralds; and failying of payment thereof, that they may be
incarcerat in the nearest Prisonhouse: therein to remain upon their own
Charges, during the pleasure of the said Lion.




From which Act, we may draw these Conclusions, 1. That only such as are
Gentlemen by Blood can carry Arms; which opinion is also received now into the
Law of Nations, Hopping, cap. 6. Par. 10. But it was first enacted by Frederick
the Emperor, lib. 2. feud. tit. 27. De pace tenenda.

2. It is observable, that the Lion cannot give Arms to such as are not Noble
by descent: for the reason inductive of this Statute, is, That there may be a
difference betwixt such as are Noble, and such as are not; but there would be
none, if it were lawful to the Lion to give Arms even to such as are not
Gentlemen by birth: For as he cannot Nobilitate, so neither can he bestow the
marks of Nobility. Likeas, by that Act, he is commanded to inhibit all such as
are not Noble to carry Arms. But yet the Prince may still bestow Arms, without
any restriction, though he cannot properly make a Gentleman: for that comes by
Blood, and not by Patent. And Camden informs us, That of old there was a
distinction betwixt Gentlemen of Blood, and Gentlemen of Coat Armor; and that
the third from him, who first had Coat Armor, was to all effects and purposes
a Gentleman of Blood, page 157.2. Albeit the Letter of that Law does only
forbid, to wear, and use Arms without Authority, as said is, upon In-sight, or
Houshold-gear; yet, per paritatem rationis, they cannot use them upon Tombs,
Seats in the Church, or elsewhere: and de praxi the Lion with us, does raze
and deface all such Arms: But whether the users of false Arms, do incur the
penalties in such cases, may be doubted; seeing penae sunt restringendae, and
are not to be extended beyond the Letter of the Law.

3. By that Act, the Lion is to distinguish, and discern Arms with congruent
differences; from which words it may be inferred, that not only Arms must be
originally given by the Lion, but that marks and differences amongst the
Cadets, and Descendants of the same Family, should be given by the Lion; and
that these Cadets cannot assume them: And this is suitable to the opinion of
the Doctors, who teach, that non solum Potestas conferendi nova insignia, sed
Potestas augendi, mutandi, diminuendi, and confirmandi insignia Vetera, est
penes Principem and ejus Heraldos, Hopping, cap. 8. membro 5. But it may be
doubted, if prescription of Arms by Predecessors, be not sufficient to infer a
right to the bearing of Arms, and to defend against the penalties of this Act:
as to which points, the Doctors deliver these conclusions.

1. That no man can prescrive the right of using Arms belonging to another
Noble Family without immemorial possession, but that they may prescrive a right
to bear indefinitely, or to bear the Arms of any other private person, per
spatium december annorum inter praesentes, and viginti annorum inter absentes,
vult. consil. 17. volum. 3. But by our Law, where prescription is not allowed,
except in the cases wherein it is introduced by a special and express Statute,
It is probable, that prescription might well have defended before that Act,
Jacob. 6. But since that time it should not, seeing that Act ordains all Arms to
be matriculate in the Lyon's Books, and Registers.

The penalty appointed by that Act, to be inflicted upon such as carry false
Arms, is, That the Movables and Furniture whereupon these Arms are graven, and
painted, shall be confiscated: which words must be taken disjunctively, and not
copulatively, notwitstanding of the Particle (and;) for if the Arms be either
graven or painted, they are to be escheated: as also, the Contraveeners are to
pay one hundred pounds to the Lion, and his Brethen Heralds: But by the Civil
Law, he who bears and uses another another man's Arms, to his prejudice, vel in
ejus scandalum and ignominiam, is to be punished arbitrarily at the discretion
of the Judge, l. eorum f. de falso; But he who usurps his Princes Arms, loses
his head, and his goods are confiscated, l. sacri asflatus, C. de diverse.
rescript.

Suitable to which Law, the Duke of Norfolk was forfeited, and execute by Hen.
8. for no other crime, but because he did bear the Arms of Enland, though his
Predecessors had born them 100. years.

How sacred the Lions Office is with us, appears among many other instances
from this, That the Lord Drummond was in anno, 1515. (as Leslie observes in his
story) forfeited, for striking the Lion, vita ac dignitate aegre concessis.

But seeing the Patent given to the Lion gives him power, to give Arms to such
a^ are Virtuous, and worthy Persons; And since, by the foresaid Statute, the
Lion is only discharged to suffer any to bear Arms, who are not worthy by the
Law of Arms, to bear any signs armorial: It is therefore worthy of our enquiry,
to know who are such Persons, as may by the Laws of Heraldry have Arms given
them by the Lion, without a special commission from the Prince. And first, it
is uncontraverted, that a Gentleman may bear without a warrant the Arms of his
Predecessors, and such as are descended by three generations from him, to whom
Arms were given are Gentlemen. But this holds only in the eldest, for Cadets
must have marks of Cadency, and differences assigned them by the Lion, and
cannot assume them as was formerly observed.

2. Though the Patent allows the Lion to give Arms, Personis virtute praeditis,
and Philosophers, Poets, and Orators say, That Virtue is the truest Nobility,
which is allowed by the Cannon Law, cap. nos. qui, and cap. pen. ext. de
praeben. Yet Lawyers distinguish betwixt Nobility Politic or Civil, which they
assert; is not bestowed by Virtue only, and Moral Nobility which Virtue does
destow. Bald. in l. Nobiliores, C. de commerciis: From which Text, they prove
clearly this distinction. And therefore* the Patent joins these two Persons,
Virtute praeditis, and de nobis meritis; for certainly, such as have deserved
well of the Prince, may have Arms given them by the Lion: For the first
institution of that Office was (as I formerly proved from Laz.) designed to
reward such as had done great service to the Prince: and the Lion is Judge
competent to the bearers merit, in order to this effect; nor can the Law
presume, that the Lion will transgress so grossly, as to assert that he has
served the State, who never did: For that were in him, crimen falsi.

3. Riches do not Nobilitate, nor do they warrant the Lion to bestow Arms upon
the Possessors. Tiraqueil de Nobilitat. cap. 3. though, as Ierom observes,
Nobility is nothing oftimes but ancient riches.

4. The being an Heritor of Land does not Nobilitate in all cases, even though
the Heritage be very considerable; for else a Rich man might Ennoble himself:
but these feuda only render the possessors Noble, which are bestowed by the
Prince, or confirmed by him. For a few in either of these cases make the
receivers Noble, seeing the Prince is the Fountain of Honor. And a few in
those cases is a sufficient warrant to bear Arms, Tiraqu. cap. 7. And this
remembers me of a custom in Scotland, which is but gone lately in dissuetude,
and that is, That such as did hold their Lands of the Prince, were called
Lairds; but such as held their Lands of a subject, though they were large, and
their Superior very noble, were only called Good-men, from the old French
word, Bonne homme, which was the Title of the Master of the Family; and
therefore such Fews as had a Jurisdiction annexed to them, a Barrony, as we call
it, do ennoble: For Barronies are established only by the Princes erection or
confirmation. And thus it was found by the Parl. of Grenoble, That qui
possident castrum cum territorio, and omnimoda jurisdictione sunt exempti a
contributione subsidiorum, ut Nobiles, licet non sunt a Nobili Progeny, Guide.
pap. decis. 385.

6. The employment of a Soldier does enoble, if it be honored with any
considerable Command, l. 2. C. de Primicier, calls it, Praeclarem nobilioremque
militiam; and l. 2. c. ut nemo prim. aliter miles, aliter plebeius punitur.

7. Church-Employments do nobilitate, Bart. Council. 180. pertext. in l. 2. C.
ut nemo private. And generally, it is a Law in Heraldry, that Doctors, Orators,
and Lawreat Poets may be honored with Coats of Arms. The rule runs thus,
Doctores, Oratores and Poetas (laureatas) togatam militiam profitentes, a
dilatione insignium, galea aperta fenestratorum, and cristis, vexillis,
laciniis, condecoratorum, citra laesae Majestatis crimen arcendos non esse.
Hopping. page 443. and Vaschal. page 712. warrands this by a decision of the
Courts of France.

Nobility and the right of bearing Coat-Armours, being thus acquired, is lost
many ways; as First, By leading a vicious and profligat life, l. Si qua c. de
secund. nupt. Where it is ordained, that ob scelera and vitae turpitudinem,
honestae nobilisque decore privetur. And the reason given for this is, quia
nulla sine honestate est Nobilitas: and Nobility thus is not re-assumable by
their Children: but this, with many other virtuous Laws, is gone in dissuetude:
For only Crimes and a Sentence, do now take off the Sacred Character of
Honor. And with us, upon reading the Sentence of Forfeiture, the Arms are
torn, and the Decree of forefeiture bears an order for this, but no other
sentence for other Crimes discharges the bearing of Arms with us: albeit by the
Civil Law it seems, that all Crimes discharges the bearlng of Arms, Statuas
detrahendas scire debemus, l. 24. f. de Pen. cap. 1. c. decis. 130. Nor can
such as are condemned for capital Crimes get Arms, Tresser. de existim. l. 3.
c. 25. And whatever renders the Bearer infamous, does likewise render him
incapable of getting Arms, though every infamy forfeits them not.

2. This right is not lost by poverty, even in the longest course of time,
Tiraquel, cap. 5.

3. This right is lost by exercising mean Trades, Viles and Mechanicas arts,
l. nobiliores, c. de Comer. But when they leave off these, they return to their
former Dignities, pap. decis. 196. But the being an Advocat is accounted no
such Trade: For an Advocat is noble by his profession, l. providendum, c. de
postulat. and l. Advocat. c. de Advocat. div. Iua. And Spartian speaking of
Julian the Emperor, says, That he was descended of Salinus Iulianus, who was
twice Consul, and twice Governor of Rome, but was much more noble by being a
learned Advocat: And therefore in France, they, as all other Gentlemen, are
exempted from paying taxes, Pap. decis. 388. Physicians likewise, and their
posterity have a right to bear Coat-Armours, Tiraquel. cap. 31.

Though Merchants be most worthy members of the Commonwealths, yet they are
not noble nor Gentlemen by their profession, l. nobiliores, c. de Commer. nor
should they have Coat-Armours; but the Laws of Heraldry, and the general custom
of the World allows them a Merchants mark, called by the Doctors, marcha
mercatoria: And as no man may bear another man's Arms, so no merchand may put
his mark upon another man's goods, Nam balla mercatorum ex signo cognoscuntur,
Feret. lib. 15. de re naval: and he who puts another man's mark upon his own
goods, or balls, loses his own, Mascard, v. l. 1. conclus. 1. because that he
would occasion a confusion in Trade, and because the Law presumes that to be
done to conciliat to the Users goods, the privileges or advantages due to
another; and for the same reasons, one Tradesman cannot hang up another
Tradesmans sign, whereby his customers may be withdrawn, or strangers may be
cheated to give their sale to one who deserved it not: it being ordinare for
people to go to such signs, where they have heard others to have bought
excellent commodities: and therefore Monar. observes a decision, whereby the
Parl. of Paris found, 1612. That a merchand, who had assumed lately the mark
of a red cross, which his next neighbor, who was a Rich Merchand had long
used, should desist in all time coming from using that sign. From this rule are
excepted the Merchands of Paris, whom Charles 5. Anno 1371. ennobl'd, and
allowed to bear Coat-Armours, and by their examples the chief Burgesses of
capital Towns pretend to the same privilege, L' Osean. page 65.

Of the SHIELD.
ARms were ordinarily painted or engraven upon the bearers Shield, which Shield
was called by the Ancients, Scutum, which was called (...), Sculpere: quod
imaginibus illustrium virorum, ipsorumque insignibus sculptus esset, Plin. l.
35. c. 8. vel Scutum, a Graeco, (...), corium, because their Targets were
covered with Skins, or parma. The Scutum was long, and four square, the other
two round: and our Shield is made up of the figure of both* of old, the
Soldiers did bear their cognizances upon their Shields, that they might be
known. Veget. de re milit. l. 2. c. 18. And thence it is, that we bear now our
cognizances upon Cuts, like to their Shields: the Shield was made of Wood,
covered with Leather, but the Buckler was of Brass: This Shield now is called
by the French; Escu, by the Italian scudo, by the English a Shield: and what
space is within the Shield, is called a Field, by the English, and Campo by the
Italian, Spanish, and by the Latins, Area, fundus, campus: The ancientest form
of a Shield, was ovall, which shape the Italians still retain, after that they
were worn in Heraldry in the shape, fig, 1. and all our Charters have such
Seals appended: but the latest form used both here, and in France, is fig. 9.
the lines whereof are straight till they come very near the bottom. The
Italians, and Germans carry them ordinarily, as fig. 3. Because they allege
that this form of a Shield did give most ease to the bearer in giving a thrust,
but surely it agrees not so well with the charge which is put upon the Shield.

Some Families carry their Arms in a Banner represented by a Shield, that is
quadrangular: as the Family of Perez in Spain, for having recalled the Army, by
putting up his handkerchife as a Standard, and the Sieur de Coucy in France,
for recalling the Army, by raising the Banner, Hopping, cap. 5. sub-divis. 12.

The Shield uses ordinarily to be placed upright, yet sometimes it is hung by
the right, or left corner: This is ordinarily in Scotland, and I have seen the
Prestons Arms so hung in a Shield above the gate of Craigmiller. This the
French call, I'escu pendu; the Italians, scudo pendente: and the reason given
for it, is, That when Tiltings (torneamenta) were proclaimed, there were two
Shields hung upon an Oak, or other Tree, at the place where the Tiltings were
to be: and he, who offered to fight a foot, did touch the Shield that hung by
the right corner, and he who was to fight on horseback, touched that which was
hung by the left corner: For in these days, it was judged more honorable to
fight on foot then on horseback, Columbier, cap. 43. The Shield is also called
by the English, an escutcheon, from the word escusson, for so the French call a
little Shield.

That which is born upon the Shield is called the Charge, and the Shield is
said to be charged with it: and the Field and Charge together are called the
Coat of Arms, the French call it, un cott'd arms: and the reason why Arms are
called Coats of Arms, is, because of old, men wore those symbols upon Coats
above their Arms, as Heralds do at this day: So great desire had men in those
days to have their personal Valor and Courage known in Battles, and Combats,
by the ensigns armo^ial which they bore.

I have here set down several forms of Shields, to show how various figures
were employed for that use by the Ancients; but that fig. 9. is the ordinary
form now in use for men's Arms, as the Lozenge fig. is for women, which (as
Loyseau observes) is allowed only to the Wives of considerable Persons, who had
no power to raise their own Banner. I find that Mur^el, Countess of
Strathern, carried hers in a Lozeng, Anno 1284. Which shows how long we have
been versant in Heraldry.

If there be but one Shield, or Coat of Arms to be descriv'd, that is called to
Blazon: but if there be more Coats joined in one, that is called, Marshalling:
The French or Italian have no such distinction.

To blazon a Coat, is to descrive what the things born are, and what their
color is: in which these rules are to be observed.

1. It is fit to use the ordinar terms, and not to be too inventive and
curious; for else every one out of vanity should invent a peculiar way, and new
terms: and not any two Heralds should understand one another.

2. There must be no reiteration of words in Blazoning the same Coat; and
therefore the English say not, He bears argent* a Lion gules, collard, argent,
but they say, Collard of the first, because argent was the first color; yet
the French repeat the colors after, and observe not this rule, and it is the
better way for eviting confusion: for when there are many pieces in the Shield,
it is most difficult and tedious to remember always what is first, and second,
third, and fourth; and all this trouble serves to no purpose, and it is not at
all natural.

The Third Rule is, to evit as much as is possible, the words, of, or, and with.

4. In blazoning a Coat, you must begin with the Field, and then proceed to the
charge; and if the Field be charged with more things, you must name first, that
which lies nearest the Shield. The English say in blazoning, he bears ^zur,
but the French never say, he bears a-zur, and the word, bears, is
superfluous: the English sometimes say, the Field is argent, vid. Guilims, page
285. But that is likewise superfluous: and it is better, with the French, and
Latin, to express, 1. The bearers name, and then to express the color of
the Field, v g. Winram, gules, a Ram passant, argent, whereas Guilims would
have blazoned these Arms thus, he bears gules, a Ram paussant, argent, by the
name of Winram: which way of blazoning sounds not so well as the first, nor is
so short and proper. Naked Shields were sometimes born without any Charge, upon
many accounts: Thus Alphonsus King of Portugal, did take five Shields placed
^altier-wise, in remembrance of 5. Sarasen Kings, whom he killed Chassan,
council. 17. part. 1. And the first of the name of Hay, got three Shields in a
Field argent, because He and his two Sons did gallantly defeat the Danes at the
Battle of Loncart, 942. After which Battle, they were brought to the King with
their Shields all colored with blood, as Buchanan observes: and Baliol gave
for his Arms G. an escutcheon Or.

CHAP. IV. Of COLORS and METALS.
HEralds do not express all Colors by our ordinar terms, nor do they admit
all Colors in blazoning but they use ordinarily two Mettalls, to express two
of the ordinary Colors, viz. white by argent, and yellow by or; and that
because silver is white, and gold is yellow. The Spaniards call such fields as
are all Metal, Campo de Plata.

The use of their Metals and Colors, and the difference betwixt them, did in
Coat-armours arise, from the several Colors used by Soldiers, and others in
their habits whilst they were in Armies, as Pet. Sanct. proves by many
Citations. And because it was the custom, to embroider gold or silver upon
silk, or silk upon cloth of Gold, or Silver; therefore the Heralds did
thereafter appoint, that in imitation of the clothes so embroidered color
should not be used upon color, nor metal upon metal.

The colors used by them are only Blew, which they call azur; Red, which they
call gules, from the Hebrew word gulude, a piece of red cloth, or from the
Arabic word, Gule, which signifies a rose, which are ordinarily red, as
Menestier observes. Black, which they call sable, because the best sable furrs
are black; and green which they call vert: which is the French word of green,
or sinople; for so the French term green, never using the word vert: and the
reason why it is called sinople, is from a Town in the Levant, called Sinople,
where the best materials for dying green are found, and not from the Greek
words, (...), because it being contraverted at Constantinople, whether green
was a proper color to be used in Heraldry, It was determined, that it suited
with Heraldry, cum armis. Menestier derives sinople from (...), green arms, by
suppressing the first syllable as the Greek often do. The French admit purple
in Heraldry, though Favin and some Heralds in that Nation, think that Purple is
but argent worn, which by occular inspection turns purple: they likewise allow
carnation or flesh color Colomb.

The French observe, that the English use taunie, which Heralds call ten; and
is composed of gueuls and sable: and the English observe, that the French use
it, Guilims, page 21. But Guilims is here in a mistake; for the French use it
not, but the English do. Colombeir likewise observes, that the English use
sanguin; which is made up of pure lacque and orange, which is composed of leed
and tin: But Colombeir is mistaken here, for the English use not orange, but
the Germans do sometimes. The ordinar colors and metals in use, are, or,
argent, gules, sable, azur, vert and purpure.

Why Heralds choosed these five colors only, I can give no surer reason, then
that they thereby resolved to fix the uncertainty of vagrant and capritious
Artists; even as Lawyers have fixed prescription to forty years, and minority to
twenty one; but yet there are some original colors. Aristotle reduced them to
four, White, black, yellow and red. Cardan makes them seven. Albus, Croceus,
Purpureus, Puniceus, Viridis, Caeruleus, niger. Scaliger chooses, album,
flavum, rubrum, purpureum, viridem, caeruleum, and nigrum, Exercit. 325. But
the Chimists observe, that white, blew, red, green and yellow, are the original
colors, and from them Heralds have choosed their.

These colors have their own mystical representations in Heraldry. For Or is
used to express the bearers faith, justice, temperance, riches, generosity, or
prosperity: Argent, his humility, innocence, beauty: and a white Shield was
given to novices, when they went to the War, and before they had done any
glorious action, Virgil. Parma. inglorius, alba azur: his charity, victory:
Gules, his magnanimity, courage, love and charity: Sable, his grief, prudence,
honesty. Sinople or Vert, his courtesy, civility, youth and abundance. Yet
sometimes these colors are used to disguise and conceal the bearers Origin.
Thus, some were originally Murrays, but being forced to change their Name, and
leave their Country, they retained their Arms, but changed their Colors. For
whereas the Murrays bore azure, three stars argent, they bear now arg. three
stars azur: and yet colors have been changed upon very honorable occasions:
And thus Ker of Cesfoord did bear G. Till their chief was killed at Gambspath,
upon the border fighting valiantly for his Country: whereupon King James the
fourth appointed, that for the future, the House of Cesfoord should carry
Vert, in remembrance of that Green Field whereupon he was killed. Sometimes
also Colors were chosen by Knights to their Arms, because at Tiltings, they
used to appear in that Color; and for that reason, the first Crichtoun chois'd
his Lion that he bears to be Azure. Sometimes also the things born are allowed
in their natural Colors, if they be of many Colors, and then the things born
are said to be born proper. As the Peacocks in Scotland, bear three Peacocks
proper, that is to say, in all their ordinar Colors. But though this be
allowed in the charge, yet it is not allowed in the field; for that must be of
either the ordinar metals, or colors. Yet this suffers some exceptions, as in
the Arms of the Count de Prado in Spain, who bears a meadow proper, that is to
say, a green field charged with flowrs of several colors. Or is writ, O;
argent, ar Gules. G. azur, az; Sable, S. vert. etc. Sin; purpur, P. Some
fantastic Heralds have blazoned not only be the ordinar colors and metals,
but by flowrs, days of the weeks, parts of a man's body, as le feron and Bara,
and have been condemned for it by the Heralds of all Nations: Yet the English
have so far owned this fancy, that they give it for a rule, That the Coats of
Sovereigns should be blazoned by Planets, those of Noblemen by precious Stones,
and have suited them in the manner here set down.

Or. Topax Sol Arg. Pearl Luna Sab. Diamond Saturn Gul. Ruby Mars Azur. Saphir
Jupiter Vert. Emerald Venus Purpur. Amatbist Mercurii Ten Taoyth Dragons head
Sanguin Sardonix Dragons tail.

BUt I crave leave to say, that their are but mere fancies, and are likewise
unfit for the Art in which they are employed: which is clear from these
reasons, 1. The French, from whom the English derive their Heraldry, and to
whom they conform themselves, not only in principles and terms of Art; but even
in extrinsick words of the French language, do not only not use their different
ways of Blazoning, but constantly treat them en ridicule.

2. The Italian, Spanish, and Latin Haralds, use no such different forms: But
Blazon by the ordinary Colors* and Mettalls, Non variari nomina debent
mettallroum, vel colorum in Magnatum, aut in Regum insigniis pro hac re provoco
ad scriptores caeteros, qui Gallice, Germanice, aut Latin hac de re
disseruerunt, Pet. sanct. page 58.

And one of the great designs in Heraldry, is to have the Art universal, and to
have the Arms they describe generally understood in all Nations* yea, and even
Mr. Cartwright, their Country man, does condemn this way as fantastic.

3. Art should imitate nature, and as it were an unnatural thing in common
discourse, not to call red^punc; red, because a Prince wea^s it: So it is
unnatural to use these terms in Heraldry: and it may fall out to be very
ridiculus and unnatural in some Arms. As for instance, if a Prince had for his
Arms an ass couchant under his burden, gules: It were very ridiculus to say,
that he had an ass couchant mars, for the word mars will agree very ill with
asses, Sheep, Lambs, and many other things which are to be Painted red in
Heraldry. And a hundred other examples may be given, but it is enough to say,
That this is to confound Colors with Charges, and the things that are born
with Colors.

4. As this is unnecessar, so it confounds the Reader, and makes the Art
unpleasant, and deters Gentlemen, and others from studying it, and strangers
from understanding what our Heraldry is: Nor could the Arms of our Princes, and
Nobility be translated in this disguise unto the Latin, or any other language.

But that which convinces me most, that this is an error, is, because it makes
that great Rule unnecessar, whereby Color cannot be put upon Color, or
Metal upon Metal; for this cannot hold, but where Mettalls and Colors are
employed.

It was of old impossible to know the Colors of Arms, except they had been
Blazoned, or Illuminated; and yet Arms differ only by their Colors: As we see
in our Lion, which Scotland carries Red; Kinghorn, Blew; Rosse of Balnagoun,
White; and therefore, the French have found out this device, for discovering
even in Taliduce, or Carving what the Colors are. For they make or point O,
arg. plain, Azur is represented by Lyns in Fasse, gules by Lyns in Pale, Vert,
by Lyns in band, Purple by Lyns in Bar, sable by Lyns in Pale, and Face^punc;

I have thought fit, to represent ten, by Lyns in Band and Bar, and Sanguine
by Lyns in Face and Bar; as will more clearly appear by the figures: and I
could wish that Gentlemen would cause cut Seals in this fashion, So that not
only the bearing, but the colors of the bearing might be known by the Seal.

It is an uncontraverted rule in Heraldry, that color cannot be put immediately
upon color, nor metal upon metal: that is to say, That if the Field be
argent, the immediate charge must not be either, Or, or argent; but must be of
some color, as Azur, Gules, etc. And if the Field be of any color, as Azur,
Sable, etc. then the immediate Charge must be either, Or, or arg. The reason
why I add the word immediate here, is, because, though the Field be or, yet the
immediate Charge may be a Lion, or any thing else: If that Lion be Charged with
another Charge (which Heralds call Super-charge) then, that Super-charge may be
Or: This rule was not observed amongst the Romans, as Pier. observes, cap 19.
nam Herculeani Seniores gerebant ceruleam aquilam alis utrimque expansis in
parma rubra. But this Law was first authorized by Charles the great, and
thereafter improved by Henry surnamed Aucuper velser, lib. 4.

And it is now Stated in this form by Heralds. In Legibus Heraldicis, Non
convenit Metallam supra Metallam ponere, ita quoque non decet colorem supra
colorem pingere, Hoppin. cap. reg. 2. vid. anton. thessaur. decis. 270. and
thereafter, Trissin Italia Liberata says.

Ond' essi non poneano in alcum secundo,
Metal supra Metal, ne may color
Sopra eolor, ma vi poneano sempre
Eli' uni, eli' altri mescolati insieme
Talche sell campoerad' argento od'oro,
Vandava il color sopra, e sell color
Teneva il campo, era^l metal sorr'esso.
Where he shows us, that the Origin of differencing Metals, from Colors, was
from the differences which fell out in the Trojan Wars, betwixt the followers
of Achilles, and Ulisses: Whereupon Achilles friends Blazoned only Metals, and
Ulysses his friends Colors. And in commemoration of that difference, Heralds
appointed that* Mettalls, and Colors, should thereafter be no more divided,
lest Heraldry should become, or be made a Badge of discord, in Courts or
Armies: but I prefer Petr. Sanct. his conjecture above related.

Albeit this rule be very Universal in Heraldry, yet it suffers its own
exceptions, as 1. Heralds gave to Godfrey of B^lloigne, King of Jerusalem,
Crucem auream majorem, cum quatuor cruciculis aureis, in scuto argenteo, Chass.
de glor. mundi. consil. 38. conclus. 70. To the end that men seeing His Arms
should enquire after them, and so learn the Fame of the bearer. And the French
call, to this day, such Irregular bearings, des arms, a enquerir, Arms to be
enquired into. The 2. exception is, of the extremities of Beasts, such as their
Horns, Tongues, Nails, and their Crowns upon their Heads, which may be Metal
upon Metal, or Color upon Color. The 3. exception is of marks of Cadencie in
Royal Families: Thus the House of Bourbon, carry Battons Gules, on a Field
azur: The like is in our private marks to younger Brothers, of Cadencie, such as
our mollets, cressents etc. given.

The 4. exception is, of the Color Purpure; for purple, is accounted Metal,
when it is upon Color; and Color, when it it is upon Metal: The reason of
which exception seems to be, either because is a Royal Color, and therefore to
be priviledg'd, or more probably, because Purple is thought by some Heralds (as
was formerly observed) to be oftentimes, argent worn off by use, and time. So
that it is hard to know when it was at first designed to be a Metal, and when
a Color. Sometimes also a Chief will appear to be so contrived, as to be
Metal, upon Metal or Color, upon Color: but then the French call it Cousu,
a Chief sewed to the Shield. And thus they evite that objection, The French
also claim the privilege to their Flowerdeluce, as Desvarennes observes,
because it being given frequently by the Prince, to such as had formerly Fields
of Color, or Metal: the rule could not be observed. But in this I differ from
them; For it may still be placed upon some other figure, so as to salve the
Rule; and if they plead this privilege to their Flowerdeluce, The Scots may to
their Lion, and the Germans to their Eagle: but in my opinion, it is better to
shun the breaking of Rules, then to be vexed making apologies.

Some Heralds debate what Colors are Noblest in Heraldry, and Bart. de insig.
number. 29. gives it for a Rule, aureum esse nobiliorem, posteumque purpureum, and
tunc rubeum, sequi hunc azorem, hunc album. Caeteros vero esse nobiliores, aut
ignobiliores, quo, de albedine, vel, nigredine plus participant. But I humbly
conceive, that this debate is impertinent to many cases: for colors are
chois'd to express the humor of the bearer, or the nature of the bearing. And
therefore, there can be no precedencie. For that color is best, which is
fittest; but otherwise it seems, that those colors which have most resemblance
to light, are the best colors; seeing light is the author and cause of all
colors: And therefore white is preferable to all colors, but in Heraldry Or
is preferred to it, seeing white is not a color in Heraldry, but an Metals and
Mettalls are by the principles of this Art still preferred to colors, and Gold
is preferable to Silver.

Though ordinarily colors are not only preferrable, as they suit best with
what is represented; as for instance, in the Keiths Arms, three pales, Gules:
being to represent three bloody draughts drawn by the King, and a hand Gules in
the Mcfersons Arms for killing the Cumming, could not have been so honorably
represented by any other color; yet if the bearing require no special color,
it is given as a Rule, that the Shield should be of a nobler color than the
bearing: and if the Shield be composed only of different colors, as will be
seen hereafter, in Shields, parted per pale, or per fesse, that the Nobler
should be in the upper part, or upon the right side: quoties arma fiunt ex
diversis coloribus, semper nobilior color nobiliori in loco ponendus, Hopping,
cap. 11. lex. 4. The old Scots used still to express color by the Word
tincture.

CHAP. V. Of FURRS.
SHields were anciently either Painted, or covered with Skins, as the Targets,
or Shields of our Hig-hlanders, yet are: The Painting gave occasion to the
Colors formerly treated of, and the covering to the Furrs, or Skins mentioned
in this Chapter. And this I take to be a better rise for their being in
Shields, then to say, that they were used in Mantles and Garments; and that
therefore Heralds use them as Guilims observes: For this may be a good reason
why they are used in Mantlings, but not in the Shields. Pet. Sanct. calls these
Furrs Vellera.

There are two Furrs allowed by Heralds, viz. Ermin, and Vair. Ermine is a
little Beast, less then a Squirrell; so called, because it lives ordinarily in
the Woods of Armenia; the color of its body is a pure white, and its tail is
black: And therefore our Heralds make Ermines to be a Furr, whereof the ground
is white, distinguished with black spots; but it is not naturally of the form
represented in this figure, the disposal of these black spots being only
invented by Furriers, who mix for beauty the blackness of the tail with the
whiteness of the body. But because the black spot of the tail, was not
sufficient, to spot the whole Skin; therefore Furriers do take the wool of
Italian Lambs shorn out of the Bellies of their Dames, by which they beautify
the Skin with various spots, as Varennes observes, page 8. It is hotly debated
by Menestier, and his namelesse adversare, whether these be whole Skins of
Ermins, or only the tails of Ermines, that are; represented in blazoning: But I
think both err, for it cannot be the entire Skin, with its own natural spots
only, for some are very frequently spotted: nor can it be the tails of Ermines
only, as Menestier asserts; For these tails are so little, that they would make
ill Furring: But I think that these spots are added by Heralds, not only in
imitation of the spotted Furrs used by Ladies, for these are regularly spotted,
and in Heraldry they are not, but to diversifie the many Coats of Arms: And
thus some bear one spot in the middle, some two, some three, some one in chief;
some dispose them as a Cross, etc. They are called by the Italians, Armelini,
and the Latin express them per maculas nigras muris pontici.

The first user of this Furr in Arms was Brutus the Son of Silvius, who having
by accident killed his Father, left that unhappie ground, and traveling in
Bretaigne in France fell asleep; and when he awoke, he found this little Beast
upon his Shield, and from that time wore a Shield Ermins, which is the Arms of
Bretaigne to this day: and when the Field is charged with nothing but Ermins,
we say, he carries of Bretaigne; and the Mushets carry Ermins, to show their
descent from Bretaigne. And I observe, that many sirnames, who allege they
came from France, bear Ermine; and therefore, I presume they came from
Bretaigne: for that Country being upon the Sea, its inhabitants were more
inclined to travel, than the other French: but some Families, as the Coupers,
do for more security, carry the Flourdeluces, and Ermins, in one Shield, to
signify their descent from France and from Bretaigne in that Kingdom.

Where the Ground or Field is black, and the pouldring white, we call it
Contre-Ermine, Colomb. page 52. Though Guilims call it more improperly Ermins:
making no difference, betwixt the names, but the addition of the Letter s. But
the French write still Hermins, Guilims says, that where the Field is Or, and
the pouldring black, it is called Erminois, and cites for this Bara, page 14.
But there is no such thing to be found in Bara. and where the Field is black
pouldered with Or, He calls it Pean: but I find no such term used in the
French; for they call Furs, or doublings, des pannes or pens, which
possibly gave occasion to this mistake, and many others, in such as understand
not the French tongue; for the French say only Hermine, if it be proper, viz.
white pouldered with black; but if the colors alter, they express the same as
Sable pouldred with Ermins, Or; as also they say, Or pouldred, with Ermins
sable, seem D. Or. Hermins de sable, Bara. page 14. and Colombier, page 53. If
there be but one hair of red in each side, Guilims calls it Ermenits; but these
are but fancies, for Erminits signifies properly little Ermins.

The other Furr is called Vair, vellus petasite, where all the several pieces
are made in form of little Glasses, and, as some think, are called Vair, from
the French Verre, a Glass; or as some say, from the Variation of the colors;
and therefore, the Latin say, Arma variata ex pellibus albis and cerulis. The
Field of it is arg. and az. and if so, it is simply called Vair; but if the
colors alter, or be more, the alterations must be expressed: And therefore our
Heralds have ill Blazoned Straiton of Lauristons Arms, verri arg. and az. for
here the naming the colors was superfluous.

This Furr must be still of Metal and Color, and in Blazoning, you must begin
at the Metal as he carries Verry Or, and Sinople: Nor is there any difference
betwixt these words, Vair, Verry, and Verrey, though Sir John Fern, page 86.
assigns to every word its particular difference; but Guil. page 28. condemns
this justly as a mere fancy, and founded upon no Authority; and I wish he had
adverted to this himself in other places. Vair is ordinarily of six ranks* if
they be more or fewer they must be expressed: This rule the French still observe.

The French likewise observe, that if the pieces be of Metal, and made not in
form of a Glass, but of a Bell, then they are to be called Beffroy Colomb.
page 58. et on dit a la band de Beffroy de Vair: d, une seul tire, that is, of
one rank.

The origin of Vair in armorie is from the Furr of a Beast, called Varus, whose
Back is a blew-gray, its Belly being white: and therefore Heralds have expressed
it in blew and white colors, and when the Head and Feet of that Beast is taken
from its Skin, it resembles much the figure of Vair, used by the Heralds, vid,
Aldrovand de quadruped. lib. 2. cap. 24. And the reason why they are never used
in Heraldry, in the natural color of blew-gray, is, because Heraldry admits no
mixed colors; and therefore it has chosen blew, because that is the nearest
color to blew-gray: and the reason why it is never used all blew, or all
white, is, because the whole Skin is parted into these different colors: the
first use of them in Heraldry is said to be from le Segneur de Coucies,
fighting in Hungary, and seeing his Army flee, did pull out the doubling or
lyning of his Cloak, which was of those colors, and hung it up as an Ensign:
whereupon the Soldiers knowing his courage, and confiding in it, did return to
the battle, and did overcome their enemy. Colomb. page 58. Leigh, fol. 132. is
of opinion that Ermine is not a color, but may be looked upon, and should serve
in Heraldry as a metal: But Guilims, page 24. taxes him in this of an error,
(says he) it is used as the doubling or lining of mantles, and metal is not
fit for that employment: and therefore he concludes that it must be a color:
but in this I think they err both, for seeing it is a compound of Metal and
color, I think it should be looked upon, as neither the one nor the other, and
so may be put indifferently upon Metal or color without offending the rules;
for seeing it is Metal and color, it can no more be put upon color then upon
Metal, and so it must be used indifferently as both, or not put in a Coat with
either Metal or color, which were impossible: but in the practice of
Heraldry, they are indifferently used, as may be seen by the tresor armorique
de France, and in Scotland Ermin is born sometimes with color, as in the Arms
of the Mccullochs.

CHAP. VI. Of the Principal Points of the SHIELD.
BEfore I descrive the Charge, that is to say, the things born in the Shield, I
must advertise my Reader, what the several points of the Shield are; for the
same things make different Arms, according as they are placed, and therefore,
by the Doctors called, Alveoli, seu Cellulasoli.

The reason of the Names, and designations of the several points, is from the
several parts of a man, who is in Heraldry, Architecture, and Painting, the
true measure of all Simetrie, and Perfection: Imagine then a man standing in
the Field, his highest point is his head, which in French is Chef, and so chief
Point is not so called in Heraldry, because it is the most excellent, but
because it is the head of the Shield; and the English writ it wrong, for it
should be writ Chef: It is allowed three Points A, B, C.

The second Point, is called Honor Point, because a man wears all the Badges
of his Honor, about his Neck: As is to be seen in the Knights of the Holy
Ghost, Saint Esprit, and even in the Knights of the Garter, who wear their
Collar about their Neck, on St. Georges day; though for conveniencie they wear
it otherwise, at ordinary occasions.

The third Point E is called caeur, or center Point, the heart Point; but by
Guilims, and other English Heralds, is erroneusly called fesse Point: and yet
in this they follow Bara, as I conceive: but he calls it fesse, or face: which
last is more proper, because face, which is one of the ordinaries, as shall be
said hereafter, passes through this Point: For fesse signifies the flank, or
the buttocks, and these are not the middle part of a man: And the Italians call
Ceur Point, il centro, and the Latin, centrum parmae.

The fourth E, is nombrill Point, the Navel Point; for nombrill signifies a
Navel, in ordinary French. The English use it also; but I wonder why Les fesse
sont plus hautes, que le nombrill, the next Point to nombrill are the two
flanks G.H. H. acording to the French, and under them the base Point; but the
English have no flank Points, but make all the three to be the dexter base,
middle base, and sinister base: Which in my humble opinion is very improper;
for by occular inspection, it appears that a Shield has but one base Point, or
basis Fern, constantly: and some of our Scottish Books of Blazonrie following
his mistake, call the base Point bast. And since the English follow the French
here generally, both, as to the names, and situations; why they should not
follow them, in what is most reasonable seems strange: Especially seeing the
Latin and Italian Authors agree with them, as is clear by Petra Sancta, cap.
20.

The use of these Points, is, to difference Coats exactly: for Arms having a
Lion in Chief, differ from these who have a Lion in nombrill Point and all the
Points have their different significations: For bearings which argues
Precedencie, or Wit, are placed in Chief Point: These which are given as
additions of Honor, are placed in honor Point: These which are given to
reward Courage, are given in caeur Point, or center Point: These that are given
in Reward of Supply, or Support, are given in one of the flank Points; because
a man's thighs or flanks are his great Supporters, etc.

The learned Spelman divides the Shield in three Regions, the highest, he calls
cephalica, the middle he calls centrica; and the lower perigaei.

1. But these (not being followed by other writers and differing only from
others in the way of expression) are not to be used.

Menestrier the Jesuit divides the Shield in 16 points, distinguished in five
threes, and a single base point. The first three, he calls the three points of
the chief, the second three, he calls the three points of honor, the third
threes, he calls the heart points, the fourth threes, he calls the nombril or
navel-points, the fifth threes, he calls simply the points. And the single and
lowest point he calls the base point. And thus he designs the several
situations of any Bearing expressed in the Shield, by saying it is placed in such
a point, or in the canton dextre or sinistre of such a point: if it possess all
the three, he terms them couched, or laid along the chief, or nombril, etc.
sometimes also they are said to be placed in Pale or pale-wise, or
Saltire-wise, etc.

When Arms are described without relation to, or expressing the point where
they are to be placed, they are then understood to possess* the center of the
Shield called by Plutarch, Homer, and others (...) the seat of the Arms.

CHAP. VII. Of Lyns used in HERALDRY.
THe Charge or Bearing is composed of several and different forms of Lyns, of
which, though the French do not treat separately; yet seeing they are common to
all Bearings, I thought fit to premise to the knowledge of them an explication
of different Lyns; of which they are composed, following Guilims, Cartwright,
and the English Heralds.

The figure explains it self.

The chief reason why the Lyns are thus used in Heraldry, Is to difference
Bearings, which would be otherwise the same; for a chief wave differs from a
chief simple, as much as if the one bore a Chief, and the other a Lion Rampant:
But though this be the general reason, yet there are particular reasons for
these differences, as shall be observed hereafter.

The difference betwixt invecked and engraild, is, that they are opposite, the
one being the other turned out, indented and daunsette, differ, in that the one
is the other inverted; but I think them all one: And so the French and Latin
calls them promiscuously dentatus, vid. Skinner. But for difference, because
the one is large and the other small, therefore indented is termed dentata
absolutely, and daunset dentes decumani in Latin, and di non ordinaria
grandezza by the Italian, Pet. Sanct. page 181.

Invecked, is so called by the English from the Latin Invehor; because it
carries in its corners upon the thing whereupon it borders; But I find no such
word used by the French: yet I think it is useful, seeing ingraild which they
make use of, to signify both, is of a contrary figure. The word ingraild, is
said by Upton and Guilims, to come from ingredior, quia ingreditur rem
circumscriptam: But this is a mistake, for then invecked and ingraild should
not differ, though they be contrair in their figure; but the true origination
of it, is from the French word graile, which signifies hail, and engraile in
ordinary French, signifies struck, and cut by hail: which hail, being round,
pinches and cuts the leaves of trees, or any thing else in the form represented
by that line, which is called, Linea striata, in Latin, and Skanellata, by the
Italians. Waved is so called, from the waves of the Sea, which it represents,
and is therefore called unde; and is used for signifying that the Bearer got
his Arms for service done at sea: Thus the Drumonds bear three faces unde, or
wave, because the first of that name came with Queen Margaret, as Master of the
Ship, and having suffered great storm, through which he by his skill conducted
them; he did thereafter get three faces wave, representing those great waves:
The Latin call it, Vndiformis or Vndulata, Pet. Sanct. page 163. Neb^le is so
called, because that Line represents a cloud; for which cause, French Heralds
call it, nuance, Colomb. page 102. Linea nubilosa, and is given to such as have
been eminent for their skill in Navigation and Pilotry: for that Employment
oblidges them to understand Clouds, Storms, and Winds: Crenelae is a French
word, signifying the battelement of houses, as the figure of this line
signifies, which is called, Linea pinnata, and it is used on the Arms of such
as have defended Castles for their Prince or Country, or of such as are
skilful in Architecture.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Partitions of the SHIELD.
AFter Battles were ended, the Shields of the soldiers were considered; and he
was accounted the most deserving, whose Shield was either most, or deepliest
cut; and to recompense the dangers wherein they were known to have been by
these cutts, Heralds did represent those cutts upon their Shields. And those
Bearings in general, are called the Partitions of the Shield.

The ordinar Cuts did give names to the ordinar Partitions, of which the others
are made by several conjunctions: If the Shield was cut from the chief to the
base, it is called by the French, parti; if all over, coupe; if from the right
high angle, to the lowest left angle, tranche; if from the left high angle, to
the right low angle, taille: But the English observe not these terms, nor have
they followed the French in this; but they name the Partitions by the
honorable ordinaries, and what the French call parti, they call parted per
pale; for coupe, they say parti per fesse; for taille they say parti per bend
sinistre; for tranche they say, Parti per bend: for a be^d dextre, needs not be
called otherwise then a bend simply, as in the figure herewith annexed will
appear, and in this I prefer the English to the French, because they in this
use not many superfluous terms, and hereby avoid much confusion; likeas they in
this agree better with the Latin and Italian Heraldry.

But where the Lines cannot describe the several Cuttings of the Shield, there
must be new terms, and there only they should have place; and therefore gyrons,
quarters and cantons were first invented. A gyron is the French word of bosom,
and these partitions are called gyrons, because they meet in the bosom: They
were of old called, contrarie-conid, because they did meet in in cono; portat
arma contra conata ex octo partibus, vid. Fern. 211. They are in the latin
called, pinnulae octonae, and merli octango-laxi, by the Italians: And
therefore if they be eight, they need not be expressed, but the number must be
expressed if there be more, or fewer: And Berengarius was so called, quia ejus
arma erant been gyronata.

But the Earl of Argil's Coat should not be blazoned gyrone, for it may be
blazoned by the ordinary Lyns: and therefore I choose rather to blazon it thus
parted by pale, face, bend dextre, and sinistre, or, and sable; and as this is
suitable to reason, so I desire any person to consider if the Earl of Argyl's
Coat does not differ from that of Grolle in Colomb. page 80. Why then should
they not differ in the terms of art: and for authorizing me in this, I
recommend the Reader to Colomb. fig. 11. and 12. page 81.

A quarter is the fourth part of the Shield, and is called canton from the
French word canton, which signifies a corner. It represents the Banner that has
been given to the Bearer, as a reward of his service, or at least is
equivalent, as if a Baner had been given him. A pyle in Heraldry represents
that ingine whereby soldiers and others secured the foundations of their
buildings; and have been given since to such as had been very useful in
founding Commonwealths, Colonies, or Families: But three piles are ofttimes
mistaken (as I conceive) both in England, and with us for the passion nails;
which where ordinary simbols, assumed by such as went to the Holy-land^ And
thus I blazon the Wisharts Arms, arg. three passion nails, gules meeting in
point, For they resemble exactly the Jesuits cognizance, which are three
passion nails. And generally in France and Spain, where these pyles are
gules, and meet in point, they are called passion nails: And I rather believe
this because Spelman page 572. relates, That the Wisharts got this name out of
malice from the Sarazens, whom Robert the first of that name, did much
persecute, about the time of the Norman conquest.

We express still the place from which the pyle takes its beginning, by the
word; issuing as issuing out of the chief, issuing out of the corner dextre.

A flasque is the segment of a circle stretched along the straight side of
the Shield. It is given as a reward for Learning, as Guilims alleadges, and has
its name, as Skinner observes, a similitudine uterum antiquorum: animicandorem
notat, Herodian. in severo, page 223. But Spelman asserts, That they are the
facings of gowns, which were of old so shapt. Others also there are wno think
these flasques to be the proper rewards given by Princes, to such as have
served them as domestic servants: for the voyder which is the diminution of
the flasque, is acknowledged by Guilims, to be the reward for domestic
service, and eadem est ratio totius, and partis.

The flanch is yet as much larger than the flasque, as the flasque is than the
voyder.

It is a general Rule in blazoning all these partitions, that we must begin
with that Color or Metal which possesses the highest part or corner dexter,
descriptio harum partitionum (says Pet. Sanct. page 194.) inchoari debet ab eo
fulgore, seu coloris, seu metalli, qui primus obversatur oculis in superiore
loco, vel in angulo dextro. Sometimes one color is said to be cut upon
another, which Bearing has been invented in imitation of clothes, wherein
stuffs of one color were ordinarily cut out after that fashion of old, in
sumptuous varieties: But I likewise imagine, that this way of blazoning has
been fallen upon to save some of the received Rules of Heraldry; for we then
only say, That one Color is cut upon another, when there is a Border, and any
honorable Ordinary of one color; which Ordinary does not reach the
extremities of the Shield, as it ought to do: An example whereof, Upton gives,
page 248. where he calls such Coats, Arma duplicia and jaggata, gules voided,
Or by the three Bars, portat de rubeo ablato, sive evacuato super aurum, ad
modum trium barrarum.

The description of the PLATE belonging to the eight Chapter
I.

THis kind of Bearing is blazoned by the French, party coupe, tranche, taille.

II.

With us, parted per pale, face ( or fesse) bend and bar: Or parted per pale,
fesse, bend dexter, and sinister.

III.

Ker Earl of A^erum.
Ermine on a chief parted per pale Gules and or, a lion passant counterchanged:
quartered in the second place with the Coat of Ker.

IV.

Parted per fesse, or, and gules, a lion rampant within a double tressur,
Midleton Earl of Midleton.

One Family of the name of Richardsone gives.


counterflowred, and countercharged.

Per fesse, argent, and azure, a lion rampant, counterchanged.

V.

Parted per fesse, argent, and sable, a cheveron counterchanged, Ba^lnewis of
and in base, a cinquifoil of the first.

Drumond of Kincraigie.
Perfesse, waved, argent and gules.

VI.

Parted per bend argent and azure, a crescent counterchanged. Addair.


Per bend, indented, argent and gules, a crescent in chief of the second, Allen.
and a mollet in base or.



Spot.
Per bend indented argent and sable, in chief a spur-revell of the second.

Alison.
Per bend Gules and Or, a Flower de-lis tending toward the sinister chief
counterchanged.

VII.

Campbell Earl of Argyle. Campbell of Glenurquhy. Campbell Earl of Lowdoun.
Campbell of Gargunnock.
Parted per pale, fesse, bend, dexter and sinister, Or and sable; but I shall
let it pass in the terms generally used in this kingdom, viz.

Gyronie of eight pieces, Or and sable: quartered with the Coat of Lorn.

The same quarterea with the Coats of Stewart and Lorn.

Some Cadets of Argyle, give the lyns of the Gyrony, engrailed, others waved,
for a difference.

Gyrony of eight Ermine and Gules.

The same, and in each of the last 4 pieces, a Be volant en arriere argent.

VIII.

Alexander Earl of Stirling, as his paternal Coat. Laing.
Parted pe-pale, argent and sable, a cheveron, and in base a Crescent
counterchanged.

Per pale argent and sable, a chief indented counterchanged.

IX.

Bruce Earl of Elgin.
Or, a saltire and chief gules, a canton of the first charged with a lion
rampant as the second,

Drumond Lord Madertie.
Or, three bars waved gules, on a canton of the first, a lions head erased
within a double Tressure counterflowr^d as the second, langued az^r.

Livetennent General Drumond of Cromlix.
The same, and over all a simiter in pale argent, hilted and pomelled of the
field.

X.

Argent two flasques azure; This says Guil, is given for Virtue and Learning,
and especially for service in an Embassage.

XI.

Wishart. Hacket of Pitfirren.
Or, three pyles Gules (or rather passion nails) in point. Sable, three pyles
conjoined in the nombrill argent, on a chef Gules a lion passant guardant Or,
if these issue from any other part than the chef it is necessar to express it.

XII.

Young of Lennie. Young of Auldbarr formerly of Seaton, who gives,
Argent on three pyles sable als many annulets Or, but the paternal Coat of this
name, belongs to.

Argent three pyles sable, on a chef of the second, als many annulets Or.

Argent three pyles sable.

Astruther of that ilk. Graham of Fintray. Polwart.
Or three pyles within a double tressure counterflowred sable, on a chef of the
second, als many E^salaps as the first.

Argent three pyles engratled Gules: This is quartered in the second place by
Hume of Polwart with his paternal Coat, being vert, a lion rampant argent,
within a border Roses Gules, by the name of Hume, Lovell sometime of Ballumbie.


Argent three pyles sable, surmounted of a fesse waved Gules.

CHAP. IX. Of the Honorable ORDINARIES in general.
THe Bearing which is charged upon the Field, is either an Fowl or other
creature, Tree, Flower, or some such thing, which depends not upon Heraldry,
but has its name, and being independent from that Art, and these are called
Common Charges: Or else it is one of these pieces which is properly invented,
and has its Name, and Being from Heraldry, and those are called the Proper
Charge. And such pieces are called the Honorable Ordinaries, because Heralds
do ordinarily bestow them upon deserving persons. But Leich and Guilims do err
in calling them the most worthy Partitions, for Partitions, and Ordinaries are
different, as shall be shown hereafter.

Their Honorable Ordinaries (or Piec^s Honorables, as the French call them) are
numbered by the French to be ten, Chief, Pale, Band, Fasce, Bar, Cross,
Saultoir, Cheveron, Bordre, and O^le; and express all the several parts of a
man's entire Armor. as the Chef, the Helmet; the Pale, his Lance; the Band and
Bar, his Sword and Belt; the Fasce, his Scarf; etc. But this is but a
Conjecture, or Fancy: and I rather think that these have been invented to be
different Marks of different Qualities in the Bearer. As for example* the Chief
reward those actions which are the product of Wit, the Cross Religious
Exploits, etc. The English make the Border, nor Orle, no Honorable Ordinaries,
and so make them nine, viz. 1. Cross. 2. Chief. 3. Pale. 4. Bend. 5. Fesse. 6.
An Inescucheon. 7. A Cheveron. 8. A Saltyr. 9. A Bar.

Each of these do in the French Heraldry fill a third part of the Shield; But
the English give them more or less, or as shall be hereafter observed. In this
the French agree with the Italians and Spaniards, as Pet. Sanct. observes, and
seeing all the honorable Ordinaries are of the same quality, I see not why
they should not have equal room in the Field.

CHAP. X. Of the CHIEF.
THe Chief is called from its Position, which is Dans le chef de lescu; for
chief signifies the head, in ordinary French; and is termed capitale, or
coronis scutaria, by the Latin: And therefore it is ill writ Chlef by the
English; for it is not so called, because the Head is the chief part, as
Guilims observes. According to both, It is given as a reward for Wisdom and
Prudence, and many out of respect to their Superiors or Over-lords have taken a
part of their Over-lords Coat, charged in Chief; which I conceive to be the
reason why Chiefs are so frequently charged in Scotland with other Bearings.
Both the English and French conclude, that it contains the third part of the
Shield:

When there is a Partition in it, if the Partition be in the upper part, it is
called a Chief surmounted of another, but if it be divided in its lower part,
it is called a Fillet, as Guilims observes, who derives that word Fillet, from
the Fillet that is put about the hair; but it is indeed a French word,
signifying a small thread.

A Chief covered by any thing which hangs over it, is called by the French un
chef couvert, and sometimes the covering is like an Episcopal Chapperon: this
Mr. Guilims not understanding the French, calls shapournet, or shapernet, as
Cartwright writes; and by this, and many other errors it appears how different
languages have occ^sion'd many mistakes in the term^s.

Sometimes it is blazoned a Chief crenele, sometimes wave, etc. according to
the lyns which compose it.

There is much notice to be taken to the several ways of Blazoning this
Ordinary, as will appear by the examples hereeo subjoyned.

The description of the Plate belonging to the tenth Chapter.
I.

Menzies of that ilk, or of Weem. Carron. Dewar. Airth.
ARgent, a chief gules.

Gules a chief Or.

Or, a chief azure.

Argent, a chief sable.

II.

Gules, a chief Or, surmounted of another argent: Such a chief, says Guil.
denotes a double reward given by the Sovereign. The paternal Coat of Graham
Marquess of Montrose. Simpson of Udoch. Squyre.


III.

Or, on a chief sable, three Escallops of the first: This is quartered with,
argent, three roses gules, by the title of Montrose.

Argent, on a chief vert, three crescents of the first.

Or, on a chief sable, two mollets argent.

IV.

Dalmahoy of that ilk.
Azur, in chief three spur-revells argent.

V.

Burnet of Lees.
Argent, three Hollin leaves in chief vert, and a hunting horn in base sable
garnished gules.

VI.

Keith earl Marishal
Argent, on a chief gules, three Pallets (or Pales) Or: Some Painters have of
late done this chief, Pallie of 6; but that is an error.

Dickson of Bughtrig.
Azur, three moll^ts argent, on a chief Or als many pallets gules: Thus he bears
the Keiths chief counterchanged, as deriving his origin from that noble
Family, the Dicksons having been Keiths.

VII.

This is a French Coat, and by them blazoned, de vert, au chef d'argent,
couvert d'azur. Couvert, i. e. shadowed by the foot of hangings or tapestry,
for that is the reason of that Bearing.

VIII.

The French blazon this, de sable, au chef d'hermines chapperonne d'or: In our
language, Sable, a chief ^rmine hooded or.

IX.

According to the French, d'argent au-chef mantelle de sable; but according to
us, parted per chief cheveron ways sable and argent.

X.

D'azur au chef cousu de gueules, board d'or, i. e. Azur, a chief gules
embordured or.

XI.

D'or au chef d'azur chappe a dixtre d'argent: Or a chief azur parted per bend
sinister in the dexter canton argent.

XII.

D'azur au chef d'or a dextre de gueules: Azur, a chief or, and dexter canton
gules.

CHAP. XI^ Of the PALE.
THe Pale is that ordinary, which stands perpendicular in the Shield: and it
comprehends in the opinion of all, the third part of the Shield. A Pallet is,
as says Guilims, The half of the Pale, and an Endorse is the fourth part of the
Pallet.

The French say. That Soldiers of old carried Pales of wood to encamp them,
which they fixed in the earth, and as Varenus observes, they are bestowed on him
who empai'd a City for its defense. For Palus signifies these Pales with which
Cities or Camps were guarded L. 1 68. f. de verb signifi. Pali and Perticae in
numerum mat^eriae re^igendae sunt, and ideo lignorum appellatione non
continentur and, Aul. Gell. Lib. 5. c. 6* observes, That Castra and fossarum
supercilia palis precinger^ moris fuit.

Betwixt these they fixed or tied small rods, and therefore the French express
no diminutive of a Pale, but a Verget, which is their ordinary word for a small
rod; and we should call it a rod, and what the English call an Endorse, they
call a Pale charged with another little Pale or Verget. But I believe Endorse
is also an old French term, and signifies to put upon the back of any thing,
in dorso; and therefore Executions of Summonds are called Indorsations in
Scotland, because they are writ upon the backs of the Summonds.

If there be more Pales, they are numbered as Pales, four or eight; But if there
be only six pales, then the French say simply pale arg. and azur, etc.

The description of the PLATE belonging to the 11. and 13. Chapters
I.

Areskine or Erskine Earl of Mar.
ARgent a pale sable; this is quartered in the second place with the Coat of
Mar, being, azure a bend betwixt six cross Crosslets fitched or.



Carnegy Earl of Northesk, as an Coat of augmentation by the title of Northesk.
Sawers. Esplin.
Argent a pale Gules quartered in the second place with his paternal Coat by the
name of Carnegie, Or, an Eagle displayed Azure armed and membred sable.

II.

Or, a pale Engrailed Sable.

Parted per fess Gules and Ermine, a pale counterchanged, and three Mascles,
two in chief and one in base Or.

III.

Lord Ruthven.
Argent three pallets (or pales) Gules: Some will have it palle of six,

Skirven of that ilk.
Or, three pallets Gules, over all on a cheveron engrailed Azure, als many
Buckells of the first,

IV.

Azure a pallet Argent. V.

Or, an Endorse Gules. VI.

Cunningham Earl of Glencairn.
Argent a Shak-fork sable. This is called a Shak-fork with us, and should not
touch the corners of the Escutcheon. It relates to some office about his
Majesty's stables, this being an instrument whereby hay is thrown up to horses:
And some think that it was given to the Family of Glencairn as Master of horses
to one of our Kings; But the French call it, une pairle from the Latin
parilis, though a late Author makes it to be pallium Archiepiscopale, albeit it
differs from that in somethings, as it is described by Innocent c. de pallo 62.
Sometimes also the letter Y is taken for it, as in the Arms of the Town of
Yssodun, who took this for their Arms, as the first letter of the name of their
Town, Menest. art. du blazon. paege 168.

VII.

Lundie of that ilk.
Palle of six (Or simply according to the French palle) Gules and Argent, on a
bend azure three Cusheons Or.

Murray Marquess of Athol.
Palle of six sable and Or: Guarterly quartered with the Coat of Stewart:

Or a fess checkie azur and argent, and with the Coat of Murray,

Azure, three stars within a double Tressure counterflowred, Or.

Jaffray of Kingswells
Palle of six argent and sable, on a fesse of the first, three mollets as the
second.

VIII.

Gules two Flanches Ermine.

IX.

By the French, d'azur au pal d' or board de gueules: By us, azur, a pale Or
imbordured Gules.

X.

Melvill of Raith.
Argent a face (or fesse) Gules: Now quartered in the Achievement of the Lord
Melvill, who gives Gules three Crescents argent, within a bordur of the second,
charged with eight roses as the first, likewise by the name of Melvill.

Charters of Hempsfield.

Charters of Kilfaunes.


Argent a fesse Azure.

Argent a fesse azure, within a Tressure counterflowred Gules.

Lindsay Earl of Crawfurd. Stewart.
Gules a fesse checkie argent and azur, as his paternal Coat, quartered with the
Coat of Abernethie.

Or a fesse checkie azure and argent.

Sir William Sharp of Stonnyhill. Carmichael Lord Carmichael.

Carmichael of Ballinblae.

Drumond Earl Pearth Auchinlek of that ilk.


Argent a fesse azure, betwixt two cross Crosslets in chief, and a mollet in
base sable, within a bordur Gules.

XI.

Argent a fesse wreathed azure and Gules.

The same within a bordur of eight Crescents.

XII.

Or three bars waved Gules

Argent three bars sable.

Fothringham of Powrie.
Ermine three bars gules

CHAP XII. BEND.
THe Bend (or Band as the French write) is that honorable Ordinary, which
passes from the right angle of the Shield, to the lower left angle. the Bar is
just contrare, for it passes from the highest left corner, to the lowest right
corner; and is therefore called by the English a bend sinister. Both comprehend
a third part, according to the French; but according to the English, it
comprehends the fifth part only of the Shield, when i^ is uncharg'd, but the
third part when charged, But I see no reason why this should hold in the Cross,
Saltyr and Bend, and not in the other Ordinaries, nam ubi eadem ratio, idem jus
est statuendum.

This Bend represents the Belt of a Knight, and is called Baltheus in Latin,
and in Italian, Benda or cingulo, and is born of different colors, and in
different forms by sundry Nations: For the French wear their sword belt, as a
Bend; the Germans as a face about their middle. The French wear their Bend
white, the Spaniard red, the English Scots and Danes blew, the Barbarians
black^ Such French as wear a bend in their arms with us, wear it white, to show
their origin. According to some Amorists it represents a Ladder, and is given
to such as Scaled first the walls of Castles or Towns. Guilims marks its
divisions thus, The half of the Bend is called a gartier, from the French word
gartier; a Cost is the fourth part of the Bend, and half of the gartier; a
Ribband is half the Coast. Cartwright differs in this from Guilims, but the
French use no such fancies, but call all diminutives of the Bend, Cotise, from
Cost the side, because these Cotices are margin'd upon the side of the Bend.
And if there be more or less than six Bends in one Shield, they express the
number. Guilims observes that the Bendlet differs from Bend; in that it is
still limited to the sixth part of the Shield, and in that it still begins at
the corner, where the Bend is in the middle corner betwixt the Lyns.

The English call half a Bend, sinister, a Scarpe; from the French word
esharpe, a scarf; and half a scarpe, a batton, if it be short of the Shield in
both its extremities: But the French call them Battons, though they be not cut,
and gives us a rule, that there may be twelve Battons in one Field, but no more;
if they be but six, they say Bar, without numbering the pieces.

The French have no such word as scarpe, but what the English call Scarp, they
call counter cottice, and if any thing should be called a Scarpe, it should be
the Bend, for it looks likest to a Scarf; and a Bend in English, is un
escarpe, in the French, or a scarf. I find bend sinister used but very seldom
with us in Scotland, so much we have hated every thing which looked like
bastardry.

The desription of the PLATE, belonging to the 12. Chapter.
Vaus Lord Dirleton of old. Bisset of Lesindrum Sandilands Fenton of that ilk.
Wallop. Monteith.
OR, a bend Gules: Or according to some, Argent a bend Gules.

Azure, a bend argent.

Argent, a bend azure.

Gules, a bend engrailed argent.

Argent, a bend waved sable.

Or, a bend checkie, sable and argent.

Leslie earl Rothes his paternal Coat.

Stirling of Keir.


II.

Argent on a bend azur, three buckels Or: quartered with the Coat of Abernethy.

Argent, on a bend sable, three buckels Or.

I^I.

Scot Duke of Buccleugh, as the paternal Coat of that name. Scot of Harden.
Or, on a bend azur, a Star betwixt two Crescents of the Field.

The same, and in the sinister canton, a rose Gules, stalked and barbed proper,
for difference.

Scot of Scotstarbet
The same, within a bordur ingrailed Gules, for difference.

Scot of Harwood.
The same, with an Oak tree vert, suppressed of the bend, for difference.

Scot of Whitslaid.
The same with a broken Lance in chief Gules, for difference.

Tours of Innerleith. Liddel.

Dishington sometime of Ardross Kinneir of that ilk.

Turring of Foveran. Binning of Carlowriehauch.

Haliburton of Egliscairn.


IV.

Argent, on a bend azur, three mollets of the first.

Gules, on a bend argent, three mollets sable.

Argent, on a bend sable, three Escalops of the first.

Sable on a bend Or, three Cannarie birds vert.

Argent, on a bend sable, three Boar heads couped Or.

Argent, on a bend ingrailed sable, a Wagon of the first.

Or, on a bend waved azur, three Lozenges of the first. His second brother
gives the bend waved on the upper, and engrailed on the nether side.

V.

Sandersone.
Argent, three bendlets sable.

Honyman. Porterfield
Argent three bendlets coticed, and engrailed on the outter side Gules.

Or, a bendlet twixt a staggs head, erased in chief, and an hunting horn in
base sable, garnished gules.

VI.

Auchmouty. Dempster of Pitlover
Argent, a broken spear in bend, betwixt two spur revells azur.

Gules a sword in bend argent, hilted and pomelled Or, surmounted of a fess as
the third: This is quartered with the Coat of Abernethy.

VII.

Whytford.
Argent, a bend coticed sable, betwixt two garbs Gules.

Cant.
Argent, a bend engrailed betwixt three Crescents sable.

VIII.

Azur, a bend Or, issuing out of two Lions mouths or throats of the second: In
French, d'azur a la band d'or mouvante de deux testes and gueules de lion de
mesme; some term this bend in French, la band engoulee: It Is called by Syl.
Pet. Sta. Balteus fluens ex hiante rictu Leonum, and is a Spanish bearing.

IX.

Argent, a bend sable, betwixt two other demi-bends, couped or broken off, the
upper issuing from the sinister flank, and moving toward the dexter chief, the
nether from the dexter side to the sinister base, and two Martlets, one in the
chief, the other in base, all of the second: This is a French Coat, and by them
blazoned, d'argent a la band de sable accompagnee de deux autres demi bands
retraites, celle qui tend verse le chef mouuante du flanc senextre, and celle,
qui tend verse la point, mouuante, du flanc dextre, and de deux merletes de
mesme l'vne enchef and l' autre en point.

X.

Haliburton of Pitcur.
Or, on a bend azur betwixt three Boar-heads erased sable, als many Lozenges of
the first.

Brand of Baberton.
Argent, on a bend sable, three mascles of the first, a chief of the second,
charged with als many Spur-revells Or.

XI.

Weston or Waston, Kay or Cay
Gules, on a bend sinister argent, three Crescents sable.

Argent, a bend sinister sable, twixt an annulet in chief Gules, and a
Gryphon-head, erased in base sable, in his mouth a key azur.

XII.

Wigmer.
Argent, a bend sable charged with another waved of the first.

Elliot of Stobs. Elliot of Laringston
Gules, on a bend engrailed Or, a batton, or (according to some) a flute azur.

Gules, on a bend Or, a flute of the Field.

CHAP. XIII. Of the FACE.
THe Face is that honorable Ordinary, which by two Lyns traverses the Face of
the Shield, keeping the center equally distant from both the Lyns, and
comprehends a third part of the Shield. The Italians and Latins call it Fascia,
or Benda.

The English writ it Fesse, and derive it from the loins of a man; But Fesse is
a French word, signifying the buttocks, which are much lower then the center,
and therefore the French (Bara excepted) writ it still face, and it represents
the Scarf of a Warrior, un Esharp, Colomb. Page 118. and from bearing arg. a
face azur, The first of the Sharps who came from France with King David, was
called Monsieur De l' esharp, and by coruption Sharp.

The face hes no diminitive in the English Heraldry, which I admire, seeing
they assign so many diminitives to other Ordinaries: but the French call
little Faces, trangls, if they be equal in number; but burels, if they be
unequal in number, as five or seven: In our Scottish the Face is called a Bar,
as in the Earl of Perths Arms, who is said to bear O. three Bars wave G.;
those should be called Faces according to the French, and Fesses according to
the English; and yet it appears that a Face of old was truly called a Bar, and
it represents in its shape one of those Bars which are used all over some
doors; and therefore the Latin Authors call it Verris, Skinner verb. Bar. As
also the name of Dempster carry a Sword arg. surmounted of a Bar Or, to show
that they were heritable Dempters, who are criminal Officers; and therefore
carry a Sword for power in criminals, and it is called Ius gladii: and because
the Dempster used to stand at the Bar, and pronounce the Verdict; therefore
they got the Bar; and this Ordinary does in effect represent in its shape the
Bars, which ly alongs in Judicatures.

The House of Austria carry G a Face arg. because Leopold 2 Duke of Austria in
the first Battle of the Holy War had his Coat, which was Cloth of Silver, so
covered with blood, that it was all red, except that part which his Scarf
covered, which remained still of its native color: this shows that this
Ordinar represents the Scarf, and shows why it is given by Heralds.

When the Bar is above any Charge, so that the Charge in so far is not seen, we
say he carries V. G. a Sword surmounted of a Bar, as Dempster does.

CHAP. XIV. Of the CHEVERON.
A Cheveron is an ordinar French word, signifying a couple, by Vitruvius
Capreolus, and therefore this Ordinar represents a couple in its Shape, fig. 1.
by the Latin now it is called tignum or cantherius; by the Italian, capriolo
or caviletto, and is given by Heralds to such as have supplied their Prince,
Country, or Family: and thus the Hepburns carry G on a Cheveron arg. two Lions
pulling at a rose: the reason of which was that when the Scots were near beat
at the Battle of two Brothers of that name came in with a fresh Supply and
recovered the Battle; (as Holins-bead also confesses) for which they got the
Cheveron, to signify the Supply they brought, the two Lions to represent the
two Brothers, and that they were Scots pulling at a Rose, which is the Arms of
England. As also Robertsone of Struan got a Cheveron added to his Shield, for
taking Graham, who killed King James the First; but he has not used it of late,
because he thought it a mark of Cadency. Leigh says, That a Cheveron
represents a woman's attire for her head; but the conjecture is very groundless,
and proceeds from wa^^ of French, and for the same want of French some use to
say, a Cheveron rompe, for a broken Cheveron, which is in French, un cheveron
rompu, or brise. Spelman well observes, That it is given to men for
^ompleating, and having brought any great design to perfection, since the
putting on of the couple shows the work to be completed: And therefore the
Greeks used to say, (...). It comprehends also the third of the Shield, and the
reason why a Cheveron is taken broken in its top, is because the Principle
House was ruined and sold, and therefore the Cadets, to show that they are
fallen from the original height of the Family, take the Cognizance bruised in
its top.

If there be more Cheverons, they are called Cheveronells, of which Leigh and
all the English write, that there can be three in a Field; but the French say
three Cheverons, and why not three Cheverons as well as three Bends, Bars, etc.
the French mark 1.3.4. or 5. Cheverons at pleasure, and in this, as in many
other things we follow the French: For the Mclellans bear, Or, two Cheverons
sable.

A Couple close contains the fourth part of a Cheveron, and are not born but by
pairs, except there be a Cheveron betwixt them.

If the Cheveron be turned down with the point to the base, it is called a
Cheveron inverted.

If two Cheverons be joined together, the English call them Brazed from the
French word Bras, as I conceive, which signifies Arms, because they are
interlac'd as Arms; the French, accrochete.

The description of the PLATE belonging to the 14. Chapter.
I.

Fochhart. Tailzefer. Masterton of Parkmilne. Lidderdale of St. Mary Isle.
ARgent a cheveron sable.

Ermine a cheveron Gules.

Argent a cheveron Gules, and chief azur.

Azur a cheveron Ermine.

II.

Ker Lord Jedburgh. Longlands of that ilk.
Gules on a cheveron argent, three mollets of the first.

Argent on a cheveron Gules, three mollets of the first.

Hepburn.
Gules on a cheveron argent, a rose betwixt two Lions (or Lion cells as some will
have it) combatant of the first.

III.

Branch. Bannatine of Keams.
Argent a cheveron sable, betwixt three mollets Gules.

Gules a cheveron argent, betwixt three mollets Or.

Elphingston Lord Elphingston.
IV.

Argent a cheveron sable, betwixt three Boar heads erased Gules armed of the
first.



Cochran Earl of Dundonald Nisbet of Dean.
Argent a cheveron Gules, betwixt three Boar-heads erazed azur, armed and
langued of the first.

Argent a cheveron Gules, betwixt three Boar-heads erased sable.

V.

Sempill lord Sempil
Argent a cheveron checkie Gules and of the first, betwixt three Bugles sable,
garnished as the second.

Howston of that ilk.
Or, a cheveron checkie sable and argent betwixt three martlets (or kaes) of the
second.

Wedderburn of Easter-Powrie. Brown of Colstoun.
VI.

Argent a cheveron betwixt three roses Gules.

Gules, a cheveron betwixt three Flowers de lis Or.

VII.

Mclellan.
Or, two cheverons sable.

Pakston. Carruthers of Howmains.
Or, two cheverons sable, and three mollets in pale Gules.

Gules two cheverons engrailed, betwixt three Flowers de lis Or.

VIII.

Mushet. Chiesly of Kersewell.
Ermine two cheverons Gules.

Gules, a cheveron voided betwixt three cinquefoils Or.

Main of Lochwood
Argent a cheveron voided Gules betwixt three pheons in chief, and an Unicorns
head erased in base sable.

Cowper of Gogar
Argent a cheveron Gules surmounted of another Ermine, betwixt three laurel
slips vert.

IX.

Pearson of Balmadies.
Argent two Swords cheveron-wayes azur pearcing a man's heart in chief proper,
and in base a cinquifoil of the second.

Pearson of Kippenross.
Argent, two daggers azur, the pomells divided in chief, and the points
conjoined, piercing a man's heart in base proper, in the honor point a
cinquifoil sable.

X.

In French, de sable au cheuron d'argent brise ou eclatte par le haut. i. e.
Sable a cheveron argent, burst or split on the top: by Syl. Pet. Sta. Capreolus
fractus, diminutus capite, mutilus, etc.

XI.

Gules, a cheveron reversed argent.

XII.

Argent, three cheverons brased (or rather interlac'd one with the other) in
base, a Sun in chief azur.

CHAP. XV. Of the BORDUR and ORLE.
SHields had Bordurs for their ornament, and sometimes for their difference, as
vestiments had fringes, and thence did the Bordur grow an honorable Ordinary
amongst Heralds: It possesses the fifth part of the Shield amongst the English,
but the third amongst the French. An Orle is a little Bordur, from the Latin
word Orula, which signifies a little Bordur; but both the one and the other are
given to recompense such, as have given protection and defense: For the Bordur
defends what is within it, and therefore Scotland got the Orle Flower deluc'd
from the French, to recompense the assistance, the French got from the Scots in
all the Wars: At which time, and for the same reason, the Scots got the
guarding of the French King's body, which honor they retain to this day.

It is now used as a mark of distinction by Cadets, because they ought to
defend their elder Brothers Family, as the Bordur defends the Shield.

All nations use few terms in describing Borders, except the English, who use
very many, and such as are unnecessar, and have proceeded from affecting French
words for terms of art: For if the Bordur be charged with dead things, it is
called a Bordur entoire, as of Annulets, Besants, etc. which word is from the
French word entoure (about) corrupted; this word is also improper; for all
Bordurs go about the Shield.

If the Bordur be charged with Fowls, it is called by them enalauron; if it be
charged with other beasts, it is termed enurny; if with Flowers, Fruits, or
Leaves, verdoi; and then the particulars, and their numbers are expressed, as
Verdoy of eight (...) if with furre, it is called Purflew generally, and then
the Furr is specified, as he bears G. a Bordur purflew ermine.

The French say only, G. a Bordur Ermine, as also they say, he bears Or, a
Bordur of 8 Pigeons.

If the Bordur be of more colors, it is said to be componed of such and such
colors, when there is but one range of them: But if there be more ranges, and
these be counterly placed chequer wise, the Bordur is said to be compon'd, and
counter-compounded.

Skinner in his Dictionary thinks, that enalauron is a corruption of
inorulatus; but I think it comes from the French, who say, un bordure en
alerions, to describe a Bordure of martlets, so that enalauron is the corrupti-
of en alerion.

The Fiblier is the French diminitive of a Bordur; but the English have no
diminitive of it.

He translates likewise a Bordur purflew, fimbria acu puta nam pourfiler is
profilare, id est, aureo filo intexere, so that purflew is rather a Bordur
embroder'd, than furred.

The Orle is an inward Bordur as in the figure 12. and the Tressure or
Tresheur, as the French call it, is the diminitive of the Orle, and where There
are two of these as in the Arms of Scotland, it is called a double tressure
taenia gemella.

The description of the PLATE, belonging to the 15. Chapter.
I.

Wallace of Ellerslie.
GUles, a Lion rampant argent within a bordur componed (according to the English
gobbonated) azur and of the first.

Stewart Earl of Murray.
Or, a Lion rampant within a double tressure counterflowred gules, a bordur
componed azur and argent: quartered with the Coats of Stewart and Randolph.

Spence of Aberdeen. of old.
Argent, a Lions head erased gules, within a bordur componed azur and of the
first.

II.

Gray, Lord Gray.

Mure of Caldwell.


Gules, a Lion rampant within a bordur engrailed argent.

Argent, on a fesse azur, three Mollets of the first within a bordur engrailed
as the second.

III.

Azur, a bordur with these words, AVE MARIA GRATIA PLENA.

IV.

Andrada in Spain.
Azur, on an Orle Or, eight decrescents of the first, all within a bordur
argent, charged with four Lions rampant gules. Or according to others, azur,
within two bordurs, the outmost argent charged with four Lions rampant gules,
the inmost Or, of 8 decrescents as the first.

V.

Or, a bordur gules.

Randeil. Campbell of Aberuchill.

Nairn of Strathuird one of the Lords of Session.

Nairn granchyld to the old Nairns of Sandford.


Or, a bordur azur.

Gyronie of eight, Or and sable, a bordur imbatled vert.

VI.

Per pale sable and argent, on a Chaplet, four quarterfoiles counterchanged.

Per pale sable and argent, on a chaplet four cinquefoils all counterchanged.

Nairn now of Sandford.
Per pale sable and argent, on a chaplet four Mollets counterchanged.

This by the French is termed un orle rond.

VII.

Argent, an orle gules, and in chief 3. Martlets sable.

Rutherford.

His Royal Majesty's coat as King of Scotland


VIII.

Or, a Lion rampant within a double tressure counterflowred (with flowers de
lis) gules, armed and lingued azur.

IX.

Argent, a cheveron gules, betwixt three Cross Crosslets fitched sable, Kennedy
Earl of Castils.
within a double tressure counterflowred of the second.

Fleeming Earl of Wigton.
Gules, a cheveron within a double tressure counterflowred argent: quartered
with the Coat of Frazer, being, azur three frazes argent.

X.

Lion, Earl of Kinghorn
Argent, a Lion rampant within a double tressure counterflowred azur, armed and
lingued gules.

Or, a Lion rampant sable, armed and lingued gules within a double tressure
counterflowred of the second. Buchanan of that ilk.


XI.

Randolph sometime Earl of Murray.
Or, three Cusheons within a double tressure counterflowered gules: now born by
some of the name of Dumbar, and by Stewart Earl of Murray.

Seaton of Winton.
Or, three Crescents within a double tressure counterflowred gules: quartered
with the Coat of Cumming, azur three garbs Or.

Murray Marquess of Athol.
Azur, three Stars within a double tressure counterflowered argent, quartered
with the Coats of Athol and Stewart.

XII.

Landell. Landell of Coule.
Or, an Orle azur now born in the achievement of the Earl of Hume.

Or, an Orle indented upon the inner-side azur.

CHAP. XVI. Of the CROSS.
THe Cross has been in great esteem, since our Saviors death did make it so
venerable amongst Christians: for the Egyptians did ingrave it upon the breast
of their god Serapis: And Caelius Rod teaches us, That the ancient,
Philosophers and Mathematicians did highly esteem that Figure. But that which
made this Ordinare so considerable in Heraldry, was the expeditions unto the
Holy lands, and the Holy war; for both the Pilgrims after their Pilgrimage took
the Cross for their Cognizance, and the Ensign of that War was the Cross; And
therefore these Expeditions were called Croissads: And in these Wars, the Scots
carried St. Andrews Cross argent, the French a Cross arg. the English a Cross
Or, the Germans sable, the Italians azur, the Spaniards gules, as Colomb.
observes. Thus Montmorancy carry the Cross, because they were the eldest
Christians amongst the Gauls; and the Dukes of Savoy, because they did assist
the Rhodes against the Turks: And the Sibald, who are come from Sabaudia, carry
the Cross, because Savoy or Sabaudia, from whence they came, carried the Cross;
for Sibandas or Sibaldus is but the corrupted name of Sabaudus. Before the Holy
War, the Cross was blazoned four Cantons or Quarters.

It has several Denominations, according to the several Persons, who did
originally bear it: Thus the Cross of Calvary is long in the Pale, and short in
the Arms, fig. 8. A Patriarchal Cross (or a Cross of Lorraine, bacause Lorraine
wears it) as in the fig. 7. A Cross of Maltha, is that which is born by he
Knights of Maltha for defending the Christian Religion, fig. 19. A Cross
Crosslet, is that which has all corners of it crossed as is the fig 9. A Cross
Patee, is that which has large Extremities, though they be not fimbriated or
doubled, as Guilims alleadges, page 90. A Cross fitched, is that, whose lowest
point is sharpn'd, and fit to be fixed in the Earth, as in the figures 11. and
12. Fitched comes from Fichee, which signifies fixed in the French Language;
but the writing it fitchee with a t is the Error: But such words though
unnecessar, vex the Reader to purpose: and therefore it were better to say, a
Cross fixable; and for the same reason it were better to say, a Cross
crouch-wise, than to say, a Cross potent, or potence: For a potence signifies a
crouch in the French, but potent and potence are the same terms: Nor could the
French understand their own terms in those Books.

I cannot here pass by a ridiculous remark made by Upton an English Writer,
otherwise learned, the reading of whom might have possibly occasioned some
mistakes. Nota, quod istae cruces non sunt proprie signa, sed differentiae
signorum. Quare dic quod Rex Haraldorum videns aliquem cupientem portare arma,
ignorans aliquam bonam, vel malam conditionem in eo, vel proprietatem, debet
asignaere sibi de crucibus supradictis, quam crucem portare, signat portantem
non habere aliquam causam, vel conditionem secundum quam possent sibi arma
assignari, sed signant hominem brutalem.

The reason of Crosses fitched (or fixable, as I term them) was that the
primitive Christians did always carry crosses with them as marks of devotion;
and when they settled themselves in their journey at any place for devotion,
they fixed these portable crosses in the ground.

CHAP. XVII. Of the SALTYR.
THe Saltyr crux transversalis seu decussis, is a Saint Andrews Cross, and is
very ordinary in Scotland, because St. Andrew was our patron Saint; for St.
Andrew appeared to Achaius our King upon that Cross, when he fought against the
Picts. It was of old one of those Instruments which were used as Ladders, to
scale the walls of Towns; and therefore it is called sautoir by the French,
from sauter to leap, because it did help the soldiers to leap over walls: The
English write saltyr, but I know no reason for that word: the former reason has
in my judgment occasioned that the Saltyr is with us, and all other nations
born ordinarily engrail'd, or ragg'd, as we call it, because the Soldiers used
to cut so those trees, for helping them to climb, and to support their feet or
hands, upon its nicks.

Upon the account, that the Saltyr is a St. Andrew cross, therefore the
Andersons carry ar. a Saltyr engrail'd sable betwixt four stars gules.

When five of any thing, as leaves, beasts, etc. are born like a cinque, they
are said to be born in Saltyr, because of its shape, from the aggreement of a
cinque and Saltyr in their shapes: And by the Italians it is called figura, a
forma della lettera, X. and what we call Saltyr-wise, they call Incrotiato a
foggia della lettera X. and we in Scotland use the word Saltyr, or St. Andrews
equally often; because the Saint Andrews Cross is one of the Badges of our Nation.

The description of the PLATE belonging to the 16. and 17. Chapters.
The Latin terms of most of the Crosses following, are set down as Syl. Pet.
Sta. Vpton, and others have them.

I.

A Plain cross; this is called, Crux simplex and plana.

Corsby. Bannatyne of Corhouse Rind.
Or, a cross gules.

Argent a cross betwixt four Mollets azur.

Ermine, on a cross gules, a crosslet fitched Or, and in the sinister quarter
argent two Mollets azur.

Guthry of that ilk.
Argent, a plain cross sable quartered with the coat of Cumming.

II.

A cross engrailed. Crux striata, cannaliculata, seu crispata, By some
Ingradata. By Dion in macrino, (...).

Rait of Hallgreen. Sinclair of Roslan.
Or, a cross engrailed sable.

Argent, a cross ingrailed sable. Sinclair Earl of Caithness bears this cross
over all dividing his other coats. Sinclair Lord Sinclair bears the same in an
Inescutcheon, others of that name gives, this cross azur.

Aiton of that ilk.
Argent, a cross engrailed betwixt four Roses gules.

III.

A cross waved. Crux undosa.

Sinclair of Olbster.
Argent, a cross engrailed on the outter, and waved on the inner side sable.

Glendinning of that ilk.
Quarterly argent and sable, a cross parted per cross indented, counterchanged
of the second and first.

IV.

A cross Raguled. Crux arbori similis quae decussis ramalibus undique
asperatur, vel Crux truncata, seu undique asperata.

V.

A cross voided. Crux secta introrsim, seu perforata. It is said to be voided,
when the Field appears throughout; but if it be of another color or metal,
It is said to be charged with another of such a color.

VI.

A cross potent. Crux patibulata. The French call this, la croix potancee.

Miller. Butter of old.

But now Butter of Gormack gives.


Argent, a cross potent azur, betwixt four men's hearts proper.

Argent, a cross potent sable, betwixt four men's hearts proper.

Argent, a plain cross sable, twixt 4 hearts.

VII.

A cross patriarchal. Crux patriarchalis, or as some call it, The cross of
Lorrain.



VIII.

A cross calvary. This cross by Morgan page 8. is set upon three degrees or
steps.

IX.

Crosslet. Crux recruciata, seu cruciata.

Spalding.
Or, on a cross azur, five cross-crosslets of the first.

Argent, a cross-crosslet gules, on a chief azur, a Mollet in the dexter canton
of the first.

X.

Cross crosslet fitched. Recruciata cuspidata, vexillaris, or according to
Vpton, cruciata, figitiva.

Mar.
Azur, a bend, betwixt six cross-crosslets fitched Or. This is quartered with
the coat of Areskine by the Earl of Mar.

Robertoun of Carnock
Argent, a cross-crosslet fitched sable: quartered in the second place with
gules, a closs helmet argent.

XI.

Patee, Crux patula ad scapos, seu crux pateus.

Bennet. Dawson. Duiguid of Auchinhuiff.
Gules, a cross patee Or, betwixt three Mollets argent.

Gules, three crosses patee argent.

Azur, three crosses patee argent.

XII.

Patee fitched. Crux patula desinens in cuspidem oblongam, seu cu^pidata.

Lord Chein of old. Chein of Straloth. Bennet aliter.
Gules, a bend twixt six crosses patee fitched Or.

Azur, a bend ar^ent twixt six cross patee fitched Or.

Gules, a cross patee fitched argent, issuing out of the base undie Or.

XIII.

Patee fimbriated, patula fimbriata.

XIV.

Tau, or cross of St. Antony, Crux Sancti Antonii.

XV.

A cross florie, florida.

An^y of Dolphington.

Fletcher of Salton.


Or, a cross florie gules.

Sable, a cross florie betwixt four Escallops argent.

XVI.

A cross patonce. This is called by the English, a cross patonce, and by
Colomb. page 142. Croix enhendee.

Milne.
Argent, a cross patonce gules, betwixt three Mollets sable.

XVII.

A cross flurrie, according to Morgan, and by some, patens florida, But
Colomb. page 136. calls it, Croix flowerdelisee.

XVIII.

A cross avelane, avellana, the ends thereof resembling the husk of a
Filbert-nut.

XIX.

A cross anchored, anchorata, But Colomb. calls this, The cross of Maltha, or
a cross patee of eight points: and that Cross which the French call a cross
anchored, is much like to that figure 22. called by Morgan, Molin.

XX.

A cross patonce voided, florida, perfossa seu introrfim secta.

XXI.

A cross sarcel^ or resarcile by Morgan; by Vpton page 219. termed dupla
partita flo^ida: but that which the French call croix ressercellee Colomb. page
138. differs much from this.

XXII.

A cross moline, according to Morgan; by Upt. mollendinaris: but by the French
as is already said, Croix ancree.

Colvil lord Colvil of Ochiltry. Sibbald of Ranke^llor
Argent, a cross moline sable.

Argent, a cross moline within a bordur azur.

XXIII.

A cross mil^ine by the English.

XXIV.

A cross crennelle or imbatled on both sides, undique pinnulata, by the French
crenellee and bastillee.

Auchinlek of Balmanno.
Argent, a cross counter-imbatled sable.

XXV.

A cross furchie, furcata.

There be many other kinds of crosses little differing in form from some of
these before mentioned, but none of them are in use in Scotland.

XXVI.

A cross of St. Andrew, the Patron of Scotland, by some termed a saltir Crux
Sancti Andreae, decussis, seu crux decussata.

Maxwell.
Argent, a St. Andrews cross sable.

Sable, a St. Andrews cross argent.

Little. Colquhon. Powrie of Wood cocksholm Betson of Contle. Dalrymple of
St^ir, now Praesident of Session. Carse of Fordelcarse.
Argent, a saltir ingrailed sable.

Arg^nt, as s^ltir ingrailed gules, surmounted of another Or, betwixt four
Bugles sable.

Or, a saltir verrey.

XXVII.

Or, on a St Andrews cross azur, nine Lozenges of the first; This ought to be
an plain cross, and not ingrailed as in the Plate.

Argent, on a saltir vert, betwixt four crosse-crosslets fitched gules, five
Crescents of the Field.

XXVIII.

Kinnaird of Inshture.
Gules, a saltir betwixt four Crescents Or; quartered with the Coat of Kirkaldy
of Inshture being, Gules, three stars argent: The saltir should also be plain
in this gentle man's bearing.

Mcferlan of Kertone Napeir, lord Napeir
Argent, a saltir waved betwixt four roses gules.

Argent, a saltir ingrailed betwixt four roses gules.

Lennox of Woodhead Smyth of Gibliston.
Argent, a saltir betwixt four roses gules.

Argent, a saltir azur, betwixt two Crescents in chief and base gules, and als
many garbs in fesse of the second banded Or.

XXIX.

Bruce of Clackmannan.

Bruce of Balcaskie Bruce of Newtone Kirkpatrick of Closburn. Johnston Earl of
Annandale


Argent, a saltir, and chief gules.

Argent, a saltir gules, and chief waved of the second.

Argent, a saltir gules and chief imbatled of the second.

Argent, a St. Andrews cross azur, on a chief of the second, three cusheons Or.

Argent, a saltir sable, on a chief gules, three cusheons Or.

XXX.

Argent, a saltir couped gules.

Currie. Gorran.
Argent, a sword in pale azur, hilted and pomelled Or, surmounted on the point
of a Mollergules, overall a saltir couped sable.

Richardsone of Smeiton
Or, on a fesse azur, betwixt a bulls head couped in chief, and a Gally her oars
erected saltir-wayes in base sable, a St. Andrews cross argent.

CHAP. XVIII. Of such FIGVRES square and round as are only used in Heraldry
THere are besides the Ordinaries many other figures, which are proper to
Heraldry: and therefore I have insert them here next these; and before I begin
to treat of the common Charge.

These are either round or square.

The round get from the English various names, according to their various
forms, which I have here set down from Guilims.

if they be 1 Or, then we call them 1 besants, if they be 2 argent, then we
call them 2 plates, if they be 3 vert, then we call them 3 pomeis, the French
word for aples if they be 4 light blew, then we call them 4 hurts, if they be 5
sable, then we call them 5 pellets or ogresses if they be 6 purpure, then we
call them 6 golpes, if they be 7 ten, then we call them 7 oreges, if they be
8 sanguine, then we call them 8 guzes, if they be 9 gules, then we call them 9
torteauxes.


But the French allow no such multiplicity, nor confusion of terms; and Colomb,
says, c' est plustost obsturcir la Science que l' eclaircir, c' est pourquoy
ce ne scaurois approuuer ces terms begearres d' angleterre.

The ordinar round figures approved by all Nations, are,

The besants, which were the money of Constantinople, and had their Name from
that town, which was called Bizantium, and have been generally born of old by
such as were at the Holy War; of late they are born by such as have been
raised, by being Thesaurers or Customers: For these besants are still of Metal.

If these Roundlets be of color they are termed, torteauxes, generally by the
Scots and French.

If they be half Metal, half color, they are called besant torteaux, if the
Metal be in the highest place, or in the dexter side; if otherwise, they are
called torteaux besants: This word torteaux is in Latin called limba torta and
rotunda (round Cakes) and thence sprung the term torteaux Leigh: calls them
wastals. It is given by Chassaneus conclus. 75. as a Rule, That besantae
numerantur usque ad octo, si excedant dicentur besanteae and tortellae
numerantur sicut besantae: That is to say, If the besants exceed six, you
should say, bestanted, and need not specify their number.

If these Roundlets be shadowed, they are called Bowls; and the first who bore
these, was the Family of Medicis now Duke of Florence, because the first of
that name, Edward de Medicis, who served under Charles the great, killed Mugel
a Giant, who wasted all about Florence, and murdered Passengers by a mace of
iron, at which were hung five iron bowls, and did thereupon take five bowls
for his Arms.

The four cornered figures, are either Lozanges, which are exactly four squared
para-lello grammata, and are born by Mathematicians, and ofttimes are the
symbols of exact Honesty, and Constancy; that being a figure whose right side
is always highest, homus quadratus, Chas lib. 1. conclu 75. tells us, That
Lozangiae factae sunt ad modum lozangiorum in vitriis.

The fusill is longer, and has its highest and lowest angles sharper than the
Lozanges: it was the form wherein women carried their Arms of old, and by the
old shape of it, and the present name, it represents a Spindle: If there be
many of these, then we say, lozan'd or fusill'd.

The Macle is also four square, but it is voided as in the fig. 3. some think
they resemble the mashes of a net, and if so, they must still be voided, as
Guilims well observes, page 317. and they signify the Bearer to have been
pollitick, and fit to take others in his net, as Sir John Fern observes* but if
the Macle represents a Mash, why was it cut as a Macle? and therefore I do
rather believe Colomb. page 149. Who asserts, That these Macles were first used
in the Arms of the House of Rohan, who chused them, because all the Carps, and
Flints also of their Lands in the Duchy of Rohan, are all marked with this
Figure, which being a thing very extraordinary, and singular, gave occasion to
them to use these in their Arms, and these Spots are called Macles in that
Country from the Latin Macula: Whereupon the Dukes of Rohan have for their
Motto, Sine Macula, Macla. In my opinion they look like Mirrours, and seeing
the Name of Purves carries three Macles, and that their Name in France is
Purvoir, I think these Macles represents Mirrours in their Arms.

The English call their Figures Macles, without distinguishing whether they be
voided or pierced; but if they be pierced round, the French call them rustres.

I have also set down the form of a Fret, which should consist of six pieces,
if of more, we say Fretted.

Billets are also four cornered, but are longer in the sides, than at the ends;
they represent a Brick, and therefore are called Laterculus by the Latin
Heralds: Some ancient Families bear these, to show the antiquity of their
Families, as Varreus observes, for of old all houses were built of Brick. Some
Families with us use them, to show their Original was from England, where brick
tyles are much used.



I have added the Earl of Errols Coat as an Example of Inescutheons.

The description of the PLATE, belonging to the 18. Chapter.
I.

Beton, Beton of Balfour.
AZur, a Fesse betwixt three Lozenges Or.

The same quartered with the Coat of Balfour, Argent on a cheveron sable, an
Otters head crazed of the first.

Argent, a cheveron ensigned on the top, with a cross patee betwixt three
Lozanges sable. Strange, of Balkcaskie.


Argent, three Lozanges sable, on a chief of the second, als many Lions passant
guardant as the first. Ogston, of that ilk.


II.

Leith of Restalrig. Leith of Overbarns. Leith, of Leith-hall.
Argent, a Fesse fusiliesable (or five fusils in fesse)

Or, a cheveron betwixt three fusils azur.

Or, a cross crosslet fitched sable betwixt three Crescents in chief, and als
many fusils in base gules.

III.

Purves, Purves, now of that ilk.
Azur, on a Cheveron betwixt three Mascles argent, als many cinquefoiles Gules.

Azur, on a fesse betwixt three mascles argent, als many cinquefoiles of the
first.

Gules, six mascles Or, 3, 2, and 1. quartered in the second place, in the
achievement of Cockburn of Langtoun, Weapont.
with his paternal Coat argent, three Cocks Gules.

Wardlaw, of that ilk.
Azur, three Mascles, Or.

IV.

Mercer, Mercer of Adie.
Or, on a fesse, betwixt three Crosses, Patee Gules, als many bezants.

Or, on a fesse, betwixt three Crosses, Patee in chief Gules, and an star in
baze Azur, als many Bezants.

Fountain, Hope of Craighall.
Argent, on a fesse azur, three Bezants.

Azur, a Cheveron, betwixt three bezants.

V.

Mcculloch, Mcculloch of Myretoun.

Mcculloch, of Piltonn. Lyll.

Lauderdale.


Ermin, a frett Gules.

Ermine, frette Gules.

Ermin, a frett ingrailed Gules.

Gules, a frett Argent.

Sable, fretted Or.

VI.

Sable, a bend betwixt six billets Or: This is quartered in the achievements
of the Earls of Linlithgow and Callender. Calender.


VII.

Hay, Earl of Errol.
Argent, three Shields (or inescutcheons) Gules.

Balliol.
Gules, an inescutcheon Or,

Mcnaught of Kilquharitie. Straiton of Lowriston.
Sable, an inescutcheon, chekie argent and azur, betwixt three Lions heads
erased of the second.

Argent, four bars imbatled azur, over all an inescutcheon, Gules.

VIII.

Blair of Balthayock.

Myrton of Cambo.


Argent, a Cheveron Sable, betwixt three Torteauxes, (or three roundles) Gules.

Argent, a cheveron, betwixt three pellets, (or three roundles) Sable) This may
serve for roundless of other colors; of each of which, there want not
instances amongst the Bearings of this Kingdom.

IX.

Hutton. Eglington.
Or three annulets Gules.

Gules, three annulets or stoned Sapphire: quartered in the second place in the
achievement of Montgomery Earl of Eglingtoun.

CHAP. XIX. Of living Creatures, Trees, Flowrs, etc. and the General Laws of
Heraldry relating to them.
THere are some things proper to Heraldry, as the honorable Ordinars, and of
these I have treated particularly: but there are other things, which have only
relation to Heraldry, as they are expressed as bearings in the Shields of
particular persons; as Planets, Meteors, Animals, Trees, Flowers: And thus, all
things may be here comprehended, and Heralds to swell their Books, treat of
those, either to show why such things are born: (But since that depends upon
the actions done by the bearers, that is rather the part of an Historian, then
a Herald: But however in the second part of this work, wherein I have given an
account of our Families and Arms, I have set down the reason of every Coat, as
far as my inquiry can reach) Or else others make long discourses of the nature
of the things born; but that belongs rather to a natural Philosopher, then to a
Herald.

I am then resolved only to trouble my self with the general Laws to be
observed in bearing these things, which I have reduced to these Rules.

1. The first is, that every thing be placed in its natural form, if there be
no special reason for doing otherwise. For nature is the chief model, and
pattern of Art in all things, and Art only imitates Nature.

2. That if a rapacious creature is to be set down, it is to be expressed in the
posture that is most devouring; because then it is presumed to show most
strength: and thus a Lion is to be expressed, rampant, etc. Bart. de insig. number.
16. animalia fera debent exprimi in act^ ferociori.

3. Other creatures that are not wild and ravenous, ought to be expressed in
their noblest position, as a Horse salient, a greyhound running, etc.



4. Creatures, that are remarkable for any posture, ought to be born in that
posture, as a Lamb passant, because it is naturally simple; a Serpent noue, or
circling in a knot, because it is remarkable for that form.

5. All Creatures must be looking to the right side of the Shield, and must
have their right foot first; Which things Bartol founds upon, L. Qui clavum
item sciendum F. de aedilit. edict. Yet I found it rather upon the general
opinion that men have, that the heart is in the right side, and that therefore
the right side in man is strongest, and so he has made it the noblest side in
all other things.

6. As the right side is nobler then the left, so the upper part is nobler then
the lower: and therefore things that must look either up, or down, ought rather
to be designed looking upward.

7. But if two Creatures or things be looking to one onother, then these Rules
are not to be respected, Bartol. number. 22.

8. When beasts are to be painted upon banners, the noblest position is to look
to the staff; because that is the support of the banner: If upon houses that
have chimneys, the noblest position is to look to the fire, because generally
the worthiest persons are placed next to the fire: if there be no chimney, the
noblest posture is to be placed, looking from the door: if upon Caparasons,
they ought to look to the head of the horse, or beast that bears them.

IX. If they be born to express a History, they are to be painted in the
posture that best expresses the history.

X. In some things custom has allowed a peculiar position in Heraldry; which
ought to be observed: as two Keys are to be born like a Saint Andrews cross,
because the Keys born by the Pope, are so painted: A Sword is to be born in
pale, because the Sword of Honor is so carried before Kings and Magistrates.
But these postures, and the special terms are to be found in Guilims, Carter,
Morgan, and others; and many of them may be known by the explication of the
Coats here set down.

Of PLANETS, etc.
I.

Ker, Earl of Lowthian, as an coat of Augmentation.
AZur, the Sun in his glory. This is quartered with per fesse gules and vert, on
a Cheveron argent betwixt three mascles in chief Or, and an Unicorns head
erased in base of the third, as many mollets as the first, be the name of Ker.

Azur, The Sun in his splendour, betwixt two Crosses patee fitched in chief,
Gilchryst.
and a mollet in base argent.

Brownhil.
Azur, The Sun in his glory, betwixt three flowers de lis argent.

II.

Innes, of ilk.
Argent, three Stars azur.

Innes, of Blairtone.
Argent, a fesse, betwixt three Stars azur.

Murray Earl of Tillibardin.

Murray of Philipshauch.

Sutherland Aberbuthnot, Viscount of Aberbuthnot.

Aberbuthnot, brother to the said Viscount.


Azur, three stars within a double tressure, counterflowred argent; now
quartered in the achievement of the Marquis of Athol.

Argent, an bugle sable, garnished gules, on a chief azur, three Stars of the
first.

Gules, three Stars Or, quartered in the achievement of Gordon, Earl of
Satherland.

III.

Azur, a crescent, between three Stars argent.

Azur, a frasier, issuing out of a Crescent, betwixt three Stars argent.

IV.

Murehead of Stanhope. Die.
Argent, on a bend azur a mollet betwixt two accornes, Or.

Argent, a fesse waved azur, betwixt three mollets Gules.

One family of the name of (...) own.
Ermine, on a chief Gules, three mollets argent.

Argent, on a Cross azur, a Crescent betwixt four mollets of the first. Binning
of Baird.


V.

Gules, an increscent Or,

Delaluna in England. Durham of Duntarvie.
Azur, a Moon decrescent proper.

Or, on a fesse azur, betwixt two Crescents: The upper inverted Gules, three
mollets argent.

Oliphant* Lord Oliphant.
VI.

Gules, three Crescents argent.

Gules, three Crescents argent within a bordur of the second, charged with
eighth Roses, Melvil, Lord Melvil.

Edmistone of Ednam.


as the first: quartered with argent, a fesse gules, be the name of Melvil of
Raith.

Or, three Crescents Gules.

VII.

Kathcairt.
Azur, three Cross crosselets fitched, issuing out of als many Crescents argent.

Monypenny, of Pitmillie.
Gules, three Cross-crosselets fitched, issuing out of (or within) als many
Crescents argent.

VIII.

Bailzie of Lamington
Azur, nine stars Or, 3, 3, 2, and 1.

Sable, the Sun in his glory, betwixt nine stars argent, three, two, Bailzie of
Jeresword
three and one.

IX.

Pont.
Argent, a Rainbow proper.

X.

Azur, Jupiters thunderbolt in pale Or, inflamed at both ends proper,
Carnagie, Earl of Southesk, gives for his Crest.
shafted saltir-wayes, and winged in fesse argent.

Jupiters thunderbolt winged as the former, but of old he gave ane and
throwing the thunderbolt.



XI.

Seaton, Earl of Winton, as an coat of Augmentation.
Azur, a Star of eighth Rays, within a double Tressure counterflowred Or: This
he gave over all on an Shield of pretense; but has lately laid it aside.

XII.

Cartwright.
Azur, a Comet or blazing Star in the dexter corner, and straming in Bend Or.

Of the Parts of a MAN.
Dalzel Earl of Carnwath Dalzel of Glenea.
SAble, an naked man his arms expanded proper.

The same, within a bordour argent:

II.

Gladstains of that Ilk.
Argent, a Savadge head couped distilling drops of blood, and thereupon a Bonnet
composed of Bay and Hollin-leaves all proper, within an Orle of eigth Martlets
Sable.

Gladstains of Whitelaw.

Edington of Balbartan.


Argent, a Savadge head full faced, distilling drops of blood within an Orle of
eighth Martlets Sable, a bordur invecked Gules.

Azur, three Savadge heads couped argent.

III.

Moir of Scotstoun.
Argent, three Negroes heads couped proper with a ribban about the brow knit
behind of the first.

IV.

Azur, three Sarazen heads conjoined in one neck proper, the faces looking to
the Chief, Morison.
dexter and sinister sides.

Morieson of Bognie.
The same, with this difference, that the uppermost head was affixt by a wreath
to the other two.

V.

Nevoy of that Ilk. Nevoy now designed of Nevoy, one of the Senators of the
College of Justice.
Sable, a Chevalier armed at all points, brandishing a Simiter aloft, and
mounted on Horseback argent.

The same, within a bordur Gules.

VI.

Aikman.
Argent, a dexter arm issuing from the sinister-side, holding an Oak-tree
eradicat and broken asunder near to the branches proper, betwixt a Crescent in
the sinister Chief, and a mollet in the dexter base gules.

Aikman of Cairnie
Argent, a sinister hand holding an oaken-battone palewayes proper, surmounted
of an bend ingraised Gules.

Agnew of Lochcow.
Argent, three sinister hands couped and erected in pale 2. and 1. Gules.

VII.

Turner.
Two Coats quarterly, First sable, a Catharin-wheel argent. Second argent, three
gut de sang. (or drops of blood) proper. Third as the second, the fourth as the
first^

VIII.

Blackhal:
Gules, a dexter hand couped fesse-wayes, and thereon a hooded Falcon pearched
Or, on a chief argent three mollets of the first.

Neilson of Craigeaw.
Argent, three sinister hands tending to the sinister chief-point Gules 2. and 1.

Neilson.
Or, an dexter hand holding an dagger betwixt three Hearts Gules.

IX.

Naesmith.
Gules, a dexter hand couped fesse-wayes proper, holding a sword in pale argent
betwixt two broken Hammers Or.

Naesmith, of Possow.
Quarters the same with the Coat of Baird.

Hardy.
Gules, a dexter hand couped, holding a dagger-point downward argent, and in
chief two Spur-revells Or: Others give it a dexter-hand issuing out of the
sinister-flank, holding a Simiter in Pale.

X.

Baine.
Sable, two Leg-bones in Cross argent.

XI.

Rule. Heart.
Or, three Man's hearts within a bordur ingrailed Gules.

Gules, on a chief argent, three Men's hearts of the first.

Argent, three nails (according to some arrows) fastened in, or parting a heart
Gules. Logan.


XII.

Birnie.
Gules, on a fess betwixt a bow and arrow in full draught in Chief, and three
legs couped at the thigh in base argent; a Lions head crased Sable.

Bonyman.
Argent, an naked Savadge proper, shooting an arrow out of an bow Gules.

Of four footed BEASTS.
I.

Ogilvie.
ARgent, a Lion passant guardant Gules crowned Or: But now,

Ogilvie Earl of Airlie.
Argent, a Lion passant guardant Gules, crowned with an Imperial Crown, and
collared with an other open Crown Or.

Argent, a Lion passant guardant Gules, crowned with an Imperial Crown Or:
Ogilvie Earl of Finlator.
quartered with, argent a cross engrailed Sable by the Name of Sinclair.



Ogilvie of Boyne.
Argent, a Lion passant guardant Gules; quartered with Edmistoun, Or three
Crescents Gules: and over all dividing the Coats a cross engrailed Sable, by
the name of Sinclair.

Ogilvie of Newgrange.
Argent, a Lion passant guardant Gules crowned Or, within a bordur indented of
the second.

II.

Mortimer Mcdowal sometime of Galloway.
Or, a Lion Rampant Sable degoutte.

Azur, a Lion rampant argent crowned Or; quartered in the achievement of the
Marquess of Douglas.

Maitland, Duke of Lauderdale.

Chrichton, Earl of Dumfreis.


Or, a Lion rampant Gules, couped in all joints of the first.

III.

Argent, a Lion Rampant Azur armed and langued Gules: quartered with azur,
three water-budgets Or, by the Name of Vallange.

Dundas of that Ilk Edgar.

Colonel William Urrie.

Chambers now Barron of ^artas in France, descended of Chambers of that ilk in
Scotland.

Scot of Balweirie Badzenoch.


Argent, a Lion Rampant Gules.

Sable, a Lion Rampant argent.

Argent, a Lion Rampant Gules crowned, and chained Or.

IV.

Argent, a demi-lyon rampant Sable, issuing out of a fesse with a flower de lis
in base Gules, all within a bordour of the second.

V.

Argent, three Lions heads erased Gules, langued azure.

Or, three Lions heads erased Gules: quartered in the achievement of the
Marquess of Huntly.

VI.

Gules, three Lions Rampant argent, now born by the Lord of Baluagowan. Ross,
Earl of Ross of old. Gleg.

Hepburn of Humbie.




Sable, two Lions counterpassant argent, collared Gules.

Gules, on a Cheveron argent, a Rose betwixt two Lyoncells combatand of the
first.

VII.

Guthrie of Halckerton.
Or, a Lion Rampant reguardant Gules; quartered with the Coat of Cuming.

Scrimzeor, Earl of Dundie
Gules, a Lion Rampant Or, armed and langued azur with a Sword in his dexter paw
proper hilted, and pomelled of the Second.

VIII.

Preston of old.
Argent, three Unicorn-heads Couped Sable.

Preston now of that ilk.
Argent, three Unicorn-heads erased Sable.

Ker Earl of Roxburgh.
Vert, on a Cheveron betwixt three Unicorn-heads erased argent; alse many Stars
Sable.

IX

Baird of Auchmed den.

Baird of Newbyth, one of the Senators of the College of Justice. Gordon
Marquess of Huntly. Gordon of Pitlurg. Gordon of Rothiemay.

Gordon, Viscount of Kenmure. Hog of Bogend.


Gules, a Boar passant Or.

The same, and on a Canton Ermine, a Sword in pale proper.

X.

Azur, three Boars heads couped Or.

The same within a bordur of the charge.

The same with a Saint-Andrews Cross in the Center.

Azur, a bend betwixt three Boars-heads couped Or.

Argent, three Boars-heads erased azur, armed Or.

XI.

Forbes, Lord Forbes.

Forbes Lord Pitsligo.

Forbes of Tolquhon Forbes of Monimusk.


Azur, three Bears-heads couped argent, muzled Gules.

The same quartered with the Coat of Frazer.

The same quartered with the Coat of Preston.

Azur, on a Cheveron, betwixt three Bear-heads couped argent, muzled Gules, a
Man's heart proper.

Sir Arthur Forbes, now Viscount of Grannaird in Ireland.
Azur, three Bear-heads couped argent, muzled Sable; above the Shield a
Viscounts Crown, and over the same, on an Helmet befitting his quality, mantled
Gules, doubled argent, and wreath of his Colors is set for his Crest, A Boar
passant argent, overspread with drops of blood; supported on the dexter by an
Unicorn Or, powldered with Ermine Sable; and on the sinister by a Dragon
Ermine: With this Symbol, Fax mentis incendium gloriae.

XII.

Windrahime.
Gules, a Ram passant argent.

Of four-footed BEASTS, and their several Parts.
I.

Fullerton. Fullerton, of that ilk bears.
ARgent, a fesse betwixt 3. Otters-heads erased Gules: But.

Argent, 3. Otters-heads erased Gules.

Balfour Lord of Burleigh.
Argent, on a Cheveron Sable, an Otters-head erased of the first.



II.

Lethingtoun.
Argent, a bend ingrailed Gules, betwixt two Otters heads couped Sable: But
other Books, especially the latest, gives the Coat of Livingtoun (which it
seems is all one with Lethingtoun) of Saltcoats, argent, an b^nd ingrailed
Gules, and in chief a bears-head erazed azur, muzled of the second.

III.

Cleland of that ilk.
Azur, an Hare salient argent, with an hunting-horn about his neck Ve^t
garnished Gules.

One of the Name of Forrester.

Clay-hills of Innergowrie


Argent, a Ratch hound current, betwixt three hunting-horns Sable.

Parted per bend Sanguine and Vert, two greyhounds current bend ways argent.

IV.

Azur, the Holy Lamb carrying a staff and flag argent, and thereon a
Saint-Andrews cross Gules. Lamb. Town of Perth, alias, St. Iohnstoun.


Gules, an Holy Lamb passant reguardant Staff and Cross argent, with the banner
of Saint-Andrew proper; all within a double tressure counterfloured of the
second: The Escutcheon being surmounted on the breast of an Eagle with two
necks displayed Or.

V.

Calder of Asloune.
Or, a Stags-head couped, attired with sex-tynes on every horn Sable.

VI.

Mckenzie Earl of Seaforth. Sir Geor. Mckenzie of Rosehauch. Porteous Calder of
that ilk.
Azur, a Dears-head cabossed Or.

The same within two lawrel-branches disposed Orle-wayes.

Azur, three Dears Heads cabossed Or.

Or, Hearts head cabossed Sable, attired Gules.

VII.

Ballenden Bellenden Lord Ballenden
Gules, a Bucks head couped Or.

Gules, an Hearts head couped and attyred with ten tynes, betwixt three
Cross-crosselets fitched, all within a double tressure counterflowred Or.

VIII.

Mcgie.
Sable, three Leopard heads erased argent.

Liberton of that ilk.
Azur, a Leopards head erased Or.

IX.

Rae.
Argent, three Roe-bucks in full course Gules.

Troup.
Vert, three bucks passant argent, attyred and ungul^d Or.

Torrie.
Argent, a horse passant proper furnished Gules.

X.

Robertson of Strowan. Robertson of Newbigging
Gules, three Woolf heads erased argent, armed and langued azur. Some of the old
books give the Field azur.

The same within a bordur ingrailed of the second.

XI.

Turnbul.
Argent, a Bulls ^ead erased Sable.

Turnbul of bad-rule.

V^itch of Davick.


Argent, three Bulls heads erased Sable, armed Vert.

Argent, three Cows heads erased Sable.

XII.

Schives of Muretoun
Sable, three Cats A mountain passant in pale argent.

Of FOWLS, etc.
I.

Ramsay, Earl of Dalhoussie.

Carnegie, Earl of Southesk. Bickerton Panther of Pitmedden.


ARgent, an Eagle displayed Sable.

Or, an Eagle displayed azur, armed and membred Gules.

Argent, an Eagle displayed Gules.

Or, an Eagle displayed Sable.

II.

Maxwel, Earl of Nidsdale.
Argent, an Eagle displayed with two heads sable: but now, he gives the Eagle
surmounted on the breast of an Inescutcheon argent, charged with a Saltire
sable. And most of the Name gives only the saltire.

Atchison of Gossesurd.
Argent, an Eagle displayed with two heads sable, on a chief vert, two
spur-revells Or.

Barrie of that ilk.
Azur, an Eagle with 2. heads displayed argent over all on a fesse Sable, two
mollets of the second

Dunlop of that ilk.
Argent, a double Eagle displayed Gules.

Monro of Foulis.

Sir Geor. Monro, Lieu. General.


III.

Or, an Eagle pearching on a helmet Gules.

The same within a bordur embatled of the second.



Blackhall.
Gules, an hand issuing out of the sinister flank, and thereon an Ho^ded Falcon
pe^r^hed Or, a chief argent charged with three mollets azur.

IV.

Lawder of Halton.
Argent, a Gryphon Saliant sable winged, be^ked and armed Gules.

Lawder of Bass.
Gules, a Gryphon saliant within a tressure counterflowred argent.

Forsyth of Tailzerton.
Argent, a Cheveron engrailed Gules, betwixt three Gryphones Saliant Vert, armed
and membred of the second.

V.

Mcgil of Rankillor.
Gules, three Martlets argent.

Cairns.
Argent, three Martlets Gules within a bordur Or.

Bounten of Kilbryd.
Argent, three bounten birds proper on a chief azur a Sword fesse-wayes of the
first hilted and pomelled Or.

Kinneir of that ilk.
Sable, on a bend Or, three Cannarie birds Vert.

Winton of Strickmartine.
Argent, a Cheveron betwixt three Turtle-doves azur.

VI.

Cranston, Lord Cranston. Cranston of Meckrie.

Fythie.


Gules, three Crans Argent.

Gules, three Crans within a bordur invecked argent.

Azur, a Cran argent.

Fin.
Gules, a Cran without head argent.

VII.

Falconer.
Or, a falcons head issuing out of a Man's heart proper, betwixt 3. mollets azur.
But the Lord Halkertoun has changed this bearing lately.

Sir John Falconer
Or, a Falcons head issuing out of a Man's heart proper, betwixt 3. mollets azur,
on a chief of the second alse many bezants.

VIII.

Cockburn of Langtoun.
Argent, 3. Cocks Gules: quartered with the Coat of Weapont, Gules, 6. mascles
Or, 3, 2, and 1.

Argent, a fesse chekie azur, and of the first, betwixt 3. Cocks Gules.
Cockburn of Ormiston. Ogill.


Argent, on a fesse Gules, 3. Cocks passant Or.

IX.

Paterson.
Argent, in nests Vert, 3. Pelicans feeding their young Or.

Crawmond of Auldbar.
Azur, a bend betwixt two Pelicans in their nests feeding their young argent: in
some old books azur, on a bend, Or, 3. Pelicans vulned proper.

Ormiston of that ilk.

Fenwick of that ilk.


Argent, three Pelicans vulned Gules.

Gules, a Phoenix Argent in flames proper.

X.

Parted per Cheveron embatled Vert and Gules, 3. Craws argent, aliter argent,
Craw.
a Craw feeding on a garb both proper.

Cornwall. of Bonhard.
Gules, on a fesse argent, three Cornwall (or Cornish) Kaes sable becked and
membred of the first, betwixt alse many Mollets Or.

Corbet.
Argent, a Raven (or Corbie) proper.

XI.

Norvell.
Sable, on a bend argent, betwixt two Cottises or, three Cornish Crawes of the
first. Some call these fowls Martlers, and give them azur, as in the
explication of the Plate of the bends.

XII.

Kilgour.
Argent, a Dragon with wings displayed within a bordur inwardly circular sable,
charged with 3. Crescents of the first.

Brymer of Wester town.

Seton Viscount of Kingston, as an coat of augmentation.


Or, a fesse Ermine, betwixt three Dragon heads erased Gules.

Argent, a Dragon Vert spouting fire: quartered in the second place with the
Coat of Seaton.

Of FISHES.
I.

A Sea argent waved sable in French Vnemer d' argent ondoyee ou agitee de
Sable, and is the Coat of Sadoc de Vencon chevali^r de la Table Ronde.
Craigdallie.


Argent, a Rock Sable betwixt three Fountains proper.

II.

Meldrum.
Argent, an Otter issuing out of a bar waved sable; But,

Urquhart of Meldrum, gives.
Argent, an Otter issuing out of a bar waved sable, crowned Or, as the Coat of
Meldrum: quartered with the Coat of Seaton which is Or, three Crescents within
a double tressure counterflowred Gules.



Meldrum, sometime of Fyvie.
Argent, three Otters issuing forth of a bar wave sable: quartered with the Coat
of Preston.

Meldrum of Segie.
Argent, three Otters heads couped Sable.

III.

Loch.
Azur, a saltir ingrailed betwixt three Swans najant in a loch proper, 2. in
fesse, and 1. in base argent.

Loch of drylaw gives.
Or, a Saltir ingrailed Sable, betwixt two Swans najant in fess Undie (or in a
loch) proper.

IV.

Argent, an Dolphine najant azur: quartered with the Coat of Cathcart,
Moniepennie of Pitmille.
viz. azur, three Crescents with as many crosse-crosselets fitched, issuing out
of the same argent: or azur, 3. cross-crosselets fitched with alse many
Crescents argent.

V.

Fisher.
Azur, three Salmond najant fesse-wayes in pale argent.

Garvie.
Azur, three Fishes called Garvine-fishes najant fesse-wayes in pale argent. The
midlemost looking to the sinister, and the other two to the dexter.

As the fourth in their achievements, parted per fesse waved argent. and vert
in the center a Salmond naiant proper. The Mc-Donalds.


VI.

Foreman of that ilk. Foreman aliter.
Sable, a Cheveron Or, betwixt 3. Trouts hauriant argent.

Azur, three Trouts fretted in triangle: One looking to the base, and two to
the dexter and sinister chief argent: quartered with argent, an horse head
couped sable furnished Gules.

VII.

The Royal company of fishing.
Azur, an Imperial Crown, and under it two Herring in form of a St. Andrews
cross Or.

VIII.

Tarbet.
Argent, three Turbets fretted proper, one fesse-wayes looking to the sinister,
and two to the dexter chief and flank.

IX.

Gules, an Inescutcheon argent, betwixt 3. Pyke or Geds heads couped Or. Geddes
of Rachin.


Ged of that ilk.
Azur, 3. Geds or Pyks hauriant argent.

X.

Pringle of Gallowshiels.
Argent, on a St. Andrews cross ingrailed sable, five Escalops Or. This Pringle
of Whitebank, as his representer bears.

Pringle of Torwood lie.

Pringle of Stitchel.


Argent, on a Saltir engrailed azur, five Escallops as the first.

Azur, three Escallops Or.

XI.

Per pale argent and gules, a Bordur of eighth Escallops counterchanged. Maull
Earl of Panmure. Maul Doctor of Medicine.


Per pale waved argent and Gules, a Bordur of eighth Escallops counterchanged.

Crab of Robslaw.
Azur, a Cheveron argent, betwixt two flowers de lis in chief, and a Crab in
base Or.

XII.

Hamilton of Hags.
Gules, a Salmond head couped fesse-wayes argent, with an annullet through the
nose proper, betwixt 3. Cinquefoilles of the second.

Gules, three Salmonds (some say Trouts) hauriant palewayes in fesse with a
ring through each of their Noses argent. Sprottie.


Of TREES and PLANTS, etc.
I.

AZur, an Oak-tree accorned Or, growing out of a Mount in base proper, Wood of
Boningtoun.
betwixt two Cross-crosselets fitched of the second.

The Oak with two keys hanging on the dexter side azur, being fastened to one
of the branches with strings Gules. Wood of Balbeigno gives.


A Bugle Sable, hanging on the branches of the Oak stringed Gules, Wood of
Craigie gives.
within a Bordur engrailed argent.

The Oak tree, betwixt two ships under sail; and some of the Woods give the
tree eradicated. Wood of Largo bears.


Forest.
Argent, three Oak Trees Vert.

Kyd of Craigie.
Argent, a Pine Tree eradicated proper with a bugle pendent upon one of the
branches Or.

Argent, a Vine-tree growing out of the base leaved and fructed, betwixt two
Papingoes endorsed standing at the foot, Winchester.
and feeding upon the Clusters all proper.

Argent, a fir tree growing out of the middle base Vert, surmounted of a Sword
in bend, Mcgregor.
bearing upon the point an Imperial Crown proper.



Calderwood.
Argent, a Palm Tree growing out of a Mount in base proper, surmounted of S.
Andrews-cross Gules, on a chief azur three mollets of the field.

II.

Argent, on a Cheveron Gules, betwixt three Oak-trees vert, a Boars head couped
of the field. Spotswood.


Mosman.
Azur, a Cheveron betwixt three Oak-trees Or.

Watson of Sauchton.
Argent, an Oak-tree growing out of a Mount in base proper, surmounted of a
fesse azur.

Walkinshaw of that ilk.
Argent, upon a Mount in base, a grove of trees proper.

III.

Scroggie.
Azur, a Cheveron Or, betwixt two Scrogs or starved branches in chief, and a
man's heart in base argent.

Blackstock of that ilk.
Argent, three Trunks or Stocks of Trees couped under and above 2. and 1. Sable.

Dalgleish.
Argent, a Tree eradicated and lying fesse-wayes vert, betwixt three Pheons azur.

IV.

Fowlis of Collington.

Lowis of Merchiston.


Argent, three Edock-leaves slipped 2. and 1. vert.

Argent, three Lawrel-leaves slipped vert.

V.

Argent, three Hollin-branches, each consisting of alse many leaves proper,
Irwin of Drum.
banded together Gules.

Irwin of Bonshaw.
Argent, three Hollin-leaves slipped Vert.

VI.

Argent, on a bend azur three accornes in the seed or.

Ralston of that ilk. Aikenhead.
Argent, three accorns slipped vert.

VII.

Sydeser^e.
Argent, a Flower de lis azur.

Broune of Colstome. Royal burgh of D^ndie. Kello.
Gules, a Cheveron betwixt three Flowers de lis or.

Azur, a Pot of growing Lillies argent.

Gules, an fesse or, betwixt two Lillies slipped in chief argent, and an
annulet in base of the second.

VIII.

Primrose.
Argent, on a fesse azur, three Primroses of the Field.

Or, a Lion rampant Vert armed and langued Gules, over all on a fesse purpure,
Primrose of Caringtoun.
three Primroses of the field.

Livingstone, Earl of Linlithgow.
Argent, ^hree Gellie-flowers Gules within a double tressure counterflower
delised vert: quartered with the Coat of Calender being sable, a bend betwixt
six billets Or, and over all on an shield of pretense, He gives the Coat of
Linlithgow, viz. azur, an Oak-trre or, within a bordur argent, charged with
eighth Gellie-flowers. Livingston, Earl of Callender gives the Gellie-flowers
eradicated, and Livingston, Viscount of Kilsyth gives them slipped.

Wedderburn of Eastpoury Aiton of that ilk.
IX.

Argent, a Cheveron betwixt three Roses Gules barbed vert.

Argent, a Cross engrailed betwixt four Roses Gules.

Cumming sometime Earl of Buchan.
X.

Azur, three Garbs Or.

Riddel.
Cheap of Rossie.
Argent, a Cheveron gules betwixt three Ears of Rye slipped and bladed vert.

Argent, three Ears of Wheat slipped in fesse vert.

Hamilton, Duke of Hamilton.
XI.

Gules, three Cinquefoilles Ermine: quartered with the Coat of Arran.

Frazer.
Azur, three Frasiers (or frases) argent; These are Strawberrie-leaves, but the
Painters have of a long time done them like to Cinquefoils, making no
difference, which certainly is an error: They are the paternal bearing of the
Lords Salton, Lovat and Fraser; and are quartered in the achievements of the
Marquess of Huntly, Earls of Wigton, and Tweddal, and Lord Pitsligo.

XII.

Wordie of Torbrecks.
Argent, an hand issuing out of the dexter side holding an garland ensigned with
an Imperial Crown proper, on a chief Gules two Thistles of the first. Bayne
Sheriff Clerk of Fyfe.


Azur, a Garb Or banded of the first betwixt three Thistles as the second. The
Thistle is the Badge of the King of Scotland.

Of Castles and Instruments of War.
Mcleod of that ilk.
Azur, a Castle argent Gates and Windows Gules: But,

Mcleod of the Jews
Or, a Mountain azur inflamed proper, quartered now by Sir George Mckenzie of
Tarbet with the Mckenzies arms.



Braig of Nether-Auquharsk. Mcaben of Knockdolian. Royal Burgh of Aberdeen
Sable, two barrulets engrailed betwixt alse many Towers treeple towered in
chief argent, and three Crescents in base Or.

Azur, on a Rock proper a Castle argent.

Gules, three Towers triple towered within a double tressure counterflowred
argent. Several names of this Kingdom bear Churches, Bridges, Pillars, and such
like for their Ensigns Armorial which I omit.

II*

Lord Rae.
Azur, on a Cheveron betwixt three Bear-heads argent, muzled Gules, a Bucks head
betwixt two hands couped, each grasping a dagger proper.

Findlay.
Argent, on a Cheveron betwixt three Roses Gules, two swords points downward,
and conjoined at the pomells of the first hilted and pomelled Or.

III.

Dempster of Pitlover.
Gules, a Sword in bend argent, hilted and pomelled Or, surmounted of a fesse as
the third: quartered with the Coat of Abernethie.

A Family of the Name of Scrimgeor.
Gules, two Swords points downward crossing other Saltirewayes argent, hilted
and pomelled Or, and a sinister hand couped in base pointing upward of the
second.

Scheires.
Gules, three Swords in fesse pale-wayes with their points downward argent,
hilted and pomelled Or.

IV.

Hutcheson
Argent, a fesse azur surmounted of three Arrows, The midlemost in pale, and the
other two in bend with the points downward, and meeting in the base
counterchanged of the first and second; in chief a Boars head erased sable.

Cuthbert, Provost of Inverness.
Vert, a fess engrailed betwixt four mollets argent, over all in pale, an arrow
point downward Gules, feathered and headed of the second. The arrow is given
here as a difference from Cuthbert of Castlehil chief of the name.

V.

Argent, on a bend cottised and engrailed Vert, three Buckels Or; but of late
they have given the bend engrailed azur, Stirling of Keir.
and sometimes engrailed sable.

Leslie, Earl of Rothes. Leslie of Balguhan.
Argent, on a bend azur three Buckels Or, quartered with the Coat of Abernethy.

Argent, on a fesse azur three Buckels Or.

Leslie of Wards.
Argent, on a bend azur betwixt two Laurel leaves slipped vert, three Buckells
Or.

VI.

Skein of that ilk.
Gules, three daggers (or Skeins) pale-wayes in fesse argent pomelled Or,
surmounted of alse many Woolf-heads couped of the third.

Gules, a Cheveron betwixt three Skeins argent, hefted and pomelled Or, Skein
of Fintray.
surmounted of alse many Woolf-heads couped of the third.

VII.

Toshauch
Gules, three Pole-axes in fess pale-wayes argent, surmounted of a fess checkie
of the first and second.

Eccles of Kildonan.
Argent, two Halberts crossing other in saltire azur.

VIII.

Elleis*
Per bend sinister argent and gules, a hand couped and grasping a Lance
bend-wayes, bearing on the top thereof an helmet proper in the sinister chief
angle, a Spur-revel of the first, and in the dexter base a Horse-head couped
Sable.

Eccles of Southside
Or, three Helmets bavers open proper.

Gules, three Boars-heads erased argent, betwixt a Lance issuing out of the
dexter base, Rankine of Orchardhead.
and an Lochaber-axe issuing out of the sinister, both erected in pale of the
second.

Robertoun of Bedly.
Gules, a Closs Helmet argent.

IX.

Seaton of Barnes.
Or, a Sword erected in Pale, surmounted on the top with an Imperial Crown
proper, betwixt three Crescents within a double tressure counterflowred Gules.

Patton of Kinaldie.
Azur, a Sword in pale argent, hilted and pomelled Or, betwixt three Crescents
of the second.

Spalding of Ashinillie.
Or, a two handed Sword in pale azur.

X.

Wright.
Azur, three Broad axes argent 2. and 1.

XI.

The Earl of Caithness by the Title of Cathness, as the third coat in his
achievement Craik.
Azur, a Ship under sail argent: And the same Earl for the first Coat, as
representing Spar, sometime Duke of Orkney, bears Azur, a Ship at anchor, her
Oars in Saltire within a double tressure counterflowred Or.

Azur, in the sea vert, a Ship in full course Or, Masts, Sails, and Taiklings
proper flagged Gules.



Earl of Arran of old.
Argent, a Ship with her Sails trussed up sable: quartered in the achievement
of the Duke of Hamilton.

XII.

Mcintosh as the chief of the Clanchattan.
Or, a Lumfad her oars erected in Saltire Sable, in chief a dexter hand couped
fesse-wayes, holding a man's heart palewayese (according to some a flower de
lis, Gules. But Mckintosh has altered this, and gives now four Coats quarterly
first Or, a Lion rampant Gules, as being come of Mcduff. Second argent, a
dexter hand couped fesse-wayes, grasping a Man's heart pale-wayes Gules, Third,
azur, a Boars head couped Or. Fourth Or, a Lumfad her oars erected in Saltire
sable.

Lord of Lorn of old.
Argent, a Lumfad with her oars in action sable: now quartered in the
achievements of the Earl of Argyle and Glenurqhie.

Argent, an ark in the waters proper surmounted of a dove azur, bearing in her
beck an olive branch vert. Gallie.


Of Vtensils, Crowns and others used in Armory.
I.

Johnston Earl of Annandale.

Kirkpatrick of Closburn. Marjoribanks of Bowbardie.

Melvil, sometime of Carnbie The ancient Coat of Randolph is now born by some
families of the name of Dumbar. Sprewl of Coldoun.


ARgent, a Saltire Sable, on a chief of the second, three Cusheons Or.

Argent, a Saint Andrews Cross and chief azur. The second charged with three
Cusheons Or.

Argent, a mollet (or rather a Spur-revel) Gules, on a chief sable a Cusheon Or.

Or, three Cusheons Gules, each charged with a Crescent argent

Or, three Cusheons within a double tressure countefloured Gules.

II.

Or, a Cheveron betwixt three purses Gules. Some give the Cheveron checki^ azur
and argent. Others give a fess checkie.

III.

Gules, on a fess Or, a mollet azur, betwixt three quadrangular locks argent.
Grierson of Lag.


Gules, a Sword in pale proper, hilted and pomelled Or, betwixt three Padlocks
argent. Dun of Taar^^e.


IV.

Lockart of Lee.
Azur, a fetterlock argent, on a chief of the second, three, Sanglier heads as
the first. But others give it argent, a man's heart proper within a fetter-lock
sable, on a chief azur, three boars heads erased of the first. And there are
lately some other alterations made in this Coat.

Lockhart of Bar.
Argent, on a bend sable, three-fetterlocks. Or.

V.

Gibson of Durie.

Gibson of Paintland


Gules, three keys barr-wayes Or; or as the English blazon fessewayes in pale.

The same within a bordur Verry.

VI.

RossLord Ross.
Or, a Cheveron checkie sable and argent, betwixt three water budgets of the
second: quartered with the Coat of Melvil.

Azur, three water Budgets Or: quartered in the second place in the achievement
of the Earl of Drumfreis. Vallange.


Ross of Kilravock Ross of Auchlossin.
Or, a bears head couped Gules, betwixt three Water budgets sable.

The same within a bordur.

VII.

Azur, three covered cups Or 2. and 1.

Shaw of Sauchie. Shaw of Sornbeg.
Azur, three mollets in fess betwixt alse many covered cups argent.

Gules, two cups covered Or, and in the middle chief a Star argent. Mcilvain of
Grimet.


Lowry of Maxweltoun.
Sable, a Cup argent with a garland betwixt two Lawrel-branches, all issuing out
of the same Vert.

VIII.

Sable, a Catharine-wheel argent: quartered in the achievement of Sir James
Turner with argent, Turner.
three gut. de sang. proper.

IX.

Bell of Kirkonel. Bell of Provesthauch. Kyle.
Azur, theee Bells Or.

Azur, a fesse betwixt three Bells Or.

X.

Or, three Candlesticks Sable 2. and 1.

XI.

Orrock.
Argent, a Cheveron gules betwixt three Chess rooks sable; But now he gives
sable, on a Cheveron Or, betwixt three mollets argent, alse many Chess rooks of
the field.

Smyth of Methven.
Azur, a burning cup betwixt two Chess rooks in fess Or.

XII.

Grant of that ilk. Grant of Bellindalloch. Fraser, Lord Lovat.

Lord Garrioch of old.


Gules, three Antique Crowns Or.

Gules, a boars head couped betwixt three Antique Crowns Or.

With his paternal Coat by the name of Fraser gives, Second and third argent,
three antique or open Crowns Gules.

Or, a fesse chekie azur and argent* betwixt three open Crowns Gules.

CHAP. XX. Why ARMS are changed.
ARms once taken ought not to be changed without a sufficient cause. The
ordinary causes of changing Arms are six. First, When the bearer becomes
subject to another, and thus William the Conqueror changed the arms of England.
2. The succeeding to a greater Fortune, and thus the Family of Stewarts arms
were changed by our Kings, when they succeeded to the Crown 3. Adoption, as by
Tailies with us. 4. Some considerable new exploit, and thus a Savoyard having
preserved Francis 1. at the Battle of Pavie craved liberty to change his arms,
and take a sword arg. accompanied with a flower de luce. 5. Some new devote
enterprise, as those who went to the holy War. 6. Marks of cadency, and
defamation, and marriage: of which three last, I shall treat in separate
Chapters.

What was meant by a Gentleman of Name and Arms in ancient Records is doubted:
For some interpret this of those, who made profession of arms: Others do more
justly interpret this of these, who came to the honor of having sirnames, and
Coat Armor; for till William the Conqueror's time in England, and King
Malcome, Canmor's Reign in Scotland, there were no sirnames; but men were
called by their Fathers name, as Gulielmus, filius Iacobi: but thereafter they
got sirnames from the lands they possessed: and therefore it was a mark of
Nobility in those days, to have a Few, or Lands. But now a Gentleman of Name
and Arms, is he, whose Name and Arms are registrated by Heralds, as Menestier
observes.

CHAP. XXI. Marks of CADENCIE and DIFFERENCES.
ARms are sometimes given upon a personal account by a Prince; thus Kings give
sometimes to such Strangers, who have mediat happily as Ambassadors, betwixt
them, and their own Masters, the Arms of their Kingdom in a Canton; and
generally in these cases, Arms are personal, and descend not to his Successors:
And such Arms are called insignia personalia, Noal. de Transmis. casu 33. and
Cartwright, page 20. gives an instance of this in the person of S. Henry, St.
George, who got the Arms of Swede in a Canton, when he was Ambassador there:
and the Italians give many instances of this Rule, in arms given by Princes to
Cardinals: But if Successors be not secluded; then Arms descends to his Heirs,
though they be not expressed, Bart. ad l. 1. c. de dignit. Hoping. c. 7.. 1. and
these succeed to their arms, though the arms were bestowed upon the Father
after their birth, even as they would succeed to a Crown falling to their
father after their birth, Tiraquel. c. 15. Hot. quaest. illust. 2.

But when they are given by the Prince to a man, or to his posterity, then his
Successors, who are descended of him, do carry the Arms, and have right
thereto, and that though they renounce to be Heirs, Noal. ibid. Because these
are marks of their Princes favor, and no lucrative parts of succession: And
therefore, possibly it is that our Nobility bear the Titles, and enjoy the
honors of their Predecessors, though they renounce to be Heirs, and though
these Honors and Titles were given at first to their Predecessors and their
Heir.

But it is here questioned by the Doctors, whether Daughters have right to bear
arms of the Family: as Jason observes, consil. 63. Virile officium est arma and
insignia defer, the carrying Arms belongs only to men; yet it is generally
concluded, that Women who were never married, may carry their Predecessors
arms, Tiraquel. de nobil. cap. ult. and Tacit. lib. 3. annual. de funere juniae
ait, Viginti clarissimarum familiarum imagines antilatae sunt, sed
praefulge^ant Cassius atque Brutus, eo ipso quod effigies eorum non visebantur:
idem probatur per l. mulieres, C. de dignitat. and the Custom both in France
and Scotland is, That they bear the Paternal Coat in a lozenge, limneus: de
jure Reipublicae, cap. 6. But they should be born in a fusil, which is a figure
longer then a lozen, and signifies a Spindle in French, which is a womanly
Instrument: Yet when women have been once married, they can no more carry their
paternal Coat or Arms, because, by marriage, transeunt ex familia patris, in
familiam mariti, Bart. ad l. quoties C. de privil. Schol. menoch consil. 197.
and yet to show whence they sprung, they carry their paternal Coat marshalled
with their husbands, as shall be hereafter observed: But the children born by
them cannot carry their Grandfathers Arms, Noal: ibid. No man can bear his
Mothers Arms; for Children follow the condition of their Father, not of their
Mother; and yet the mother may by Paction or Testament provide, that they shall
not succced, except they bear her Arms, in which case they may be forced to
carry them if the Prince consent: For He only can bestow Arms; and without this
the Son cannot bear them, Peleus act forens: c. 96. Whither agnati
transversales, such as Nephews, Uncles, etc. have right to carry the Arms that
are given by the Prince to their Uncles, and those of his family may be
doubted: and that they may is concluded by the Doctors; nam agnati
intelliguntur esse de familia, l. pronunciatio, f. de verb. signif. But if the
Arms be granted to a man and these descending of his body, they will thereby,
or by any such express concession be secluded.

It is most ordinar in Scotland to tailye Estates to the eldest Heir fernal,
she marrying one who shall bear the name and arms of the disponers family: but
whether the person who marries that Heretrix or Heiresse, as the English speak,
may lawfully carry the disponners Arms, according to the Laws of Heraldry,
wants not its scruple; seeing Arma gentilitia, which are presumed still to be
granted to a man and his Heirs, non transeunt ad extraneos; else any man might
give Arms, as well as the Prince or Heralds: Yet Lawyers are very positive that
their pactions are lawful, and qui liber^s non habet, potest in alium
transfer suum feudum ea condition, ut adoptatus nomen and arma and insignia
ferat. Former. tract. feud tit. de his qui feudum accipere possunt; and that
because Arms are given, not only to reward the Receivers virtue, but to
distinguish Families, and quia adoptatus transit in familiam and agnationem
adoptant^. Some Lawyers do here distinguish betwixt him, who is so assumed or
adopted by one of his own Predecessors, or Family; for these surely may bear
the Arms of the adopter; And these who were strangers before the adoption; and
they conclude that these cannot have right to the Arms: and this is asserted by
Hopping. de jur. insig. cap. 7.5. number. 251. to be the common opinion of the
best Lawyers. But I think it may be more justly distinguished* whether the
disposition be made to a daughter, she marrying one who shall bear the Name and
Arms; for in that case certainly, the children may bear the Arms, for she was
Heiresse her self: But if Lands were disponed to a mere stranger, not upon
condition that he should marry a daughter, but that he should bear the Name and
Arms; it may be in that case asserted, that the Receiver of the disposition
cannot bear the Arms: for that was not in the disponners power to bestow,
except the Prince consent. And suitable to this it is observed by Co. 4. inst.
126. that Edmond de Eincourt obtained from E. 1. a liberty under the great Seal
to assign his Name and Arms: but that the Parliament of England did find that
such an assignation without the Kings consent, was void. And with us, if the
King either confirm a right made of Name and Arms, or accept a Resignation upon
that condition, this is thought equivalent to an original right. Though the
descendent of him, to whom the Arms were first granted, may bear them; yet the
eldest Son who represents the Receiver of the Arms, properly can only bear them
entire by the Laws of Spain, Molim. l. 2. de hisp. primog. The same is observed
in France, Colomb. tit. de Brisurs: and Expilly relates a decis. of the
Parliament of Grenoble, anno 1496. wherein they found that the Cadets of the
family, could not bear the Arms of it simply, and without distinction: the like
was found by the Parliament of Toulouse, anno 1509. in Scotland and England the
same is observed. In Piemount all the Sons of Counts bear the same Arms,
without any other distinction, save that the eldest carrys the Crown of a
Count, but the Cadets do not tessaur decis. 270. nu 6.

In Germany, the several branches of great Families distinguish themselves only
by different Crests, without inserting any addition in the Arms themselves: as
Menestrier observes, page 389. The eldest also of the three secular Electors,
use in each of their Coats, the badge of their office as a mark of their
office, rather then as a distinction, Hop. c. 7. and Gaspar. Bombaci observes,
that there are few or no differences used in Italy: che vuole essempi frequenti
di arm di un medisimo liguaggio ln vary guise non sostantialmente
maaccidentalmente diversificate; bisogna que esca fuori d' Italia. And I think
that the reason, why the Germans use none is, because all succeed equally there
to the Honors and Estate. Likeas, it seems that in Italy the reason of
frequent omitting them is, because there, the cadets are ordinarily Churchmen;
and these use, nor need no marks of difference or cadency; because they are to
have no succession, and because ofttimes the cadet by his office, is greater,
and more honorable then the eldest is by his birth, Menestrier, page 390. But
our Churchmen being allowed succession ought to use these differences.

These marks, whereby the Cadets or younger Sons do distinguish their Arms from
those of the principal House, or the chief House, as we say in Scotland, are
called Brisurs by the French: because Its brisent, they break the principle
bearing of the Family. By the English, they are called differences, and of late
are called marks of Cadency by both when their differences were first
instituted, is not easy to be determined; but that they are very old, may be
conjectured from this, that Paradin makes Robert Count of Anjou who lived, anno
870. to bear the Arms of France within a bordur Gules, for a difference.

By Fern, page 155. Arms were divided into perfect, and abated Arms. Perfect
were called abstract: But Arms fixal, and terminal were these of Cadets: This
Guilims, and others have not noticed, and here he makes embording, as he calls
it to be the difference of the second Son^

Colombier relates, that in the Bibliotheck of the Count of Brien, he found
those differences set down for Cadets, which are now received by the English,
and ascriv'd to Vpton: to the eldest* unlambeaux a Trois pendans, a file of
three Lambeaux: Which is not only a corruption, but a mistake of the French;
for the beam is the Lambeau: But Guilims and others call the pendants lambeaux.
Bartol. call them candela, and Upton lingulae sive labellae: This is given to
the eldest son whilst his Father lives, to signify that he is but the third
person, his Father being one, his Mother another, and himself being the third.
I find amongst our Arms, some bear this constantly; though they never were the
eldest sons of their Families: as the Earl of Abercorn, who was at first but a
second Son of the House of Hamilton: and Findaury, who was a second Son of the
Family of Arbuthnet. I find also, that at an Indentor betwixt David Prince of
Scotland, and David Earl of Cranford, anno 1399. the Princes Coat is hung upon
an oak tree, having no other Supporters, and the Coat is the ordinary Coat of
Scotland, with a file of three labells; and I conceive that these files of
three pendants, should be expunged out of these Coats: For though they be born
sometimes as ordinary charges, and not as marks of difference; yet here they
were originally given as marks of difference, as is clear from their blazone.

The second Son has a Crescent, to show that he should increase the Family, by
adding to the Estate and Repute of the Family. The third an Mullet or Spur
Ryal, to show that he should follow Chevalry. The fourth, a Martlet, because
expecting no Patrimony, he should become a soldier, and defend Castles, which
were the only old Fortifications, in which Castles Martlets use to make their
nests. The fifth, an annulet d' or, to remember him to atchieve great actions:
the Badge whereof was in old times, jus aureorum annulorum. The sixth, a Flower
de iuce, to remember him of his Country and Prince. The seventh, a double
Rose, to remember him to endeavor to flourish like that excellent Flower. The
eighth, an Cross Moulin, or the anchoring Cross, to remember to grip when he
can fasten* seeing he has nothing else, to which he may trust. The ninth, a
double quater foil, or a Flower of eighth leaves, to express that he is
removed from his eldest Brother, and the Succession by eight degrees.

The modern French, and generally all Nations do now reprobat these affected
forms; and allow every private person to take what mark of distinction, can suit
best with the Coat, which his Chief bears. Against the former differences these
Arguments may be brought.

First, that the French, from whom these were borrowed, have rejected them.

2. No other Nation uses them: and uniformity should be very much studied in
Heraldry, to avoid confusion; and that our Arms may be the more universally
understood.

3. These, nor no constant differences can suit with all Arms; for if the
Bearer had three Crescents proper, two, and one; it were very irregular to
adject a fourth, which would wrong both the beauty and regularity of the
former bearing. Sometimes also the whole Shield is seem de fleuer de lis, all
covered with flower de luces: In which case it were impossible that a flower
deluce could be a distinction.

4. It is appointed by that Rule, that the mark of cadency shall be still
placed in the center of the Shield; as Colombier relates of that old form,
page 74. whereas in many Coats paternal, or in Coats Armours of chief Families,
the Center point is naturally charged with some of those same marks, as
Crescents, Flower deluces, Annulets; etc.

5. The only reason why it is pressed, that the differences should be known is,
to the end that the degrees of Consanguinity may be clearly instructed; whereas
if the degrees be not remote, then they are easily known without such
cognizances; but if they be remote, then their cognizances are ineffectual: for
no ^emoter degree than the grand child of the first Sons can be thus known: for
though the second Son (for example) who is descended of a former second Son,
may take a Crescent upon a Crescent; yet it is not conceiveable how this second
Son, or his second Son can be thus distinguished by his Arms.

6. This confounds all the ancient Coats, and has absurdly filled ours with more
Crescents and Mullets then are in the Arms of all Europe besides.

7. These differences do respect France in some things, which are not
communicable to Britain: For the Flower deluce was given at first to remember
the bearer of his Country; that Flower being the ordinary cognizance of
France: But seeing the Flower deluce is not the cognizance of Scotland or
England; therefore that ground ceases with us.

8. Colomber does very well observe, that the old forms were contrare to the
Rules alow'd in Heraldry, by the consent of all Nations; for no subject can
take that for his Arms, much less for a distinction or diminution, which is a
part of the Sovereigns Coat; and therefore the Flower deluce being a Royal
Bearing with us, no subject ought to bear it as a mark of difference.

And lastly though these may show that they were once second Brothers, yet they
are not perfect marks of difference: Because many Cadets wear the same
difference, and thus many Families do bear Crescents, as Second Sons of Huntly:
and there have been twenty second Sons of that Family, which no Crescent could
distinguish: whereas if they had taken another difference at pleasure, they
might have shunned that confusion; and the registrating the mark given Cadets in
the Lions Register, with the reasons why they are given to that son, and at
what time, will clear much better the degrees of Consanguinity, then these
differences can: and yet that was the only reason, why these differences were
invented. And therefore Colomb. concludes thus, mais quant a may Ie tiens
toutes ces contra in tes inutiles, pource quelles ne peuent pas conveniru a
toute sort d' arms*

The French have constantly, and the Scots frequently taken such differences,
or brisurs as might express at once some considerable alliance, or action, and
might likewise distinguish their Families from that of their Chief; for so we
call the representative of the Family, from the French Word chef, a head: and
in the Irish with us the chief of the Family, is called the head of the Clane.
Thus the Lord Balmerrinoch cha^ges the Cheveron, which the Elphinston carries,
with three Buckles; because his mother was Monteeth, and daughter to the Lord
of Carse, whose charge these are: and the Lord Couper, Brother to Balmerrinoch
did charge the Cheveron, with three hearts, because his mother was daughter to
Maxwel of Newark.

Sometimes also they changed only the color of any one part of their chiefs
bearing, and sometimes they altered the ordinaries, taking on a bend these
cognizances, which the Chief carried in chief, or upon a Saltire what he
carried on a Cross, etc. as is to be seen in the Families descended of the
Craufoords, Rutherfoords, Purvesses, etc. Our Predecessors also took marks of
difference from their Employments: and thus Forbes of Corse, a Cross fitche,
because they were Learned-Church-men for many generations: Bruce of Earls-hall
a Flower deluce, given him as a reward by the French King; which the Patent yet
shows: and there are no better differences* than any one of the ordinaries, or
to alter the ordinary lines: Thus Sir William Bruce of Balcaskie got the lowest
line of the Chief in the Bruces Arms waved, to show his kindness to, and his
Skill in the art of Navigation. Sometimes also Cadets add to the number of what
is born by their Predecessors; as if he carry two Stars, they add a third: and
sometimes they diminish the Number, otherwise alter the position, so that if
the eldest have five Crescents saltirewayes, the Cadet will dispose them on a
Bend, etc. Albiet every person may take any Cognizance he pleases to difference
his own Arms, from these of the Chief, and all others of the name; yet there
are some Rules here to be observed: as First, that they take no part of their
Princes Arms, without his Majesty's license: Such as Lions, nor the double
tressure flower deluc'd, and contre flower-deluc'd, nor the flower deluce
simple: for though his Majesty bears not these, as Kings of Scotland, yet they
are still a Royal bearing: and the Doctors assert that this Rule holds in
Spain, as to all the Kingdoms under that Kings subjection.

The bearing, or charge of the Chiefs house should not be altered, as many
Families in Scotland have done: Thus Auchinleck of Balmanno gives arg. a Cross
embatled Sable; whereas Auchinleck of that Ilk gives arg. three Bars sable: and
Scot of Balwyrie bears different Arms from these of Balcleuch. But this was
occasioned by Cadets, their marrying Heretrixes, whose Arms they assumed
without using their own, seeing they got no Patrimony from their Predecessors.

2. It is irregular to alter the Chiefs Colors, as Campbel of Lundy does, who
bears gyronie of eight pieces Er. and Sa. whereas the Earl of Argyle bears
gyrone of eight pieces (as we erroneously blazen) O. and Sa: yet this was
allowed of old by our Custom, which may defend what was done, though it should
be no precedent for the future, seeing all Nations do now endeavourvery justly,
not to differ, that so all Arms may be universally understood.

3. It was thought irregular to diminish any part of the Chiefs bearing, as
Campbel of Cesnock has done, who filled the room of one of the Gyrons with a
Cheveron: for how can he be said to bear the Chiefs Arms with a difference, who
diminishes them, and how can it be known that he is descended of that Family
when he bears not the Arms of it: For either of the alterations makes the
bearings very different, and there are original Families who differ only so;
and yet such differences are ordinar abroad.

4. These Cadets, who have their Arms quartered with other Arms, need no
difference: for the quartering, or empaling is a sufficient difference: as is
clear in the example of Campbel of Glenarchie, Hoom of R^nton, and others: And
therefore it was unnecessar for the Earl of Kellie to have born a Crescent for
a mark of difference, as Second Son of the Earl of Mar, seeing he bears
quarterly with the Arms Aerskine 1. and 4. an Imperial Crown within a double
Tressure Or: bestowed upon him for his assistance given to King James in
Gauri's conspiracy.

5. It is observable, that though a Cadet be descended of a Cadet, yet I think,
he needs not express the difference of that Family, out of which he is
immediately come; for else the Coat should be filled with differences, and the
use of differences, is only to distinguish from the chiefs Family. Albeit there
be no stated, and constant differences in France, yet the Cadets of the Royal
Family have their certain and constant differencies: Orleans carrys the label,
aniou a bordur Gules, Alencon a bordure G, charged with eight besants, etc. for
by these they are known to the people in Coaches.

It is also observable, That the Heralds of all Nations aggree, that Sisters
should carry no mark of difference; the reason of which is by Guilims said to
be, that when they are married, they loss their surname, and receive that of
their Husbands. But I crave pardon to think this reason not sufficient; for it
would only prove that they should not at all bear their paternal Coats, and yet
I have formerly demonstrated, that they may in some cases; nor does the reason
prove, that daughters before their marriage, should not bear their paternal
Coats with difference, seeing till then they loose not their own sirnames. But
the true reason of this rule is, that albeit amongst Sons, the eldest excludes
all the younger from the Succession, and therefore differences are given for
clearing the right of succession amongst Brothers; yet Sisters succeed equally,
and are Heirs Portioners, and so there is no use for their differences amongst
them, seeing Seniority infers no privilege.

It is generally believed, that their differences are excepted from that general
Rule, whereby it is declared false Haraldry to place color upon color, or
metal upon metal (though Guilims nor Carter have not observed it) But yet
seeing the instances of this exception, are only given in Royal Bearings, I
conceive it is safer to avoid the exception in Coat-armours of private persons:
Sunt enim Principes legibus soluti.

In what part of the Shield these differences should be born, is not certain:
But the point of Honor is the most proper place, in my opinion, to receive
diminutions or additions of honor; and yet Guilims, Morgan, and others give us
many different examples as to the place: for Wingfield bears for a difference a
flower deluce in the sinister point of the Chief, Ienne a Crescent for a
difference in the middle point of the Chief, page 243. and in Scotland it is
generally received, that the differences should be placed upon the point of
honor; but to place them at liberty, may lessen much the easiness of knowing,
when the things designed for difference are not so; and yet it is impossible to
place them in one fixed place in all Shields, because that place may be charged
with some figure in the paternal Coat, which cannot well admit the difference
to be supercharg'd. But to evite all their difficulties, it were to be wished,
that the differences should still be appended to the base without the Shield;
for by that means neither should the Shield be confounded, nor should we
mistake the original charge for a difference, nec e contra: or at least that
exact Registers were kept of their distinctions, which would much better clear
the degree of Consanguinity.

CHAP. XXII. Of BASTARDS.
SUch as are not born in lawful marriage, are divided by Lawyers in naturales,
spurios, and ex damnatis complexibus procreatos: but by our ordinar Style, all
of these go now under the general name of Bastards, Bartol. in l. Pronounciatio
f. de verb. signif.

It is a received rule amongst Heralds, that Bastards should not bear their
paternal Coat, nam de jure patrem demonstrare nequeunt: and therefore seeing the
common law determines not who is their Father, it were absurd that the Laws of
Heraldry should allow them to bear any man's Arms, as their paternal Coat: This
rule is allowed by Hopping. de jure insign. cap.. 3. Colomb. cap. 11. Guilims,
page 72. Farin. lib. 1. tit. 2. quaest. 13. Menoch. council. 117. lib. 2. Boer
decis. 127. But though this hold in Germany, where Bastards are not at all
allowed to bear the Arms of their supposed Fathers; yet it is otherwise in some
Countries, as in France, Britain and Italy; in which their Heralds have
allowed, that they may bear the Arms of him who is alleged to be their Father
with the difference of a Battoun.

Some Lawyers call this Battoun Barra, sive baculum, Sintag. jur. cap. 6. number.
6. lib. 45. some tinea lutea, Hopping, Some linea Tepat. cap. 5. Some call it
divise Mar: quest, 1140. The Germans call it strich, and Bachovius most
improperly calls it tignum; for tignum is a Cheveron.

This Battoun is the fourth part of the bend sinister according to Guilims, and
should extend to the Corners of the Shield: but it should be cupe, or cut short
of both, it represents a cudgel, and is given to Bastards to show that they
were not free men, but liable as slaves of old were, and servants yet are, to
be beat and cudgelled: And though in France the Brisurs, or differences of
Princes of the blood differ from these of private persons, yet Bastards have in
both the same cognizance as the French G: In England the Brisur of Royal
Bastards is still of Metal; but I think it may be varied in its color,
according to the colors or metals of the Coat, lest there be color upon
color, or metal upon metal: For, albeit some say that Brisurs should be
excepted from that Rule; yet I think that the note of Bastardy deserves no such
privilege.

I cannot be so partial here, as not to reprove an error of my own
contrymen, who make the mark of Bastardy to be a Ribban Sable, and make it
to extend from the dexter Corner of the Shield to the sinister: For the mark of
Bastardy should still be sinister, nor is it called a Ribband in any Nation,
and though we have received an opinion, that the Bastards distinction may be
after three generations born dextre, or omitted; yet I conceive the opinion is
most unwarrantable: For jura sanguinis nunquam praescribuntur, and in the
bastards of great Families this were very dangerous, for the bastards might
pretend to the succession by this means, albeit that mark was invented to
exclude them.

Yet, it is certain, that such as were once Bastards, but are Legittimated by
subsequent marriage, may bear the Fathers Arms without any such Diminution:
Menoch, Council. 128.

Whether such as are Legittimated by Letters of Legittimation, per rescriptum
Principis, may carry their Paternal Coat, is much debated: Some think that they
cannot: because the Prince cannot bestow the right of blood, as he cannot make
a stranger an agnat, and the bearing of Arms is only competent to such, nor can
such as are Legittimated, per rescriptum Principis succed in the feudal rights
belonging to the defunct, lib. 2. Feud. cap. 15. nor do such Legittimations as
these, enoble the children of noblemen, who were formerly Bastards: Tiraquel.
de nobilitat. cap. 15. number. 16. Others conclude that any Legittimation,
empowers the person Legittimated to bear his fathers Arms; nam pro legittimis
habentur and jus sui^atis obtinent, Nov. 24. cap. 2. and Nov. 189. cap. 9. But
a third sort unwilling to extend favors done to Bastards, beyond what is
necessar, and yet unwilling to bound the power of Princes too narrowly, in the
matter of honor, which flowed originally from them, have concluded, that
Legittimations by the Prince does not empower the person, who is Legittimated
to bear his Fathers Coat, except that power were expressly contained in his
Legittimation, nisi Legittimatio express ad delationem armorum facta fuerit,
Hopping de jur. insignium, cap. 7.

Albeit, Bastards be absolutely excluded from bearing the Arms of their
supposed Father plain, and without a diminution; yet it is doubted if they may
not bear their mothers Arms: Gothofred ad l. 2. de muncip. thinks they may
because (says he) the Law must allow them some original, and the marks of it:
But so it is, they are not allowed to bear their fathers Arms. 2dly Bastards
are admitted by the succession of the mother equally with her lawful children,
l. pen. C. ad S. C. Orf. But so it is that insignia inter bona reputantur: But
Tiraquel conclud's very justly that they cannot, cap. 15. nam respectu matris
agnationis nominisque gentilitii nulla est consideratio, l. 10. F. de grad.

CHAP. XXIII. Of ABATMENTS.
AS the Law was ready to honor such as deserved well, so it had not been just,
if it had not punished such as transgressed by removing not only them from
their employments they possessed, but by removing their honor from them.

This was done either by Deposition, I. aut damnum F. de panis: or
exauctoration, l. 4. F. dear milit. or by degradation, l. 3. de offic. mag.
schol. Deposition, was a verbal laying them aside; degradation and
exauctor^ation was real, taking from them the marks of honor: But degradation
wa^ the throwing them down from an higher to a lower degree, l. 2. C. Theo. de
curs. publ. and this was by the Graecians called (...).

And that which was called amongst soldiers exauctoration, is as to others
called degradation.

When Soldiers were exauctorated, their arms were taken from them, and in
imitation of that, the Coat of Arms is taken from others, or it is dishonored
with some mark of infamy; which by the English, and us, is called an abatment*
and by the Latin, and French diminution of Arms.

Some think, that this diminution of Arms took it is origin, from throwing down
of Images used among the Romans: For most of them had their Statues standing in
the mercat-place, and when they were convict of crimes, these Statues were
thrown down, l. eorum F. de paenis: But I think that this is more immediately
founded upon, L. Iudices, and l. quoties C. de dignitat.

These who writ as Lawyers upon this subject, do remark, that Arms are
diminished, or lost, for murder, falsehood, oppression, false witness, and a
profligat life; and that they are many several ways defaced, or diminshed,
such as abrasion, perforation; but the most ordinary way is by reversing and
ryving: which Far. observes to be ordinary in the case of treason, de crim.
les. maj. cap. 16. which punishment is in observance by the Laws, and Customs
of Scotland; for when any person is forfeited in Parliament, the Lion, and his
brethren Heralds come in with their Coats, and formalities, and the Lion does
publicly tear the Arms of the person forfeited, and if he be a Cadet of a
Family, he says openly that the tearing of these Arms shall be without
prejudice to the Nobleman or chief, whose Arms these are; after which he and
his brethren go to the Cross, and there he hangs up the Shield reversed,
turning the base, or lowest point upwards: Which Decian tract. crim. lib. 7. c.
31. asserts to be used in imitation of the old form of hanging traitors by the
feer.

It is debated amongst Lawyers, whether the children of forfeited traitors
loose thus the Arms of their predecessors, and the ordinar resolution is, that
either the Father who was forfeited, was the first who got Arms, and then he
being forfeited, his Arms are not transmitted: But if his Arms pertained
formerly to his Family; then his crimes does not debare his posterity from
using them: For cryms should only infer punishment against the committers, vid.
ant. Fabr. l. 9. tit. 29. and Tiraquel de nobil. c. 35. But they advise them to
crave restitution as the safer way. With us the children of forfeited parents
do use their predecessors Arms without being restored.

Not only in treason, but in other cryms this is allowed, as in the crime of
barratrie, or perverting of justice, Gigas quest. 2. n. i. and in the crime of
ambitus, or unjust acquiring of an office, Tiraquel. de nobilit. c. 6. And of
murder, Laur. per. page 45. and in the crime of falsehood, where any man does
falsely assume other men's Arms, l. ^os. F. de falso, or committs falsehood
otherwise, Rochenga. cons, crim. 127.

With us, only treason forfeits Arms once given, except the sentence provide
otherwise.

The Lion may judge with us if Arms be lawfully assumed; but the Lion cannot
take away a man's Arms, upon commission of a cry me; But in Germany, the Heralds
have power to take away Arms, upon commission of crimes, though the criminal
Judge should neglect his office, Sextin. de Regal. l. i. c. 5. number. 127.

In these abatments, the French differ from the English, both in the form, and
color of their abatments: for the English assign a delf- ten to him who
revocketh a challenge.

An inescutcheon reversed sanguin, for deflouring a Maid.

A point dexter for too much boasting in Martial Acts.

A point in point sanguine, due to a Coward.

A point Champion ten, to him that kills his prisoner.

Two gussets sanguine, for adultery.

A gore sinister ten, for him that flies from his colors.

A point plain sanguine, for telling lies to a Sovereign, or General.

The whole Coat of Arms reversed is proper only to a traitor.

Menestier calls these English fancies: for who would bear such abatements, nor
have I ever seen such abatements born by any: and therefore I rather think,
that less remarkable Figures are to be used, and possibly beasts looking to
the left hand, or broken cheverons, have at first been diminutions: and I find
that the Family of Tiepoli were for a conspiracy in Venice, by the Senate
forced to quite the Tour arg* they carried, and take a Vipers Tail, anno 1310.
And one of the Family of Fastrzenbeir in Pole for being accessory to the murder
of St. Stinslaus, anno 1279. was forced to bear the horse shoes he bore
pointing downward, whereas they pointed upward formerly.

The French call these abatements, des marquis d'infamie, and call the Arms
wherein these are born, des arms deschargees and rompues, and to a Rodomontado
or Hector, who boasts injustly of his pretended courage, they do gild the
dextre point of the chief of his Shield.

To him who killed his prisoner, the blunted point of his Shield.

To him who broke his paroll, they gave a delph (which they call un-tablet)
gules in caur point.

To him who lied betwixt the Prince, and his Subjects they colored the point
of his Shield gules.

To him who was a coward they gave a gore sinister.

Sometimes Princes do for an abatment, diminish a part of the principle
bearing: Thus St. Jews King of France ordained, that Iean A'vesnes should bear
no more a Lion armed, and langu'd; because he had abused his mother in his
discourse before the King: And Edward the third of Enland ordained of two sex
Stars, which a Gentleman had in his Arms to be effaced; because he had sold a
Seaport, of which he was made Governor.

CHAP. XXIV. MARSHALING.
TIll now, I have only treated of distinct Coats Armours, and other abatments:
in the next, my method obliges me to consider mo Coats Armours joined together,
the disposing of which is called to marshal. The French allow more Coats to be
marshalled, to the number of 32. and the English, and Germans to the number of
40. as Colomb observes, cap. 8. but I find not the number expressed by any
English Heralds in their own books. In Scotland we exceed not six; only the
Viscount of Falkland (who was an English man) did bear 33.

Coat-armours are marshalled together either to signify an additione by
marriage, by estate, by office, or by dignity.

The learndest Antiquaries, and Lawyers (who call quartring cumulatio armorum)
do observe that the quartring of Coats, did proceed at first from the vanity of
Kings and Princes, who added the Arms of the conquired, or acquired Kingdoms to
these which they bore formerly, Bart. tract, de insign. number. 13. the first
instance whereof is given, in the arms of Castill, and Arragon, and they
conclude, that when a person leaves his Estate to another, upon condition that
he shall bear the disponers name, and arms; he who is to succeed, is not by
condition oblidged to lay aside his own name and arms: but may quarter his own
arms, with these of the disponer, except the disponer do, in the institution,
prohibit the bearing of any arms, beside his own, Fachin. lib. 2. Council. 6.
number. 3. and the Heir in Marshalling his own, and the disponers arms, may use
what order he pleases, by giving the first quarter either to his own, or to the
disponers; except the contrair be expressed in the institution, Thessaur. decis.
Pedemont. 270. upon which condition Percey got the Estate of the Lucies in
England, Cambd. Brit. page 630.

When a man joins in the arms of his wife, with his own in one Shield, he does
it by dividing the Shield per pale, in two parts; on the right side the man's,
and on the left the wifes are placed; and therefore this form of bearing is
called impaling, from the pale that divides the arms, and Barron and femme from
the different arms that are born; Barron signifies a man, and femme is the only
French word for a woman: So that Barron, and Femme is a mixed expression; and
man and wife would do much better: for now neither French nor English
understand it.

If a man marry an Heretrix, he himself impales only her Arms; but his children
procreat of that marriage quarters them; the first, and fourth quarters should
contain the fathers arms, and the third, and fourth, the mothers: Thus the Earl
of Rothes bears two Coats quarterly, first and fourth, (some say last) arg. on
a bend azur three buckles Or, by the name of Lesly his Paternal Coat: second
and third Or, a Lion rampand g^les, Surmounted of a Ribband Sable, by the name
of Abernethie: and yet sometimes the Paternal Coat is not the first, which
falls out upon many accounts, as for instance, when the Heirs derive not only
their Heritage, but their Title and Dignity, from the Mother: And thus the Earl
of Mar bears two Coats quarterly, First and Fourth azur, a Bend betwixt six
Cross Cressets fitchee Or, by the Name of Mar; 2. and 3. arg. a pale sable,
for his Paternal Coat as Areskin.

Sometimes also there are four, or more Coats marshalled together upon this
account, according to the number of the Heretrices, whom the Bearers
predecessors have married, and then all the Coats are not twice born.

Sometimes also (says Guilims) he who marries an Heretrix, may carry her Arms
in an Inescutcheon upon his own; because the husband pretends, that his heirs
shall one day inherit an Estate by her; it is therefore called an Escutcheon of
pretense: but this way of Bearing is not known abroad upon that occasion.

With us in Scotland, and in France also it is ordinar, where many Coats must
be Marshaled, That the Bearers own Arms are born in an Inescutcheon, as the
English and we term it improperly; for an Inescutcheon is properly that which
is born within the Shield; but the French do better term it Sur-tout, a
Shield over all, because it covers some piece of all the other Shields which
are placed about it: Thus the Marquess of Dowglass bears 4 Coats, 1. azur, a
Lion Rampant arg. crowned Or, for the Name of Mcdowald. 2. Or, a Lion Rampant
gules, surmounted of a Ribband Bend-wise sable, by the Name of Abernethy. 3.
Azur, 3 Pyles in point gules, for the Name of Wishart; I call them rather
Passion-Nails; born by the Jesuits also, and an ordinar Bearing among such as
went to the Holy-war. 4. Or, a Fesse checkie azur and arg. surmounted of a Bend
sable, charged with three Buckles, above all his paternal Coat, which is arg. a
crowned Heart in the point of Honor on a Chief azur, three Mollets of the
first. I must here take notice of an error in some of our Heralds, who call,
a Shield above all, a Shield of pretense: for it is absurd to say, that a man
carries his paternal Coat, as a Shield of pretense; and therefore I say only
above all; this of old was called, a Fesse Target, Fern. 207.

Sometimes the Arms of one of the Heretrices are born in a sur-toutes, or above
all: thus the Earl of Sutherland bear Huntlies four Coats; and above all gules,
three Mollets Or, for the Name of Sutherland; this our Heralds term
erroneously, a Shield of pretense also, for a Shield of pretense is only born
by him who marries the Heretrix; but not by the Heirs procreat of the marriage,
who should quarter the Arms. Here there seemed a necessity to place the
Sutherlands in a sur-tout, or above all, because there were four Coats born by
him, as a son of the Earl of Huntly; but this is lately altered, and that of
Sutherland is placed first and fourth, and the Coats of Huntly in the second
and third place. I find this Bearing used, where the Shield above all might
have been in one of the Quarters: thus the Earl of Hume bears quarterly 1. and
4. vert, a Lion Rampant arg. by the Name of Humes 2. and 3. three Pepingoes, by
the Name of Pepdie, above all Or, an Orle azur, by the Name of Landells; but
these Coats might have been better marshalled thus, 1. and 4. Pepdies, 2. and
3. Landells, and the Humes Arms in a sur-tout, or above all; or 1. and 4. Hume,
2. Pepdies, and 3. Landells, either of which had been more proper.

When the Arms which are quartered, are the Arms of private Families, we say
not, That he bears the Arms of that Family in general, but we Blazon the
particular Bearing; but when the Quarters are the Arms of great, and well known
Families, then it is good Heraldry to say in general, He bears the Arms of such
a Family in general, without Blazoning them: as in Blazoning the Earl of
Sutherland's Arms, we say, he bears the Arms of Huntly, without Blazoning the
particulars of Huntlys Coats.

That the Terms of Marshalling may be know in Latin, I have blazoned the Earl
of Wintons Coat thus, In solo quadrifido gestatur primo Setonius, nempe in auro
tres Lunae crescentes Ambiente tenia gemella exlil^is utrinque florente
rubicunda, in secundo Buchania, Umboni superinducitur Vintoniae cerulius
insignitus Cometa ignescente tenia gemella florida aurea concepta.

If the Shield above all had been an Escutcheon of pretense, the Latin had
said, Pretenditur Clypeus.

It was very ordinar in Scotland not to quarter the Heretrix's Coat, but to
take a part of it into the Husbands paternal Shield; and thus Hamiltoun of
Innerveik did take the Face checkie, when he married Stewart Heretrix of
Bancreef: And this seems very proper, when the Husband is not tied to bear the
Father in Law's Arms by tailzie or express paction.

Sometimes the Husband did of old assume only the Wifes Arms who was an
Heretrix, as Scot of Balcleuch the Arms of Murdiston, and Naper the Arms of
Lennox, and did not bear their own native Arms.

Coat-Armours are Marshalled sometimes for Honor, and signify not Alliances,
nor an Estate come by Heretrices; but when Earls are created, they get
honorable Additions, which are quartered or impaled with their paternal Coat,
of Impaling I formerly gave an example in the Earl of Holderness Coat.

As to quartering we have many instances; Thus the Marquess of Montrose bears
two Coats quarterly, first and fourth arg. on a Chief sable, 3. Escalops Or, by
the Name of Grahame, second and third arg. three Roses as Montrose.

Sometimes the Coats of Augmentation are placed first, and fourth, and
sometimes the paternal Coat is first placed; as to which these Rules should be
observed, 1. If the person whose Coat is to be augmented be a person of an old
Family, and its Representative, he ought to keep his own Coat 1. and 4. as
Montrose does; but a Cadet may place his Coat of augmentation 2. and 3. because
his Honor is above his Birth: But if His Majesty bestow any part of His own
Arms, even upon an ancient Family in their Coat of Augmentation, then the Coat
of Augmentation is to be first.

Some when they are advanced to dignities, if they be not obliged to quarter
the Coat of some Heretrix, they do for a difference take Crest or Supporters of
the Family out of which they are descended, and quarter with their paternal
Coat: As the Viscount of Kingston bears 1. and 4. the Arms of Seatoun, in the
2. and 3. arg. a winged Dragon vert. vomiting fire, which Dragon is the Crest
of his eldest brother the Earl of Winton: But I approve not this way of
Marshalling, and I would rather allow a second Brother, or any Cadet, when
nobilitated, to bear the Arms of the house with a difference, except he were
obliged by his marrying an Heretrix, to quarter her Arms, or had got some
Symbol of his Majesty's Favor to reward some great service done him.

Some get Cognizances and Rewards of Honor from their Prince, not by way of
impaling, or quartering, but in a Canton; thus the Earl of Annandale got from
King James the sixth in a Canton, arg. a Thistle vert. crowned Or; and the Earl
of Elgin got in a Canton, a Lion rampant Gules, armed azur.

Sometimes also a Shield over all is given, as a reward of Honor: thus the
Earl of Stirling did bear two Coats quarterly, and over all, an Inescutcheon of
Nova Scotia, because he was the first Planter of it.

When any Nobleman at his creation, takes or gets a new additional Symbol, as
Earl, (as Montrose carries the Roses, not as Grahame, but as Earl) I think that
these Coats, or Symbols, should not be transmitted to their Cadets; but are
incommunicable, as the Honors are, to signify which they were granted. And
such as are descended from the Dukes of Lennox, may as well take the Symbol,
which he bears as Admiral, as such as are descended from the Earl of Montrose,
may take these Roses, which he bears as Earl: And yet custom has prevailed
against this Rule.

Follows the Blazon of the Coats in the Plate of the quarterings.
I.

QUarterly, first and last, azur, three flowers de lis within a bordure
ingrailed Or, Stewart late Duke of Lennox.
by the title of Obignie in France; 2. and 3. Or, a fess checkie azure and
argent within a bordur Gules, charged with 8 buckles as the first, by the name
of Stewart; On a Shield over all Argent, a Saltire ingrailed (some give it
plain) betwixt 4 roses Gules, by the name of Lennox.

II.

Four Coats quarterlie, first azure, 3 boar heads couped Or, Gordone Marquess
of Huntly.
by the name of Gordone; Second Or, 3 Lions heads erased Gules lingued azure,
by the name, or title of Badzenoch; 3. Or, 3 Crescents within a double tressure
counterflowered Gules, by the name of Seaton; fourth azure, 3 frazes argent, by
the name of Frazer.

III.

Quarterly, viz. first azur, a Lion rampant argent, crowned Or, Douglas
Marquess of Douglas.
by the name of Mcdoual; Second Or, a Lion rampant Gules, surmounted of a
ribbon (by some a cost) Sable, by the name of Abernethie; Third argent, three
Pyles conjoyning at the point Gules, by the name of Wishart; Fourth, Or, a fess
checkie azur and argent, surmounted of a bend Sable charged with 3 buckles of
the first, by the name of Stewart; Over all, his Paternal Coat being argent, a
man's heart crowned Gules on a chief azur, 3 Stars of the first, by the name of
Douglas.

IV.

Two Coats quarterly, first Or, on a chief Sable, three Escallops of the Field
by the name of Grahame; Grahame Marquess of Montrose.
second argent, three Roses Gules, by the title of Montrose; third as the
second, the fourth as the first.

V.

Gordone Earl of Sutherland.
Gave the Coats of Huntly, and over all, that of Sutherland; but it is now
changed thus, Quarterly quartered first, Gules, three stars Or, by the name of
Sutherland; second and third, the Arms of Huntly, viz. Gordone, Badzenoch,
Seaton, and Frazer (as may be seen before in Huntlies Achievement) the last as
the first.

VI.

Lesly Earl of Rothes.
Two Coats quarterly, first argent, on a bend azur; three buckles Or, by the
name of Lesly; second Or, a Lion rampant Gules, surmounted of a ribbon sable,
be the name of Abernethie; third as the second, the fourth as the first.

VII.

Montgomery Earl of Eglintone.
Two Coats quarterly, first and last azur, three flowers de lis Or, by the name
of Montgomery; second and third, Gules, three annulets or stoned azur, by the
name of Eglinton; third as the second, the fourth as the first; all within a
bordure Or, charged with a double Tressure counterflowred Gules.

VIII.

Stclair (or Sinclar, Earl of Caithness.
Quarterly, first azur a Ship at anchor, her oars erected in saltire within a
double tressure counterflowred Or, by the name of Spar; second and third Or, a
Lion rampant Gules, by the name of fourth azur, a Ship under sail Or, (by some
argent) by the title of Caithness; over all dividing the Coats, a Cross
ingrailed sable, by the name of Stclair.

IX.

Home Earl of Home.
Quarterly, first and last, vert. a Lion rampant argent, by the name of Home;
second and third argent, 3 Pepingo's vert becked and membred Gules, by the name
Pepdie; over all on a Shield Or, ane Orle azur, by the name of Landel.

X.

Areskine Earl of Kellie.
Two Coats quarterly, first Gules an Imperial Crown within a double tressure
counterflowred Or, as a Coat of augmentation for his good service against the
Earl of Gowrie; second argent a pale sable by the name of Areskine; third as
the second; the fourth as the first.

XI.

Weems Earl of Weems.
Two Coats quarterly, first Or, a Lion rampant Gules, by the name of Weem, or
Mcduff; second argent, a Lion rampant sable, by the name of Glen; third as the
second, fourth as the first.

XII.

Bruce Earl of Kincardin.
Two Coats quarterly, first and fourth argent, a Lion rampant azur armed and
langued Gules, as the old Arms of the Bruces when they were Earls of Carrick,
second and third Or, a saltire and chief Gules, by the name of Bruce.

Where the Office has an known Coat, there it is impaled with the Coat of him,
to whom it belongs; and the Arms of the Office are placed upon the dexter side
of the impaling: Thus the Archbishop of St. Andrew's bears azure, a St.
Andrews cross argent, as the Coat of the Sea conjoined in pale with his
Paternal bearing, being, argent, a fess azure betwixt two cross crosselets in
chief, and a mollet in base sable, by the name of Sharp. When the difference
arose for Precedence betwixt the Patriarch of Rome, and Constantinople, the
Roman Patriarch did under Phocas the Emperor, assume the Keys for their Arms,
to show that they were Saint Peter's Successors, Anno 800. or thereby, Hopp.
page 233. No Pope marshald or joined his own Arms, to those of the Church which
he governed, till the year 1045. at which time, Damasus the second, being a
German, brought in from Germany, (where Arms were much honored) this custom to
the Church, and to Italy, and from him it descended to the inferior Clergy.
Sometimes the Italian Churchmen, instead of Impaling, Marshal their Bearing,
Per Fesse, giving the Coat of the Sea above, and their own below: Likewise some
of them, give the Coat of their Patron above, and that of the Sea impaled with
their own underneath.

The reason why Bishops, and other Officers have their own Coats impaled with
those of their Office, is because they are in Law, in place of Husbands to
their Office: and therefore the Canon Law calls a Bishop, or other benefic^d
person, maritus Ecclesiae: But if so, It may be asked, why the Bishops proper
Coat, is not impaled on the right side, as the Husbands is, when his wifes Coat
is impaled with his own: to which the proper answer is, that the Churches Arms
take place as the more noble^ and the Bishop is Husband by a figurative speech
only.

The Guarter of England, who is the principle King at Arms, bears the Arms
pertaining to the Office, which is argent, a cross Gules on a chief azur; a
crown environed with a Guarter, buckled and now'd betwixt a Lion passant
gardant, and a flowr de lis impaled with his own Coat.

Sir Charles Areskin Lion King of Arms, gives the Coat of the Office, being
argent, a Lion sejant full-faced Gules, holding in his dexter paw a thistle
slipped vert, and in the sinister, an Escutcheon of the second, on a chief
azur, a St Andrews cross as the first, likewise impaled with that belonging to
himself, as the second brother of the Earl of Kellie.

But sometimes the Office has no known Shield, but ane other Symbol which is
placed without the Shield: thus the Admiral carries an Anchor, the Chancellor a
Purse, the Theasaurer a Whyt rod, the Lord Chamberlain a Key, The Constable two
Swords, and the Marshal Battons.

CHAP. XXV. Of ACHIEVEMENTS in general.
AN Achievement is, the whole Arms adorned with their exterior parts and
ornaments; which are the Helmet, Wreath, Crest, Mantlings, Supporters, and
Motto's, or Words: and because these are but accidental parts of the Arms, and
of late institution, as Ferme observes: Therefore we are not tied
superstitiously, to all the nice Rules of Art; but may speak of, and express
one color twice, and use, and, within, or such relative particles, as often as
we please. I shall first treat of such of these exterior parts separatly, and
then I shall show how they are marshalled together, in blazoning a complete
Achievement.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the HELMET.
ONe of the chief parts of Armor is a Helmet: because it covers the chief part
of man, which is his Head; and therefore it is made by Heralds, one of the
chief ornaments of their Coat Armours.

It was of old called Galea, from the Greek (...), a Cats skin whereof it was
made; Cassis by the Romans: It is now called Helm, by the Germans, from the
Dutch word Helm, which signifies the Head; hence comes the French word Heaume,
the English word Helmet, and the Italian, Elmo.

Who should bear Helmets, and in what manner they should be born, is much
controverted; And whole Nations, rather than private Authors, do here disagree
amongst themselves: and yet most of them agree in this, that it is nobler to
bear an open Helmet, than a closs one; because the open Helm is given to, and
is only fit for, such as have command, and so must see what others do, and must
speak to them, and tell them what they ought to do; Whereas, such as are
obliged to thrust themselves into all dangers, and need little to see others,
and speak none, should bear a Helmet closse: Nostri mores (says Besold
thesaur. Pract. duplicem faciunt stech-vnd* Thermer helm) illam plebeiorum, and
clausam; hanc nobilium, and opertam: and yet this Rule is not without all
exception, for Hopping. cap. 9. and Aldrovand. tom-1. page 91. observe, that in
Spain and Italy, some great Families bear no Helmets upon their Coat Armours;
and others bear their Helmets closs; and gives an instance in the Dukes of
Brunswick: but generally all Nations use Helmets in their Heraldrie, and
distinguish betwixt open and closs Helmets.

Because the English and French do differ so much in their Rules here, I
resolve to give an account of both their principles, and to begin with the
English.

The English allow a Gentleman to bear, a side-standing Helmet with the baver
closs: which was the Roman custom, as appears by Iuvenal.

Et statua meditatur Praelia Lusca. To a Knight, a Helmet standing direct
forward, with a baver open without guards.

To all Persons above the dignity of a Knight, and below that of a Duke, a
side-Helmet with an open-fac'd guard visure.

To Dukes, and all above them, a Helmet which is full forward open-fac'd with
guard visures.

The French give to a Gentleman, a side-standing Helmet, very little open, to
show that he should not look about to view other men's actions.

To a Knight they allow, a side-standing Helmet, with 5 Bars in his Guard
vizur: Fenestras distinctas clathris seu cancellis.

To a Barron, they allow, to carry his Helm half side-wise, half in Front, en
Tiers, as the French call it, with 7 Griles or Bars.

To Counts, Vidames, and Viscounts, a direct standing Helmet, with 9 Bars.

To Marquesses, a direct standing Helmet, with 11 Bars.

To Kings and Emperors, a direct Helmet, altogether open.

Though Scotland agrees with England, in the Bearing of their Helmets, yet I
must confess, that both by the consent of all other Nations, and in reason
also, it were fitter to give Kings Helmets fully open, without Guard visurs (as
the French do) than to Knights, as we do; for Knights are in more danger, and
have less need to command; and seeing all Nations agree that a direct standing,
is more noble than a side-wise standing, I see not why the Helmet of a Knight
should stand direct, and a Dukes only side-wise: Sculptura, sive ornament^m
quod in front est, plus prae se fert, quam illud quod a latere est; nam oculum
habet ubique. Limneus, lib. 6. cap. 6.

There is likewise this difference betwixt them, that the English make no
difference, betwixt the Bearers, from the Metal of which the Helmets is made;
whereas the French allow only the Knights, a Helmet adorned with Silver; to
Counts, and all above them, they allow Helmets adorned with Gold; and to Kings,
all the Helmet damasquin'd: But Limneus, lib. 6. cap. 6. says thus, Altora est
differentia, quod Duces uti possunt aureis, Comites argenteis, reliqui vero
ferreis, Ovid.

Scuta sed and Galeae gemmis radientur and auro. Timbre is ordinarily used
amongst the French and Italians, for a Helmet, and was frequently used by the
English of old. It is a general word which comprehends all sorts of Ornaments
of the Head, and comes from la form d'un timbre de cloche, the shape of a
Bell, which it resembles somewhat: And as L'oseau observes, des ordres des
gentils-hommes, cap. 5. Gentlemen did not adorn their Achievements with
Helmets, till they found that the Burgesses of Paris, did by warrant from
Charles V. bear Coat-armours: Whereupon, to distinguish themselves from those,
Gentlemen did assume Helmets; and by the 200 Article of the Statutes of
Orleance, all who were not Gentlemen by birth, were discharged to bear Helmets
on their Arms.

Helmets being a part of the Soldiers Arms, it is only used by Swordmen, or
Gentlemen. Bishops use Mitres, Cardinals a Hat, and therefore L'oseau, cap. 5.
remarks justly, That Gown-men should not bear a Helmet, but a Cornered Cap; and
my reason allows rather his Judgment, than our Custom, which is contrary.

CHAP. XXVII. of MANTLINGS.
OF old, Knights, and such as did wear Helmets, took great pains to keep them
very neat, and clear; and therefore they did cover them with Linning, or Stuff
doubled with Silk, which served also to distinguish them in the Battle: And
when they went to Battle, these Coverings being very much cut, and torn, they
did thereafter paint them with their Casques in their Achievement, or Arms;
and these we call Mantlings in English, which hang down cut now with Art and
Curiosity: The French call them, Lambreqains, from the Latin, Lamberare, (it
may be) which, as Festus observes, signifies to cut or tear, because these were
torn; the Germans, Helm-de^ken, and Helmzter; the Latin, Fascae, seu Lacinlae
utrinque dependentes; and Paul. Iov. oiim hae nihil a^iud quam galearum
teg^ina, Crus. page 477. and that their Institution was very old, appears from
Diod. Sieul. iib. 5. cap. 30. And that such were used by Knights, appears from
all the old Seals, Menest. cap. 8.

Sometimes Skins of Beasts, as Lions, Bears, etc. were thus born, to make the
Bearer more terrible; and that gave occasion to the Doubling our Mantlings with
Furrs.

In Scotland, all the Mantlings of Noblemen, are G. doubled with Ermine;
because the Robes of our Earls and above, are Scarlet doubled with Ermins: and
therefore oftentimes in Blazoning we only say, With Crown, Helmet, and Mantling
befitting his degree, without expressing the Colors: But since Mantlings
represent only the Coverts of Shields, and must be represented all torn, I see
no reason why they should with us represent the Robes of our Noblemen: and of
old with us, our Mantlings were of the color of the Coats, lined or doubled
with the Metalls, which was more proper than that we now use.

Sometimes the Achievement stands within a Pavilion, as that of the Emperor,
and King of France; this Petra Sancta calls, Tentorium, and is, as he observes,
competent only to Princes, though all use them not. But I admire, why the Kings
of England did not assume as well the Pavilion, as Arms of France; seeing that
is one of the special Honors of that Kingdom. But yet Subjects use Mantlings
in form of a Pavilion, as is to be seen in the Achievement of Belchier of
Gilsborough, represented by Guilims, page 409. And these Pet. Sanct. calls
Chlamys, Vmbella, or Palliolum, page 642. where he also informs us, that the
General of the Pope's Armies, carries, ratione Officii, his Arms within a
Pavilion or Tent.



CHAP. XXVIII. Of WREATHS.
ABove the Helmet, immediately did stand the Wreath, which the French call,
Burlet; and in our ancient Scots Herauldry, it was called the Roll, or Row,
because of its shape: Sometimes the English, and we in imitation of them, do
term it, a Torse, a torquendo. It was a Cord of their Mistresses Colors, as
Favin relates, page 1. cap. 3. fol. 24. and did hang and dangle to the very
Cruppers of their Horses, the Extremities being tassl'd, and enriched. The use
of it was, to fasten their Mantlings to their Helmet. Now these Wreaths should
be of the colors of the Field, and Charge; and the Rule is, That the first
should be that of the Field, and then that of the immediate Charge, and after
that, the next mediate, and so forth, if there be more Charges than one; yet
some old Wreaths with us, differ from these, and possibly these have been at
first Mistresses colors.

Though the Earl Marshal bear, arg. on a Chief Or, three Pales gules; yet his
Wreath is, Or, and Gules, whereas it should have been, Arg. Or, and Gules. The
Earl of Nithisdale, arg. a double Eagle sable, membred gules, yet his Wreath
arg. and sable, yet this may be ascribed as an error of the Painter, but it
should be reformed. When more Coats are quartered, the Colors of the Paternal
Coat are only to be twisted in the Wreath, and this Rule is observed in all our
Achievements, two or three excepted, which may be reformed, without naming the
Bearers.

If the Field be charged with a Furr, and color, then some make the Wreath to
be of that same Furr and Color; Thus the Earl of Low^on bears, Gyron^e of 8
pieces Ermine and Gules, and his Wreath is, Ermine and Gules; but I think, that
the Wreath should never consist of any Furr; for Furr is not fit to be twisted
in a Wreath, nor to bind the Helmet, which was the use of a Wreath, nor did I
ever see any such Wreath in approven Authors, and we say constantly, On a
Wreath of his colors, but never of his Furrs; so that these who carry only
Furrs in their Shield, should carry a Wreath of these Colors; as if Ermine,
then White and Black, etc.

CHAP. XXIX. Of CRESTS.
THe Ancients did wear the shapes of several Creatures, or some such things
above their Helmets, called Crista, to make them appear terrible, Virg. lib. 8.
Aen.

Terribilem Cristis Galeam, flamasque vomentem. Or to distinguish them in
Battle;

Sed cum centuriones Galeas haberent ferreas, transversis tamen and argentatis
Eristis, quo facilius agnoscerentur a suis, Veget. lib. 2. cap. 16.

Or to adorn their Helmet, Stat. lib. 2.

Interdum Cristas hilaris jactare comantes. That these are Iuris Gentium, in
use amongst, and approven by all Nations, is clear from, Limn. lib. cap. 6*
number. 74. and now all such as are allowed to wear Helmets, are allowed to adorn
them with Crests; and for Crests, men choose what they fancy; only it is not
proper to choose such things, as could not stand, or be carried by Warriors
upon their Helmets, such as Balances, or such other things, which cannot
either stand fixed, or wave with Beauty.

The French call the Crest, Cimier, because it stands upon the top of the
Shield, sur la Cime de L'escu; but the old and proper term used in Scotland for
a Crest was, a Badge, because our Noblemen in riding Parliaments, and at other
Solemnities, do bear their Crest wrought out in a Plate of Gold or Silver upon
their Lacquies Coats, which are of Velvet: And now the Crest is used upon all
Seals and Plates, and therefore, it is necessar for Noblemen amongst us, to
carry differing Crests from the chief Family out of which they are descended.

It is ordinar to bear for a Crest, a part of what is born in the Charge; thus
the Crest of Scotland, is a Lion; the Crest of England, is a Leopard; the Crest
of France, a double Flower de lis: And with us the Earl of Dumfermling carrys a
Cressent, and the Earl of Lothian, a Sun in his Glory: sometimes also the Crest
is a part of the Supporters; thus the Earl of Linlithgow carrys for his Crest,
a Demy-Savage proper, holding a Batton in Hand dexter, and his Supporters are
two Savages with Battons.

The Earl of Weems carry's for his Crest, a Swan proper, and his Supporters are
two Swans.

Sometimes also the Crest is bestowed by the Prince, as a Reward of Service
done to the Crown; and the Royal Crest cannot be born without special warrant;
and thus the Earl of Lauderdale, bears the Crest of Scotland for his Crest,
having a Flower de-lis in place of the Scepter.

Sometimes it is relative to Alliances, and thus the Earl of Kinghorn bears for
his Crest, a Lady to the West, holding in her right Hand, the Royal Thistle,
and enclosed within a Circle of Laurells; in memory of the honor that Family
had in marrying King ROBERT the second's Daughter. Sometimes it represents some
valiant Act done by the Bearer, thus Mcclelland of Bombie did, and now the Lord
Kirkcudbright does bear a naked Arm, supporting on the point of a sword, a
Mores head; because Bombie being forfeited, his Son killed a More, who came in
with some Sarazens to infest Galloway; to the Killer of whom, the King had
promised the Forfeiture of Bombie; and thereupon he was restored to his Fathers
land, as his Evidents yet testify. Sometimes it respects the Title of the
Bearer, thus the Lord Ross of Halkhead bears for his Crest, a Falcons head
eras'd.

Sometimes it relates to an Office or Employment, thus the Lord Iohnstoun,
being Warden of the Marches, and very famous for repressing Robbery, took for
his Crest, a Spurr with Wings.

Sometimes it is a rebus, that is to say, something borrowed from the Name;
thus the Lord Cranston has for his Crest, a Crane sleeping, with her head under
her wing. And sometimes Crests are taken by Noblemen from the Name of the
Country, as the Earl of Sutherland takes a Cat for his Crest, because
Sutherland is called Cattu in Irish, and was so called from the great number of
Wild Cats, which were of old, and yet are to be found, in that Shire. Sometimes
Crests are taken from some considerable Deliverance: Thus the Lord of
Anstruther gives two Hands grasping a Pole-axe, with the Word, Per^issem ni
peri^ssem; because his Predecessor (as is commonly reported) did strike off the
head of the Lord of Barns with a Pole-axe, when he was coming to his house
with an intenti^n to kill him.

It is lawful to change the Crest, and Colomb* page 4. tells us, that it is
lawful for such as change their Arms, to retain a part of their old Arms as a
Crest. Cadets also do, and may change their Crests: Thus Dumfermling keeps not
the Crest of Winton, nor Kellie the Crest of Mar; but it is most proper for
Cadets, when they take Crests, to take a Member, or some small part of their
Chiefs Crest, or Arms; as Ogilvie of Birnies has taken the Lions Paw, though it
be ordinar to retein the Chiefs Crest, marked by the ordinar differences, or of
a different Color.

CHAP. XXX. Of CROWNS.
THe first Origin of Crowns in Arms, was from the Romans, App. lib. 2. de
Bell. Civil. For they rewarded the great Actions of their Citizens and
Warriors, with different and suitable Crowns, which I have set down out of
ingenious Mr. Cartwright. Corona Muralis, this was due to him that was first
seen upon the Wall of the Enemy. Corona Castrensis, for him that made a breach
in the Wall of the Enemy; The first, a Crown embattail'd, or made with
Battlement, being of Gold; the other, of Towers. And then they had Corona
Navalis, garnished with Fore-Castle, for Service at Sea, made of Gold too.

Then Corona Ovalis, of Myrtle, for Victory gotten with little hazard; Corona
Obsidialis, which was made of Grass, for him that preserved an Army besieged.
Corona Civica, for him that saved a Citizen from the Enemy, made of Oaken
boughs. Corona Olivaris of Olive leaves, for Victory in the Olympic Games; and
Corona Populea, for young men that were found Industrious, and Studious in the
Exercises of Virtues: But I find that amongst these Rewards of Honor, that of
Ivy, called Corona Hederalis, was only appropriated to the Poets.

Crowns were still the infallible Mark of Kingly Power, and therefore Sue^on in
Calligula's Life, observes, Parum abfuit, quin Diadema sumeret, and speciem
Principatus, in Regnum converteret; which Expression I have set down, to show,
that the Roman Emperors were then less than Kings in their Titles, though
greater in their Power.

As to the Crowns now born, they differ not only according to the Quality of
the Bearer^, but according to the Nation wherein they are born; for England and
France differ much in this, though the English acknowledge that they owe their
Heraldry to the French.

I have here set down the different Shapes of the English Crowns.

The first whereof is the Crown of the Empire of Germany, which is but little
different from that of England, in the second, which is Imperial too*

The third is a Coronet of the Prince, which is the same with the Kings, only
the Arches, Mound, and Cross, wanting.

The fourth is a Crownet of an Archduke, which is the same with a Duke, the
Arch only added.

The fifth is a Crownet Florial, only proper to a Duke

The sixth is the Crownet of a Marquess, which differs thus; It is of Leaves
and Points, the Leaves or Flowers above the points.

The seventh is proper to an Earl, which has Points and Flowers; but the
Points are above the Flowers.

The eighth is due to a Viscount, which is a Circulet pearl'd, and neither
Flowers nor points.

As to the French, the French Kings Crown is closs above, like the Imperial,
and raised into eight Demy-Diadems, enriched with Diamonds, etc.

The Dolphine Crown differs only from the Kings, in that it rises upon four
Demy-Diadems, the Kings upon eight.

The Circle of their Ducal Crown is enriched with Stones and Pearls, and is
raised with eight Flowers.

Their Marquess Crown has its Circle adorned only with Pearls (tempeste) de
Perls, and raised into four Flowers betwixt 12 Points or Pearls, as the French
call them.

Their Counts carry only a Circle of Gold, raised unto nine Points, ane Cercle
d' or garny de pier reries rehausse de 9 grosses perle de Comte.

The Viscount has only a Circle of Gold plain or enambled, and raised unto four
Points, or as the French term them, four Pearls.

Barons have also in France, a Circle of Gold enambled, mounted by a Bracelet
of Pearls.

Of late, both the Barons in England, and Lords in Scotland, have got Coronets
by His Majesty's concession.

The Bannerets carried only a plain Circle of Gold, adorned with three ordinar
Pearls. Our Baronets carry no crown nor circle

The Regal Crown of Scotland has Arches, Mound, and Cross, like to that of
England, adorned with precious Stones and Pearls, and having four Flowers. de.
lis, and as many Crosses pat^e interchanged, Farm, page 79.

The ninth Figure here represented, is by Silvanus Morgan said to be than Crown
which is born by Homager Kings, and by John Baliol, when he held the Crown of
Scotland of Edward the First; but I beg the Gentleman's pardon to tell him,
that of old the Roman Emperors carried no other than these, after their
Apotheosis, and being numbered amongst the the gods, Lucan.

Fulminibus Manes radiisque ornabit and Astris. And generally all the Kings of
Christendom carried theirs of that A Lords Coronet.
shape, (as L'oseau observes) till of late that Dukes, Marquesses, etc. were
allowed to bear Crowns: which allowance had this Rise; The children of Kings
were of old, in France, Kings, and so carried the Crown; but thereafter they
were forced to take Dutchies, and Earldoms for their shares, yet they still
retained their Crowns, to declare their Extraction: Whereupon other Dukes and
Earls did think they might likewise assume the same, being in the same Degree,
which obliged the Kings of France to distinguish the Forms of these Crowns, as
we now see, L' oseau, chap. 5. des Seigneuries; and from this also did proceed
his calling all such of the Nobility as bear Crowns, his Cousens, as the same
Author observes.

CHAP. XXXI. Of SUPPORTERS.
SUpporters are these Exterior Ornaments, which are placed without the Shield
at its side, and were at first invented (as Pet. Sancta observes) to represent
the Armour-Bearers of Knights; but why then are they ordinarily two? and
therefore I rather believe, that their first Origin and Use was, from the
Custom which ever was, and is, of leading such as are invested with any great
Hono^ to the Prince, who confers it: Thus when any man is created a Duke,
Marquess, or Knight of St. Andrew, of the Garter, or any other order, either in
Scotland, or else where, he is supported by, and led to the Prince, betwixt two
of the Quality, and so receives from him the Symboles of that Honor, and in
remembrance of that Solemnity, his Arms are thereafter supported by any two
Creatures which he chooses; and therefore, in the received Opinion of al
Heralds, only Nobiles Majores, who have been so invested in these Honors, are
allowed to have Supporters: And albeit Chiefs of old Families have used
Supporters with us, yet they owe these to Prescription, and not to the original
Institution of Heraldry, as shall be observed. Others, as Menestier, think that
when Knights hung up their Shields to provoke all Passengers to the Combat,
they placed their Pages, or Armor-bearer under the disguises of Wild-men,
Lions, Bears, etc. to watch who offered to touch them, and thereafter they used
these Figures as Supporters; but beside, that this Fancy seems as wild as the
Supporters, it may be asked, why some Men use Fowls, or Fishes? to which
nothing can be answered, save that Beasts being once allowed, each man choosed
thereafter any living creature he pleased.

Shields are oft-times supported either by Living Creatures, and these are
properly called Supporters, or by things inanimate; and these Arms are said to
be co^is'd, not from costa, the ribs, as Guilims alleadges, but from cote the
side, an ordinar French word; for else they would be pronounced, costis^d. The
proper word for Supporters in Scotland is Bearers.

Colomb and the French distinguish not betwixt Supporters, and Cottises; nor
did I ever see a Shield Cottis'd by things inanimate, and I believe these
Cottises are mistaken for the lower parts of the Mantlings; but the French
distinguish, enter les Supports, and les tenans, and call these only Supporters
which raise up the Shield somewhat, whereas these are Tenans, or Holders, which
hold the Shield, but do not raise it; and such are ordinarily Angels, Men or
Women; whereas Brutes, such as Lions, Unicorns, etc. are said by them to be the
proper Supporters. I acknowledge neither the one nor the other Distinction,
following in this, Chass. paict. 1. Number. 36. conclus. 49. Hopp. cap. 9. 4. and
the other Civilians, who call all things which support Arms, Sustentacula: And
albeit the Germans assert, That Supporters are only due to persons who are
invested with the highest Jurisdiction, and to great Princes, and that Guilims
thinks that none under the degree of a Knight Baronet, and that it is believed
now that none under Knight Baronets can have Supporters; nor do some Lawyers
allow these to any, save such as have a particular warrant from the Prince,
habendi Delatores sive Sustentatores, Zippaeus ad L. 12. C. de dignitate. Yet
Chassaneus observes, that, Non interest sint ne alicujus ordinis Nobiles, vel
minus, sed sufficit ut in magna aliqua Dignitate sint constituti: so that
according to his opinion, an Heretable Sheriff, or an eminent Judge may take
Supporters; and I crave liberty to assert, that all our Chiefs of Families, and
old Barons in Scotland, may use Supporters: For besides that, to be a Chief,
was of old, and is still, repute an Honor, though it be adorned with no mark
of Nobility; yet these Chiefs have prescribed a right to use Supporters, and
that such a right may be prescribed, I have proved formerly, and what Warrant
is for most of our Rules in Heraldry, but an aged Custom: and that they have
constantly used Supporters past all memory of man, even when they were Knights,
is clear from many hundred Instances; Thus the Lairds of Pitcur, did, and do
use, two wild-Cats, for their Supporters; Fothringhame of Powrie, two naked
Men; Irwin of Drum, two Savages, wreathed about head and loins with Hollin, and
bearing Battons in their hands; Moncreiff of that ilk, two Men armed at all
points, bearing Picks on their shoulders: And many of our Noblemen have only
retained the Supporters which they formerly had: And that of old, Barons might
use Supporters, de Iure, seems most certain; for they were Members of
Parliament with us, as such, and never lost that Privilege, though for their
convenience, they were allowed to be represented by two of their number, and
therefore such as were Barons before that time, may have Supporters, as well as
Lord Barons; nor should we be governed in this by the custom of England, seeing
there is Dispar ratio; and this is now allowed by the Lion to such.

Supporters are not Hereditary, but they may be altered at pleasure, Colomb.
page 42. and it is fit, that these extrinsick Parts of Achievements should not
be Hereditary, to the end, men may have somewhat to assume, or alter, upon
considerable Emergents; but it Cadets keep their Chiefs Supporters, they use to
adject some difference, as is to be seen in the Earl of Kellies Achievement.

Supporters have been given and taken in Scotland, upon many occasions; for
sometimes the Royal Supporters are given, to signify the Assistance the Bearer
has got from the Crown: Thus Bruce of Clakmannan got the Royal Suporters. But
without a special Warrant, none can assume, nor can the Lion bestow the
Supporters of the Prince. Thus also Sir Philip Moubray of Barnbugle, having
been forfeited by King Robert the Bruce, the Lands were restored to his
Daughter; in requital of which favor, the Husband and all the Family since,
have a Man and Woman for their Supporters.

Sometimes also, a part of the Benefactors Arms are taken as Supporters: And
thus the Lairds of Dundass did take the Lions, which was the Earl of Marches
Arms, to testify how much they were obliged to that Family. Sometimes they are
taken to signify the Employment and Humor of the Chooser; Thus the Lord Rae,
when he went to Germany with his Regiment, did take his Arms supported on the
dexter side by a Pick-man armed, at all parts proper, and on the sinister, by a
Musquetier proper. By Supporters, sometimes the occasion of the Bearers Honors
is signified; and thus the Earl of Panmure changed his old Supporters to two
Grew-hounds, because he was first noticed by King James upon the occasion of
his entertaining him with excellent sport in the Moor of Monrowman.

Some use to adorn their Supporters with a part of the Charge; and thus the
Earl of Monteith adorns the collars of the Lions, which are his Supporters,
with Escalops, which are a part of his charge; and the Lord of Innes, the
collars of his Grew-hounds with three Stars, which are the Charge.

The Germans and Spaniards sometimes want Supporters, and sometimes takes
Supporters, which seems very irregular; for sometimes they have the head of a
Lion, or other Beasts, at the opposite corners of their Shields; and sometimes
their Crest is a Serpent, whose body surrounds the Shield; and sometimes their
Shields are surrounded with the Banners which they have taken from the Enemies.

It is given as a Rule by the French Heralds, that only sovereign Princes, can
use Angels for their Supporters; but I see no reason for that Rule, nor find I
it in the Authors of any other Nation; so that I believe this Rule holds only
in France, where Angels are the Supporters of the Prince, and so should not be
used by any subject without permission: But in Scotland, the Lords Borthwick
and Iedburgh, have long had Angels for their Supporters, which were their old
Supporters before they were Noblemen.

The Compartment is that part of the Achievement, whereupon the the Supporters
stand, and though none have offered to conjecture what gave the first occasion
to Compartments in Heraldry, yet I conceive that the Compartment represents the
Bearers Lands and Territories; though sometimes they are bestowed in Recompense
of some honorable Action: And thus the Earls of Dowglass got the privilege of
having their Supporters to stand within a Pale of Wood wreathed, because the
Earl of Dowglass, in the Reign of King Robert the Bruce, did defeat the English
in Iedburgh Forest, and that they might not escape, cause wreathe and impale
in the night that part of the Wood, by which he conjectured they might make
their escape.

These Compartments were ordinarily allowed to sovereign Princes only, nor know
I any subjects in Britain, whose Arms stood on a Compartment, save those of the
Marquess of Dowglass above set down, and that of the Earl of Pearth, who has
for his Compartment, a Galtrap used in War; albeit of late, Compartments are
become more common: And yet some Families in Scotland have certain Creatures,
upon which their Achievements stands, as the Lord of Dundass, whose
Achievement has for many hundreds of years, stood upon a Salamander in flames
proper; and Robertsone of Strowan gives, a monstrous Man lying under the
Escutcheon chained, which was given him for his taking the Murderer of King
James the first.

Women generally use no Supporters; but they surround their Shields with a
Cord of their colors, which the French call, Cordeliere, or las d'amour, the
Lace of Love, Cingulus laqueatus in se insertus, born first by the Relict of
Charles VIII. as some say, in veneration to St. Francis, Patron of the
Cordeliers, Pet. Sanct. page 639. I find Muriel, Countess of Strathern; to have
carried her Shield, Anno 1284. with one Supporter, viz. A Falcon standing upon
the Neck of a Duck, which with the Neck lies under the Escutcheon, and both
Shield and Supporter are within a Lozenge.

CHAP. XXXII. Of MOTTOS, or DEVISES.
OF old, Men did choose some Sentence or Word, whereby they expressed somewhat,
and yet concealed somewhat of their genius and inclination: This being carried
by Knights upon their Arms, and being ordinarily relative to them, or
explicatory of them, did give ocasion to Heralds to account these as fit
Ornaments of Armories. The English call this a Word; the French, a Devise; the
Italians, a Motto; the Scots, a Ditton; the Latin, Epigraphe; the Grecians,
(...).

It is placed by the French, in a scroll above the Achievement; but in my
opinion, if it relate to the Crest, it should be placed above; but if it relate
to the Armor, it should be placed under the Achievement, that so it may be
near to the Armor to which it relates.

That Dittons or Words relate sometimes to the Bearing, is clear by many
instances; Thus the Earl of Glencairn bears, Arg. a Shake^fork sable, and his
Word is, Over fork over. Sometimes, and most ordinarily, to the Crest, as the
Earl of Kinghorn has for his Crest, a Maid, holding a Thistle vert in her hand,
within a Garland or Wreath vert, and or; and his Motto is, In te Domine
speravi, for having gained the affection of King Robert the second's daughter,
he was much crossed in his Match, but having at last married her, he took that
Crest, and the Motto relative to it.

The Earl of Galloway has for his Crest, a Pelican feeding her young ones in a
nest, or; and the Motto is, Virescit vulnere Virtus.

And yet Burnet of Burnetland, who has for his Crest, a Hand holding a pruning
Knife, pruning a Hollen-tree all proper, has the same Motto: and having
pursued Burnet of Lees before Lindsay of the Mount then Lion, to change his
Motto; Lees did thereupon take for his Motto, Alterius non sit qui potest esse
suus, alluding to the occasion.

Sometimes it is relative to the Supporters: Thus the Supporters of Buccleugh,
were two Ladies in rich and antique Apparel az. their lokes over their
shoulders, and the Word is, Amo, which was assumed by his Predecessors, when he
got his first Estate by marrying the Heretrix of Murdistone. Sometimes it
relates to the Supporters and Compartment: Thus the Earl of Pearth gives for
his Supporters, two Savages with Battons on their shoulders, and under their
feet, a Galtrap, with this Motto, Gang warrily.

Sometimes it is relative to the difference or mark of Cadencie: Thus the Earl
of Kellie, a brother of the Earl of Mar, gave for his Word, Decori decus addit
avito.

Sometimes the Word is relative to some considerable Action, and to neither
Arms, Crest, nor Supporters: And thus the Earl of Stirling, having planted Nova
Scotia, the Word he took was, Per Mare per Terras.

Sometimes they are but a mere Rebus, alluding to the Name,

Sometimes to the Bearers Office, as Forresters Motto is, Blow Hunter thy horn;
The Lord Iohnstoun, when Warden of the Marches, Light thieves all, id est,
Light from your Horses and render your selves. Sometimes they serve to remember
a family to be ware of a misfortune: Thus the Lord Maxwell being forfeited, and
thereafter restored, took for his Motto, Reverisco, I stand in awe to offend.

Sometimes they show the Bearers Origin more than the Arms do: Thus the
Mcphersons have for their Motto, Touch not the Cat gloveless, to show they are
of the Clanchattan.

These Dittons serve ofttimes to instruct us, what is the true Bearing: Thus
the Earl of Glencairn's Ditton, Fork over fork, shows that his Bearing is a
Fork, and not an Episcopal Pale, as some would have it: and though Bailzie of
Lamingtons Arms are by some blazoned Mollets, (Spurryals) yet that they are
Stars appears from the Motto, which is, Quid clarius astris.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of SLVGHORNS, or the Cry of War.
NOt unlike these Motto's are our Slughorns, which are called Cris de guerre in
France. The use of them is either to serve as a Watchword to all of one Family,
or are the name of the place at which a Family should meet in time of War: And
thus the Mckenzies have for their Slughorn, Tulloch Ard, which is the place at
which this Clan does meet; and the Name of Hume have for their Slughorn (or
Slogan, as our Southern Shires term it) a Hume, a Hume: For it is most ordinar
to have either the Name of the Family who do meet, or the Name of the Place at
which they do meet: And this Word or Cry was proclaimed everywhere, by a person
who carried a Cross of wood burning, or a fiery Cross, as we call it, by which
and by the cry of War or Slogan, all the Cadets of the Family were advertised
to meet at the ordinar place; For of old, all of a Family did dwell in a
Neighborhood. From which we may conclude, that these Words are the Marks of
Greatness and of Antiquity; nor were they of old allowed to any but to the
Chiefs of Clans, and to great men, who had many Followers, Vassals, and
Dependers; and in effect they are useless to all others. Menestier allows them
only to such as had power of carrying a Displayed Banner, and says, that they
were taken from the Name of the Princes, or Great Men who did command. 2. From
the chief place where they were to rendezvous. 3. Some used the Name of the
Family out of which they were descended. 4. The Name of the Saint they adored.
5. The Design they were about. 6. Some remarkable and happy Accident relating
to the Family, and these Slughorns were not only used in public Rendezvouses,
but in private Combats, upon which occasions the Heralds used to cry aloud the
Slughorn of the Combatant, when he entered the lists, and the beholders used to
cry out cheerfully when he prevailed.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of DEVISES.
THough we confound Devises and Motto's, yet they differ much; for a Devise
properly is a painted Metaphor, Metaphora in fatto, as the Italians call them,
wherein one thing is represented by another to which it resembles: The painted
Resemblance is called the body of the Devise, and the Word whereby these are
explained, the souls of the Devise: And thus it appears, that a Devise
comprehends somewhat like to both Crest and Motto, and that some Authors are
mistaken, who make Devises to be either such as are all soul, such as the
Pathetick Sentences used by some, to express their Inclinations; or those that
are all Body, such as the ancient Hierogliphicks; or such as are composed of
Soul and Body, which are indeed the true Devises.

Some believe that Devises are as ancient as Antisthenes, who gave Cephisolode
for his Devise, Incense burning, with this Word, (...), that is to say, I
please whilst I consume. But others think that Devises were no older than
Paulus Iovius; and yet Petra Sancta, lib. ^. simbol. heroic. asserts, That the
Thistle taken by Achaius King of Scots, when he made his Alliance with
Charlemaigne, with the Word, Nemo me impune lacesset, is the ancientest Devise
now upon record and all praise it as very regular and pretty. But some think it
ought to be Lacessit, because the present time shows best the nature of the
thing, yet Lacesset has more of daring and Gallantry.

The ordinary Rules in making Devises (which Scipione Ammirata, calls Filosofia
del cavaliere, are these as to the Body of the Devise, 1. That nothing
Monstrous be used, for the easilier it be understood, the better it is. 2.
Things of different Natures ought not to be joined together, for else it were
too easy to make Devises, and would also breed Confusion, and for the same
reason too many things must not be represented, and more than four are
irregular, and even two or three are irregular, except NEMO ME IMPUNE LACESSET
they relate to one Design. 3. No parts of a man's body must be taken for a
Devise, because say they, that were to represent man by man; but I think this a
mistake, for some one part of a man's body, may well with some posture or
addition, represent the inclination or design of a living man, such as a Hand
with a Laurel, or a Heart in Flames, etc. 4. Because a Devise should be a Noble
and Pleasant Representation, therefore Devils, vile Animals, or rustic and
mean Mechannick Instruments, ought not to be used. 5. For the same reason, the
thing that is put in the Devise, ought to be put in its n^blest posture, as a
Lion rather rampant than sleeping. 6. They ought to be modest, and thus the
present French Kings Devise, which is a Sun, with the Word, Nec pluribus impar,
is very faulty, because very vain. 7. The Body of the Devise should be things
known and apparent, and therefore Flowers or Beasts not known amongst us, ought
not to be used; and thus some blamed that excellent Devise taken by Queen Mary
of Scotland, after the Death of Francis the II. of France her Husband, which
was a Liquorish Stalk with this Word, Dulce meum terra tegit.

The Rules relat^ng to the words of the Devise are, 1. That they be not too
general, and such as might be used to almost any thing. 2. That the words do
not express as fully the things represented, as if you saw the thing it self;
for else the representation were useless, as una Hirundo non facit ver; and
this is called an Emblem, and not a Devise: And therefore the words of a
Devise must have still something that is mysteriously imperfect, as ut vivat,
under a Phoenix burning; and cominus and eminus, to a Porcupine, without adding
the word ferit. 3. We must not for the same reason express the thing
represented in the words of the Devise, so we must not say, ita Phoenix, or ut
vivat Phoenix. 4. The words must relate to the thing, and not to the person,
and thus where the Devise was gold in a Furnace, these words, Domine probasti
me, are censured, because they are not applicable to the Gold. 5. The words
must not be clenching, or equivocall, for that were to make Devises mere
Aenigmata.

The Blazon of the Achievement of the King of SCOTLAND, and the Reasons of
that Bearing.
THe Most High and Mighty Monarch, CHARLES the II, gives, as the Sovereign
Achievement of His Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND, Or, a Lion Rampant gules,
armed and langued azure, within a double Tressure flowred, and counterflowred
with Flowers de lis of the second. Encirled with the Order of Scotland, the
same being composed of Rue and Thistles, having the Image of St. Andrew, with
his Cross on his Breast; above the Shield, an Helmet, answerable to His
Majesty's High Quality and Jurisdiction, with a Mantle Or doubled Ermine,
adorned with an Imperial Crown, beautified with Crosses patee, and Flowers de
lis, surmounted on the Top for His Majesty's Crest of a Lion sejant, full faced
gules, Crowned Or, holding in his dexter paw, a naked Sword proper, and in the
sinister, a Scepter, both erected pale-wayes: supported by two Unicorns argent,
crowned with Imperial, and gorged with open Crowns, to the last chains affixed,
passing betwixt their fore Legs, and reflexed over their Backs Or, he on the
dexter embracing, and bearing up a Banner of cloth of Gold, charged with the
Royal Arms of Scotland, and he on the sinister, another Banner azure, charged
with a St. Andrews Cross argent, both standing on a Compartment placed
underneath, from which issue two Thistles, one toward each side of the
Escutcheon, and for His Majesty's Royal Motto's in an Scroll above all, In
Defense, and under, in the Table of the Compartment, Nemo me impune lacesset.

The Historians of our own and Foreign Nations assert, That Fergus took this
Lion for his Arms, when he did beat the Picts: And thus Hopingius, cap. 6* page
3. 3. tells us, That cum Picti in agros Scotorum copias primum ducerent, quibus
haud minus cupide, quam strenue obviam ivit Fergusius sublatis Signis, and
rumpendo ipsorum claustra, assumpsitque Leonem rubeum erectum, aurea facie
descriptum, cauda tergum, ut fere mos est, dum se ad pugnam incitat, verberans,
eoque generosam iracundiam significans. Vid. etiam Beyerlink. Tom. 4. Theatr.
vit. tit. signa page 324. Pet. Gregor. de Republ. lib. 6. cap. 16. Limneus de
jur. publ. lib. 6. number. 86. Memen. Ord. Equit. Card. page 146. It is observed
by Boethius lib. 1. hist. cap. 7. and lib. 10. that the Crown with which the
Lion born as a Crest, is crowned, is Corona vallaris, though our Painters crown
him with an Imperial Crown; and certainly a Corona vallaris agrees better with
the breaking of the Picts Barriers, for which this Crest was at first assumed.

The double Tressure flowred, and counterflowred, was bestowed upon our Kings
by Charlemaigne, when he entered in a League with Achaius King of Scots, to show
that the French Lillies should still defend and guard the Scottish Lion: The
word is Trescheur in the French, which comes from Tressouer or Tressoir, a
tressing; and I conceive that these Tresses were introduced in Heraldry, upon
Coat-Armours, to represent the Silver and Gold Laces, with which Coats are
usualy adorned. Hoping* also in the place formerly cited, tells us, That
Charlemaigne adorned our Crown (being then Emperor as well as King of France)
with four Lillies and four Crosses, as a Reward for, and an Encouragement to
the Scots, to continue in the Christian Faith, Acceptis in Coronae circo,
quatuor Liliis aureis, cum salutiferae Crucis quatuor aureis signis paulo
eminentioribus, paribus intervallis discretis, ut inde Scotiae Gentis
Christianae Religionis, inviolataeque fidei observatio omnibus dignosceretur.

The Royal Badges and ordinary Symbols of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND are,

A Thistle of Gold crowned.

The white Cross of St. Andrew in a blue Field. The Standard Bearing.

St. Andrews Cross is a Badge derived to us from the Picts, for this Cross
having appeared to Achaius King of the Scots, and Hungus King of the Picts,
before a Battle with Athelstane; and St. Andrew having promised to these Kings,
that they should be always victorious when that Sign appeared: The Picts and
their Kings did use it in their Banners, and they being extinguished, the Scots
assumed the Badge. But the order of the Thistle was erected by Achaius, and
this I have set down, to clear a contradiction, which some late English Authors
endeavor to fasten DIEV ET MON DROIT
upon our Historians, Chassan. page 1. confid. 38. conclus. 17. The Reason why
the Cross is white in a blew Field, is, because this Cross appeared as a Flash
of Light shining in the azure Firmament.

The Collar of the Order is composed of Thistles, interwoven and linked with
Sprigs or Leaves of Rue all of Gold, having thereunto pendent on a blew Rundle,
the Image of St. Andrew, his Vesture of Cloth of Gold, with the white Cross of
his Martyrdom on his Breast, and in a circle invironing the Figure beautified
with pearls, This Epigraph written, Nemo me impune lacesset; Though some think
that it should be, Nemo me impune lacessit, in the present time, as all other
Motto's are; but albeit the present time marks more the nature of the thing:
yet the future is more menacing, and expresses more of courage, and this
Thistle is choosed not for its nature, but for its aptness to express this
effect of courage.

The ordinary and common Ensign worn by the Knights of the Order, was a green
Ribband, whereat hung a thistle of Gold crowned with an Imperial Crown, within
a Circle also of Gold, bearing the foresaid Motto, Nemo me impune lacesset.

Likewayes upon the Feast of St. Andrew yearlie, being the 30 day of Noevmber,
when the Knights met solemnly in the Cathedral Church of the Town of St.
Andrews for celebrating the feast, they were, during the Solemnity, richly
apparelled, and wore their Parliament Robes; having fixed on their left
shoulders an azure Rundle, on which was embroydred St. Andrews Cross argent,
environed in the center, with a Crown beautified with Flowers de lis Or.

The Blazon of the Achievement of His Majesty of Great BRITAIN.
THe Most High and Mighty Monarch CHARLES the II. by the Grace of GOD, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. For His
Majesty's Achievement, and Sovereign Ensigns Armorial, bears these Royal
Coats quarterly quartered, viz. First, Or, a Lion Rampant, within a double
Tressure counter-flowerdelised gules, armed and langued azure, as the Royal
Arms of Scotland: Second, quartered, first and last azure, three Flowers de lis
Or, as the Royal Arms of France: Second and third gules, three Lions passant
guardant in pale Or, for the Royal Ensigns of England: Third, azure, an Irish
Harp Or, stringed argent, for the Ensign of His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland:
Fourth and last, in all points as the first. All within the Orders of St.
Andrew and of the Garter. Above the same an Helmet answerable to His Majesty's
sovereign Jurisdiction, and thereon a Mantle of Cloth of Gold doubled Ermine,
adorned with an Imperial Crown, surmounted on the Top for His Majesty's Crest
of a Lion sejant full faced gules, Crowned Or, holding in his dexter paw, a
naked Sword, and in the sinister a Scepter, both erected: supported on the
dexter by an Unicorn argent, crowned with an Imperial, and gorged with an open
Crown; to this a gold chain affixed, passing betwixt his fore Legs, and
reflexed over his Back: and on the sinister, by a Lion rampant guardant or,
crowned also with an Imperial Crown as the other; the first embracing and
bearing up a Banner azure, charged with a St. Andrews Cross argent, and the
last another Banner argent, charged with a Plain Cross (called of St. George)
gules* Both standing on a rich Compartment; from the middle whereof issue a
Thistle and Rose, as the two Royal Badges of Scotland and England: and for his
Majesty's Royal Motto's in an Escrol above all, In Defense, for Scotland; and
in the Table of the Compartment, Dieu et mon Droit, for England, France, and
Ireland.

The Royal Badges are, a Thistle of Gold crowned, for Scotland,

A Rose gules for England,

A Flower de lis or, for France,

An Harp or stringed argent, for Ireland.

Besides these, there are Badges peculiar to the Kingdoms of Scotland and
England, represented on the Banners in the Royal Achievement, and advanced in
His Majesty's Standards by Land and Sea* viz.

Azure, a Cross of St. Andrew argent, for Scotland, St. Andrew being Patron
thereof.

Argent, a Cross of St. George (or plain Cross) gules, for England, St. George
being Patron thereof.

Thus have I for the Honor and Satisfaction of my Country, interrupted so far
the course of my ordinary studies at spare hours, nor was this Book only
necessary for them, but for all such as love this Science; since the Theory of
our Civilians was not hitherto sufficiently illuminated by the knowledge of
Blazoning, nor the practical and common knowledge of Blazoning rightly founded
upon the civil Law and Law of Nations; our ordinary Practicians in this Art
having been such as cited the civil Law without understanding it; and as it is
much nobler to raise a Science, than to be raised by it; so having writ this
Book as a Gentleman, I design as little Praise or thanks, as I would disdain
all other Rewards.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE of the Sirnames of these Noblemen and Gentlemen, whose
Achievements, or any part of the same, are made Patterns of Bearings in this
Science of Herauldry.
A
ABerbuthnet Page 52. Earl of Abercorn, vide Hamilton. Aberdeen Town 9, 65.
Abernethy 80, 81. Addair 28. Agnew 54. Aikenhead 63. Aikman 53. Ainsly 45.
Airth 31. Aiton 44, 64. Alexander 29, 97. Alison 29. Allan 28. Andrada in Spain
41. Anstruther 29, 91. Areskine 32, 75, 81, 84, 85, 91, 94, 97. Arran 67.
Atchison 58. Auchinleck 34, 46, 74. Auchmoutie. 36.
B
Badzenoch 55. Bailzie 52, 97. Bain 54, 64. Baird 56. Balfour ibid. Baliol 17,
49. Balnewis 28. Bannatine, alias Ballanden, 38, 44, 57. Barrie 58. Bell 68.
Bennet 45. Beton 49. Betson 46. Bickerton 58. Binning 35, 52. Birnie 54. Bisset
35. Blackhall 54, 59. Blackstock 63. Blair 50. Bonyman 54. Borthwick 95. Braig
65. Branch 38. Brand 36. Lord Brechin of old, vide Wishart. Brown 39, 52, 63.
Brownhill 51. Bruce 2, 3, 29, 47, 74, 83, 84, 94. Brymer 60. Buchanan 42.
Buckleuch vide Scot. Bunten 59. Burnet 3, 31, 96. Butter. 44.
C
Cairns 59. Caithnes 66, 84. Calder 57. Calderwood 63. Callendar 49, 64.
Campbel 29, 41, 74, 89. Cant 36. Carmichael 34. Carnagy 33, 52, 58. Carron 31.
Carruthers 39. Carse 46. Cartwright 53. Cathcairt 52. Cay, or Kay 36. Chambers
55. Charters 33. Cheap 64. Chein 45. Cheislie 39. Clayhills 57. Clealand 57.
Cochran 39. Cockburn 59. Colquhoun 46. Colvill ibid. Corbet 60. Cornwall ibid.
Corsby 44. Cowper 39. Crab 62. Craigdallie 60. Craik 66. Cranston 59, 91. Craw
60. Crawfurd 74. Crawmond 60. Crichton 55. Cumming 64. Cuninghame 33, 96, 97.
Currie 47. Cuthbert. 65.
D
Dalgleish 63. Dalmahoy 31. Dalrymple 46. Dalzel 53. Dawson 45. Delaluna in
England 52. Dempster 36, 65. Denham 88. Dewar 31. Dickson ibid. Die 52.
Dischington 35. Douglas 2, 81, 83, 95. Drummond 28, 29, 34, 95, 97. Duiguid 45.
Dumbar 3, 42, 95. Earl of Dumfermling, vide Seaton. Dun 67. Dundas 3, 55, 95,
96. Dundie Town 63. Dunlop 58. Durham. 52.
E
Eccles 66. Edgar 55. Edington 53. Edmiston 52. Eglington 50, 84. Earl of
Elgin, vide Bruce. Elleis 66. Elliot 36. Elphingston 38, 74, 88. Esplin. 33.
F
Falconer 59. Fenton 35. Fenwick 60. Fin 59. Findlay 65. Fisher 61.
Fishing-Company Royal ibid. Fleeming 42. Fletcher 45. Fockhart 38. Forbes 56,
74. Forman 61. Forest 62. Forrester 3, 57, 97. Forsyth 59. Fotheringham 34,
94. Fountain 49. Fowlis 63. Fraser 64, 68. Fullerton 56. Fythie. 59.
G
Gallie 67. Galloway 8. Earl of Galloway, vide Stewart. Lord Garrioch 68.
Garvie 61. Ged ibid. Geddes ibid. Gibson 68. Gifford 3. Gilchryst 51.
Gladstains 53. Gleg 55. Glen 84. Earl of Glencairn, vide Cuninghame.
Glendinning 44. Gordon 56, 83. Gorran 47. Graham 29, 31, 82, 83* Grant 68. Gray
41. Grierson 67. Guthrie. 44, 55.
H
Hacket 29. Halyburton 35, 36, 94. Hamilton 62, 64, 72, 82, 95. Hardy 54. Hay
17, 49, 85. Heart 54. Hepburn 7, 38, 55. Hog 56. Home, Hume, or Hoom, 3, 75,
81, 84, 97. Honyman 36. Hope 49. Howston 39. Hutchison 65. Hutton. 50.
I
Iaffray 33. Lord Iedburgh, vide Ker. Innes 51, 95. Iohnston 2, 47, 67, 97.
Irwin. 3, 63, 94.
K
Keith 2, 21, 31, 89. Kello 63. Earl of Kelly, vide Areskine Kennedy 41. Ker
28, 38, 51, 56, 95. Kilgowr 60. Viscount of Kilsyth, vide Livingston. Earl of
Kinghorn, vide Lion. now Strathmore, vide Lion. Viscount of Kingston, vide
Seaton. Kinnaird 46. Kinneir 35, 59. Kirkpatrick 47, 67. Kyd 62. Kyle. 68.
L
Lang 29. Lamb 57. Landell 42, 81, 84. Lauder 59. Lauderdale 49. Duke of
Lauderdale, vide Maitland. Leith 49. Lennox 46, 82, 83. Leslie 35, 65, 80, 84.
Lethington, or Livington 57. Libberton ibid. Liddel 35. Lidderdale 38, 95.
Lindsay 34. Earl of Linlithgow, vide Livingston. Little 46. Livingston 49, 64,
90. Loch 61. Lockhart 68. Logan 54. Longlands 38. Lorn 67. Lord Lovat, vide
Fraser. Earl of Lowdoun, vide Campbel. Lovell 29. Lowis 63. Lowry 68. Lundin,
or Lundie 33. Lyll 49. Lion 42, 90, 96. Lyon-Office. 85.
M
Macaben 65. Macculloch 49. Macdonald 3, 61. Macdowal 3, 55, 81. Macduff 3, 88.
Macferlan 46. Macgie 57. Macgill 59. Macgregor 62. Macilvain 68. Mackenzie 57,
85, 97. Mackintosh 67. Macky 65, 95. Maclean 4. Maclellan 39, 90. Macleod 64.
Macnaught 50. Macpherson 21, 97. Main 39. Maitland 55, 90. Mar 32, 45, 81. Earl
of Mar, vide Areskine. Earl of March, vide Dumbar. Earl Marischal, vide Keith.
Marjoribanks 2, 67. Masterton 38. Maule 62, 88, 95. Maxwell 46, 58, 89, 97.
Meldrum 60, 61. Melvill 33, 52, 67. Menzies 4, 31. Mercer 49. Midleton 28.
Miller 44. Milne 45. Moir 53. Moncrieff 94. Monro 58. Monteeth 35, 74, 95.
Montgomery 84. Marquess of Montrose, vide Graham. Monypenny 52, 61. Morison 53.
Mortimer 55. Mosman 63. Moubray 95. Muir 41. Murehead 42. Muriel 96. Murray 33,
42, 52, 82. Mushet 22, 39. Myreton. 50.
N
Naesmyth 54. Nairn 41. Napier 46. Neilson 54. Nevoy 53. Earl of Nithsdale,
vide Maxwell. Nisbet 39. Norvell. 60.
O
Ogill 59. Ogilvie 54, 55. Ogston 49. Oliphant 52. Ormiston 60. Orrok. 68.
P
Packstoun 39. Earl of Panmure, vide Maule. Panther 58. Paterson 59. Patton 66.
Pearson 39. Pearth Town 57. Earl of Pearth, vide Drummond. Pepdie 3, 81, 84.
Lord of Pitcur, vide Halyburton. Polwart 29. Pont 52. Porteous 57. Porterfield
36. Powrie 46. Preston 55. Primerose 64. Pringle 2, 61, 62. Purves. 49, 74.
R
Rae 57. Lord Rae, vide Macky. Rait 44. Ralston 63. Ramsay 2, 3, 7, 58.
Randeill 41. Randolph 3, 41, 42, 67. Rankin 66. Richardson 28, 47. Riddell 64.
Rind 44. Robertoun 45, 66. Robertson 58, 96. Ross 6, 55, 68, 90. Earl, now Duke
of Rothes, vide Lesly. Rule 54. Rutherfoord 41, 74. Ruthven. 2, 33.
S
See of Saint Andrews 85. Lord Salton, vide Fraser. Sanderson 35. Sandilands
ibid. Sawers 23. Scot 35, 55, 74, 82, 97. Scrimzeor 55, 65. Scrogie 63. Seaton
3, 42, 53, 60, 66, 82, 90, 91. Sempill 39. Sharp 34, 85. Shaw 3, 68. Sheires
65. Shives 58. Skein 66. Skirven 33. Sibbald 46. Simpson 31. Sinclair 44, 84.
Smyth 46, 68. Spalding 45, 66. Spar 66, 84. Spense 41. Spot 29. Spotswood 63.
Sprewl 67. Sprottie 62. Squyre 31. Stewart 34, 41, 82, 83, 96* Stirling 35, 65.
Straiton 23, 50. Strange 49. Sutherland 52, 81, 84, 91. Sydserf. 63.
T
Tailzefer 38. Tarbet 4, 61. Torrie 58. Toshach 66. Tours 35. Troup 58.
Turnbull ibid. Turner 54, 68. Turring. 35.
VV
Vallange 68. Vaus 35* Veitch 3, 58. Vrquhart 60. Vrrie. 55.
W
Walkinshaw 63. Wallace 41. Wallop 35. Wardlaw 49. Watson 63. Weapont 49.
Wedderburn 39, 64. Weems 3, 84, 90. Weston 36. Wigmer ibid. Winchester 62.
Winram, or Windraham 4, 56. Winton 59, 82. Earl of Winton vide Seaton. Wishart,
or Wiseheart 3, 27, 29, 81, 88. Wood 3, 62. Wordie 64. Wright 66. Whytfoord.
36.
Y
Young. 29.
FINIS.

