Pia Fraus: OR, Absalom's Theft.

BEING A SERMON Preached to a Country-Congregation On the Thirtieth of January
last, BEING The ANNIVERSARY FAST FOR The MARTYRDOM OF King CHARLES the First.

By R. L. M. A.

Lament. chapter 4. v. 20. The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord,
was taken in their pits; of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among
the heathen.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and F. Collins, for Charles Yeo Bookseller in Exon.
1684.

Viro vere Nobili, Et Regiae Majestatis Subdito fidelissimo, Necnon Ecclesiae
Anglicanae Filio obsequientissimo, EDVARDO SEYMOR Bart Hanc CONCIONEM, In
Testimonium gratitudinis, Humillime offert, dicat and dedicat

ROB. LAW.

The Reader is desired to take notice, that this SERMON was fitted for the
Press, as now it is, before the Plot was detected; but met with an unexpected
impediment.

2 SAMUEL 15. v. 6. So Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.


THE Text presents you with a Theft of the highest nature, aggravated by the
horridest circumstances. Under the Law, Exodus 22 v. 1, 4. Prove. 6.31.
common Theft was punished with restitution of double; in some cases, of
fourfold, fivefold, sevenfold, according to the various circumstances of the
fact: But he that stole a man, was to die without mercy: He shall surely be put
to death, Exodus 21. verse. 16. Hence (...) Men-stealers are reckoned amongst the
vilest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.10. What punishment does he deserve then, that
steals the best and noblest part of man, the heart? 1. Psalm. 82.6. I have said,
Ye are Gods.
From so sacred a person as a King (a God upon earth) that robs him of the love
and loyalty of his Subjects. 2. For so vile a purpose, as Rebellion, Murder,
etc. 3. By such wicked means as falsehood, flattery, lying, hypocrisy,
profanation of the name of God, etc. prostituting Religion it self to the
basest designs, by making it a Veil to cover the infamy of the most enormous
actions. 4. And for so mischievous an end, as to dethrone the Lords Anointed,
and advance an infamous Rebel to his Seat.


But let us examine the circumstances apart, and enquire,

I. First, What the Theft was, or who stole?

Absalom, an unnatural Wretch, an ungrateful Viper, a Subject, a Son, bound to
his Father by many obligations and extraordinary favors; one that had so deep
an interest in his heart, that the barbarous murder of his own Brother Amnon,
could not alienate his affection from him; but his heart was still toward him,
2 Samuel 14.1. (when indeed the hand of his Justice should have been against
him). Nay, he so vehemently doted on this ungracious wretch, that his soul not
only longed to go forth unto him, 2 Samuel 13.39. but also In the margent, Was
consumed. The Septuagint renders it (...), i.e. Valde laboravit, or usque ad
fatigationem.
languished in the desire of enjoying him; so that he was no longer able to
bear his exile or absence. Nay, so doting and blind was his Fathers affection,
that he could not, or would not see the Plot that was hatching against him,
though visible enough, by his Darlings daily courting the people, and slily
insinuating himself into their affections: which could not choose but come to
his ears by some one or other of his attendants, (it being so frequent, so
public, beside the way of the gate, 2 Samuel 15.2. the place of public
concourse, and his daily practice) had not his monstrous fondness either
silenced the tongues of those that were about him, or stopped his own ears
against all informations, or charmed him into such a confidence of his Son's
Loyalty, as that he was resolved to believe no Reports against his ungrateful
Fondling.

Here were obligations enough to have kept him within the bounds of his duty,
and all loyal obedience, and to have silenced and suppressed all risings of
rebellious thoughts within him; being so strongly, bound by Nature, Scripture,
Allegiance, Gratitude, etc. But what unnatural Villainies will not Pride and
Ambition put rebellious spirits upon!

II. Secondly, What did this Absalom steal? The hearts of the men of Israel; id
est, their Affections, Love, Loyalty, Obedience; alienating them from their
lawful Sovereign, and wretchedly perverting them to the advancement of his own
rebellious design, and the destruction of his Father, whose right they
properly were.

Now that this was a manifest Theft, will appear by a double consideration.

First, Furtum est occulta acceptio rei alienae, Aquin. or ablatio fraudulenta
rei alienae, invito domino, lucri causa. The Septuagint renders it, (...), etc.
fecit cor virorum Israel suum.
Because the hearts of the men of Israel were not Absalom's, but his Father's
right; their Affection, Loyalty, and Obedience were due to their Sovereign: and
it was theft in Absalom (a private person) to alienate them from his Prince,
who had the only just and legal Title to them: a theft (as might be showed)
that was aggravated by many circumstances; as, the high value of the thing
stolen, the great injury that was done to the Owner, and the sad consequences of
it, even to those that were accessory to it. For to steal the hearts of the
people, was to steal a Crown from a King, to convert it to the damage and
destruction of the legal Possessor, whose Crown and Head were doomed to fall
both together.

The peoples hearts then were David's by right; he had as good a Title to them
as he had to his Crown, and that was as good as God himself could confer upon
him. But the Rebel had none but an usurped power; and it is certain that the
clamours of the Rout, Absalom reigns in Hebron, could devolve no right upon
him.

It Is granted, that they might love and honor him as the King's Son; but not
in competition with, or opposition to their lawful Sovereign; not so as to be
persuaded, by his pious disguises and plausible pretenses of Reformation, to
give up their hearts to the disposal of an Usurper, and combine to set the
Crown upon a Rebels head.

Secondly, Because he did it secretly, closely, treacherously, like a thief-in
the dark, Job 24.14. and like a cunning insinuating Hypocrite, inveigled all
the people with his gentile Deportment and Complements, his specious Pretenses
and Allurements; and this so subtily, that neither David himself, nor the
people, could discover his Plot, till it was ripe for action, and past all
possibility of prevention.

The common guise of all Rebels, to walk at first in the dark, and like cunning
Pioneers, to work under ground until they have brought their Mine to
perfection, and then they blow up the foundations of all ancient and regular
Government in an instant: such exact imitators are they of that Prince of
Darkness, the first Rebel in the World, the grand Inciter to, and Author of all
Rebellions against God and his Vicegerents. Had Absalom attempted this by plain
and open force, probably he had never prevailed so far; therefore he lays the
foundation of his Plot in secret fraud, and makes use of the Foxes case, to
prepare a way for his after-appearance in the Lions skin.

III. Thirdly, Let us enquire whose hearts Absalom stole? The hearts of the men
of Israel; who were,

1. The peculiar people of God, solemnly dedicated to him and his service, in
covenant with him, and highly prized by him. Now to draw them into so foul an
Apostasy, so fatal a Conspiracy against the Lord and his Anointed, was a great
aggravation of his damned Impiety.

2. But this is not all. The men whose hearts he stole, were David's Subjects,
tied not only by the Bonds of natural Allegiance to their Prince, but with the
most sacred Ties of Religion; a Solemn League and Covenant made before the Lord
in Hebron, 2 Samuel 5.3. So that he drew them not only into Rebellion, but
Perjury; such near affinity there is between sins of this nature.

3. Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel, not barely from their King,
but a King of Gods own immediate choice and appointment, Psalm. 89.20. I have
exalted one chosen out of the people, I have found David my servant, (as it
were by diligent search and enquiry after some excellent and heroic person)
with my holy oil have I anointed him: And 2 Chronicles. 6.6. I have chosen
Jerusalem, that my Name might be there: and have chosen David to rule over my
people Israel, that under his government they might enjoy the greater felicity.

4. He stole their hearts from a King, whom they received with the greatest
expressions of joy, 1 Chronicles. 12.40. and not without cause, if you consider how
well he deserved of them, by their own acknowledgment, 2 Samuel 5.2. Also in time
past, when Saul was King over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest
in Israel, etc. 2 Samuel 19.9. The King saved us out of the hand of our enemies,
and delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines, etc. In a word, one that
had conquered their enemies, enlarged their Territories, (but above all)
reformed their Religion according to the purity of Gods Law. And yet these are
the men whose hearts were stolen from their confessedly-deserving Sovereign, by
the crafty insinuations of complemental Absalom. So mutable are the opinions
and affections of the giddy Multitude!

IV. Fourthly, This will appear more clearly, if we consider the next
circumstance; from whom the hearts of the men of Israel were stolen: from no
common person, but a King; from no foreign King, but their own; no unworthy
dastardly Prince, but an heroical, magnanimous, and renowned one, for his
Valor, Wisdom, Piety, etc. chosen of God to be the Ruler of his people, as you
heard before: A man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. one that did judgment
and justice to all his people, 2 Samuel 8.15. (whatsoever the Rebel suggested to
the contrary) ruled them prudently with all his power, fed them according to
the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands,
Psalm. 78.72.

This is the King whose Subjects hearts were stolen by an ungrateful Son and
infamous Rebel. So blind is Ambition in the Plotters, and a brutish Itch after
novelty in the Abettors of rebellious projects and practices against the best
of Princes.

How much then does it concern Princes to carry a jealous eye over that beast
with many heads? to suspect the fickle and unconstant disposition of the
Multitude (especially if poisoned with principles of Rebellion, under pretenses
of Religion); who are apt enough of themselves to grow weary of the present
Government, if at least it be charged (true or false, they never examine) by
their graceless Ringleaders with any irregularities or defects, (though such as
probably cannot be avoided in the best of Governments, or by the best of
Governors): but Absalom furatus est cor, etc. i. e. (as one descans upon the
Text) excordem reddidit, and amentem populum: he made the people stark mad by
his intoxicating Allurements and Enchantments.

V. Fifthly, By what means he stole the hearts of the men of Israel? By the
most vile and sordid that Hell it self could suggest, (and yet such as are
usually practiced by Rebels in their method of undermining Kingdoms) as Fraud,
Flattery, Lying, Hypocrisy, palpable and malicious slandering his Fathers
Person and Government.

This obsequious Gallant puts forth his hand, embraces and kisses every one
that comes to him to do him obeisance, 2 Samuel 15.5. Et omnia serviliter pro
dominatione, as Tacitus said of Otho. He kissed them, not out of love, but
design, as Judas did our blessed Lord and Savior, Mat. 26.48. not to salute,
but betray him. We read, John 12.4, and 5. how sollicitous the Hypocrite seemed
to be for the good of the poor; not that he cared for the poor, but because he
was a thief. So this Traitor puts on the Cloak of feigned Humility and
Humanity, Holiness and Charity; not that he regarded any of those, or minded
the happiness of the people; but because he was a Thief, and aimed at the Crown.

For what probability was there, that he who was so prodigal of the blood of
his own Brother Amnon, should be tender of the lives of his Subjects? or that
he should make conscience of preserving the Rights and Privileges of his
People, who endeavored to deprive his Prince and Father of his Regal
Prerogatives? or that he should consult the Peace of the Nation, that wilfully
involved it in an unnatural and bloody War, only to satisfy his own ambitious
Lust?

And yet how passionately does the Hypocrite breath out, O that I were made a
judge in the land, that every man that has suit on cause, might come unto me,
and I would do him justice! How zealous would the good man be for the Peoples
Welfare Occultum and insidiosum malum est perfidia cujus efficasissimae vires
sunt mentiri and fallere. Val. Max.

Prove. 10.18. He that hides hatred with lying lips, and he that utters a
slander, is a fool.


! for says he, thy matters are good and right, but there is no man deputed of
the King to hear thee. As if he should have said, Neither the King, nor any of
his Officers, have any regard to Justice or the Public Good; (a brazen-faced
lie, and shameless slander, of a graceless wretch): Yet with this Art he woes
and wins the hearts of the men of Israel. But the grand Engine to advance his
hellish design, was the Traitors hypocrisy, and pretense of Religion, (the
painted Vizard that the vilest Rebels use to hide the deformity of their
mischievous Plots with). Religion must be a Cloak for his Rebellion; a Vow must
be paid in Hebron, the place where his Father was first crowned King, and, as
it is probable, where himself was born and bred, amongst his Relations and
Acquaintance; and at some distance from the Court, that he might act his part
with the less suspicion. It Is granted, that as a prologue to the Plot, he
prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him; that he
might appear splendid before the People, and dazzle the eyes of the Vulgar, who
are much taken with Novelties, and apt to admire such a royal Attendance, and
outward appearance of Grandeur.

Besides, he invited two hundred men out of Jerusalem, to grace the action, who
went in their simplicity, and knew not any thing: Yet, I say, Religion (the
pretense of it) was the main and most effectual Artifice to win the Peoples
affections, and under the vizard of Piety, to cheat them into a most impious
Rebellion and Apostasy. A Vow must be paid in Hebron, 2 Samuel 15.7. Sacrifices
must be offered there, v. 12. And would so religious a Prince attempt any thing
that was unlawful or unjust? But see the damned hypocrisy of this flagitious
Wretch! these Sacrifices were offered in Design, not in Devotion.

First, Either quod conjuratio validior esset foedere Sancita, that the
Conspiracy might be the stronger, being ratified by a Solemn League and
Covenant.

Thus the Guisian party in France strengthened their side by their holy League;
and the perfidious party of the Scots, in imitation of them, (and it is probable
by the French advice) played their Pranks under the same Vizard; You may read
their palpable Hypocrisy and Juggling, in the King's large Declaration.
by which they intended, especially the Ringleaders of the Faction (whatever
they pretended) to strengthen the hands of their Party, and by the strictest
ties of Religion, to engage incautelous Souls in one of the most villainous
Rebellions that ever was hatched in Hell, or acted on Earth: And yet all this
while (see the villainy of it!) many of the Contrivers had a secret reserve and
resolution to keep it no further or longer than it should be subservient to
their own ambitious and covetous ends. Witness their base, barbarous, and
treacherous delivery up of the King's person (whom they were bound by the Law
of Nature, Nations, and common Humanity, to have protected) into the hands of
his cruel and bloodthirsty Enemies.

And this too, directly contrary to the tenor of their own Covenant; wherein
they had solemnly, with hands lifted up to the most high God, sworn to preserve
and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom; that the World may
bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty Psalm. 55.21. The words of his
mouth were smoother than butter, but war in his heart: his words were softer
than oil, yet were they drawn swords. A Psalm penned, as it is probable, upon
the occasion of Absalom's Conspiracy and Achitophel's Treachery. Mel in ore,
fell in cord.
and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just
Power and Greatness. And yet it is manifest that they basely sold him (as Judas
did his Master) for a sum of money, to the eternal Infamy (if not of the
Nation, yet) of those Hucksters amongst them that were employed to drive the
Bargain.

Or else, secondly, that he might impiously crave the Blessing of God upon his
cursed Rebellion. Thus Jezebel, when she thirsted after Naboth's Vineyard and
life, proclaimed a fast, 1 Kin. 21.9. that the masque of Religion might cover
the villainy of so barbarous an action, as the cruel Murder of so innocent a
person. In imitation of whom, these men or Monsters amongst us, who were the
occasion of this days Solemnity, had learnt to fast for strife and debate, and
to smite with the fist of wickedness, Isai. 58.4. For when they had any
mischievous design on foot, they used to prepare their way by proclaiming a
Solemn Fast, as a pious Cheat to inveagle the credulous Multitude into an high
opinion of their extraordinary Sanctity.

VI. Lastly, For what end Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel. Not to
relieve the Oppressed, or reform the State, (though these were pretended); but
to satisfy his ambition and avarice, by making the dead Carcass of his own
Father a step to the Crown; and then, like a Tyrant, to own no Law to rule by,
but his own Lust. A perfect Pattern of our late Rebels! as will after appear.

And the Issue was every way correspondent to the Action; a mischievous
design, attended with a miserable destruction of the Arch-rebel himself, and
twenty thousand of his poor seduced Party, 2 Samuel 18.7. And let such a fate
attend all such infamous Rebels!

But was not the hand of Achitophel in all this? It Is probable that it was;
though the subtle Fox did not appear openly, till Absalom's Party was grown so
strong and formidable as to take the Field, and bear down (as he thought) all
opposition that could be made against it. Peter Martyr thinks that he was Author
vel faltem magnus adjutor Conjurationis: I am persuaded that he was both, and
that in compliance with Absalom's discontented, ambitious, and (it may be)
revengeful humor, the whole Plot was projected, the Scenes divided, and the
Actors assigned their several parts, by this subtle Politician, before there
was any apparent entrance upon the execution. And this appears to me probable,
by his readiness to attend upon Absalom's motion, 2 Samuel 15.12. the desperate
counsel that he gave him to make the breach irreconcilable, 2 Samuel 16.21. and
the offer of his own personal service to pursue weary and weak-handed David,
before he could recover counsel or courage to make any considerable resistance,
2 Samuel 17.1, etc. Which latter (if it had not been defeated by the overruling
providence of God) had certainly proved destructive to his forsaken Sovereign.

Upon what provocation this Arch-rebel as well as Politician, engaged in this
Conspiracy, is uncertain: But it is certain, that David esteemed and honored
him so far, as to make him his chief Counselor, (it may be, Lord President of
his Council) whose counsel was of that weight and authority with David, as if
he had enquired at the Oracle of God, 2 Samuel 16.23. Nay, if we consult 55 Psalm.
v. 13, etc. (where the Psalmist curses his perfidious Villainy) we shall find
that he made him his equal, his companion, his bosom-friend, his guide in all
his affairs and actions; one in whom he reposed the greatest confidence;
therefore, 2 Samuel 15.31. it was brought (as it seems) as strange and unexpected
news to David, Achitophel is amongst the Conspirators. Strange it was indeed,
that a person so highly honored and obliged by the King, should assault his
Crown and Life with such bitter, bloody, and implacable malice.

But we need not be curious in our inquiry after his base Treachery, and
ungrateful Apostasy from his own Master. A plodding head and mischievous heart
will never want pretenses for the sordidest Villainies; especially when aspiring
persons conceive hopes of advancing their fortune by a compliance with, and
adoration of the rising Sun: and that no obligations from a Prince will keep
such persons firm to their Loyalty, might be made evident by a multitude of
Instances amongst our selves.

To apply this to our present occasion.

This day fell the best of Princes, by the bloody and barbarous hands of his
own Subjects. There were many Absaloms and Achitophels, proud, ambitious,
covetous, subtle, malicious wretches, that conspired to shed his innocent
Blood: and to this end, stole the hearts of his beguiled Subjects, and by
plausible pretenses, decoyed them into a Rebellion against their lawful and
gracious Sovereign, that so they might rob him both of his Crown and Life at
once. Unnatural Miscreants! whom no reverence to his sacred Person, no fear of
that great God (whose Vicegerent he was) no sense of their own Duty, nor shame
of the World, could restrain from the open, impudent, impious, and villainous
shedding his Royal and Sacred Blood. What Morsters were these, that durst deal
so barbarously with a King, their own King, who offered them all the pledges of
his Love, all possible security for their Lives, Liberties, Laws, Religion, or
whatsoever was dear to, or might abundantly satisfy all good and loyal
Subjects This the King grievously complains of in his (...), I had formerly
declared to sober and moderate minds, how desirous I was to give all just
content, when I agreed to so many Bills; which had been enough to secure and
satisfy all, if some men's hydropick insatiableness had not learnt to thirst
the more, by how much the more they drank. Chap. 6.
! A King famous for his Parts, Piety, Patience, Devotion, and all other
Christian Graces; which will make him admired to all Generations, when the name
of these wicked ones shall rot, Prove. ^0.7. and stink in the nostrils of all
those that have any sparks of Ingenuity or Humanity left in them.

But what assurances could satisfy those that were resolved not to be
satisfied with any thing but his Crown and Life? and therefore wretchedly
staved off all offers of Accommodation for Peace Or else offered such
unreasonable terms as he could neither in Honor, Reason, or Conscience, yield
to. Witness the 19 Propositions, the Treaty at Vxbridge; which proved
unsuccessful (says the King, in his (...)) by the treacherous obstinacy of
those men, with whom it was a grand Maxim, to ask something which in reason
and honor must be denied, that they might have some color to refuse all that
was in other things granted, chapter 18.
. For these Miscreants had a bloody Tragedy to act, an execrable design
contrived, which they were resolved to carry on, against all Laws of Scripture,
Nature, Nations; against their own public Declarations, against their solemn
Oaths, Vows, Covenants, and (I am persuaded) the checks of their own
Consciences too, unless they had as wilfully seared them, as they had
impudently brazened their faces to act such a prodigious Villainy in the face of
the Sun, and view of the whole World; who stood amazed to behold the impudence
and impiety of those graceless wretches, who had made such public and frequent
Professions (and those confirmed by sacred and solemn Oaths) of their Loyalty
to that innocent and excellent Prince, whose Blood afterward they so
barbarously spilt.

If we enquire into the Means and Methods by which they effected this monstrous
Villainy, we shall find that they traced exactly the steps of this bloody
Absalom, in their Fraud, Hypocrisy, Calumny, false and impudent Slanders cast
upon that Kings Person and Government: as appears by that Remonstrance set
forth in 1641. pretended to be for the information of the People; but intended
(by some at least) for their seduction, and indeed proved the source of all our
ensuing Miseries, and the prologue to that woeful Tragedy acted on this day. As
also by their frequent and false Declarations, wherein they wrest all his
Expressions and Concessions to the worst sense, charging him with the Irish
Rebellion, and the guilt of all the Blood that was spilt in the three Nations
The tenderness and regret I find in my soul, for having had any hand (and that
very unwillingly, God knows) in shedding one man's blood unjustly, etc. may, I
hope, be some evidence before God and man to all posterity, that I am far from
bearing justly the vast load and guilt of all the blood which was spilt in this
unhappy War; which some men will needs charge on me, to ease their own fouls.
(...), chap. 2. Of the Irish Rebellion, see chap. 12.
. (Though themselves had no ground for the raising that bloody War, but their
own pretended and groundless fears and jealousies); and offering the highest
indignities to his Royal Person and Family.

Their usual Expressions were, Blacken him, blacken him; i. e. load him with
Reproaches, defame him amongst the People, make him odious by false
Accusations, malicious Slanders, infamous Libels, etc. Those foul and false
Aspersions were secret Engines at first employed against the love of my People
toward me, that undermining their value of me, mine Enemies, and theirs too,
might at once blow up their Affections, and batter down their Loyalty. Chap. 15.
And so they did. Some of them spit their hellish Venom upon his Name, as
others (in imitation of their Forefathers the Jews, Mark 14.65.) did their
aspish Poison in his face, (a Barbarism unheard of!) in token of their greatest
Contempt and Abhorrence.

But his Name, like a precious Ointment, will yield a sweet savor, Eccl. 7.1.
when their Memorial shall perish with them: or if any thing remain of it, it
shall be noted with a black mark, Nigro carbone, fit only to be fixed upon men
famous for infamy, and render them an hissing, a byword, and an astonishment
to all succeeding Ages I am well assured, that as my Innocence is clear before
God, so my Reputation shall, like the Sun, (after Owls and Bats have had
freedom in the night and darker times) rise and recover it self to such a
degree of Splendor, as these feral Birds shall be grieved to behold, and
unable to bear. Chap. 15.
.

But the grand Cheat lay in the pretense of Religion and Reformation; Popery
was coming in upon us like a Flood. Popery; a terrible word, and which of late
has been made use of by some subtle Underminers of Monarchy, as a Bugbear to
affright silly people out of their wits. But were they really such Enemies to
Popery as they pretended, who connived at least, at the most infamous Heretics
and Heresies that ever started out of Hell? (or else Mr. Edwards belyes them in
his Gangrene). And Mr. Prynn, in his perfect Narrative, undertakes to
demonstrate to them, that their new Commonwealth or Good Old Cause (they are
his own words) was originally projected by the Jesuits, and other Romish
Emissaries, To destroy our Protestant Religion, Church, King, Kingdom,
Parliament, Laws, Liberties, etc. And Papists and Popish books were grown so
numerous and audacious under their government, that the Stationers of London
thought themselves bound in conscience to alarm them and the whole Nation with
a little Tract called The Beacon fired: which was very ill resented, and
bitterly answered by the Ringleaders of the Faction. But it would be endless to
insist upon particulars of this nature.

It Is certain, that as they were no Enemies to Popery, so they were no Friends
to Religion; only they had learnt Machivel's Principle, to own the show, but
not the substance of it: For their Solemn League and Covenant taken by
themselves, rigorously and unconscionably pressed upon others, in the taking
whereof, there were so many Solemnities used, so much seeming Zeal, Reverence,
and Devotion expressed; this very Covenant, when it crossed their design, was
laid aside like an old Almanac out of date, and a useless thing. Base
Hypocrites! thus to profane the sacred Name of the great God, by Religious
Mockeries.

And of this their vile Hypocrisy, their own actions were a clear
demonstration, when they plucked off the Vizard from their faces, and were not
ashamed to discover the ugliness of their complexions to the whole World. For
when these zealous Reformers had gotten the Power into their own hands, and
when they had stolen the Peoples hearts, heads, hands and all, and engaged them
in their Party, what Havoc did they make, what Oppression, what Cruelty did
they exercise toward their fellow subjects? What Violence, Psalm. 55.9.
what Strife, what Mischief, what Wickedness, what Deceit or Guile did they
omit, to support their new-erected Tyranny?

Is it not lamentable to consider that so much Treasure should be spent, so
much Christian Blood spilt, so many Subjects lives lost? (not to speak of the
dangerous condition of their Souls who died in actual Rebellion against God and
their King, Romans 13.2. and were drawn in by the subtilty of those Bloodthirsty
men); and all this to mount an infamous Faction, made up mostly of the Dregs of
the Nation, to the highest pitch of Power and Dominion. Tantum religio potuit
suadere malorum?

But the great God made them know, to their smart, that he rules in Jacob, and
to the ends of the earth, Psalm. 59.13. that he is King, be the people never so
impatient; that he sits between the cherubims, Psalm. 99.1. Old Translat.
be the earth never so unquiet; that he who sits in Heaven, sees and derides
the bold attempts of such daring mortals, Psalm. 2.4. that he to whom vengeance
belongs, will show himself; that the Judge of all the earth, will render a
reward to the proud; that the wicked shall not always triumph, nor the workers
of iniquity boast themselves, nor break in pieces his people, and afflict his
heritage, and slay the widow, and murder the fatherless, Psalm. 94.1. Sera sed
certa venit vindicta. At last God arose, and fcattered his enemies, Psalm. 68.1.
blew up their Plots, subverted their Councils, and turned all their mischief
upon their own pates. A fire not blown, consumed them, Job 20.26. A strange and
unexpected Judgment sent from Gods immediate hand, like a fire that arises of
it self, no man knows how, seized upon them (when they were at the highest of
their hopes and confidences, and fancied, with the Psalmist, an immovable and
settled prosperity, Psalm. 30.6.) and cast them down into destruction, brought
them into desolation, as in a moment, and utterly consumed them with terrors,
Psalm. 73.15, etc.

And is it not sad to consider, that notwithstanding all this, there should be
some of the same Litter still lurking in the Nation? who, though they have seen
the mighty hand of God in the destruction of their Party, and the miraculous
reduction of his present Majesty, do yet long to be at it again, and still hope
for the day, when they shall cry once more against Church and State, (as the
Edomites did against Jerusalem) Psalm. 137.7. Raze it, raze it, even to the
foundation thereof Isai. 26.11. When thy hand is lifted up, they will not see:
but they shall see and be ashamed of their envy at the people.
.

Is War so sweet to these men, Dulce bellum inexpertis.
that they should stand on tiptoe to leap into a new Rebellion, to act over the
old Part upon a new Stage, and under a new disguise, to revive the Good Old
Cause, to the confusion of King, Church, and Kingdom? and in order to this, to
endeavor, by a new knack of an Ignoramus, to pervert all Law and Justice, and
let loose the Reins to the greatest Villainies, to plot and act all manner of
mischief impune, even to the murder of the King himself? For what Justice can
we expect to be done upon those, who are to be tried by their
fellow-Delinquents?

And is it not yet to be feared, that Absalom and Achitophel are still at work
amongst us, and hope by their secret machinations and subtle insinuations of
strange fears and jealousies, to prevail with the giddy Multitude, the Rabble
of Towns, and Rout of Country-bumkins, to beat (not their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks, Isai. 2.4. that is a
Prophecy of Gospel Times, and that Peace and Concord which should reign
amongst Christians, but) their Plow-shares into Swords, and their Pruning Hooks
into Spears, as it is in Joel 3.10. to convert all into Arms and Ammunition, as
men use to do in the calamitous times of War? A time most suitable to the
spirits of bold, furious, fiery, and bloudy-minded men.

But God has hitherto dashed their designs; so that though they intended
evil, and imagined a mischievous device against King and Kingdom, yet they are
not able to perform it, Psalm. 21.11. God, I say, has hitherto prevented their
Malice, and out of the ashes of that Phoenix, the best of Princes, a Non-such
indeed, (but not in the sense of those Miscreants) has raised up another, our
most gracious Sovereign now reigning, (whom God long preserve) maugre all the
Plots and devices, the spite and malignity of all his open and secret Enemies.

I shall conclude with Jacob's exprobation of Simeon and Levi, (for some of
both Tribes had a hand in the innocent blood that was shed this day) and his
Apostrophe to himself, by way of detestation of their bloody fact, (and I hope
every good Christian and loyal Subject will join with me): Simeon and Levi are
brethren, Genesis 49.5, etc.
instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul, come not thou into
their secret: unto their assembly, mine honor, be thou not united: for in
their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they dug down a wall.
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I
will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

FINIS.

