A JOURNAL OF THE Brest-Expedition, BY THE Lord MARQUESS OF CAERMARTHEN.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Amen-Corner. 1694.

This may be Published,

EDWARD COOK.
25 June 1694
TO THE READER.
IT being my Lot in the Brest-Expedition, to be on Board Their Majesty's Ship,
the Royal William, commanded by the Marquess of Caermarthen, Rear Admiral of
the Blue, I saw at our return to Spit-Head, His Lordship 's Journal which he
was sending to His Grace the Duke of Leeds; I found it was so very Just, in
every Particular, that I thought I should do a very acceptable piece of Service
to the Public in printing it; I therefore got a Copy of it, which, with his
Lordship's Allowance, I have here published, Word for Word, without any manner
of Alteration, and have made an exact Draught of the Place, and manner of our
Attack.

Line of Battle, 1694. The English to lead with the Lar-board, and the Dutch
with their Star-board Tacks on Board.
Fireships and Small Frigates. Rates. Ships. Men. Guns. Division. Squadron.
Zeyst. 46 Westfriesland. 450 88 Deharder. Koning William. 530 90 Vice Adm. Van.
Zeirick Zee. 325 60 Putten. Drakenstein. 44 Captain General. 500 86 S. B. N.
Van. Goes, Wesel. 30 Stol. Muyden. 400 72 Lieutenant Adm. Dutch. Wymberg. Unic.
550 94 Etna. Damiaten. 210 50 De Wolf. 30 Munikendam. 375 70 Brandenburg.
Wassanaar. 300 60 Princess. 500 92 Vice Adm. Schey. Cheuwirsten. 500 94
ENGLISH. Hawk. Charles, Fire Ships. 3 Suffolk. 340 60 Blaze, Fire Ships. 4
Greenwich. 280 50 Syam, Hosp. Ship. 1 London. 730 100 Shoreham. 1 Royal
William. 780 106 Rear Admiral. Charles Galley. 3 Hope. 460 70 Mercury, Advice
Boat. 3 Dreadnought. 400 60 Bristol, Hosp. Ship. Blue. Roebuck. 3 Monck. 340 60
Speedwell, Fire Ships. 2 Royal Katharine 540 80 St. Paul, Fire Ships. 1 Queen.
780 100 Admiral. Crescent, Brigant. 2 Duchess. 660 90 Dispatch, Brigant. 3
Edgar. 445 66 Shark, Brigant. 3 Swiftsure. 420 66 Discovery. 3 Lion. 340 60
Owners Love. 3 Captain. 460 70 Machine, Fire Ships. 2 Neptune. 730 94 Vice Adm.
Red. Joseph, Fire Ships. 2 Vanguard. 660 90 London Merchant, H.S. 3 Sterling
Castle. 460 70 3 Defiance. 400 62

A JOURNAL KEPT AT SEA, BETWEEN THE Twenty Ninth of May, and the Fifteenth of
June, 1694. With an exact and Impartial Relation of our late Expedition and
Attempts in Camarett Bay, near Breast.
MAY 29. 1694: This Day we had little Wind, and variable, from the S.S.E. round
the Compass. In the Morning we had the Signal for the Fleet to Weigh; but
falling calm, rode fast. Afternoon the Wind came to the N. W. with Showers of
Rain, and at Night much Lightning.

On the 30th. about 4 a Clock in the Morning we had the Signal for Weighing,
the Wind at N. N. W. and then to N. W. We came to Sail, and about 10 a Clock
Donnoze bore S. W. by W. about 5 Miles distant. At 8 at Night the Needles bore
N. W. by W. about 3 Leagues distant, we standing off all that Night.

On the 31st. At 4 in the Morning the High Land of St. Albans bore N. W. of us,
about 3 Leagues distant. We had little Wind at N. W. About 9 there was a
Council of War held on Board the Britannia, where were present,

Mr. Russel, Admiral of the Fleet. The Lord Berkeley, Admiral of the Blue. Sir
Cloudesley Shovel, Vice Admiral of the Red. Colonel Aylmer,. Vice Admiral of
the Blue. Colonel Mitchel, Rear-Admiral of the Red The Marquis of Caermarthen,
Rear-Admiral of the Blue. Captain Bing, eldest Captain to the Admiral.
Lieutenant General Talmash. Earl of Macclesfield. The Lord Cutts. Sir Martin
Beckman. Admiral Allemonde, Admiral of the Dutch. Vice Admiral Vander-Putten.
Vice Admiral Schey. Vice Admiral, Vander-Goes. Rear-Admiral Everten. Captain
Vander-Duten.
Where it was Resolved,

First, That the Fleet designed for Breast should make the best of their way for
Camarett Bay, and Anchor there, where the Landforces were to be immediately
disembarked, and the Fleet to remain at Anchor, 'till they had Advice from
Lieutenant General Talmash of the Condition of the Fort on the Starboard side
going in, and what Forces he might find there.

Secondly, That the going into Breast Water with the Fleet being taken into
Consideration, 'twas not then thought advisable, to come to any positive
Resolution at what time to go in, but to have that matter to be considered of,
when the Fleet arrived at Camarett Bay.

Thirdly, That a Red Ensign on the Fore-Top-Mast-Head on Board the Admiral, and
firing a Gun, was agreed upon to be the Signal for the Soldiers Imbarking on
Board the small Vessels and Boats; and the taking down the said Signal, and
firing Two Guns, the Signal for the Soldier's going from the Fleet on Shore.

But in going on Board the Britannia, there arose a Fogg, which lasted 'till
Noon; then came a fine fresh Gale of Wind which cleared up the Fogg; and at 8
at Night Portland bore N. W. by N. about 3 Leagues distant.

June 1st. At 4 a Clock in the Morning, Portland bore N. W. about 5 Leagues
distant, the Wind at W. by S. and at 8 (the Ebbing spent) we Anchored in 29
Fathom Water, ( Portland bearing N. W. about 4 Leagues distant) with pleasant
Weather. At 2 Afternoon we came to Sail again, and at 8 at Night the Start bore
W. S. W. S. about 6 Leagues distant; and at 9 we Anchored in 19 Fathom Water,
with a small Breeze Northerly.

On the Second, at 3 a Clock in the Morning we Weighed, it being calm; and at 6
the Berry-Head bore W. by S. about 5 Leagues; at half an Hour after 9 we
Anchored in 25 Fathom Water, where we lay till half an Hour after 2, then
Weighed, having a fine Gale at S. W. and at 8 at Night the Berry bore W. S. W.
about 3 Leagues distant, the Wind at N. W.

June 3d. We had a Calm all the Morning, till about 7 a clock; then a small
Gale at N. N. W. Afterward veering to the W. and W. S. W. At Noon we had the
start W. B. S. about 3 Leagues distant. And at 8 at Night N. W. B. N. about 3
Leagues, the Wind then at N. W.

On the 4th. At 4 a clock in the Morning, the Bolt bore N. W. about 3 Leagues
distant, the Wind at W. N. W. afterward came about to S. W. B. S. At Noon, the
Bolt L and was N. B. W. half W. about 5 Leagues distant; and at 8 at Night, the
Ram-head N. W. half W. about 5 leagues distant; all the Fleet at this time
plying to the Westward.

On the 5th. At 4 a clock in the Afternoon (the Wind at N. W. and the Ram-head
bearing N. of us, about 37 Miles distant) we parted from Admiral Russel, with
29 Sail of Line of Battle Ships, English and Dutch (besides small Frigates,
Fireships, Machines, Tenders, Well-Boats, and 5 Bomb-Vessels) under the
Command of my Lord Berkely: The Admiral, with the rest of the Fleet, at the
same time, making the best of his Way for the Streights, and We for
Camarett-Bay.

On the 6th. At 9 a clock in the Morning, my Lord Berkeley made the Signal for
a Council of War, for consulting, directing and ordering all things to be in a
readiness for Landing in Camarett-Bay. And,

1st. It was agreed to put in Execution the Resolutions of the Council of War
afore-mentioned, held on board the Britannia, the 31st. of May, Admiral Russel
President.

2dly. It was resolved to send a Lieutenant in each of the Ship's Boats (that
carry the Men on shore) to Command them.

3dly. It being Proposed to go in without Flags, it was Resolved in the
Negative.

My Lord Cutts advised landing all the Grenadiers (which were about 600) a
little before the rest of the Forces, that (in case the Enemy should be
entrenched, and that it should be resolved to attack them) we might be in a
better Condition to force their Entrenchments; and also advised, That before
they should land, a Captain, with 50 Grenadiers, might go on shore, to discover
the Posture and Countenance of the Enemy; for 'twas his Lordship's Opinion (if
their Intrenchments were very strong, and sustained by Regular Troops) not to
attack them, believing the thing, in such a case, not to be practicable; but if
the Grenadiers should all land, then the rest of the Forces should immediately
land to sustain them. This Advice of his Lordship's was by all extremely
well-approved of, and Lieutenant General Talmash himself agreed it should be
so: accordingly it was ordered, That all the Grenadiers should be embarked on
the Well-Boats, and my Lord Cutts very honorably offered his Service to
Command them; which Lieutenant General Talmash also consented to.

It was also consulted at this Council of War, Whether we should stand in for
Camarett-Bay that Night (though in the Night,) And 'twas Resolved, To endeavor
to make the Land that Evening, and to go in as far as we could in the Night.
Accordingly we made sail, and about 6 a clock in the Evening we saw Ushant,
bearing S. E. half E. about 7 Leagues distant; but at 10, so many of our
Tenders and Well-Boats, besides some Ships, were so far a-stern, that we were
forced to lie by for them, till 3 the next Morning.

June 7th. At Three a clock in the Morning we made sail, the Wind at N. N. E.
At Four, had Ushant E. S. E. of us, about Three Leagues distant. At Twelve, St.
Matthew's- Cloister bore N. E. B. E. And at Half an hour after One (the Tide of
Ebb being strongly made) we were forced to come to an Anchor about a league S.
S. E. from St. Matthew's Point, in 20 Fathom Water. At Five (the Tide of Flood
being made) we weighed again, and stood in; and at Seven, came to an Anchor
between Camarett-Bay, and the Bay of Bertheaume, in 16 Fathom Water.

In our coming in (the Wind shortning upon us) we were forced to make two Trips
from side to side, before we could get to our designed Anchoring-place. In
which time, we were received with Bombs from 4 Points of high Land. The first
Bomb that was thrown at us, was from the West Point of Camarett Bay, our Ships
being forced (at first) to stand near that Point, the Wind being at N. N. E. so
that we had several Bombs thrown at us before we tacked, and stood the other
way, and after we were about, and had stood pretty near the N. Shore, we were
also received with several Bombs from an old Castle which stood very high upon
a little Island close to the W. Point of Bertheaume Bay; and after we had
tacked again, as we were standing in to come to an Anchor, the other Two Points
on each side of the Narrow, going into Breast Road, (one on the N. side, called
Point des Minoux; the other on the S. side, called Point des Filletes, (which
is the W. end of Point 'Spanicle,) played also their Bombs at us. But the Two
latter could not throw them so far as our Ships, though the Two former did; and
after we were come to an Anchor, they continued throwing Bombs at us from all
the afore-mentioned Places, till Ten a clock at night, but did us no damage at
all.

A little before we came to an Anchor, My Lord Cutts, and my self, agreed to go
on Board my Galley, and look into Camarett-Bay, taking along with us Sir John
Jacobs, Captain Pitman, Captain Hammond, Mr. Vanbrooke, etc. that were on Board
the Royal William, and accordingly went on Board my Lord Berkely for leave,
where we met my Lord Mohun, and Mr. Wharton, who also desired to go along with
us; and having stood well into the Bay, so as to gain a good View of it, we
were warmly fired at by Camarett-Fort; but by the Assistance of those few
little Guns we had in the Galley, and the good Sailing of her, we made a shift
in our own Smoke to get out again, without any Damage.

Then we returned on Board my Lord Berkely, and after having given an Account
of the Posture of the Bay, and the Situation of its Castle, how advantagiously
it lay for defending the Landing-Places; 'twas thought fit that Two Ships of
about 60 Guns each, should be sent in, in the morning to batter that Castle,
and accordingly my Lord Berkely ordered the Monk, and a Dutch Man of War, about
the same Force, to go in for that purpose. But I (having viewed the Place) did
believe that Two Ships would not be sufficient to cover our Boats at their
Landing, from the Fire of that Fort, and therefore moved his Lordship to think
of sending such a Number, as would be sufficient not only to secure the Boats
from the Shot of the Castle, but also give Assistance to our Landforces, (when
landing) by playing some of our Cannon upon the Enemies Troops, which we had
great Reason to believe would strongly oppose them; finding them much better
prepared on all sides, with Mortars, Guns, and Men, than we expected: But all
my Proposals in that Matter, my Lord Berkely referred to the Opinion of a
Council of War, which he then resolved to call the next morning by Three or
Four a clock.

On the 8th. at Break of Day, was a stark Calm, and so great a Fog, that we
could not see half the length of our Ships from us, and continued so till
between 6 and 7, at which time the day cleared up, so that the Signal for a
Council of War was easily perceived; as also that for Embarking the Soldiers,
at the same time we saw drawn up in a Line, upon the High-land on the W. side
of Camarett-Bay, Fourteen Squadrons of the Enemies Horse, which appeared to us
to be Regular Troops, being all very well clothed.

Between Seven and Eight a Clock, the Council of War, consisting of the English
and Dutch Flags, and the General Officers of the Landforces, were assembled,
and after consulting what was best to be done, for the securing our
Landforces, on their Approach to the Enemies Shore, and to cover their
Landing, 'twas resolved (as I had proposed to my Lord Berkely the night before)
to send in Three English, and Three Dutch Frigates more, besides the Monk and
Dutch Man of War aforementioned, which were only ordered to batter the Fort,
and I (having the night before been in the Bay, and viewed the Posture thereof)
offered my Service to Command the Ships ordered on this Occasion; which being
Accepted of, I desired also, that Lieutenant General Talmash might fend some
fitting Land-Officers, to go in with me, who (when we were come to an Anchor in
the Bay) might be able, and return soon enough to give him an Account of all
the Difficulties was possible for us, from our Ships, to discover in any of the
proper Landing-Places, so that he might the better avoid those Difficulties,
and land in the most easy Place of Access; which also was agreed to, and
accordingly the Lieutenant General appointed Monsieur Mountergis to go with me.

In all other Matters, this Council of War agreed in their Resolutions with
that of the 6th. excepting this Addition, That when my Lord Berkely should
hoist a White Flag at the Fore-Top-Mast Head, all the Ships, Small Vessels, and
Boats, should come off, and make the best of their Way, out of the Bay to him
again.

Before the Council of War was ended, several of the Vessels and Boats, (in
which the Landforces were Embarked) came under my Lord Berkley's Stern, but
the Mysty Weather before, and the Calm, which yet continued, hindered them from
getting to that Rendezvous, so soon as was designed, by Three or Four Hours.

I also desired my Lord Berkely (though he had ordered the Monk, and Damiaten, a
Dutch Man of War, to go in and batter that Fort, before I came in with the
other six Ships,) that he would give me leave to go in with the Monk, and lay
her and the said Dutchman in the most proper Stations for so doing, because
neither of the Captains knew any thing of the Figure of that place, and I could
easily return time enough, for leading in the other six Ships, and place them
also to the best Advantage; which his Lordship granted, and agreed would be
very convenient, so taking my leave of him, I went on Board the Charles Galley,
and hoisted my Flag there, he not being willing I should hoist it on Board the
Monk, because he would have me take the greatest care of posting the other six
Frigates as conveniently as could be to cover our Forces landing, and to annoy
(as much as possible) the Enemies Forces, which we had great reason to believe
was intrencht on the East side of the Bay; so that to have hoisted my Flag on
board the Monk, to have struck it again, (when 'twas absolutely necessary to
have it on board another Ship for leading in the rest to their designed
Stations) would have given such encouragement to the Enemy, that they would
have thought they had knook'd down a Flag-Officer, or that they had done us a
great deal more damage than they did.

The Six Ships appointed to go into the Bay with me on this occasion, were the
Greenwich, a Ship with Fifty-four Guns mounted, the Charles Galley with
Thirty-two, and the Shorehim with Thirty-two; and the Drakenstein with
Forty-four, the Wesep with Thirty, and the Wolf with Thirty; but the
Greenwich, (on board of which I had designed to have horsted my Flag) by reason
of the Negligence of her Commander, (whose Name is Weyghman) or his Cowardice,
or both, had disobeyed my Orders, and came not near me all that day; so that
the best half of the English. Force, in that little Detachment, was left
behind: After I had hoisted my Flag I called together the Five Captains, that
afterward went in with me, and gave them as good a Description, by a Map, as I
could, of the Bay we were going into, and how I designed they should be there
Posted, and what we were then to do, Ordering them with the Five Ships under
their Command to follow at such a convenient Distance from me, as that (after I
had posted the Monk, and Dutch Man of War appointed to batter the Fort) I might
return time enough to lead them into their proper Stations.

Then I went on Board the Monk, it being about Twelve of the Clock at Noon,
making the best of my way in for the Bay: But it continued yet so calm, that I
was forced to get Boats to tow us on our way, and as soon as we were separated
a little from the Fleet, the Enemy began to throw their Bombs very fast upon us
from Point des Fillettes, and the VV. Point of Camarett-Bay, and after we were
come within Three Quarters of a Mile of the latter, one of their Bombs broke
just over our Heads, in the Monk, a great piece of which struck through her
Poop, and Two Decks more, and came out again into the Water near one of the
Stern Ports, on the Larboard-side in the Gun-Room, killing Two Marines of my
own Company, and wounding a Third which stood close by me on the Poop, and soon
after (which was about One of the Clock) a fine Breeze sprung up at
North-VVest, which set us apace into the Bay, and as soon as we were come up
a-brest of the VVest-Point, Camarett-Fort fired very fast at us; and we being
forced, at that time, to stand with our Stem right upon it, the Shot from
thence did us a great deal of Damage; they, for a considerable time having the
opportunity of Raking us fore and aft, (no Shot from the Fort being thrown at
us of a less nature than a Demi-Cannon,) and we not able to bring any but our
chase Guns to bear upon them. And after we were pretty well shot into the Bay,
we were furpriz'd with Three Batteries firing upon us; which we did not
perceive, or know any thing of, till we felt their Shot: two of which, as we
were going in, was on our Starboard-side, one of Three Guns, and the other of
Five, and another of Six Guns, upon our Starboard Bow, close by
Camarett-Church. There was also a Redoubt stood pretty high behind the Fort and
the Church, which had five or six Guns mounted, but of a small nature. So when
the rest of the Ships came up, finding all these Batteries so extremely
defensive against us, I was forced to alter my former Resolutions of placing
them; and after I had brought the Monk, and a Dutch Man of War, into the most
proper Station I could judge, for battering the Fort, I was necessitated my
self to go on board every particular Ship, that was following me, to fix some
of them, so as to give Diversion to those Batteries; and the others in the most
convenient Stations I could at that time get them to, for defending our
Landforces (on their approach to the Shore) from the Cannon-shot; and also to
execute our Design on the Enemies Landforces, and cover our own on their
Descent. But I had no sooner parted from the Monck, but the Wind came about to
the N. E. which then also made it very difficult for me to prosecute my Design;
but with getting most of their Boats together, and towing first one Ship, and
then another, I made a shift, at last, to post them in such a manner, that I am
very well assured, gave great Succor to our Landforces, and also a
considerable Annoyance of the Enemy; though not so much as they should have
done, had not the Wind unluckily come about from the Westward to the Eastward.

As soon as we were come to an Anchor, Monsieur Mountergis, as well as my self,
plainly perceived that the Enemy had very advantagiously entrenched themselves
at every place where there was any possibility of Landing; and there was also
great numbers of Foot drawn behind their Trenches, besides some Regular Troops
of Horse. And as we were standing into the Bay, we saw all those Squadrons of
Horse (which were before drawn up on the high Land on the VVest-side of the
Bay) riding round, as fast as they could, to the designed Landingplace.

As soon as we had seen these uncomfortable Prospects, Monsieur Mountergis went
with all speed to acquaint the Lieutenant General therewith; who was at that
time with most of the Landforces pretty well advanced toward the Bay, (the
Signal being made for the Forces going on shore as soon as I began to engage.)

I thought our Land Forces moved toward the Shore in great disorder, and how
it happned I know not, but Lieutenant General Talmash, with a small number of
Well-boates in a kind of confused manner, went on shore under a little Rock on
the South side of the small Bay, where they landed: And I saw no prosecution of
that regular way of landing, which my Lord Cutt's proposed, and was before
agreed on; but having a great deal on my hands, and so little assistance, that
I was forced, generally to go on my own Messages, I am able to give but little
account of what was done close by the Shore: Only that when I saw the Boats,
and small Vessels (in which our Land Forces were imbarqu'd) had made their
retreat from thence, (excepting such as stuck fast there, in which a great many
men were killed, and out of which others were taken Prisoners, and some jumpt
into the Water, endeavoring that way to make their escape) I went with my 20
Oar'dboat pretty close to the Shore in hopes to save some, and had the good
fortune to take up several before they were drowned; at the same time I had the
opportunity to take notice of the disposition of that little Bay. The Enemy
just then making a running Fire round all their Trenches, and from every
Battery they had raised on this occasion; and tho they also fired Ball at us,
it presently showed they meant it only as a signal of their Victory, but by
that means I easily discovered how they were provided.

This was a Sandy Bay, about 300 yards in Front, and was naturally easy of
access, and was flankt on the right, and left with strong Earth-works, and
Cannon, and had a deep Trench of Communication, from one work to the other
fronting the Water, within less than half Musket Shot from the waterside. But
according to my poor judgment in matters of this kind, the preparations they
had made was such (the great number of the Troops both of Horfe and Foot, which
they had behind their Works to sustain them, considered) it would have been
altogether impossible (had we had double our Force) to have executed our Design.

Our Ships both at their coming in, and when anchored in the Bay made a very
vigorous fire upon the Enemy for about 3 hours but Camarett-fort had such thick
Walls and our men was so undisciplined and such ill Marksmen, that I believe we
did the Fort but little Damage, tho we occasioned their men to run out of it
twice, and saw their Officers, driving them back again, but after that, our men
seeing the Boats with the Land Forces were repulsed, and forced to retreat,
and the French Batteries firing still very vigorously on them, and every moment
some of them falling, and many killed and wounded; great numbers of the Ships
Companies that were there, both Dutch and English, ran into the Hold, in spite
of all the Officers could do to prevent it.

As soon as I had disposed of the poor men I saved from drowning, I went on
Board the Charles Gally again, and after I had been there about half and hour,
I saw the signal made for bringing off the Ships, and accordingly sent to every
Ship to get off as fast as they could: But the greatest difficulty I had in all
this Action was to effect that part, for almost all their Rigging was cut to
pieces, and most of their Masts and Yards disabled, so that there was no way
left to preserve them, but by Towing them off with great number of Boats, and
we had but very few left with this Little Squadron, by reason almost all the
Boats in the Fleet were forced to be made use of for the assistance of the
Landforces. So that Boats being our only remedy, and delay in getting them, of
most dangerous consequence, and fearing an inferior Officer might not be so
speedily obeyed, I was obliged to go my self after the Pinnaces and Barges,
carrying off some of the Officers of the Land Forces, and (disimbarking some of
them) force in as many of the Boats as I could procure, timely enough, to tow
off the Ships, the Boats Crews being very unwilling to go back to such a hot
place notwithstanding I returned with them, and then not having enough to employ
in towing off two Ships at once, I first clapped them all to the Charles Gally,
she being the farthest advanced into the Bay, and the most disabled in her
Masts, Sails and Rigging, and also her Rudder having received such an unlucky
Shot, as made it wholly unserviceable to her. But by this time the Shoreham,
whose Masts, Sails and Rigging were not so much disabled as the rest, by the
assistance of two or three Boats got out of the Bay clear of all. And after I
had towed the Charles Gally so far out as that she had weathered the Rock,
close by the West Point of the Bay, I took all the Boats from her but three,
and brought them back with all Expedition, and clapped them to the Monk At this
time the Dutch Man of War (which I had posted with her Broadside to the little
Bay, where our Forces attempted to Land) being a great deal to windward of the
rest, (and having received very little Damage, as being at the greatest
distance from Camarett-fort, and the Batteries on the West side,) immediately
sailed out, without the assistance of any Boats. Whereupon, her Boats, with
what other Dutch Boats I could meet, I sent to the assistance of two of the
other Dutchmen of War, which lay on the West side of the Bay, and in a short
time, tho they were very much shattered, made a shift to get out. By that time
they were out, the Monk had got up her Anchors; and after I had given the Fort
her broadside (as near as I could) in a Volley, (the boats being all ready) I
made them tow her Head round off in that Smoke, and so continue towing as fast
as they could. No sooner was her Smoke dispersed, but the Enemy (perceiving her
going off) fired (I think) more vigorously at her than they had done all the
time before, and (her Stem lying fair with the Fort) what Shot then took place
in her, (raking her fore and aft) did her more damage, than she had received
most of the time before: She being not far from the West side of this Bay, and
the Wind at E. N. E. and having no Sails to make use of, but her tow Courses,
all her Topmasts, Rigging, Yards, and her Rudder also being so much disabled,
that she had no Steeridge, but what the boats gave her, occasioned her driving
so much toward that shore, so that we were forced to make the Boats to tow
all they could to windward, which laid them so open to the Forts Shot, which
the Enemy perceiving, fired as fast as they could at them, and their Shot flew
so thick among the Boats, that it disheartened their Crews, that they gave over
towing, and ran all of a huddle under the shelter of the Ship, notwithstanding
all the Officers could say or do to encourage them; so that for their
encouragement I was forced to go my self in my own boat, and tow, in the middle
of them, that the Ship might be kept from the Rock near the point to the Leward
of her, toward which she then drove very fast. I had been but a little while
among them, before a shot struck through a boat, on my Right, hand, which
wounded a Lieutennant and one of his Men, and almost sunk her, and a little
while after, came a Shell into a Boat on my left hand, close by me which killed
four Men and wounded two more, and sunk the Boat, all at once; and this so
disincourag'd my Men, that they all gave over towing, and began to get under
the shelter of the Ship again, so that I was forced my self to fire a Musket
at them, and to take up another to do the same, before I could make them return
to their work.

With these difficulties I made a shift to get the Monk clear of this dangerous
Rock, and brought her off, tho she did not escape coming upon it near half her
Length, where if she had struck she would have most certainly been lost.

After I had got her clear, and out of all danger, there was but one Ship left
behind, which was a small Dutchman of 30 Gunn's called the Weesep. I had some
time before called to several Dutch Boats to go and help her, but finding they
had not obeyed my Order, I was going my self, when I saw two Boats put off from
her side: I rowed up to them, to know in what condition She was, and found an
English Ensign in one of them; who told me, the Captain, with all his Officers,
and Men, were killed, but what I saw in those two Boats; and that the Ship had
Twelve Foot Water in Hold, and was sinking: He said likewise, that half the
Company he belonged to, being accidentally left on Board with him, were all
killed, but himself, a Drummer, and one Man more; and seeing there was no
possibility of saving her, I went immediately to my Lord Berkeley, who was then
on Board the Dread-nought (where the General was carried in order to his going
to England, for the taking care of the Wound he had received in his Thigh:)
most of the Flag and General Officers of the Land Forces, being also then on
Board the Dread-nought to see the Lieutenant General. My Lord Berkeley thought
it very convenient to consult what was best to be done, and without making a
Signal for a Council of War, he sent for the rest of the Flag-Officers; and
after a long Consultation, the Result was as follows, word for word.

At a Council of War of Flag-Officers at Sea, and General-Officers at Land,
held on Board Their Majesty's Ship the Dread-nought the 8th. of June 1694. in
Camarett Road.
OUR ill Success this Day on Shore being considered, and that the Enemy were
entrenched almost in every Bay, it was considered what was now best to be done
with the Fleet and Landforces on Board. General Talmash being asked, If he had
Power to make any Attempt upon any other place than Breast, he said he had not;
but proposed, if it might not be for the Service to send into Breast a Squadron
of small Frigates, with Bomb-Vessels, to try to Bomb the Town; but 'twas thought
by the Council of War by no means advisable, because they could not go in
without a Westerly Wind, which was now Easterly; nor could they come out again,
without an Easterly Wind; so that we should be bound to stay there for them,
were it never so long; besides, not knowing certainly what Forces the Enemy
might have in Breast, it might be sending them into the Enemy's hands.

It being then proposed, what was the best place to go to from hence; Spithead
was resolved upon, it being the fittest place to Land the Soldiers, and to
re-fit our maimed Ships; it was also resolved to leave two Men of War, and two
Fireships off Ushant, to give Notice to all Ships, that came there to seek for
us, where we were gone. Another reason for not sending the small Frigates with
the Bomb-Vessels into Breast, was, That one was sunk battering the Forts, and
most of the rest for the present made unserviceable, Resolved to Sail to morrow
Morning by break of Day, Wind and Weather permitting.

Berkeley, Clou. Shovell, Carmarthen, Fran. Allemonde, Car. Vander-Putten,
Jills Schey, P. Vandergoes, Tho. Talmash, Macclesfield, Cutts.


After this Consultation was over, every Officer returned to his proper Ship.

In this Action, all the Captains (both English and Dutch) who commanded the
Ships that went into Camarett Bay, behaved themselves with great Gallantry, and
particularly Captain Warren, Commander of the Monk; who not only showed himself
to be a Man of extraordinary Courage, but in all kinds behaved himself as well
as 'twas possible for a Commander to do.

On this occasion most of the Volunteers on Board the Royal William offered me
their Service, which I accepted of, and they all behaved themselves
extraordinarily well, and were most of them of great use to me, particularly
Mr. Vanbrooke, Captain Chasseloup, Mr. Bonard, and Mr. Dixon (my Secretary.)

Mr. Vanbrooke during all this Action, stuck very close to me, and in a great
many things, was extremely serviceable both by his advice and otherwise.

Captain Chasseloup was with me both in the Monk, and Charles Galley, in which
Ships, he was often forced to do the Duty both of Lieutenant and Master; and
without him, (he knowing the place particularly well) I should not have been
able to have posted the Ships so conveniently as I did.

The Charles Galley having but one Lieutenant on Board Her, and he so dull a
Creature, that he was very useless, Mr. Bonard and Dixon were forced to supply
his Defects, which each of them performed with so much Courage and Dexterity,
that without them, the Captain would have had no assistance, and the Ship have
been much more unserviceable than She was.

Mr. Shewell, my Chaplain, would needs go along with me likewise on this
occasion, and was very serviceable, showing a great deal of Bravery himself,
and giving good Advice, and thereby great encouragement to the Seamen.

Theophilus Hodgson (my Eldest Lieutenant) went also voluntarily along with me,
whose Service (had he not been with us at our going in and coming out) we
should have much wanted, for besides the Service he did in general, when it was
hard to find any of the Monks People that would attempt it, he very readily
clapped a Spring upon Her Cable, by that means to bring Her Broadside to bear
on the Enemies Fort, and in getting the Ship off, he both performed the Duty of
several Officers, as also of a common Seaman, during the whole Action, he did
not only show himself to be an extraordinary stout Man, but wonderfully active.

Mr. Ripley (the Chief Mate of the Royal William) was also with me, who (after
the Master of the Monk was killed) did his Duty, and was a great help to us in
saving the Ship.

Two young Gentlemen, whose Names were Tankard and Trow, were also very
serviceable on board the Monk in this Action; but the latter had the Misfortune
to have his Leg taken off with the very last Shot that struck the Ship, of
which Wound he died in 3 or 4 hours.

The three English and four Dutch Men of War, that were then under my Command,
have lost about 400 Men.

The Loss that the Landforces have sustained, I am not acquainted with; but
it is reported that the Killed, Wounded and Taken, are about 700 Men.

June 9th. 1694.

PUrsuant to the Resolutions of a Council of War held last Night, at Five
a-Clock this Morning we came to Sail, the Wind at E. S. E. and stood out of the
Bay, at Noon had Fountainhead S. S. E. four Leagues distant, falling calm till
six in the Evening; then a fine Breeze at N. E. at eight at Night, the
South-end of Ushant bore N. by W. four Leagues distant.

On the 10th.

At four this Morning, Ushant bore S. E. by S. about five Leagues distant, the
Wind at E. by S. veering to the S. E. several Ships appeared in sight, which
proved to be the Bomb-vessels and Store-ships, which we had so long wanted:
Upon which there was a Council of War called, where being proposed, whether
(since their Arrival) we should alter the Resolutions of the last Council of
War, it was resolved in the Negative; so we made Sail for Spithead, and at
eight at Night had Ushant S. by E. E. about nine Leagues distant.

On the 11th.

Little Wind from E. S. E. to South, inclining to Calms. Since we took our
departure last Night, we have gone N. E. seventeen miles distant, Latitude per
Account 49 d. 18 m. departure from Ushant four miles East, it being S. W. 38
miles.

On the 12th.

Thick rainy Weather blowing hard all day, the Wind from E. S. E. to W. S. W.
and back to S. E. again: Our Course per board, all Impediments allowed, is N. E
N. 52 miles, difference of Latitude 40. and Meridian distance 32 miles,
Latitude per Account 49 d. 58 m. Meridian distance from Ushant 36 Miles East,
it bearing S. S. W. W. 28 Leag. and 2 miles; about four in the Afternoon we
handed both Topsails, bore up, and came to our Larboard tack till about
eleven, then brought to; to the Eastward again; and in bearing up, a Ship run
on board us, and split our Fore-Sail, and carried away our Fore-top
Gallant-mast, broke his own Spritsail-yard, which with the Sail hung to the
bunt of our Fore-sail, then dropped overboard: He also lost his Sprit-sail
Topmast, and so got clear.

On the 13th.

At six this Morning we saw the Bolt North, four Leagues from us; at eight the
Start had the same bearing and distance, the Wind at S. W. fair weather,
veering to the E. S. E. At eight at night the Bill of Portland bore N. E. by E.
about four Leagues; then came up with us the Surlings and Newport, two small
Frigates bound for New England. All the following Night proved but little Wind.

On the 14th.

At four this morning the Bill of Portland bore N. N. W. about 5 Leagues
distant, the Wind at S. W. a fine small Gale: At twelve we had the Needles N.
E. about three Leagues distant in the Evening; sometimes Calm, and sometimes a
small Breeze at E. S. E. We drove till the Flood was done, and then anchored in
12 Fathom-water, being 12 a-clock at night, Donnoze bearing N. by W. and Cul.
Cliff N. by E.

On the 15th.

At 6 this morning we weighed, having a fine Gale at S. W. and at half an hour
after ten we anchored within St. Helen's Road in seventeen Fathom-water, where
we moored, Jilkiker bearing N. W. W. and St. Helen's Point, South-Westerly.

My Lord Berkeley, during all this Expedition, has had a great deal of unusual
trouble by reason of the Imbarcations of the Soldiers; notwithstanding which
(both, by his Advice at Councils of War, and issuing of Orders, which his
Lordship has done very methodically) has behaved himself (in my Opinion) with
all the Conduct and Prudence that could be expected from any Gentleman in his
Station.

Lieutenant General Talmash, the Earl of Macclesfield, my Lord Cutts, and all
the Officers of the Landforces (I think) have shown all the forwardness and
readiness imaginable, for the attempting any thing that was possible to be done
on this occasion.

There are no Officers of Note (that I can yet hear of) killed in this Action,
but Monsieur Lamote; and Lieutenant General Talmash died the Tuesday following
of the Wound he received in his Thigh; but there are several Captains, etc. who
are either killed or taken, whose Names I am as yet ignorant of.

FINIS.

