THE Two great Questions, WHEREON In this present Juncture of AFFAIRS, THE
PEACE and SAFETY OF HIS Maiestie's Person;

And of all HIS Protestant Subjects In His Three KINGDOMS next under GOD
Depend: Stated, Debated, and Humbly Submitted to the Consideration of Supreme
Authority, As resolved by CHRIST.

Does our Law judge any man before it hear him? Jo. 7. 51. I say unto you, Love
your Enemies, Matthew. 44. LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1681.

The Two Great QUESTIONS whereon in this present Juncture of Affairs, the Peace
and Safety of His Majesty's Person, and all his Protestant Subjects in his
Three Kingdoms, next under God depend; Stated, Debated, and humbly Submitted to
the Consideration of Supreme Authority.
QUEST. 1.
WHether an Act of Exclusion either of the Lineal or Collateral Heir to the
Crown, ought to be passed without Lawful Summons and Hearing? Neg.

Objections against the Negative answered.
Obj. 1. The Collateral Heir to the Crown Fugam fecit, therefore he ought to be
Excluded without Summons or Hearing.

Answ. 1. The known Law of God, Nations, Nature, and Scripture is contrary;
Joh. 7. 51. Does our Law Judge any man before it hear him?

Answ. 2. The known Law of the Land is contrary, both Common Law and Statute;
and particularly the Statutes of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right.

Answ. 3. There is no Malefactor, yea Felon, ought to be found guilty of a
Fugam fecit, nor forfeit any thing for the same, until he is brought to the
Bar, Arraigned, put to Trial, and found Innocent of the Felony.

Object. 2. To Attaint or Condemn of any Crime by Parliament without Summons
and Hearing, may perhaps be unlawful. But it does not follow therefore, That
EXCLUSION of RIGHT without Summons and Hearing, is unlawful.

Answ. 1. To Exclude from Right, without Summons and Hearing, is as contrary to
the Law of God, Nations, Nature and Scripture, as to Condemn of Crime.

Answ. 2. It Is as contrary to the Law of the Land both Common and Statute, and
particularly, the Statutes of MAGNA CHARTA, AND PETITION OF RIGHT.

Obj. 3. The Press is open to the Papist, and the Protestant afraid to Print;
whereby the Protestant Religion and Liberty is Condemned without Hearing, and
it will be impossible to Extirpate Popery and Slavery, without Free Liberty of
Printing to the Protestant; neither do the Kingdoms of Darkness either of Pope
or Turk build themselves on any deeper Fundamental, than that the first permits
no Printing but by Episcopal License; and the Other permits no Printing at all:
neither can any Humane Reason be given Why the Doctrine of Wickliff, which
comprehended the whole Protestant Religion in far greater Purity than Luther or
Calvin have done since, and was far more terrible to the Church of Rome than
either of theirs; yet gave them not so great an overthrow as the two latter
have done; But only this, That Wickliff lived in a Time before the Invention of
Printing was found; And Luther and Calvin since, From which Interdiction of the
Press by the Papist to the Protestant, whereby the Protestant Religion and
Liberty, are condemned without Hearing, is objected this Conclusion. That it is
a just Retaliation to Condemn and Exclude the pretended Popish Religion and
Liberty without Hearing, as they have done the Protestant.

Answ. It is more just and easy for the Parliament to punish such Persons as
have contrary to the Law against Monopolies, Magna Charta, and Petition of
Right Imprisoned, Fined, or Pillory'd the Subject for Using the Lawful Trade of
Printing without their Licenses, by Example of Punishment on which Monopolists,
The Protestant will be restored to his Native Liberty of defending his Religion
in Print.

Obj. 4. The Public Offices of Temporal and Spiritual Judges, Magistrates and
Sheriffs, are believed great part of them to have been placed contrary to the
Acts of Parliament, on the Recommendations of Papists or their Trustees; It
will be therefore impossible to obtain any ordinary Legal Proceedings against
the Collateral Heir from such Judges who are his Creatures. The Honorable
Parliament therefore have been necessitated to have recourse to the
Extraordinary way of endeavoring an Act of Exclusion, without Summons or
Hearing.

Answ. The Cause of Succession is not now depending before Inferior Judges,
Temporal or Spiritual; but before the Supreme Court of the King and Parliament;
And the time is a time of Peace, and not of War, the ordinary proceedings
therefore of Peace ought now to be used; which are Summons and Hearing. And not
the Extraordinary without them, as in a time of War.

Obj. 5. It will be too late to delay, till a War or Rebellion break out and
surprise the Protestant with a Massacre, seeing Persons recommended by Papists
have already contrary to all Acts of Parliament, seized by themselves or
Agents, on the Military as well as Civil and Ecclesiastical Offices and Power,
and on the Commands of the Forces by Land and Sea, with the Public Magazines
of Arms and Treasure, intended by the Parliament to be given and received for
the Defense of the Protestant.

Answ. It is less delay, and more justly and easily done by His Majesty's
Assent to Summon all such Principal Persons, having so offended against the
Acts of Parliament, as His Majesty and his High Court of Parliament shall think
fit, to appear in Person before His Majesty and Parliament, to answer to such
things as shall be objected against them; on whose appearance, none doubts His
Majesty and his Parliaments Power, by such ways as to their Wisdom and Justice
seem fit, to prevent their acting in any way of Rebellion and Massacre against
the safety of His Majesty, and of his Protestant Subjects; or in case of their
Refusal, Contempt, or Neglect to appear, to take such further course as shall
be by God's assistance most just, and conducible to the same ends.

Obj. 6. The Declaring of the Lineal Heir to be the Protestant Successor, is an
Exclusion of the Collateral Heir from Succession. But the declaring of the
Lineal Heir to be the Protestant Successor, may be without Summons of the
Collateral Heir; Therefore there may be an Exclusion of the Collateral Heir
without Summons. The Major cannot be denied, and the Minor is plain; for after
the Death of Queen Elizabeth, there were no less than Sixteen Pretenders to the
Succession of the Crown, who discovered themselves, and more there might be
undiscovered; whereby if a particular Summons were in such case necessary, the
Pretenders would be very difficult, and many times impossible to be found and
Summoned: And fraudulently to evade such Summons they might convey themselves
into parts beyond Sea, or places concealed or dangerous to Summon; or Summoners
not to be got who would dare to Summon them, whereby it would not lie in the
Power of King and Parliament to make any Settlement of the Succession of the
Kingdoms to prevent Civil Wars, and all future Calamities incident to the
Incertainty of a Successor.

Answ. 1. It is granted, That a Lineal Protestant Heir may be Declared without
Summons of the Collateral, and that this does sufficiently Exclude the
Collateral from the Succession; but this Declarator does neither Exclude the
Collateral Heir from Summons or Hearing; for though the Parliament do not
actually Summon, or give him notice; yet their Proceeding in Voting a
Protestant Successor is so Notorious and Public, it gives sufficient and
general notice in Law to all Persons pretending any Right and Liberty to
address themselves to make their Claim, and to be heard on the same, and time
likewise before it can pass the Negatives of the other House and the King.

Answ. 2. This is Conform to the Judicial Proceeding in ordinary Courts of
Justice, wherein is allowed Admissio Tertii propter interesse; The receipt of a
Third Person, if he will address himself by Petition to have his Right heard.

Answ. 3. This is Conform to the Proceedings in Fines, wherein if the Party
Interested will make his Claim, he shall be heard: But if he neglect, it is his
own fault, and he is concluded by Non-claim, and this is held just in private
Rights, much more ought it to be, and greater necessity there is allowable,
Finem Litibus imponere in Public Rights of so great Consequence as Successions
to the Crown; wherein it is sufficient, if Liberty is allowed to Pretenders to
make their Claims, and to be heard, though there be not those delays of Time
and Formalities allowed, as in Discussion of private Rights, the same being
inconsistent with the imminent Dangers of Kingdoms. But an Act of Exclusion of
Right, neither allows notice in Deed or Law, nor what time may without danger
be allowed for Hearing, nor Admissio Tertii propter Interesse, nor Claim to be
made; But takes away the Right of Parties interested sine facto aut defectu,
contrary to the common Rule, Nemo debet rem suam sine facto aut Defectu suo
amittere.

Obj. 7. An Act of Exclusion may be of any Person from Succession in Elective
Kingdoms, without Summons or Hearing; But the Three Kingdoms are Elective
Kingdoms, therefore an Act of Exclusion from Succession may be without Summons
or Hearing.

Answer. It is acknowledged, That the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and of all other Nations, have been originally Elective by the People,
till by the assent of the same People, the same were by Positive Laws made
Hereditary: And as to the Positive Laws of Great Britain, not only the Common
Law, but the Acts of Parliament are full and clear in it, That the Succession
of the Crown is Hereditary to the King's Eldest Sons, is particularly enacted
in the Statute 25 E. 8. cap. 2. De Proditionibus. And by the Statutes of
Kenneth the Third, and Malcolm Mackenneth the Second, as related by Buchanan,
Lib. 6. Rer. Scot. p. 191. 196. And Anno 10 H. 7. a Right profitable Act was
made before Sir Edward Poynings, then Deputy or Provost in Ireland, whereby it
is Enacted,

That all Statutes late made within the Realm of England, concerning or
belonging to the Common or Public Weal of the same, from henceforth be deemed
Good and Effectual in the Law, and over that be accepted, used, and executed
within this Land of Ireland, in all Points, at all times requisite, according
to the Tenor and Effect of the same.

And Coke says, 4 Part 351. That, Hill. 10. Jac. Regis, It was resolved by the
two Chief Justices and Chief Barons, That this word (late) in the beginning of
this Act, had the sense of (before) so that the Act extended to Magna Charta,
and to all Acts of Parliament of England, made before this Act of 10 H. 7. And
by consequence to the Act of 25 E. 3. cap. 2. So that by the Acts of Parliament
both of England, Scotland, and Ireland, nothing can be more clear than the
making the Succession of all the Three Kingdoms Hereditary to the King's Eldest
Son. So, 1 Eliz. cap. 3. A Recognition is made by Act of Parliament, that the
Crown lawfully descended to Queen Elizabeth, as the next Lineal Heir to H. 8.
And 1 Jac. cap. 1. The like Recognition is made by Act of Parliament of the
Descent of the Crown to King James, as lawful Heir from H. 7. Unless therefore
these general Acts of Parliament of England, Scotland, and Ireland so anciently
made, and the particular Acts of Recognition of two Protestant Parliaments so
lately made, all declaring the Succession of the Crown to be Hereditary, be
first repealed by new Acts, this Objection, That the Kingdoms are Elective,
contrary to both Common and Statute Law, will signify nothing.

Reasons for the Negative.
1. It would be very dishonorable to the Protestant Religion, and the Supreme
Court, which ought to give Example of Justice to Inferior Courts, to do any
thing Injust: And though Parliaments in time of Popery De facto used to Exclude
men of their Rights, and Condemn them without Summons or Hearing, and the same
is continually practiced by the inhumane Cruelty of the Romish Inquisition;
yet, thanks be to God, it never was, nor we hope will be practiced by any
Protestant Parliament, neither was it in time of War it self; but there were
always Commissioners of Claims to hear private Rights; and if the Public were
necessitated to make use of them, or to change private Property or Possession
to Public benefit, they made according to Conscience full compensation in
value to the Owners.

2. The Exclusion of Princes from any Right without Summons and Hearing, gives
a Dangerous Precedent to Exclude all meaner Subjects from their Rights without
Summons and Hearing; neither is it possible Magna Charta and the Petition of
Right, if they fall as to one, can stand as to the other.

3. His Majesty and the Major part of Protestants in his Honorable Parliament,
will never assent to any thing Injust or Dishonorable. It were vain therefore
to attempt it.

4. It will be inconsistent with Humane Society, and destructive to Innocent
and Guilty Papists and Protestants alike.

5. It will give a pretense to Foreign Popish Princes, and Inquisitions to
justify their barbarous Proceedings against Protestants beyond Sea.

6. The Talio of a Legem quam Tuleras feras, may in the Interval of a
Parliament, be returned by the Prosecution and Power of Papists in public
Offices, Military and Civil, on any Member of Parliament, as was on Tho.
Cromwell Earl of Essex, who solicited and pressed the Judges to give an
Extrajudicial Opinion, that the Parliament might attaint a man of High Treason,
without Summons and Hearing; which was soon after executed by H. 8. on the said
Earl of Essex himself, who solicited the said Judges to deliver such Opinion;
which shows that Malum Consilium est Consultori pessimum, on which Coke 4 Part,
fol. 37. has these words: I had it of Sir Thomas Gawdye Knight, a grave and
Reverend Judge of the King's Bench, who lived at that time, King H. 8.
commanded him to attend the Chief Justices; and to know, Whether a man that was
forthcoming, might be attainted of High Treason by Parliament, and never
called to answer? The Judges answered, That it was a DANGEROUS QUESTION, and
that the High Court of Parliament ought to give Examples to Inferior Courts for
proceeding according to Justice, and no Inferior Court could do the like; and
they thought that the High Court of Parliament would never do it. But being by
the Express Commandment of the King, and by the said Earl pressed to give a
direct Answer; They said, That if he be Attainted by Parliament, it could not
come in question afterward, whether he were called, or not called to answer.
And albeit their Opinion was according to Law, yet might they have made a
better answer; for by the Statutes of Magna Charta, cap. 29. 5. E. 3. cap. 9.
and 28 E. 3. cap. 5. No Man ought to be Condemned without answer, etc. which
they might have certified, but facta tenent multa, quae fieri prohibentur, the
Act of Attainder being passed by Parliament, did bind as they Resolved. The
Party against whom this was intended, was never called in Question, but the
first Man after the said Resolution, that was so attainted and never called to
answer, was the said Earl of Essex; whereupon that Erroneous and Vulgar Opinion
amongst our Historians grew, That he died by the same Law which he himself had
made. The Rehearsal of the said Attainder, can work no prejudice; for that I am
confidently persuaded, That such Honorable and Worthy Members shall be from
time to time of both Houses of Parliament, as never any such Attainder, where
the Party is forthcoming, shall be had without hearing of him.

7. The Papist cannot be pleased better, nor any thing more for his advantage
done, than by Act of Parliament to Exclude the Collateral Heir without Summons
or Hearing; because he knows the next Parliament for him will make the Act of
Exclusion NULL and VOID; though they can allege no other Reason for Error,
than that he was not according to the LAW of GOD, NATIONS, NATURE, SCRIPTURE,
MAGNA CHARTA, and PETITION of RIGHT, Summoned and Heard: as appears was done in
a great Case concerning Thomas and Henry Earls of Lancaster, which is thus
recited; Coke 2 Part. fol. 48. Thomas Earl of Lancaster was destroyed, That is,
adjudged to Die as a Traitor, and put to Death in 14 E. 2. and a Record thereof
made: And Henry Earl of Lancaster his Brother, and Heir was restored, for two
Principal Errors in the proceeding against the said Thomas,

1. Quod non fuit araniatus, and ad Responsionem positus tempere pacis, eo quod
cancellaria, and aliae curiae Regis fuer' apertae, in quibus Lex fiebat
unicuique, prout fieri consuevit.

2. Quod contra cartam de Libertatibus, cum dictus Thomas fuit unus parium, and
Magnatum Regni, in qua continetur (and recites this Chapter of Magna Charta,
specially quod Dominus Rex non super eum ibit, nec mittet, nisi per Legale
Judicium par^um suorum, tamen per Recordum praedictum, Tempore Pacis absque
arainamento Responsione, seu Legali Judicio parium suorum, contra Legem, and
contra tenorem Magnae Chartae.) Here appears that an Act of Parliament made
purposely to exclude Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and his Brother Henry Earl of
Lancaster from the Crown, is made Void and Null by a Parliament called after by
Henry, who succeeded, and was after King Henry the Fourth, on assigning no
other Errors but these Two, Viz. (1) That he was not Arraigned nor brought to
answer, though it was in a time of Peace, when the Chancery, and other the
King's Courts were open, in which Justice was done to every one, as has been
accustomed to be done. (2.) Because against the Charter of Liberties, when the
said Thomas was one of the Peers and great Men of the Kingdom (and recited the
Chapter of Magna Charta) especially, That our Lord the King shall not pass upon
him, nor condemn him, unless by the Lawful Trial of his Peers; yet by the
Record aforesaid in a time of Peace, without Arraignment, Answer, or Lawful
Trial of his Peers against the Law, and against the Tenor of Magna Charta, etc.
he was Condemned. And such Exclusion without Summons and Hearing, will advance
the Reputation of the Title of the Collateral Heir, and disparage and draw
suspicion of weakness on the Title of the Lineal Heir; because men use not to
deny Hearing to any but to those whose right is better than their own, and whom
they are not able to answer, but by stopping their Mouths, and not suffering
them to prove or dispute against their own false pretenses. So did Edward the
Fourth deal with Sir John Mortimer, whom he could not deny to be true next and
Lawful Heir to the Crown, as Coke relates 4th Part, fol. 38. And says as evil
was the proceeding against Sir John Mortimer, third Son of Edmond the second
Earl of Marsh (descended from Lionel Duke of Clarence) who was Indicted of High
Treason for certain words; in effect, That Edmond Earl of March should be King
by Right of Inheritance; and that he himself was next Rightful Heir to the
Crown after the said Earl of March; wherefore if the said Earl should not take
it upon him, he would: And that he would go into Wales and raise an Army of
20000 Men, etc. which Indictment (without any Arraignment or Pleading) being
merely feigned to blemish the Title of Mortimers, and withal being insufficient
in Law, as by the same appears, was confirmed by Authority of Parliament: And
the said Sir John being brought into the Parliament, without Arraignment or
putting to Answer, Judgment in Parliament was given against him upon the said
Indictment; That he should be carried to the Tower of London, and Drawn through
the City to Tyborn, and there Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, his Head to be set
on London Bridge, and his four Quarters on the four Gates of London; as by
Record of Parliament appears, Rot. Par. 2. H. 6. Nu. 18.

8. Admit the Law should be proved doubtful in the point, whether an Act of
Exclusion may be lawful or not, yet the Rule is undoubted, quod dubites ne
feceris, when the same end may be better obtained in a way not at all doubtful,
it would seem therefore very contentious to cast all on a Querie in Law, to
spare the labor of so small a Punctilio as Summons, when the same may be done
with less labor, and the proceedings made clear and indisputable in Law by
giving it.

9. Admit an Act of Exclusion might possibly be proved Lawful in some case of
Necessity without Summons; yet it is a Rule Non recur ^itur ad remedium
Extraordinarium nisi deficit ordinarium, it is already shown, Here is no such
case of Necessity; The time is of Peace, and not of War; the place is in the
High Court of Parliament, and not in the Camp.

10. It were a very dangerous thing to Expose so great a Treasure as SALUS
POPULI to such Disputes as nothing can resolve but the Sword, when God has
vouchsafed so great a Mercy as a Protestant King, and Protestant Parliament,
giving so great Hopes of satisfying all desires, just honorable and necessary
to public Safety in Peace.

QUEST. 2.
Whether an Act of Oblivion ought at present to be granted both to the Lineal
and Collateral Heir of the Crown and their Adherents? Aff.

Objections against an Act of Oblivion.
Obj. 1. If an Act of Oblivion should pass, then will all the Prisoners in the
Tower and other Prisons charged with Treason, be again let loose, All Jesuits,
Seminaries, corrupted Judges, Spiritual and Temporal, Donatees, Pensioners,
Seisers or Receivers of the Public Treasure, Magazines and Arms would be
cleared from all account and restitution, and Papists be in better Condition
than Protestants.

Answ. No Act of Oblivion uses to be without Exceptions, which the King and
Parliament may insert, as it shall please to direct them.

Obj. 2. Papists though dispossessed of Public Offices, Forts and Fleets, yet
may retain their old, and provide new Arms in secret for the Field, which is
more dangerous; for the Forts will again open their Gates to him who Conquers
in the Field, and the Fleets return again to his Possession who takes the Sea
Towns; there can be no Security therefore against Papists, but Banishment,
which cannot consist with an Act of Oblivion.

Answ. 1. Banishment is not necessary of Lay-Papists, seeing the Acts of
Parliament have already banished their Priests and Jesuits, and made it High
Treason for them to come into or remain in England or Ireland; without whose
Diabolical Temptations, there appears no reason why the Lay-Papist should not
desire the Peace and Safety of their Native Country, and their own Estates, and
to enjoy their Conscience, Liberty, and Property as free from Violation as the
Protestants do themselves, rather than hazard all they have on the Event of
Rebellion or Invasion.

Answ. 2. Banishment is either imposed as a Punishment or a Policy; if as a
Punishment, it is unjust and contrary to Magna Charta to Banish before Summons
and Hearing; for that will punish the Innocent and Guilty alike. If the
Banishment is for Policy, this seems most unpolitick; For first, this inforces
all Potent Papists to fly to a Foreign Enemy, who is ready to receive and form
them and their followers into an Army, and to join his own Forces with them
against their own Country. 2. This gives them a good Cause or pretense to fight
against their Country with Foreigners in a se Defendendo, and for Recovery of
their own, and to associate themselves on the same or like Grounds as
Protestants have associated. 3. It is that which the subtle Jesuit desires to
draw the unpolitick Protestant to, that seeing he is himself Banished by the
Law, that an Army of English Papists may be Banished with him, that so he may
turn head with them on those who have made them desperate by the Injustice of
making no distinction between the Innocent and Guilty, and to take the
Resolution of Vna salus victis nullam Sperare salutem; Touching which,
Histories are full of Examples of Kingdoms destroyed by the Banishment of but
one single Person, and much more by drawing many into a wrongful Exile. Very
much more might be answered of the Danger of so deceitful an Expedient against
Papists; which for Brevity is here omitted.

Reasons for an Act of Oblivion.
1. It being proved before, That no Act of Exclusion ought to be without
Summons and Hearing, it necessarily follows, that whosoever is Summoned before
any Judge to be heard, he ought to have Protection eundo morando and redeundo,
and Summons ad Forum non tutum may justly be excepted against, and a Protection
only eundo morando and redeundo, is insufficient to make Forum Tutum without an
Act of Oblivion.

2. It cannot be hoped, that the Papists being in possession by their Agents of
so much of the Arms and Forces by Land and Sea (and the Protestant disarmed)
will deliver up their Arms, and hazard their Lives on a Trial of Law, without
an Act of Oblivion.

3. Difficile est in tot humanis Erroribus sola innocentia vivere. An Act of
Oblivion may be as safe and necessary for the Protestant as the Papist, unless
they both intend to play off their Heads one to another alternis vicibus, as
they did in the late Civil Wars, by the running of the Dice to make sport for
Foreigners.

4. Histories are full, how all Intestine Discords, Seditions, Treasons,
Rebellions, Civil Wars, and in particular the late unhappy Civil Wars in the
Three Kingdoms have been accorded, and their Continuance prevented by Acts of
Oblivion, and the happy Restoration of His present Majesty, and Peace in Three
Kingdoms, made and Established by the chief means next under God of an Act of
Oblivion.

ERRATA. Page 13. line 21. read shall please God to direct them.


