THE Count of GABALIS: Or, The Extravagant Mysteries OF THE Cabalists, EXPOSED
In Five Pleasant Discourses On The Secret Sciences.

Quod tanto impendio absconditur, etiam solummodo demonstrare, destruere est.

Tertullian. Done into English, By P. A. Gent.

With Short Animadversions.

London, Printed for B. M. Printer to the Cabalistical Society of the Sages, at
the Sign of the Rosy-Crusian, MDCLXXX.

A LETTER TO MY LORD
MY LORD,
YOU have always shown your self so Generous to your Friends, that I cannot
believe, but you will pardon the Liberty I take, in behalf of one of the best
of Mine; which is, to beseech you, to be so kind to him, as to take the pains
to read over his Book. I go not about to engage you in the following Part,
which my Friend, the Author, promises to publish hereafter; since I know, these
Authors are apt to give us large Hopes, of what they intend, but often fail. I
told him plainly, That you esteem it a great Point of Honor, never to say any
thing, but what you think; and that he should not flatter himself to imagine,
you would put off a Quality so rare, and so new in the Court, to say his Book
is Good, if you find it otherwise. But that which I now desire of your
Lordship, and which I humbly beg, you will not deny me, is, to decide a
Difference we have had betwixt us. You should not, my Lord, have engrossed to
your self, such a prodigious Stock of Knowledge and Learning, if you have not a
mind to be Consulted, before the greatest Doctors. This, Sir, is the Dispute,
which I have had with my Friend.

I would have persuaded him, to have changed the whole Frame of his Work; for
this Drolling way, of carrying it thus on, does not to me, seem proper to his
Subject. These Mysteries of the Cabal (said I to him) are serious Matters, which
many of my Friends do seriously study: They should therefore be Refuted by the
Strength of solid Arguments. And as their Errors are generally on things
Divine; the which, (besides the difficulty we have, to make a Wise Man laugh
indeed, at any Subject what so ever) are certainly most dangerous to jest with:
And we may very well fear, lest it should cast a Scandal on our Religion. It Is
true, he must make a Cabalist speak like a Saint, or else he improperly manages
the Character; and if he does so speak like a Saint, he imposes on weak
Judgments, by this appearance of Sanctity; and probably, shall induce Men to
entertain a belief of these Extravagancies, more than all his Drolling shall be
able to Refute.

To this, my Friend answered, with the same Presumption, which Authors are
accustomed to do, when they vindicate their Works: That though these
Cabalistick Mysteries be so serious; yet are there none but Melancholy
Persons, who addict themselves to the Study of them. That should he fall point
blank on this Subject, in a Dogmatick Method, he himself would become
Ridiculous, for treating seriously on such Fooleries: And that he judged it
more to the purpose, to turn all this Ridicule on the Count of Gabalis. The
Secret Sciences of the Gabal, are of the number of those Chymaeras; to which we
give most Authority, when we dispute against them soberly: and that we should
not therefore undertake to baffle and destroy them, but by jeering. And he
being read in the Fathers, alleged to me Tertullian. Your Lordship, that
understands them better than either He, or I do, may judge whether he has
quoted him true or no: Multa sunt risu digna revinci, ne gravitate adorentur.
He said, That Tertullian used this Excellent Saying, against the Valentinians,
who were a kind of very Fanatic Rosy-Crusians, in his Days.

As to the Devotion, which is almost in every part of this Work: It is an
inevitable Necessity (said he) that a Cabalist should speak of God. But then
again, it is observable in this Piece, That there is a more inevitable
Necessity, for the keeping up this Cabalistick Character, that God is never
spoken of, but with Extreme Respect: So that Religion cannot receive any
Blemmish by it; and weak Judgments shall be more infatuated with it, than the
Lord Gabalis, when they suffer themselves to be Bewitched by this Extravagant
Devotion; if the Railery used herein, abstruct not the Charm.

By these his Reasons, (my Lord) and many others, which I shall forbear to
repeat to you (because I am very Ambitious, to make you of my Party) My Friend
pretends, he ought to have writ against the Cabal, in this pleasant Manner.
Your Lordship, I hope, will be pleased, to decide this Controversy. I affirm,
It would be most proper, to proceed against the Cabalists, or Rosy-Crusians,
and against all their Secret Sciences, by serious and vigorous Arguments. He
says, That Truth is naturally Brisk and Gay; and that she is most powerful,
when she Laughs: because one of the Ancients, whom without doubt, you know,
says, in a certain place, (which you cannot choose, but call to mind, being
endued with so Faithful a Memory) Convenit veritati ridere, quia laetans.

He added, That the Secret Sciences are dangerous, if we meddle not with them
in such a manner, as may inspire is with Contempt against them; by painting out
their Ridiculous Mysteries, and preventing the Worlds losing time, in search
after them; by showing the Vanity and End of them, and displaying their
Extravagancy. Pray, (my Lord) declare your Sentence, having heard our Reasons.
I shall receive your Decision, with that Respect, with which you know, I am
always obliged to acknowledge my self,

MY LORD, Your Lordships Servitorissimo.

Count GABALIS: Or, The Extravagant Mysteries. Of the CABALISTS. OR,
ROSY-CRUSIANS. Exposed in Five Pleasant Discourses on the Secret Sciences
Discourse the First.
GOD rest the Soul of Monsieur the Count of Gabalis! who, as they Write me
news, is lately dead of an Apoplexy. Now, the Cabalists will not fail to say,
That this kind of Death is ordinary to those, who imprudently manage the
Secrets of the Sages; and that, since the Blessed Ramundus Lullius has
Pronounced the Sentence in his Last Will and Testament, a Destroying-Angel has
ever been ready to strangle in a Moment, all those who have indiscreetly
Revealed the Phylosophick-Mysteries.

But let them not so rashly condemn this Wise Man, without having better
Information of his Conduct. It Is true, He has discovered all to me; but not
without all the Cabalistick Circumspections requisite. I must do him the right,
in giving this Testimony to his Memory, That he was a great Zealot for the
Religion of his Fathers, the Philosophers; and that he would have suffered the
Flames, rather than have Profaned the Sanctity of it, by disclosing it to any
Unworthy Prince, to any Ambitious Person, or to one that was Incontinent; three
sorts of People, Excommunicated in all Ages by the Wise. By good Fortune, I am
no Prince; I have little Ambition; and by the Sequel of this Discourse, it may
be seen, that I have a little more Chastity, than a Sage needs have. I am end
ued with a Docible Wit, curious of Knowledge, and Bold enough: I want but a
little Melancholy, to make all those who would blame the Count of Gabalis,
confess, that he needed not have concealed any thing from me, in regard I was a
Subject proper enough for the Secret Sciences. It is true, that without
Melancholy, no great Progress can be made therein: But this little Stock of it
that I have, was enough to make me not to be rejected by them. You (has he said
a hundred times to me) have Saturn in an Angle, in his House, and Retrograde;
you cannot fail, one of these days, of being as Melancholy, as a Sage ought to
be: For the Wisest of all Men (as we know in the Cabal) had, as you have,
Jupiter in the Ascendant. And yet, it was never observed, that he ever so much
as once Laughed, in all his Lifetime; so powerful was his Saturn in him,
though it was certainly weaker than yours.

It Is then my Saturn, and not Monsieur the Count of Gabalis, that the Virtuosi
must Quarre^ with, if I affect more the Divulging of their Secrets, than the
Practicing of Them. If the Stars do not their Duty, the Count is not in the
Fault: And if I have not a Soul Great enough to attempt, to become Master o^
Nature, to turn the Element^ up side down, to entertain the Supreme
Intelligences, to command the Demons, to beget Giants, to create New Worlds,
to speak to God in his High Throne, and to oblige the Cherubin, which defends
the Entrance of Paradise, to let me come in, and take two or three Turns in his
Walks; It Is Me, that they must blame more or less: They must not for this,
insult over the Memory of this Rare Man; and say that he is Dead, for having
blabbed all things to me. Is it impossible, that amongst the wandering Spirits,
he may not have been worsted in a Conflict with some Indocible Hobgoblin?
Perchance he is not Dead, but in Appearance; following the Custom of the
Philosophers, who seem to Dye in one place, and transport themselves to
another. Be it how it will, I can never believe, that the Manner wherewith he
entrusted his Treasures to me, merited any Punishment. You shall see, how all
things passed.

Common Sense having always made me suspect, that there was a great deal of
Emptiness in all that which they call Secret Sciences; I was never tempted to
lose so much time, as to turn over the Leaves of these Books, which Treat of
them: But yet, not finding it reasonable to Condemn, without knowing why, all
those addicting themselves thereto, who otherwise are Wise Persons, very
Learned for the most part, and Eminent both for the Gown and Sword. I took up a
Resolution, (that I might avoid being Unjust, and wearying my self with tedious
Reading) of feigning my self a great Devoter to these Sciences, amongst all
those, whom I could learn were of that Gang. I had quickly better Success, than
I could possibly hope for. Since all these Gentlemen, how Mysterious, and how
Reserved so-ever they may seem to be, desire nothing more, than to vent their
Imaginations, and the New Discoveries, which they pretend to have made in
Nature. In a few Days, I was the Confident of the most Considerable amongst
them, and had every Day one or other of them in my Study; which I had on
purpose garnished with their most Fantastic Authors. There was never a
Learned Virtuoso of this Kind, but I had Correspondence with him. In a word,
For my Zeal to this Science, I quickly found, that I was well Approved by all.
I had for my Companions, Princes, Great Lords, Gown-Men, Handsome Ladies, and
Unhandsom too; Doctors, Prelates, Friars, Nuns: In fine, People of all Ranks
and Qualities, Some of them, were for Converse with Angels, others with Devils,
others with their Genius, others with Incubus's: Some addicted themselves to
the Cure of Diseases, some to Star-gazing, some to the Secrets of Divinity; and
almost All, to the Philosophers-Stone.

They All agreed, that these Grand Secrets, and especially, the
Phylosophers-Stone, were hardly to be found out; and that but very few do
attain to them: But they had all in particular, a very good Opinion of
themselves, to believe, that they were of the Number of the Elect. By good
Luck, with infinite Impatiency, the most Considerable of them expected at this
time, the Arrival of a Lord, who was a great Cabalist, and whose Estate lies
upon the Frontiers of Poland. He had promised, by Letters to the Children of
Philosophy in Paris, to come and Visit them; and so to pass from France into
England. I had a Commission, to write an Answer to this Great Man: I sent him
the Scheam of my Nativity, that he might judge, if I were capable of aspiring
to the Supreme Wisdom. My Scheam, and my Letter were so Happy, to oblige him to
do me the Honor of Answering me; That I should be one of the first, that he
would see at Paris; and that, if Heaven did not oppose, there should be nothing
wanting in him, to introduce me into the Society of the Wise.

For the well-management of my Good Fortune, I entertain a Regular
Correspondence with the Illustrious German: I propose to him, from time to
time, great Doubts, as well grounded as I could, concerning the Harmony of the
World, the Numbers of Pythagoras, the Revelations of St. John, and the First
Chapter of Genesis. The Greatness of the Matter ravished him! He writ to me
unheard of Wonders; and I plainly saw, that I had to deal with a Man of a most
vigorous, and most Copious Imagination. I had Threescore or Fourscore Letters
from him, of so Extraordinary a Style, that I could not think of Reading any
other thing, even when I was alone in my Study.

I was Astonished one Remarkable Day, when I saw a Man come in a most Excellent
Mein; who, Saluting me gravely, said to me in the French Tongue, but in the
Accent of a Forreigner: Adore, my Son; Adore the most Glorious and Great God of
the Sages: And let not thy self be puffed up with Pride, that he sends to thee
one of the Children of Wisdom, to Constitute thee a Fellow of their Society,
and make thee Partaker of the Wonders of his Omnipotency.

This strange Manner of Salutation, did upon the sudden, surprise me; and I
began, at first, to question, whether or no it might not be some Apparition:
Nevertheless, recovering my Spirits the best I could, and looking upon him as
Civilly as the little Fear I was seized with, could permit me. What ever you be
(said I to him) whose Complement ^avours not of this World, you do me a great
Honor, in making me this Visit. But I beseech you, if you please, before I
Worship this God of the Sages, let me know, of what God, and what Sages you
speak? Do me the Favor, to sit down on this Chair, and give your self the
Trouble to tell me, what this God is, what these Sages, this Company, these
Wonders of Omnipotency? and after or before all this, What kind of Creature, I
have the Honor to speak to?

Sir, You receive me most Sagelike, (said he, smiling, and taking the Chair
which I Presented him) you desire me on a sudden, to Explain things to you;
which, if you please, I shall not Resolve to Day. The Complement, which I made
you, are the Words which the Sages use at first, to those to whom they purpose
to open their Hearts, and to discover their Mysteries. I had thought, that
being so Wise as you seemed to me in your Letters, this Salutation would not
have been unknown to you; and that it would be the most pleasing Complement,
that could be made you by the Count of Gabalis.

Ah! Sir (cried I, remembering that I had a Ticklish Game to Play) How shall I
render my self Worthy of so much Goodness? Is it possible, that the
Excellentest of all Men, should be in my Study? that the Great Gabalis, should
honor me with his Visit?

I am the least of the Sages, (replied he, with a serious Look) and God, who
dispenses the Beams of his Wisdom, by Weight and Measure, as his Sovereignty
pleases, has given me but a small Talent, in Comparison of that which I admire
with Astonishment, in my Fellows. I hope, that you may equal them, one Day; if
I durst judge of it by the Scheam of your Nativity, which you did me the Honor
to send me: But you give me cause to Complain of you, Sir, (added he, Smiling)
in taking me even now for a Spirit.

Not for a Spirit, (said I to him) but I protest to you, Sir, that calling to
my Remembrance on a sudden, what Cardan relates of his Father; That being one
day in his Study, he was Visited by unknown Persons, clothed in diverse
Colors; who entertained him in a pleasant Discourse, concerning their Nature
and Employment. -- I understand you (interrupted the Count,) they were Sylphes,
of which I shall talk to you here-after: They are a kind of Aerial Substances;
who sometimes come to Consult the Sages, concerning the Books of Averroes,
which they do not well understand. Cardan was but a Coxcomb, for Publishing
that amongst his Subtilties: He had found those Memories amongst his Father's
Papers, who was one of Us; and who, seeing that his Son was Naturally a
Babbler, would Teach him nothing of what was most Considerable; but let him
puzle his Brains in Astrology, by which he was not cunning enough, to prevent
his Sons being Hanged. This Ass, was the Cause of your doing me the Injury, to
take me for a Sylphe. Injury (replied I!) Why Sir, should I be so Unfortunate
to -- I am not Angry at it, (interrupted he) since you are not obliged to know
beforehand, that all these Elementary Spirits are our Disciples; for they are
most Happy, when we will stoop so low, as to Instruct them; and the least of
our Sages is more knowing, than all those Little Gentlemen. But we shall talk
more at large of this, some more convenient time; It is sufficient for me to
day, that I have had the Satisfaction to see you. Endeavor, my Son, to make
your self Worthy of Receiving the Cabalistical Illuminations: The Hour of your
Regeneration is come; The Fault is your own, if you become not a New Creature.
Pray fervently to him, who only has the Power to Create new Hearts, to give you
one, that may be Capable of the great Things, which I have to Teach you; and to
Inspire me, not to conceal any thing from you, of our Mysteries. He then rose
up; and Embracing me, without giving me the Leisure to Answer him: Farewell, my
Son, (pursued he) I must go see our Companions, which are at Paris; after
which, I shall Communicate my News to you. In the mean time, Watch, Pray, Hope,
and be Silent.

He went out of my Study, in saying that; and I complained of his short Visit,
as I waited on him back, that he had the Cruelty to leave me so quickly, after
he had let me be so Happy, as to have a Glimpse of his Light. But having
assured me with a good Grace, that I should lose nothing by this sudden
Departure; he got up into his Coach, and left me in a Surprise, which I am not
able to Express. I could not believe my own Eyes, nor my own Ears: I Am sure,
(said I) that this is a Man of Great Quality; that he has an Estate of Five
Thousand Pounds a Year: Besides, he appears very Accomplished. Is it possible,
that he can thus suffer himself to be filled with these Fooleries? He has
talked to me of these Sylphes, with great Earnestness: Should he prove a
Sorcerer in the Upshot? and, Should I have been Deceived till now, in
believing, that there were no such Things? But, suppose he be a Sorcerer, Are
there also some of them so Devout, as this Man appears to be?

I could not Comprehend any thing of all this: Nevertheless, I resolved to see
the End of it; though I well enough foresaw, that he had some set Discourses
to handle; and that the Demon, which agitated him, was a great Moralist, and a
Preacher.

Discourse the Second.
THE Count was pleased to allow me all the Night in Prayer: And in the Morning,
by Break of Day, he acquainted me by a Note, that he would come to my House by
Eight of the Clock; and that, if I pleased, we might go and take the Air
together. I waited for him; he came; and after Reciprocal Civilities: Let us go
(said he to me) to some Place, where we may be free together, and where no Body
may interrupt our Discourse. Ruel (said I to him) seems to be a Place very
Pleasant, and very Solitary. Let us thither then, (replied he:) So up we get
into the Coach; and all the way, I observed my New Master. I never saw in any
Person, so great Marks of Satisfaction, as appeared in all his Gestures. He had
a Spirit more mild, calm, and free, than methought a Sorcerer could have. All
his Countenance, and Behavior, was not as of a Man, whose Conscience could
reproach him with any thing that was Black; and I was in a mavelous
Impatience, till I should see him enter upon the Matter: Not being able to
comprehend, how a Man, who seemed to me so Judicious, and so Accomplished in all
things else, should employ his Wits in these Ridiculous Speculations, with
which I knew him the Day before, to be infected. He discoursed to me of Policy
most Divinely; and was infinitely pleased, to hear that I had read what Plato
has writ of it. You will have need enough of all that, one Day, (said he to
me), a little more, than you think you shall: And if we agree together to day,
it is not impossible, but that in a small time, you may put in Practice these
Sage Maxims. By this time, we were got to Ruel, and went into the Garden; the
Count vouchsafing to Admire the Beauty of it, and walked straight to the
Labyrinth.

He seeing, that we were as free from Company, as he could desire: I beseech,
(cried he, lifting up his Eyes and Hands toward Heaven) I beseech the Eternal
Wisdom, that I may be Inspired in such a manner, as that I may not conceal any
of these inexpressible Truths from you: How Happy shall you be, my Son, if
Heaven has the Kindness to put those Dispositions into your Soul, which the
High Mysteries require of you! You are about to Learn, how to command Nature;
God alone, shall be your Master; and the Sages only, shall be your Equals: The
Supreme Intelligences shall esteem it a Glory, to obey your Desires: The Devils
shall not dare to approach, where you are; Your Voice shall make them tremble,
in the most profound Caves of their Abyss. And all the Invisible People, who
inhabit the Four Elements, shall account themselves Happy, to be the Ministers
of your Pleasures. I Adore thee, O Great God! for having Crowned Man with so
much Glory, and for having Established him the Sovereign Monarch over all the
Works of thy Hands! Do you feel, my Son, (added he, turning himself toward me)
Do you feel this Heroic Ambition, which is the certain Character of the
Children of wisdom? Dare you desire, to Serve nothing but God only; and to Rule
over all Things, which is not of God? Have you comprehended, what it is to be a
Man? And, Do you not detest the being of a Slave, since you were Born to be a
Sovereign? And if you have these Noble Thoughts, as the Figure of your Nativity
suffers me not to doubt; consider soberly, if you can have the Courage, and
Strength, to Renounce all Things, which may be an Obstacle to you, in the
attaining that Greatness, to which you were Born? He stopped there, and beheld me
steadfastly; as attending my Answer, or as if he were reading my Heart.

How much soever the beginning of this Discourse had made me hope, that we
should enter presently upon the Matter; so much the more was I become desperate
at what he had last said. The word RENOVNCE, so affrighted me, that I
questioned, whether or no he was not about to propose to me, the Renouncing of
my Baptism, or Paradise. So that, not knowing how to get out of these
Streights: Renounce, (said I to him!) Why, Sir, need I Renounce any thing?
Truly, (replied he) there is need enough; and so much need, that we must begin
with that Point first: I know not whether or no you can resolve upon it; but I
know very well, that Wisdom does not inhabit a Body subject to Sin, no more,
than it enters into a Soul, prepossessed with Error or Malice. The Sages will
never admit you into their Society, if you do not Renounce from this very
present, a Thing which cannot stand in Competition with Wisdom. You must (added
he, stooping down, and whispering in my Ear) You must Renounce all Carnal
Commerce with Women.

I could not forbear breaking out into a fit of Laughter at this pleasant
Proposition. Well Sir, (cried I!) you have quitted me for a very small Matter:
I had thought, that you would have proposed to me some strange Renunciation;
but since it is only Women, I assure you, that Work is long since done. I am
very Chaste (God be thanked!) Nevertheless, Sir, in regard that Solomon was
Wiser than I, it may be, shall ever be, and that all his Wisdom could not
hinder him from being Corrupted by them. I beseech you tell me, what Expedient
you Gentlemen take, to keep you from this Sex? And, what Inconvenience there
would be, if in the Philosophers Paradise, every Adam had his Eve.

There you ask great Matters, (replied he, consulting with himself, if he
should Answer my Question or not) but yet since I see, that you desert Women
without any Trouble, I shall tell you one of the Reasons, which have obliged
the Sages to impose this Condition on their Disciples; and from thence you will
know in what Ignorance all those Live, who are not of our Number.

When you shall be enrolled amongst the Children of Philosophy, and that your
Eyes shall be Fortifyed by the use of our Sacred Medicine; you shall immediately
discover, that the Elements are inhabited by most Perfect Creatures; from the
Knowledge and Commerce of whom, the Sin of the Unfortunate Adam, has excluded
all his too Unhappy Posterity. This immense Space, which is between the Earth,
and the Heavens, has more Noble Inhabitants, than Birds and Flies: This vast
Ocean has also other Troops, besides Dolphins and Whales: The Profoundity of
the Earth, is not only for Moles; And the Element of Fire, (more Noble than the
other Three) was not made to be Unprofitable and Void.

The Air is full of an innumerable Multitude of People, having Human Shape,
somewhat Fierce in appearance, but Tractable upon experience: Great Lovers of
the Sciences, Subtle, Officious to the Sages, and Enemies to Sots and
Ignorants. Their Wives, and their Daughters have a kind of Masculine Beauty,
such as we describe the Amazons to have. How Sir, (cried I!) Would you persuade
me, that these Fiends you speak of, are Married.

Be not so Fierce, my Son, (replied he) for so small a Matter. Believe
whatsoever I tell you, to be Solid and true. I am making known nothing to you,
but the Principles of the Ancient Cabal; and there needs nothing more to
justify them, than that you should believe your own Eyes: But receive with a
Meek Spirit, the Light which God sends you by my Interposition. Forget all that
you may have heard touching these Matters, in the Schools of the Ignorants:
whereat you will be displeased, when you shall be convinced by Experience, and
be obliged to disown, what formerly you had a good Opinion of to no purpose.

Listen then to the End; and know, that the Seas and Rivers are Inhabited, as
well as the Air: The Ancient Sages have called these kind of People Vndians or
Nymphs. They have but few Males amongst them; but the Women are there in great
Numbers: Their Beauty is mavelous; and the Daughters of Men have nothing in
them, comparable to these.

The Earth is filled almost to the Center with Gnomes or Pharyes; a People of
small Stature; the Guardians of Treasures, of Mines, and of Precious Stones.
They are Ingenious, Friends of Men, and easy to be commandded. They furnish
the Children of the Sages with as much Money, as they have need of; and never
ask any other Reward of their Services, than the Glory of being Commanded. The
Gnomides or Wives of these Gnomes or Pharyes, are Little, but very Handsome; and
their Habit marvellously Curious.

As for the Salamanders, the Inhabitants of the Region of Fire: They serve the
Philosophers, but they seek not for their Company with any great Eagerness; and
their Wives and Daughters will rarely be seen. They do wisely, (interrupted I)
and for my share, I shall excuse their Appearing to me. Why ^o, (said the
Count?) Why, Sir, (replied I?) What Business can I have, to Converse with so
ugly a Creature as a Salamander, be it either Male or Female? You are mistaken,
(answered he) that is the Idea, which the ignorant Painters and Sculpters have
given them: The Wives of the Salamanders are Fair; nay, rather more Fair, than
all others, seeing they are of a purer Element. But I forbear to speak more of
that, and shall give but a slight Description of these People; because you
shall see them your self, at your Leisure; and that very easily too, if you
have the Curiosity for it. You shall see their Habits, their Diet, their
Manners, their Policy, and their Admirable Laws. You will be Charmed more, with
the Beauty of their Wit, than that of their Body: Yet you cannot choose, but be
grieved for these poor Wretches, when they shall tell you, That their Soul is
Mortal; and that they have no Hope of enjoying Eternal Happyness, and of the
Supreme Being, which they acknowledge, and Religiously adore. They will tell
us, That being Composed of the most pure Parts of the Elements, which they
inhabit; and not having in them any contrary Qualities, seeing they are made
but of one Element, they Dye not but after many Ages: But Alas! What is such a
Time, in respect of Eternity? They must Eternally resolve into their Nothing.
This Consideration does sorely afflict them; and we have Trouble enough, to
comfort them concerning it.

Our Fathers, the Philosophers, speaking to God Face to Face, complained to him
of the Unhappyness of these People; and God, whose Mercy is without bounds,
revealed to them, that it was not impossible to find out a Remedy for this
Evil. He inspired them, that by the same Means as Man, by the Alliance which he
Contracted with God, has been made Partakers of the Divinity: The Sylphs, the
Gnomes, the Nymphs, and the Salamanders, by the Alliance which they might
Contract with Man, might be made Partakers of Immortality. So a She- Nymph, or
a Sylphide becomes Immortal, and capable of the Blessing to which we aspire,
when they shall be so happy as to be married to a Sage; a Gnome, or a Sylphe
ceases to be Mortal, from the moment that he Espouses one of our Daughters.

Hence arose the Error of the former Ages, of Tertullian, of Justin Martyr, of
Lactantius, Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athenagoras the Christian
Philosopher; and generally, of all the Writers of that time They had learnt,
that these Elementary Demimen, had endeavored a Commerce with Maids; and they
have from thence imagined, that the Fall of the Angels had not happened, but
for the Love which they were touched with after Women Certain Gnomes, desirous
of becoming Immortal, had a mind to gain the good Affections of our Daughters;
and had brought abundance of Precious Stones, of which they are the Natural
^uardians: And these Authors, relying on the Book of Enoch, which they
mis-understood, thought that it was the Attempt which these Amorous Angels had
offered to the Chastity of our Wives. In the Beginning, these Children of
Heaven begat Famous Giants, by making themselves beloved by the Daughters of
Men: And the ill Cabalists, Josephus and Philo, (as all the Jews are ignorant)
and after them all the other Authors, which I have just now named, as well as
Origin and Macrobius, have said, that they were Angels; and have not known,
that they were the Sylphes, and other People of the Elements; that under the
Name of the Children of Elohim, are distinguished from the Children of Men.
Likewise, that which the Sage Saint Augustine, has had the Modesty to leave
undetermined, touching the Pursuits which those called Faunes or Satyrs, made
after the Africans of his time, is cleared by that which I have now alleged,
of the Desire which all these Elementary Inhabitants have, of Allying
themselves to Men; as the only means to attain to the Immortality which they
have not.

No, no! Our Sages have never Erred so, as to attribute the Fall of the first
Angels, to their Love of Women, no more than they have put Men under the Power
of the Devil; by imputing all the Adventures of the Nymphs and Sylphs to him,
of which the Historians speak so largely. There was nothing Criminal in all
that. They were the Sylphs, which endeavored to become Immortal. Their
Innocent Pursuits, far enough from being able to scandalize the Philosophers,
have appeared so Just to us, that we are all resolved by common Consent,
utterly to Renounce Women; and entirely to give our selves to the Immortalizing
of the Nymphs and Sylphs.

Good Lord, (cried I!) What do I hear? Was there ever such mavelous F -- Yes,
my Son, (interrupted the Count) Admire the mavelous Felicity of the Sages!
Instead of Women, whose fading Beauty pass away in a short time, and are
followed with horrible Wrinkles and Uglyness, the Philosophers enjoy Beauties
which never wax old, and whom they have the glory to make Immortal. Guess at
the Love and Acknowledgment of these invisible Mistresses; and with what Ardor
they strive to please the Charitable Philosopher, who Labors to Immortalize
them.

Ah! Sir, (cried I once again) I Renounce --. Yes, my Son, (pursued he, without
giving me the Leisure to finish) Renounce the fading Pleasures, which are to be
had with Women; the Fairest amongst them all, is Loathsome, in respect of the
Homeliest Sylphide: No Displeasure ever follows our Sage Embraces. Miserable
Ignorants! How should you complain, that ye have not the Power to taste of the
Phylosophick Pleasures!

Miserable Count de Gabalis, (interrupted I, in an Accent mixed with Choler and
Compassion!) Will you give me leave to tell you at last, That I Renounce this
senseless Wisdom; That I find this Visionary Philosophy very Ridiculous: That I
detest the Abominable Embraces, which make you affect these Phantasms; and that
I tremble for you, and wonder that some one of these pretended Sylphides does
not hurry you to Hell, in the middle of your Transports and Raptures; and for
fear, lest so honest a Man as you, should not perceive the End of your foolish
Chymerick Zeal, and should not Repent of so great a Crime.

Oh! Oh! (answered he, Recoyling two or three Paces back, and earnestly looking
upon me with an Angry Countenance) Mischief light on thy indocible Spirit! His
Action, I must confess, affrighted me; but it was yet worse, when I perceived,
that going further from me, he drew out of his Pocket a Paper; which I could
easily see at that distance, to be full of Characters; yet I could not well
discern it. He read them gravely, and spoke low. I guessed, that he was
invoking some Spirit for my Ruin, and Repented me more than a little for my
inconsiderate Zeal. If I escape this adventure, (said I) I Will never have to do
with a Cabalist more. I fixed my eyes upon him, as upon a Judge that was ready
to condemn me to Death; When at last, I perceived; that his looks became
serene. It Is hard (said he, smiling, and coming toward me again) It Is hard for
you to kick against the Pricks. You are a Vessel of Election. Heaven has
ordained you, to be the greatest Cabalist of your Age. Behold the Scheme of
your Nativity, which cannot fail. If it be not now, and that too by my means,
'twill be a great wonder, as appears by this Saturn retrograde.

Alas, Sir, (said I to him) if I must become a Sage, it will never be but by
the means of the Great Gabalis: But to deal freely with you, I am afraid, that
you will find it a difficult matter to bend me to this Philosophical Mode. It
seems (continued he) that you should be but ill read in Physics, that cannot
be persuaded of the existance of these People? I know not, (answered I) but I
cannot Imagine that these can be any things else but Fiends disguised. Do you
still (said he) rather believe your own Whimseys, than Natural Reason? than
Plato, Pythagorus, Celsus, Psellus, Proclus, Porphyrius, Jamlicus, Plotinus,
Trismegistus, Nollius, Dorneus, Fludd; than the great Philippus Aureolus
Theophractus Bombst Paracelsus de Honeinhem; and than all our Society?

I would believe you (Answered I) as soon, nay sooner, than all these: But,
Dear Sir, could you not so order the business with the rest of your society,
that I might not be obliged to have Carnal knowledge of these Elementary
Ladies? Away, away, (replied he) you have your own Liberty, without doubt; for
nobody loves, unless he has a mind to it. Few of the Sages have been able to
defend themselves from their charms: But it has been observed, that some
reserving themselves wholly and entirely for great things, (as you will know in
time) would never do this honor to the Nymphs. I will be then of this number,
(said I:) But yet neither can I resolve to loose time about the ceremonies
which I have heard a Prelate say, must be practiced by those who mean to
converse with their Genius's. This Prelate knew not what he said, (said the
Count;) for you shall see ere long, that there are no Genius's there; and
besides, that never any Sage employed either Ceremonies or Superstition for the
familiarity of the Genius's, no more than for the People of whom we speak.

The Cabalistes do nothing, but by the Principles of Nature: And if there are
sometimes found in our Books certain strange words, characters, or Fumigations,
it is but to conceal the Philosophical Principles from the Ignorant. Admire the
Simplicity of Nature, in all her most mavelous Operations! And in this
Simplicity, a Harmony, and Agreement so great, so just, and so necessary, that
it will make you return back, in despite of your self, from your weak
Imaginations. That which I am now going about to tell you, we teach those of
our Disciples, which we will not let altogether enter into the Sanctuary of
Nature; and whom we will nevertheless, not utterly deprive of the Society of
the Elementary People, merely out of the compassion which we have for these
poor wretches.

The Salamanders (as you have already, perhaps, comprehended) are Composed of
the most subtle Parts of the Sphaere of Fire, conglobated and organized by the
Action of the Universal Fire, (concerning which, I shall one day entertain you
further) so called, because it is principal of all the Motions of Nature.

The Sylphes in like manner, are Composed of the purest Atoms of the Air: The
Nymphs, of the most delicate parts of the Water; and the Gnomes of the subtlest
parts of the Earth. There was a great Proportion betwixt Adam, and these so
perfect Creatures; because they being composed of that which was most pure in
the four Elements; He comprehended the perfections of these four sorts of
People, and was their Natural King. But since the time that his sin
precipitated him into the Excrements of the Elements, (as you shall see
hereafter) the Harmony was disordered, and there was no more proportion, he
being become Impure, and Dull, in respect of these substances so pure and so
subtle. What remedy for this evil? How shall we remount this throne, and
recover this lost Sovereignty? O Nature! Why do they study thee so little? Do
you not comprehend my Son, with what simplicity nature can render to man the
Goods which he has lost?

Alas! Sir (replied I) I am very ignorant in all these simplicities, you speak
of. And yet (pursued he) it is very easy to become knowing in them.

If we would recover that Empire over the Salamanders: we must purify and
exalt the Element of Fire which is in us, and raise up the tone of this
slackned string, we need do no more, but concenter the Fire of the World by
Concave Mirrours in a Globe of Glass. And herein, is that great piece of Art
which all the Ancients have so Religiously concealed, and which the Divine
Theophrastus has discovered. There is formed in this Globe a Solar powder,
which being purified by it self from the Mixture of other Elements; and being
prepared according to art, becomes in a very little time, Soveraignly proper to
exalt the Fire which is in us, and make us become (according to our Phrase) of
a Fiery Nature. From that time the inhabitants of the Sphere of Fire become our
inferiors, and ravished to see our mutual Harmony re-stablisht, and that we once
more approach to them: They have all the kindness for us which they have for
their own Species, all the respect which they owe to the Image and to the
Lieutenant of their Creator; and all the concern which may make evident in
them, the desire of obtaining by us, the immortality which they want. It Is
true, that as they are more subtle than those of the other Elements, they live
a very long time, so they are not very forward, to importune the Sages to make
them immortal. You may accommodate your self with one of these, if the aversion
which you have witnessed to me last not with you to the end: perchance, she
will never speak to you of that which you fear so much.

It will not be so with the Sylphs, the Gnomes, and the Nymphs; For they living
a less time, have more need of us: and so their familiarity is more easy to
obtain. You need but shut up a glass filled with Conglobated Air, Water, or
Earth, and expose it to the Sun for a month; Then separate the Element
according to art, which is very easy to do, if it be Earth or Water. It Is a
mavelous thing to see, what a virtue every one of these purified Elements
have to attract the Nymphs, Sylphs, and Gnomes. In taking but never so little,
everyday, for about a month together, one shall see in the Air the volant
Republique of the Sylphs; The Nymphs come in shoales up the Rivers, and the
Guardians of Treasures, presenting you with their riches. Thus without
Characters, without Ceremonies, without Barbarous words, you become absolute
Master over all these people. They require no worship of the Sages, since they
know well enough that he is nobler than they. Thus venerable Nature teaches her
Children how to repair the Elements by the Elements. Thus is Harmony
re-established. Thus man recovers his natural Empire, and can do all things in
the Elements, without Demon, or unlawful art. Thus you see, my Son, that the
Sages are more innocent than you thought. You say nothing to me --

I admire Sir (said I) and I begin to fear, that you will make me become a
Chemist. Ah! God preserve thee from that, my Child, (cried he) It Is not to
these fooleries that your Nativity designs you, I will warrant you on the
contrary, from being troubled about that: I told you already, That the Sages
show not these things, but to those whom they will not admit into their
Society. You shall have all these Advantages, and others infinitely more
Glorious, and more Pleasant, by ways clearly more Phylosophical. I had not
described these Methods to you, but to let you see the Innocence of this
Philosophy, and to take you out of these Panick Fears.

I thank God, Sir, (answered I) I am not at present, in any such Fear as I was
even now. And although I do not yet resolve upon the Accommodation, which you
pose to me with the Salamanders; I cannot refrain from having the Curiosity to
learn how you have discovered, that these Nymphs, and these Sylphs Dye? Truly
(replied he) they tell us so, and we see them Dye. How, (said I) Can you see
them Dye, and yet your Commerce renders them Immortal? That would be well,
(pur^ued he) if the Number of the Sages equalled the Number of these People:
Besides that, there are many amongst them, who rather choose to Dye, than
hazard by becoming Immortal, the being so unhappy as they see the Devils are.
And it is the Devil, who Inspired them with these Opinions; for there is no
Mischief, which he does not do, to hinder these poor Creatures from becoming
Immortal by our Alliance. Insomuch, that I look upon it, (and so ought you, my
Son) as a most pernicious Temptation, and a Motion of very little Charity, to
have this Aversion which you show to it.

Moreover, as concerning their Death, of which you speak: What was it that
obliged the Oracle of Apollo, to say, That all those who speak Oracles, were
Mortal, as well as he; as Porphyrius reports? And, What think you, was the
meaning of that Voice, which was heard on all the Coast of Italy, and struck so
great a Terror into all those who were upon the Sea? THE GREAT PAN IS DEAD!
They were the People of the Air; who gave notice to the People of the Water,
that the Chiefest, and most Aged of all the Sylphs, was newly Dead.

At that time, when this Voice was heard, (said I to him) I suppose, that the
World worshipped Pan, and the Nymphs: And that these Gentlemen, whose Commerce
you are Preaching of to me, were the False Gods of the Heathens.

It Is true, my Son, (replied he) The Sages have always been of that opinion,
That the Devil never had the Power to make himself Worshipped. He is too
Unhappy, and too Weak, ever to have had this Pleasure, and this Authority. But
he has been able to persuade the Elementary Hosts, to show themselves to Men,
and make men erect Temples to them; and by the Natural Dominion, which every
one has over the Element which he inhabits, they trouble the Air, and the Sea,
set the Earth in Combustion, and dispense the Fire of Heaven, according to
their Humor: Insomuch, that they had no great trouble to be taken for Deities,
so long as the Sovereign Being differed the Salvation of the World. But the
Devil never received all the Advantage of his Malice, which he hoped he should:
For it has happened from thence, that Pan, the Nymphs, and the rest of the
Elementary People, having found the Means of changing this Commerce of Worship,
into a Commerce of Love; (for you may remember, that amongst the Ancients, Pan
was the King of those Gods whom they called Incubuses, and who always
earnestly sought the Acquaintance of Maids) many Heathens have escaped the
Devil, and shall never Burn in Hell.

I do not well understand you, Sir, (said I.) You have not minded me, to
understand me, (continued he, smiling, and in a jeering Tone.) Behold what you
pass over! and likewise, what your Doctors pass over, who know not what these
Excellent Physics mean! Behold the Great Mystery of all this Part of
Philosophy, which concerns the Elements; and which will take away (if you have
but never so little Love for your self) this Repugnance to Philosophy, which
you have witnessed to me this Day! Know then, my Son; and go not about to
divulge this great Arcanum to any unworthy Ignorant. Know, that as the Sylphs
acquire an Immortal Soul, by the Alliance which they Contract with the Men who
are Predestined; so also, the Men who have no right to Eternal Glory: Those
Miserable Wretches, whose Immortality is but a lamentable Advantage, for whom
the Messiah was not sent --

Then, you Gentlemen of the Cabal, are Jansenists likewise, (interrupted I?) We
know not what that is, my Child, (proceeded he, somewhat Angryly) and we ^corn
to inform our selves, wherein consists the different Sects, and diverse
Religions, with which the Ignorant puzzle their Heads. We keep to the Ancient
Religion of our Fathers, the Philosophers; wherein it is very necessary, that I
instruct you. But to come again to the purpose: These Men, whose sad
Immortality is nothing but an Eternal Misfortune; The unhappy Children, whom
the Sovereign Father has neglected, have also this Recourse, that they may
become Mortal, by Contracting an Alliance with these Elementary People. So that
you see, the Sages hazard nothing for Eternity. If they are Predestined, they
have the Pleasure to carry with them to Heaven (in quitting the Prison of this
Body) the Sylphide, or Nymph, which they have Immortalized: And if they be not
Predestined, the Commerce of the Nymph renders their Soul Mortal, and
delivers them from the Horrors of the Second Death. So the Devil saw all the
Pagans escape, who Allied themselves to the Nymphs: And so the Sages, or
Friends of the Sages, when God Inspires us to Communicate to any one, the Four
Elementary Secrets, (which I have now been teaching you) free themselves from
the Peril of being Damned.

Without Lying, Sir, (cried I, not daring to put him again into an ill Humor;
and finding it requisite to defer the telling him plainly my Opinion, till I
should have discovered all the Secrets of his Cabal, which I judged by this
Glimps, must needs be very full of Pleasure and Divertisement:) Without Lying,
You advance Wisdom to a great Height! And you had reason to tell me, That this
surpassed all our Doctors: And I believe, that this likewise passes all our
Magistrates too: And that, if they could discover who those were, that ecsaped
the Devil by this means, (as Ignorance is very Unjust) they would engage in the
Devil's Interest, against these Fugitives, and make a strong Party for him.

Yes, It is for that, (pursued the Count) that I have so strictly commanded
you; and do again command you, to keep Religiously this Secret. Your Judges are
strange Persons! They Condemn a most innocent Action, as a dismal Crime. What a
Barbarity was it, to Burn those two Priests, which the Prince of Miranda says
he knew of, who had each of them his Sylphide, for the space of Forty Years!
What an Inhuman thing was it, to put Joan Herviller to death, for having
labored Six and Forty Years, to Immortalize a Gnome! And, What a piece of
Ignorance was that of Bodin, to represent her as a Witch; that from thence he
might take advantage to Authorize popular Errors, touching pretended Sorcerers;
in a Book as Impertinent, as his Commonwealth is Reasonable.

But it is late; and I do not consider, that you have not yet Dined. It Is your
self, that you mean, Sir, (said I) for as for my part, I could listen to you
till to Morrow, without Inconvenience. For me! Alas! (replied he, Laughing, and
walking toward the Gate) It Is easily seen, that you understand but little,
what Philosophy is. The Sages Eat but for their Pleasure, and never for
Necessity. I had a quite contrary Idea of Wisdom, (answered I;) I had thought,
that you Wisemen should never Eat but to satisfy Nature. You are abused, (said
the Count.) How long think you, that our Sages can subsist without Eating? How
can I tell? (answered I) Moses and Elias, you know, Fasted forty Days: You
Sages, I make no doubt, may do it some few Days less. What a great piece of
Business would that be? (Replied he) The most Wise Man that ever was, the
Divine, the almost Adorable Paracelsus, affirms, that he has seen many of the
Sages Fast Twenty Years, without Eating any thing whatsoever. He himself,
before he attained to the Monarchy of Wisdom, whereof we have justly presented
him the Scepter: He, I say, would undertake to Live many Years without Eating,
by taking but half a Scruple of his Solar Quintescence. And if you would have
the Pleasure to make any one Live without Victuals, you need do no more, but
prepare the Earth, as I told you it must be prepared, for the Society of the
Gnomes: This Earth applied to the Navle, and renewed when it is too dry, will
cause any one to Live without Eating or Drinking and that without any trouble.

And the use of this Catholick-Cabalistical-Medicine, frees us much better from
all the importunate Necessities, to which Nature makes the Ignorant subject: We
Eat not, but when it pleases us; and all the Superfluity of Food Passing away
by an insensible Transpiration, we are never ashamed to be Men. Here he held
his peace, perceiving that we were near our Servants. So we went to the
Village, to take a short Refreshment; following the Custom of the
Philosophick-Heroes.

Discourse the Third.
AFter Dinner, we return to to the Labyrinth. But I was somewhat Melancholy:
and the Pity which I was Affected with, at the Extravagancy of the Count, whom
I plainly saw incurable, hindered me from taking so much Pleasure at all
things, which he had told me, as I should have done; If I had hoped to have
brought him back to his right Wits. I studied for something of Antiquity, to
puzzle him with, which he should not be able to Answer. For to allege to him
the Sense of the Church, was in vain; he having declared, that he only adhered
to the Ancient Religion of his Fathers, the Philosophers: And to have gone
about to Convince a Cabalist by Reason, would have been an Enterprise
altogether as frivolous. Besides, I cared not to venture on a Dispute with a
Man, whose Principles I did not yet understand.

It came into my Mind, that what he had told me, concerning the False Gods, in
whose place he had substituted the Sylphs, and the other Elementary People,
might be Refuted by the Oracles of the Heathens, which the Scripture mentions
always as Devils, not as Sylphs. But for as much, as I did not know, if in the
Sen^e of his Cabal, the Count would not attribute the Answers of the Oracles to
some Natural Cause; I believed, that it would not be improper, to put him upon
Explaining what was his real Opinion herein.

He gave me a good Opportunity of breaking to him the Matter. Just as we were
ready to enter into the Labyrinth, turning himself about toward the Garden:
Truly, (said he) it is very Handsome, and these Statues make a Noble Show. The
Cardinal (replied I) who caused them to be set here, had an Imagination a
little unworthy of his Great Genius: He fancied, that the greatest part of
these Images had formerly yielded Oracles: And for this very Conceit, he paid a
dear Rate for them. It Is the Infirmity of many People, (said the Count) that
Ignorance makes them daily commit a kind of Idolatry, which is very Criminal;
since they preserve with so much Care, and put so great an Esteem upon Idols,
which they believe the Devil has heretofore made use of, to make himself
Adored. O God! Shall it never be known in the World, that Thou, from the Birth
of Times, have precipitated thine Enemies under thy Footstool? And that Thou
keep the Devils Prisoners under the Earth, in Tormenting Darkness? This
Curiosity, somewhat Blameworthy, of collecting on this manner, these pretended
Organs of the Devils, might become Innocent, (my Son) if they would suffer
themselves to be persuaded, that the Angels of Darkness have never been
permitted to speak in Oracles.

I do not believe, (interrupted I) that it would be an easy Matter to
Establish this Maxim amongst the Wits; but it might be done with those of solid
Parts. For it has been not long since decided in a Conference, made expressly
on this Subject, by the Wits of the highest Rank; That all these pretended
Oracles, were nothing but the Subtilty of Avaricious Priests amongst the
Gentiles, or else a Politic Stratagem of Princes.

Were these (said the Count) Mahometans, sent on an Ambassy to your King, who
held this Conference, and thus decided this Question? No, Sir, (answered I.) Of
what Religion then, were these Gentlemen, (replied he) since they reckon the
Holy Scriptures as nothing; which in so many Places, make mention of so many
different Oracles? And principally, of the Pythons; who made their Residence,
and gave out their Answers, by those Parts designed for the Multiplication of
the Image of God? I alleged, (replied I) the Examples of those, who discoursed
from their Bellyes, and instanced to the Company, that King Saul had Banished
them his Kingdom; where nevertheless he found one who was the Fore-teller of
his Death, whose Voice had the Admirable Power to Raise up Samuel at his
Request, and to his Ruin. Yet would not these Wife-Men decide it otherwise,
than that there were never any Oracles.

If the Scriptures did not show it plainly, (said the Count) they might be
convinced by all Antiquity; wherein it were an easy thing, to bring them a
thousand mavelous Proofs. So many Virgins, big with the Destiny of Mortals,
who were Delivered of the good or ill Fortune of those who consulted them. Why
did you not allege to them Chrysostom, Origin, and Oecumenius? who make
mention of those Divine Men, whom the Greeks called ENGASTRIMANDRES; whose
Prophetic Bellies delivered out in an Articulate Voice, so Famous Oracles. And
if your Gentlemen loved neither the Scriptures, nor the Fathers; those
Miraculous Maids should have been instanced, of whom Pansanias, the Greek
speaks; who changed themselves into Doves, and in that Form delivered the
Famous Oracles of the Colombae Dodonides. Or you might have said, for the Glory
of your Nation, That there were long since in Gaul, those Illustrious Maids,
who Metamorphosed themselves into all Shapes, according to the Pleasure of
those who Consulted them; and who, besides (the Famous Oracles which they gave
out) had a mavelous Command over the Ships at Sea, and a Sovereign healing
Authority over the most Incurable Diseases.

They would have rejected all these Excellent Proofs, as Apocryphal, (said I to
him.) Is it (continued he) because Antiquity renders them suspicious? You
should but have alleged the Oracles, which are still yielded daily. In what
Part of the World, (said I?) At Paris, (replied he.) At Paris? (cried I) Yes,
at Paris, (continued he) Are you a Master in Israel, and do you not know that?
Do they not daily Consult the Aquatick Oracles, in Glasses of Water, or in
Basins? The Aerial Oracles, in Looking-Glasses, and on Maidens Hands? Do they
not by this Means, recover lost Necklaces or Bracelets, and stolen Watches? Do
they not hereby learn News from far Countries? and can they not see those that
are Absent? What is this, Sir, (said I) that you tell me? I tell you, (replied
he) what I am sure, happens every Day, and of which it will be no difficult
Matter, to find a thousand Ocular Witnesses. I do not believe that, Sir,
(answered I:) The Magistrates would make a severe Example of any one, who
should be found culpable of so punishable an Action; and they would never
suffer such Idolatry -- Alas! How discreet you are, (interrupted the Count!)
There is not so much Harm in all this, as you think: And Providence will never
permit these Remains of Philosophy, to be wholly Extirpated, that have escaped
the miserable Shipwreck, which Truth has suffered. If there be still left among
the People any Footsteps of the Illustrious Power of the Divine Names; Would
you give your Vote for their Effacing? And that they should lose the Respect
and Acknowledgment due to the great Name AGLA; which operates all these
Marvels, even then when it is invoked by Ignorants, and by Sinners; and which
would work far different Miracles, in the Mouth of a Cabalist. If you would
have Convinced these Gentlemen of the Truth of Oracles, you needed but have
Exalted your Imagination, and your Faith; and turning your Face toward the
East, have cried with a loud Voice, Ag -- Hold, Sir, (interrupted I!) I durst
not have put in Execution this kind of Argument to such civil Persons, as those
were with me; for they would have taken me for a Madman: Certainly, they would
have had no Faith in all this. And if I had known, how to have wrought this
Cabalistick Operation, of which you are speaking to me, it would never have
come out of my Mouth; because I have still less Faith than they. Well, well,
(said the Count) if you have none, we shall make it come to you. But further;
If you had thought, that your Gentlemen had not given Credit to what they might
have seen daily at Paris; you might have recited to them a History of a very
fresh Date. The Oracle which Caelius Rodiginus said, that he himself had seen
given forth, about the latter End of the past Age, by that extraordinary Man,
who spoke and foretold Things to come, by the same Organ which the Euricles,
mentioned by Plutark, did. I would not (answered I) have cited Rodiginus; That
Citation had been Pedantick: Besides, it is ten to one, if some of them had not
told me, that this Man was certainly Possessed with a Devil.

That had been said most Fryar-like, (replied he.) Sir, (interrupted I) in
despite of that Cabalistick Aversion, which I perceive you have for the
Friars; I cannot but be on their sides, in this Point. I believe, that there is
not so great Harm, in denying utterly, that ever there were any such things as
Oracles, as in saying, That it was not the Devil who spoke in them. For in a
word, The Fathers, and the Divines -- For in a word, (interrupted he) The
Divines, Do they not agree, that the Wise Sambetha, who was the Antientest of
all the Sybils, was the Daughter of Noah? Well, Sir, (said I) And what of that?
Did not Plutarch (pursued he) say, That the Antientest Sybil was the First who
delivered out Oracles at Delphos? This Spirit which Sambetha lodged in her
Bosom, was not then a Devil, nor her Apollo a False God; seeing that Idolatry
did not begin till a long time after the Division of Languages: And it would be
very absurd, to Attribute to the Father of Lies, those sacred Books of the
Sybils, and all the Proofs of the True Religion, which the Fathers have drawn
from them. Neither, my Child, (continued he, smiling) is it for you to break
the Marriage, which a great Cardinal has made of David, and the Sybil; nor
accuse this knowing Person, for having put a great Prophet, and a miserable
Energumena in one Parallel. For either David strengthens the Testimony of the
Sybil, or the Sybil weakens the Authority of David. I beseech you, Sir,
(interrupted I) fall to your Seriousness again.

I will, I will (said he) upon Condition, that you will not accuse me too much
for it. Is the Devil, in your Opinion, ever divided against himself? And is he
any time against his own Interests? Why not? (said I to him) Why not? (said he)
Because that which Tertullian has so Happily, and so Magnificiently called the
Reason of God, finds it not convenient. Satan is never divided against himself.
It then follows, that either the Devil never spoke in Oracles, or that he never
spoke against his own Interest. And then it follows; That if the Oracles have
spoken against the Interests of the Devil, it was not the Devil that spoke in
the Oracles. But (said I to him) could not God force the Devil to bear Witness
to the Truth, and speak against himself? But (replied he) If God did not force
him? Nay, in that Case (answered I) you have less Reason than the Friars!

Let us see then, (pursued he) Let us proceed Invincibly, and like good
Christians. I will not produce the Testimonies of those Oracles, of which the
Fathers of the Church make relation; although I am persuaded of the Veneration
which you have for these Great Men. Religion, and Interest, which was their
Business, might have over-swayed them; and their Zeal for the Truth, might have
induced them; seeing it was cold enough, and naked enough in their Age, to have
borrowed for the clothing it, some Habit, and some Ornament, even from
Falsehood it self. They were Men; and by Consequence, following the Maxim of the
Poet of the Synagogue, may have been Unfaithful Witnesses.

I am therefore about to produce a Man, who cannot be suspected in this Cause;
a Pagan: and another kind of Pagan, than Lucretius, Lucian, or the Epicureans:
A Pagan possessed with a Real Belief, that there are Gods and Devils, without
number. He was a Man superstitious above measure; and a Great Magician, or I am
much mistaken in saying it; and by Consequence, a great Friend of the Devil:
It Is Porphyrius. Behold some of the Oracles which he relates, word for word.

An ORACLE.
THere is above the Celestial Fire, an Incorruptible Flame, always sparkling;
the Spring of Life, the Fountain of all Beings, the Original of all Things!
This Flame produces all Things; and Nothing perishes, but what it consumes.
It makes it Self known by it Self. This Fire cannot be contained in any Place:
It Is without Body, and without Matter. It encompasses the Heavens: And there
goes out from it a little Spark, which makes all the Fire of the Sun, of the
Moon, and of the Stars. Behold! What I know of God! Strive not to Know more of
him; for that is beyond thy Capacity, how Wise so-ever thou art. As to the
rest; Know, that unjust and wicked Man, cannot hide himself from the Presence
of God! No Subtilty, nor Excuse, can disguise any thing from his peirceing
Eyes. All is full of God, and God is in All!



You see here, (my Son) that this Oracle, savours not very much of the Devil.
At least, (answered I) the Devil in this, is very wide from the Character which
is given of him. Here is another (answered he) which is rather better.

An ORACLE.
THere is in God an Immense Profoundity of Flame! Nevertheless, the Heart
should not fear to touch this Adorable Fire, or to be touched by it: It will
never be consumed by this so sweet Fire; whose Mild and Tranquil Heat, makes
the Binding, the Harmony, and the Duration of the World. Nothing subsists but
by this Fire, which is God Himself. No Person begot Him: He is without Mother:
He knows all Things, and can be taught Nothing. He is Infallible in his
Designs, and his Name is unspeakable. Behold now, what God is! As for Us, who
are his Messengers; WE ARE BUT A LITTLE PART OF GOD.



Well, Sir! What say you now to this? I would say to both these, (replied I)
That God can force the Father of Lies, to bear Witness to the Truth. Pray then
observe another, (continued the Count) which will clear you of this Scruple.

An ORACLE.
ALas, O ye TRIPODES! Lament, and make the Funeral Oration of your Apollo: HE
IS MORTAL! HE IS GOING TO DYE! HE IS EXTINCT! Because the Light of the Heavenly
Flame makes him extinguish.



You see plainly, (my Son) that he, whatsoever he be, that speaks in these
Oracles, and who so well explains to the Pagans, the Essence, the Unity, the
Immensity, and the Eternity of God; He declares, that he is Mortal, and that he
is but a Spark of God. It is not therefore the Devil who Speaks, since he is
Immortal; and that God would not force him to say, that he was not so. It is
concluded, that Satan is never divided against himself. For, Would it be the
way to make him Adored, to say, that there is but one God? He says, That he is
Mortal. Since when, has the Devil been so Humble, as to take away from his
Natural Qualities? You may see then, (my Son) that if the Being of Him who is
called by way of Excellence, the God of Knowledge, subsists, it cannot be the
Devil, who spoke in the Oracles.

But if it be not the Devil, (said I to him) either Lying out of the Wantonness
of his Heart, or telling Truth by Constraint, when he speaks of God; To what
then will your Cabal attribute all these Oracles, which you maintain, have been
really given forth? Is it to an Exhalation of the Earth, as Aristotle, Cicero,
and Plutarch suppose? No such thing, my Child, (said the Count) Thanks to the
Sacred Cabal, I have not my Imagination clouded to such a Degree. How? (replied
I) Do you Esteem this Opinion so Phanatick? The Favorers of it, are Persons of
clear Sense: They are not, my Child, I can assure you, of this Judgment,
(continued he) It is impossible, to attribute to this Exhaltion, all what has
passed in these Oracles. As for Example; That Man (spoken of by Tacitus) who
appeared in a Dream to the Priests of Hercules's Temple in Armenia, and
commanded them to get them Horses ready for Hunting. Thus far might it have
been an Exhalation: But when these Coursers returned at Night quite tired, and
their Quivers emptied of all their Arrows; and that the next Morning, there
were found as many Beasts killed in the Forest, as they had put Arrows into
their Quivers: You must confess, that it could not be an Exhaltion, that could
work this Effect. It could less be the Devil; for that would be to have a
Notion not at all Reasonable, nor Cabalistick, of the Misery of the Enemy of
God, to think, that he were permitted to divert himself with Coursing of Hares,
and Wild-Beasts.

To what then (said I to him) does the Sacred Cabal attribute all this? Hold
(answered he) before I discover this Mystery to you, I must cure your Spirits
of this Fancy, with which they may be prepossessed, concerning this pretended
Exhalation; for methought, that you cited with an Emphasis, Aristotle,
Plutarch, and Cicero: You might likewise have cited Jamblicus, who, as great a
Wit as he was, was some time in this Error; which nevertheless, he soon
quitted, after he had better examined the Matter in the Book of Mysteries.

Petrus Aponius, Pomponacius, Levinius, Sirenius, and Lucilius Vaninus, are
infinitely pleased to have found this Defect in any of the Ancients. All these
pretended great Wits, who when they speak of Divine things, rather say what
they desire, than what they know; they will not allow any thing Supernatural to
be in Oracles, for fear of acknowledging something above man, They are so
afraid, to have a Ladder made them to Climb up to God; that they dare not
acknowledge by degrees, these Spiritual Creatures: they rather choose to build
one, to Descend by it into nothing. Instead of raiseing themselves up toward
Heaven, they Creep down into the Earth: and instead of man's searching among the
Superior Beings, for the Cause of these Transports, which carry him above
himself, and make him in a manner a Divinity, they weakly Attribute to
impowerful Exhalation. This force of penetrating into what is to come, of
discovering things concealed, and Advancing himself up, even to the highest
Secrets of the Divine Essence.

Such is the misery of Man, when the Spirit of Contradiction, and Humor of
thinking contrary to others, does possess him! Far off from attaining his Ends,
he runs himself into a mist, and loses himself. These Libertines will not
subject men to Substances, less material than himself, and yet, subject him to
an Exhalation: And without considering that there is no parallel between this
Chymerick Smoke, and the Soul of man, between this Vapor and future things,
between this frivolous Cause, and these miraculous Effects. It suffices them to
be singular, to believe, that they are reasonable; It Is enough for them to deny
Spirits, and also to uphold the power of them.

Then does singularity so much displease you, Sir? (interrupted I) Ah my Son!
(said he to me) It Is the Pest of good sense, and the stumbling block of the
greatest Wits. Aristotle as great a Logician as he was, knew not how to avoid
this infection, or phantasy of singularity, much less those whom it works upon
as violently as him; He could not avoid (I say) puzling himself, nor knew he
how to get clear again. He says in his Book of The Generation of Animalls, and
in his Morals, That the Wit and Understanding of a man comes to him from
without, and that it cannot come to us from our Father, and by the spirituality
of the operations of our Soul, he concludes, that it is of another nature, than
this material composition which it Animates, and whereof the groseness does but
cloud the speculations, not at all contributing to their Production. Blind
Aristotle! since that according to your sense, our material Composition cannot
be the fource of our spiritual Thoughts, what do you mean, that a weak
Exhalation, can be the cause of most sublime Thoughts, and of the Raptures
wherewith the Phythians were seized, when they thus gave out their Oracles. You
may easily see (my Child) that this great Wit Came short; and that his
Singularity was the Cause of it. You reason very justly, Sir, (said I to him,
being infinitely pleased to hear at last, that he spoke very good Sense; and
hoping Folly was not an incureable evil) I would to God that --

Plutarch, though otherwise solid, (continued he, interrupting me) in his
Dialogue, is sorry, that the Oracles were Ceased. He Objects convincing
reasons, which he leaves unresolved. Why does he not answer, to what is said?
That if it be an Exhalation, which is cause of this Transport, all those who
approach the Prophetic Tripos, would be seized with an Enthusiasme; and not
one Maid only, and she also must be a Virgin. But how could this Voice make an
Articulate Sound, through the Belly? Moreover, this. Exhalation is a Natural
Cause, and of necessity, must work its Effect regularly, and always; Why then
is not this Maid inspired, but then when she is consulted? And what is more to
the Purpose? Why has the Earth ceased to vent those Divine Vapors? Is it less
Earth, than it was? Has it received other Influences? Has it other Rivers, and
other Seas? Who else has thus opened its Pores, or changed its Nature.

I admire Pomponacius, Lucilius, and other Libertines, for having taken this
Idaea of Plutarch, and left the manner whereby he explains it. He spoke more
Judiciously, than Cicero and Aristotle, as being a Man of good Reason: But not
knowing what to conclude of all these Oracles, after a tedious irresolution, he
gives his Opinion, that this Exhalation which he believed came out of the
Earth, was a most Divine Spirit. So he Attributed to the Divinity, these
Motions, and these extraordinary Lights of the Priestesses of Apollo. This
Divining Vapor (says he) is a most Divine Breath, and a most Holy Spirit.
Pomponacius, Lucilius, and the Modern Athists, do not conclude it in this
phrase of Speech, which supposes a Divinity. These Exhalations (say they) were
of the nature of those Vapors which infested the Hypocondriacks, who spoke
Languages which they understood not. But Fernelius refutes these Impious
Wretches very well, by proving, that the Bile, which is a smarting humor,
cannot cause this diversity of Languages, which is one of the most mavelous
Effects of consideration, and an Artificial Expression of our thoughts.
Nevertheless he has decided the point but imperfectly; when he has subscribed
to Psellius, and all those who have not penetrated deep enough into our holy
Philosophy. Not knowing where to find the causes of these so unapprehensible
Effects. He has imitated the Women and Nunns, and attributed them to the Devil.
To what then must they be attributed, (said I to him) for I have been long
expecting this Cabalistique secret.

Plutarch also has very well observed (said he to me) and he had done well, if
he had stopped there. This irregular manner of explaining it self by an
indecent Organ, not being grave enough, nor befitting the Majesty of the Gods
(said this Pagan) and that which the Oracles did say, surpassing also the power
of the Soul of Man; Those have rendered a great service to Philosophy, who have
established mortal creatures between the Gods and Men, to whom might be imputed
all that which surpasses humane weakness, and which approaches not to the
Divine Granduer.

This is the opinion of all the Ancient Philosophy. The Platonists and
Pythagorians took it from the Egyptians, and they from Joseph the Patriarch,
and from the Hebrews, who dwelt in Eygypt before their passage through the
Red Sea. The Hebrews called these substances which are between an Angel and a
Man, Sadaim; and the Greeks transposing the Sillables, and adding two Letters,
called them Diamonas. These Demons according to the ancient Philosophers, were
an Aerial People, bearing rule over the Elements, Mortal, ingendring and
multiplying; unknown in this Age, by by those who make but little search after
Truth in her ancient Dwelling, that is to say, in the Cabal, and in the
Theology of the Hebrews, who had found out amongst them the particular art of
entertaining this Aerial Nation, and of conversing with all the inhabitants of
the Air. --

Why, Look ye here, Sir, you are come again to your Sylphes (interrupted I) yes
my Son (continued he) The Teraphim of the Jews, was nothing but the ceremony
which was to be observed for this commerce; and the Jew Micha who complained in
the Book of Judges, that they had taken away his Gods, cries not but for the
loss of a little Statue in which the Sylphes entertained him. The Gods which
Rachel stole from her Father was also a Teraphim. Micha and Laban were neither
reproved of Idolatry, and Jacob would never have been persuaded to live forty
Years with an Idolater, nor have espoused his Daughter, it was but a Commerce
with the Sylphes; and we know by tradition, that the Synagoge was permitted
this commerce, and the Idolatry of David's Wife was but a Teraphim, by favo^ of
which she entertained the Elementary People. For you may well imagine that the
Prophet after Gods own Heart, would not have suffered Idolatry in his House.

These Elementary Nations, so long as God deferred the Salvation of the World,
by punishment of the first Sin, took pleasure to explain to men through the
Oracles, what they knew of God; to teach them to live morally, to give them
most sage and proffitable councels, such as those which we find in Plutarch,
and in all the Historians. But since that God took pity of the World, and
would himself become its Doctor, these little Masters retired themselves, and
hence proceeded the Silence of the Oracles.

The result then of all your discourse, Sir (said I) is, that there have
certainly been Oracles, and that it was the Sylphs who delivered them, and who
still do yield them daily in Drinking Glasses, or Looking Glasses. The Sylphs,
or the Salamanders, the Gnomes or the Vndians (replied the Count) If it be so,
(said I) All the Elementary People are very dishonest. Why so (said he?) Why,
was there ever such knavery seen (pursued I) as all those answers in a double
sense, which they always gave out? Always, (replied he?) no no, not always.
That Sylphide who appeared to Q. Curtius Rufus the Roman in Africa, at the Town
of Adrimetum, who foretold to him that he should one day attain to the dignity
of Proconsul: Did she speak obscurely? And does not Tacitus, and Plinius
Secundus relate, how those things came to pass, which she foretold? That
in^cription, and the Famous Pistures, mentioned in the History of Spain, which
were seen by the unfortunate King Don Rogrido the Second, that his curiosity in
opening the Enchanted Cave, and his Incontinence, in deflouring the Elvira.
Daughter of the Count Don Julian, should be punished by men Habited and Armed
after the same manner as those Pictures were, and that these swarthy men, being
the Arabians or Moors should Conquer Spain, and Reign a long time therein.
Could all this be more clear, and did not the fulfilling thereof that same
year, Justify it sufficiently? Came not the Moors to Dethrone this Effeminate
King? as you know the History: And you may plainly see, that the Devil, who
since the Reign, of the Messiah, does not dispose of Empires, could not be the
Anthor of this Oracle, and that it was certainly some great Cabalist, who had
learnt it of some of the most knowing Salamanders. For as the Salamanders do
very much love Chastity, they willingly forewarn us of the Mischiefs which must
happen in the World by the Defect of this Virtue.

But, with your Pardon Sir, (said I to him) do you esteem that Heteroclite
Organ, becoming the Cabalistick-Modesty, out of which they use to Preach their
Morality? Alas! (said the Count, smiling) now have you again your Imagination
clouded; and you see not the Physical Reason for this, that the enflamed
Salamander is naturally delighted to be in the most Fiery Places, and is
attracted by the -- I understand, I understand you, (interrupted I) you need
not give your self the trouble to explain it further.

And as to the Obscurity of some Oracles, (proceeded he, seriously) which you
call an Imposture; Is not Darkness the ordinary Habit of Truth? Is not God
pleased to conceal himself in their dark Shaddows? And the continual Oracle,
which he has left to his Children, the Holy Scriptures, were not they clouded
with an Adorable Obscurity, which confounds and distracts the Proud, as much as
his Light guides the Humble?

If you have but this Difficulty, my Son, I would advise you, not to defer your
entering into a Commerce with the Elementary People. You shall find them very
Honest, full of Understanding, Lovers to do good, and fearing God. And I should
council you, to begin with a Salamander: For you have Mars in the Height of
Heaven, in your Figure; which is an infallible Sign, that there is a great
deal of Fire in your Actions. And as for your Marriage, I am of opinion, that
if you take a Sylphide, you would be Happyer with her, than any of the others;
as having Jupiter at the Angle of your Ascendant, which VENUS looks upon from a
Sextile. Now Jupiter Rules over the Air, and the People of the Air.
Nevertheless, you must consult your Heart above all; for as you will one day
see, it is by the Interior Stars, which the Sage is Governed by: And the Stars
of the Exterior Heaven, serve but to make him know more certainly, the Aspects
of the Stars of the Interior Heaven, which is in every Creature. So therefore,
it is you now, that must tell me what your Inclination is; to the end, that we
may proceed to your Alliance with these Elementary People, which you shall like
best. Sir, (answered I) This Affair, in my Opinion, requires a little
Consideration. I like you for this Answer, (said he to me, laying his Hand upon
my Shoulder.) Consult this Affair seriously with him, who for Excellency we
call, The Angel of the great Council. Go kneel down to Prayer, and I shall come
to you to Morrow at Two a Clock in the Afternoon.

We came back for Paris; and I, as we were upon our way, put him again upon the
Discourse against Atheists and Libertines: But I never heard one argue, nor
speak so well, such high, and such solid Things, for the Existence of God, and
against the Blindness of those, who spend their Lives, without giving up
themselves entirely to a serious and continual Worship of him; from whom we
have, and who likewise preserves our Being. I was amazed at the Character of
this Man; and was not able to comprehend how it could be, that he should at the
same time, be so Strong, and so Weak; so Admirable, and so Ridiculous.

Discourse the Fourth.
I Expected at my House, my Lord the Count of Gabalis, as we had agreed upon
it, at our Parting. He came at the prefixed Hour: And accosting me with a
smiling Look; Well now, my Son, (said he to me) which sort of the Invisible
People, has God given you the greatest Appetite to? And, What Alliance do you
like best; that of the Salamanders, of the Gnomes, of the Sylphs, or of the
Nymphs? Sir, (answered I) I have not yet fully resolved upon this Marriage.
Why? where sticks it now? (demanded he.) To deal freely and plainly with you,
Sir, (replied I to him) I cannot yet cure my Imagination; that still represents
to me, all these Hosts of the Elements, as Legions of Devils. O Lord! (cried
he) thou God of Light, I beseech thee, dissipate the Clouds, which Ignorance,
and perverse Education, have thrust into the Spirit of this idcredulous Man;
whom Thou have made me know, is one designed for so great Things! And you, my
Son, Do not shut up the Passage to this Truth, whichmight enter into you. Be
docible: But now, I dispense with your being so; for I might so be Injurious to
the Truth, to prepare its ways: She knows how to force open Gates of Iron, and
can enter where she lists, in despite of all the Resistance of Falsehood. What
can induce you to oppose it? Is it because you think, that God could not create
these Substances in the Elements, such as I have been painting out to you?

I am not well satisfied, (said I to him) whether or no there be a Possibility
in the Thing it self; if one Element can furnish Blood, Flesh, and Bones; if
there can be a Temperament without Mixture, and Actions without Contrariety.
But suppose God could make it, What solid Proof is there, that he did make it?

Shall I convince you now presently (replied he) without any more ado? I will
cause to come hither the Sylphs of Cardan: You may understand from their own
Mouths, what they are, and what I have been teaching you of them. By no means,
I beseech you, (cried I out, affrightedly) Forbear, I conjure you, this kind of
Proof, till such time as I shall be persuaded, that these same People are not
Enemies to God: For as to that, I should rather choose to Dye, than give this
trouble to my Conscience of --

Behold! Behold the ignorant and false Piety of these unhappy Times!
(interrupted the Count, in a Choleric Tone.) Why then do they not blot out of
the Calendar of Saints, the greatest of all the Anachorites? And, Why do they
not burn his Statues? It Is a great wonder, that they insult not over his
venerable Ashes! And that they scatter them not in the VVind, as they have done
to those unhappy Wretches, who have been Accused for having had Commerce with
the Devils. Are we advised to Exorcize the Sylphs? And have they not been
treated as Men? What have you to say to that Master Scrupulous, you, and all
your miserable Doctors? The Sylphe, who discoursed of his own Nature to this
Patriarch, Was it, in your opinion, an Imp of the Devil? Was it with a Fiend,
that this incomparable Man argued about the Gospel? And will you accuse him,
for having profaned the adorable Mysteries, in discoursing them with a
Phantasme, an Enemy of God? Athanasius, and Hierom, are then very unworthy of
the great Name, which they have amongst your Wisemen, for having writ with so
much Eloquence, the Elogy of a Man who treated the Devils so Humanly. If they
took this Sylphe for a Devil, the Adventure should have been concealed, or the
Preaching of a Spirit retracted, and this so pathetick Apostrophe, which the
Anachoret, (more zealous, and more credulous than you) made at the City of
Alexandria: And if they have taken it for a Creature, having a share, as it
assured him, in the Redemption as well as we. And if this Apparition, according
to their opinion, be an extraordinary Favor which God did the Saint, whose Life
they writ; Are you in your Wits, that would appear to be wiser than Athanasius
and Hierom; and more Holy than the Divine Saint Anthony? What would you have
said to this Man, had you been of the Number of the Ten Thousand solitary
Persons, to whom he related the Conversation, which he had newly enjoyed with
the Sylphe? Wiser, and more enlightened, than all these Terrestrial Angels. You
had, without doubt, remonstrated to the Holy Abbot, that his Adventure was but
a mere Illusion: And you had diswaded his Disciple Athanasius, from publishing
to all the World, a History so little conformable to Religion, to Philosophy,
and to Common Sense. Is it not true?

It Is true (said I to him) that I should have been of opinion either to have
said nothing at all, else to have said nothing at all, else to have said more.
Athanasius and Hierom (pursued he) cared not for saying more, for they knew no
better than that; and if they had known all, which they could not do, unless
they had been of us, they would not have rashly devulged the secrets of the
Sages.

But why (said I) did not this Sylphe propose to Saint Anthony, what you
proposed to me to day? what is that (said the Count, Smiling) Marriage? alas!
Had this been to any purpose? It Is true (replied I) that in all likelihood, the
Good Man would not have accepted the proffer. No certainly (said the Count) for
it would have been to tempt God, to have Married at that Age, and to have
desired Children of him. How? (demanded I) then do they Marry with these
Sylphes, to have Children by them? Why, (said he) who was ever permitted to be
Married for any other end? I did not think, (answerred I) that this had been
intended for Propagation. I had supposed, that the End, and Intention of all
this, had been but to Immortalize the Sylphides.

Ha! (pursued lie) you are Waggish. The Charity of the Philosophers proposes
for its end, the immortality of the Sylphides: but Nature makes them desire to
see them Fruitful. You shall see when you please, in the Air the Phylosophique
Families. It were a happy World, were there none but these Families, and if
there were none of the Children of Sin. What do you mean by the Children of
Sin? Sir (interrupted I.)

They are (my Son, continued he) They are all those Children who are born after
the ordinary way; Children conceived by the Will of the Flesh, not by the Will
of God; Children of Wrath, and of the Curse; In a word, Children of Man and
Woman. You have a mind to interrupt me. I perceive, what you would say to me.
It Is true, (my Child) You must know that it was never the Will of God, that Man
and Woman should have Children as they have. The design of the most prudent
Artist was far more noble, he intended to have peopled the World, after a
different manner than it is. If the miserable Adam, had not foolishly disobeyed
the order which he had from God, not to touch Eve; and that he had been
contented with the other Fruits of the Garden of pleasure, with all the Beautys
of the Nymphs and Sylphides: The World had not suffered the shame of seeing it
self peopled with Men so imperfect, that they may pass for Monsters, where the
Children of Philosophers are present.

How Sir (said I to him) you think, so far as I perceive, that the Sin of Adam
was something else than eating of the Apple? Why, my Son (replied the Count)
are you of the Number of those, who have the simplicity, to take the History of
the Apple, in the litteral sense? Alas! you must know, that the Holy Tongue
uses innocent Metaphors, to remove from us, the unseemly Ideas of an action,
which has been cause of all the miseries of mankind. For so, when Saloman said,
I will get upon the Palm, and I will gather the Fruits thereof; He had another
Appetite than eating Dates. This Tongue which the Angels consecrate, and
whereof they make use, to sing their Hymns to the Living God; has not a term to
express that, which it names figuratively an Apple or Date. But the Sage
unriddles these chaste figures, when he sees that the Pallat and Mouth of Eve
escape unpunished, and that she brings forth with pain, he knew that it was not
the Pallat that had been criminal; and discovering what the first Sin was, by
the care which the first Sinners took to cover with leaves certain parts of
their Bodies; He concluded that God would not have had men multiply by this
beastly way. O Adam! thou should not have begot men, but such as should have
been like thy self, or else. Heroes or Giants.

Alas! what expedient (interrupted I) can there be for reparation of one or
other of these mavelous generations. Obey God (replied he) Touch none but the
Nymphs, the Gnomes, the Sylphides, or the Salamanders. So should we see Heroes
born, and the Universe filled with mavelous People, repleat with strength and
wisdom. God would have us conjecture the difference, which there was between
that Innocent, and this Culpable World which we see; By permitting us from time
to time, to see Children Born, after that manner which he had projected. Then
has there Sir (interrupted I) been now and then seen of these Children of the
Elements? If so, a Licenciate of Sorbonne, who quoted to me the other day, St.
Augustine, St. Jerome and Gregory of Nazianzen, is mistaken, believing that there
could not be any fruit produced, of these amors with Spirits for our Wives, or
by the commerce that men might have with certain Devils, which he called
Hyphialtes.

Lactantius has discoursed it better (replied the Count) and the solid Thomas
Aquinas, has wisely resolved it, that the commerces would not only be Fruitful,
but that the Children which are Born from them, are of a more generous, and
more heroic nature. You shall read at large, when you please, the great
Achievements of the puissant and famous men, which Moses writes of: born after
this manner; we have the Histories by us. In the Book of the Wars of the Lord,
mentioned in the three and twentyeth Chapter of Numbers. In the mean time Judge
what the World would be, if all its Inhabitants were, for example, like
Zoroaster.

Zoroaster, (said I) who by report was the Author of Necromancy? The very same
(said the Count) of whom the Ignorants write this Calumny. He had the Honor to
be son of the Salamander Oromasis, and Vesta, the Wife of Noah: He lived twelve
Hundred Years, the most Sage Monarch of the World; and then was carried up by
his Father Oromasis, into the Region of the Salamanders. I do not doubt (said I
to him) but that Zoroaster is with the Salamander Oromasis in the Region of
Fire: But I would not do to Noah that injury, which you do him.

The injury, is not so great as you may believe; (answered the Count) all these
Patriarchs esteemed it a great honor to be the supposed Fathers which the
Children of God had by their Wives: But still this is out of your Element. Let
us come to Oromasis, he was beloved by Vesta, the Wife of Noah. This Vesta
being Dead, was the Tutelar Genius of Rome; and the sacred Fire, which she
ordained that the Virgins should preserve with so much Care, was, in honor of
the Salamander her Gallant. Besides Zoroaster, there was born from their
Loins, a Daughter of rare Beauty, and of an excellent Wisdom; It was the
divine Egeria, from whom Numa Pauphilius received all his Laws. She obliged
Numa, who loved her, to erect a Temple to her mother Vesta, where that sacred
Fire was kept in honor of her Father Oromasis. Behold the verity of the Fable,
which the Roman Poets and Historians have conceived of the Nymph Egeria.
Gulielmus Postellus, one of the least ignorant of all those who have studied
the Cabal in his ordinary Books, has observed that Vesta, was the Daughter of
Noah: But he was ignorant that Egeria was Daughter of that Vesta, and having
read the secret Books of the ancient Cabal, of which the Prince of Miranda
bought a Copy at so dear a rate. He has confounded things, believing only that
Egeria was the good Genius of Noah's Wife: But we learn in these Books, that
Egeria was Conceived upon the Waters, at that time when as Noah was tossed to
and fro, on those revenging Waves, which drowned the Universe: The women then
were reduced to that small number, who were saved in the Cabalisque Ark, which
this second Father of the world had built. This great man lamented to see the
dreadful punishment, with which the Lord chastised the Crime, caused by the
Love, which Adam had had for his Eve. Seeing that Adam had destroyed his
Posterity, by preferring Eve before the Daughters of the Elements; and by
taking her from the Salamanders or Sylphs, which knew how to make themselves
beloved by her. Noah, I say, became Wise by the sad example of Adam, consented,
that Vesta his Wife, should be given to the Salamander Oroma-Oromasis, Prince
of the Ignean Substances; and persuaded his three Children also, to give their
three Wives, to the Princes of the three other Elements. The Universe in a
little time was repeopled with Heroic Men, so Wise, so Beautiful, and so
Admirable, that their Posterity admiring their Virtue, have adored them as
Deities. One of the Children of Noah Rebelled against the Counsel of his
Father, not being able to resist the attractions of his Wife, no more than Adam
could the Charms of his Eve: But as the sin of Adam had left a Tincture upon
the Souls of all his Descendants; so this want of complacency, which Cham had
for the Sylphs, marked all his Posterity Black. Hence comes (say our
Cabalistes) that Horrible Blackness of the Aethiopians, and all those hideous
People, who are commanded to dwell under the Torrid Zone, as a punishent for
the profane Appetite of their Father.

These are very particular Relations Sir (said I, admiring the Extravagancy of
this man) and it seems, that your Cabal is of mavelous use, for the giving
Light to Antiquity. So mavelous (replied he Gravely) that without it,
Scripture, History, Fable, and Nature, are obscure and unintelligible. You
believe, for Example, that the injury which Cham did to his Father, was such,
as it seems to be by the Letter: Truly, it is clear another thing. Noah came
out of the Ark, and seeing that Vesta his Wife did nothing but trick up her
self, for the Commerce which she had with her Gallant Oromasis, becomes
passionately in love with her again; Cham fearing that his Father would stock
the Earth with another Race of people as black as his Aethiopians, took his
opportunity one day, when the good old Man was overcome with Wine, and Gelt him
without Mercy. Do you Laugh?

I laugh at the indiscreet Zeal of Cham. (Said I to him) You should rather
admire (replied the Count) the goodness of the Salamander Oromasis, whose
jealousy did not hinder him from pitying the disgrace of his Rival. He taught
his Son Zoraster, otherwise called Japhet, the Name of the Almighty God, which
expresses his Eternal Faecundity: Japhet pronounced six times, altervatively
with his Brother Sem, going backward toward the Patriarch, the powerful name
JABAMIAH; and so they restored the old Man whole again. This History, ill
understood by the Greeks, made them say, that the Ancientest of the Gods, had
been Gelded by one of his Children: But here you see the truth of the business.
Where you may observe, how much in their morality, the people of the Fire are
more Humane than ours, and indeed, exceeding that of the people of the Air, or
of the Water; For the Jealousy of these is cruel, as the Divine Paracelsus has
shown us in an Adventure which he relates, and which was seen by all the People
of the City of Stauffemberg. A Philosopher, with whom a Nymph was entered into a
Commerce of Immortality, was so dishonest a Man, as to fall in Love with a
Woman: But as he Dined with his new Mistress, and certain of his Friends, there
was seen in the Air, the Loveliest Creature of the World; which was the
Invisible Lover, that had a mind to let her self be seen by the Friends of her
unfaithful Gallant; that they might Judge how little reason he could have, to
prefer a Woman before her. After which the enraged Nymph struck him dead
immediately.

Ha! Sir, (cried I) that might give me sufficient Disgust against these so
Jealous Lovers. I confess, (pursued he) that their Jealousy is a little
violent. But if amongst our Women, we have seen enraged Lovers kill their
perjured Gallants; we should not wonder, that these Lovers, so fair, and so
faithful, are transported when they are dealt falsely with: So much the more, in
regard that they require Men but to abstain from Women, whose Defects they
cannot abide; and that they permit us to Love amongst them, as many as we
please. They prefer the Interest and Immortality of their Fellows, before their
own particular Satisfaction: And they are glad, that the Sages give to their
Republic so many Immortal Children, as they are able to give.

But pray, Sir, (demanded I) How comes it to pass, that there are so few
Examples of all this which you tell me? There are a great number, my Child
(answered he) But Men make not a true Reflection, where they adjoyn not their
Faith; where (I say) they explain it ill, for want of a true Knowlede of our
Principles. They attribute to the Devils, all that which should be attributed
to the People of the Elements. A little Gnome got into the Affections of the
Famous Magdalen of the Cross, Abbess of a Monastery at Cordova in Spain; she
made him Happy, when she was but twelve Years old; and they continued their
Commerce for the space of thirty Years: until an Ignorant Director persuaded
Magdalen, that her Lover was a Fiend; and forced her to demand Absolution of
Pope Paul the Third. Yet it is impossible, that this could be a Demon: For all
Europe knew, and Cassidorus Renius has made known to all Posterity, the great
Miracles which daily were wrought in favor of this Holy Woman; which certainly
had never come to pass, if her Commerce with the Gnome had been so Diabolick,
as the Venerable Director imagined. The same Doctor would have affirmed very
positively, if I am not mistaken, That the Sylphe who Immortalized himself with
Gertrude, the young Religious Nun, at the Monastery of Nazareth, in the
Dioecess of Cologne, was some Devil. Truly, (said I to him) so do I too. Ah! my
Son, (pursued the Count, smiling) if that were true, the Devil would not be
very miserable; could he have the Power to entertain a Commerce of Gallantry
with a pretty Wench of Thirteen Years old, and write her Amorous Letters, which
were found in her Cabinet.

No, no, (my Child) Believe; that the Devil in his Region of Death, has
Employment more sad, and more conformable to the Shame which the God of Purity
has ordained for him. But so it is, that Men voluntarily shut their Eyes. We
find, for example, in Titus Livius, that Romulus was the Son of Mars: Your
great Wits say, It Is a Fable: Your Divines, That he was the Son of an Incubus:
The merry Wags, That Mistress Sylvia had lost her Gloves, and for an Excuse to
hide her Shame, gave out a Report, that the God had stolen them. We, who know
Nature, and whom God has called from Darkness to this admirable Light; we know,
that this pretended Mars was a Salamander, who enamoured with the Young Silvia,
made her the Mother of Romulus. This Hero, who after he had founded his
Magnificient City, was carried away by his Father in a Flaming Chariot, as
Zoroaster was by Oramasis.

Another Salamander was the Father of Servius Tullius. Titus Livius says, That
it was the God of Fire, being deceived by the Resemblance; and the Ignorants
have followed the same Opinion of it, as of the Father of Romulus. The Famous
Hercules, the Invincible Alexander, were Sons of some of the great Sylphs. The
Historians not knowing this, have said, that Jupiter was their Father. They
said true: For as you have learnt; These Sylphs Nymphs, and Salamanders, being
made Deities; The Historians, who believed them so, call all those who were
born of them, Children of the Gods.

Such was the Divine Plato, the more Divine Apollonius Thianeus, Theseus,
Achilles, Sarpedon, the Pious Aeneas, and the Famous Melchisedeck: For, Do you
know who was the Father of Melchisedeck? No truly, (said I to him) for St. Paul
knew it not. Then say, that he would not tell it, (continued the Count) and
that he was not permitted to reveal the Cabalistick Mysteries. He knew well
enough, that the Father of Milchisedeck was a Sylphe; and that the King of
Salem was Conceived in the Ark, by the Wife of Sem. The manner of this Priests
sacrifizing, was the same which his Cousin Egeria taught King Numa; as also,
the Adoration of a Sovereign Divinity, without Image, and without Statue. For
which reason, the Romans becoming Idolaters, sometime after burnt the Holy
Books of Numa, which Egeria had dictated. The first God of the Romans, was the
True God; Their Sacrifices were true: They offered Bread and Wine to the
Sovereign Master of the World: But all this was afterward perverted.
Nevertheless, God was pleased, in reward of this first Worship, to give to this
City, which had acknowledged his Sovereignty, the Empire of the Universe. The
same Sacrifice, which Melchisedeck --

I beseech you, Sir, (interrupted I) let us leave off this of Melchisedeck, the
Sylphe that begot him, his Cousin Egeria, and the Sacrifice of Bread and Wine.
These Examples are fetched a far off; you would oblige me, would you produce
some Examples of a fresher Date: For I have heard a Doctor say, being asked
what was become of all the Companions of that Satyr, which appeared to Saint
Anthony, and which you call a Sylphe, That all those kind of People now are
Dead. So all the Elementary People may possibly be perished; since you affirm
them to be Mortal, and that we hear no more News of them.

Would to God! (said the Count in a Fury) Would to God, that I knew nothing,
that so I might keep this Ignorant still in his Ignorance; who maintains so
sottishly, what he understands not! May God confound him, and all such as he
is! Where has he learnt, that the Elements are void? and that these mavelous
People are reduced to their Nothing? Would he but give himself the trouble to
read a few Histories, and not attribute to the Devil, what is done by Nature;
as the good Old Wives do all that, which passes their Chymerick Theory; There
would at all times, and in all places, be found Proofs enough of what I am
telling you.

What would your Doctor say to this Authentic History, which happened not long
since in Spain? A Beauteous Sylphide made her self be beloved by a Spaniard,
lived three Years with him, had three pretty Children by him, and then dyed.
Must we say, that this was a Devil? What a wise Answer would this be! According
to what Physics, could the Devil organize the Body of a Woman, Conceive,
Bring-forth, and give Suck? What Proof is there in the Scripture, of this
Extravagant Power, which your Divines are obliged, in this Rancounter, to give
to the Devil? And with what probable Reason could their weak Physics furnish
them? The Jesuit Delrio, being of a large Faith, relates at large, many of
these Adventures; and without troubling himself for Physical Reasons,
dispatches the Business in a word; saying, That these Sylphides were Demons:
So true it is, that the greatest Doctors, do for the most part, know no more of
them, than simple Women! So true it is, that God is pleased to retire into his
Cloudy Throne, and thickning the darkness which encompasseth his Omnipotent
Majesty, he inhabits an inaccessible Light, and lets not his Truths be seen but
by the humble of Heart. Learn to be Humble, my Son, if you would penetrate the
sacred Clouds, which environ Truth. Learn of the Sages not to give to the
Devil's any power over nature, since the Fatal stone has closed them in the
Pits of the Abyss. Learn of the Pyhlosophers, to search always after Natural
causes, in any extraordinary Accident; and when Natural causes fail; have
recourse to God, and to his Holy Angels, but never to the Devil's, who have no
power over any thing, but to suffer; otherwise you will blaspheme, many times
when you think not on it, and you will attribute to the Devil the Honor of the
most mavelous works of nature.

When you shall be told, for example, That the Divine Apollonius Thianeus was
conceived without the operation of any Man, and that one of the most
illustrious Salamanders descended to immortalize himself with his Mother: Will
you say that this Salamander was a Demon, and will you ascribe the Glory to
the Devil, of generating one of the greatest Men, that ever proceeded from our
Phylosophick Marriages.

But Sir, (interrupted I) this Apollonius, is reputed amongst us, for a great
Sorcerer, and that is all the good they say of him. Behold (proceeded the
Count) one of the most admirable effects of Ignorance, and ill Education!
Because we have heard our Nurses, tell us tales of Witches and Conjures;
whatsoever is done by extraordinary means, must needs have the Devil for its
Author. The great Doctors are at a fine pass, they shall not be believed, if
they spoke not as our Nurses do. Apollonius was not begot by a Man: He
understood the Language of Birds; He was seen in two diverse parts of the World
in one day: He vanished from before the Emperor Domitian, who would have
punished him; He raised a Maid from the Dead, by virtue of Onomancy; He told at
Ephesus before an Assembly of all Asia, that at that very instant the Tyrant
was killed at Rome. How lies the question to Judge of this Man? The Nurse says,
that he is a Sorcerer; St. Jerome, and St. Justin the Martyr say, that he was
but a great Philosopher: Jerome, Justin, and our Cabalists, they must be
Phantasticks; and the silly Woman must carry it. Ha! Let the Ignorant perish
in his Ignorance: But you, my Child, save your self from the Shipwreck.

When you shall read that the famous Merlin, was born without the operation of
any Man, of a Religious Woman, the Daughter of the King of Great Britain, and
that he foretold what should come to pass, more clearly than ever Tyresias did;
Say not with the People, that he was the Son of an Incubus, since it was no
such thing; nor did he ever prophecy by the art of the Devil: Because the Devil
is the most ignorant of all Creatures, according to the Holy Cabal. Say with
the Sages, that the British Princess was comforted in her Solitude, by a
Sylph, who had pity on her: that he took care to divert her, that he knew how
to please her, and that Merlin their Son, was Educated by the Sylph, in all the
Secret Sciences, and taught by him to do all the Marvels, which the story of
England relates of him.

Nor must you do injury to the Earls of Cleave, to say that the Devil is their
Father: And have a better Opinion of the Sylphe, of whom the History says,
that he came to Cleve in a Miraculous Ship, drawn by a Swan, who was tied to it
by a Silver Chain. This Sylphe, after he had diverse Children by the Heiress of
Cleve, went away at Noonday, in the sight of a World of People, in his Airy
Ship. What has he done to your Doctors, that should make them rank him amongst
the Devils?

But will you likewise handle so roughly the honor of the House of Lusignan?
And will you give a Diabolick Genealogy to the Earls of Poitiers? what will you
say to their renowned Mother? I Believe Sir, (interrupted I) that you are going
about to tell me the tale of Melusina. Nay, If you deny the History of
Melusina, (replied he) I have done with you. If you deny that, I say, we must
burn the Books of the great Paracelsus, who maintains in five or six several
places, that there is nothing more certain, than that this Melusina was a
Nymph; and you must also give your Historians the Lie, who say, that since her
Death, or to speak more properly, since she disappeared from the eyes of her
Husband, she has never failed (at all times when any of her posterity have been
threatened by some misfortune, or that some King of France should dye in any
extraordinary manner) to appear in Mourning, upon the great Tower of the Castle
of Lusignan, which she had caused to be built. You will have a quarrel with all
those who are descended from this Nymph, or who are allied to this Family; if
you are obstinate to maintain that this was a Devil.

Think you Sir (said I to him) that these Lords are any thing more pleased, to
deduce their Pedigree from the Sylphs? They would be better pleased, without
doubt (replied he) if they knew that which I teach you; and they would esteem
for a great honor these extraordinary Births. They would know, if they had any
Light of the Cabal, that this way of Generation, being more conformable to the
manner, by which God intended in the beginning, that the World should be
multiplied; the Children which should so be born are more happy, more valiant,
more wise, more renowned, and more blessed by God. Is it not more Glorious for
these Illustrious Men to descend from these Creatures so perfect, so prudent,
and so powerful, than from some foul Fiend, or some infamous Asmodeus?

Sir, (said I to him) our Divines will not say, That the Devil is the Father of
all those Men, who are born without our knowing who put them into the World.
They acknowledge, that the Devil is a Spirit, and therefore not able to beget.
Gregory of Nicene, (continued the Count) says not so, for he is of opinion,
that the Devils multiply amongst themselves, as Men do. We are not of his
mind, (replied I) but it happens (say our Doctors) that -- Hold! Do not say
(interrupted the Count) Do not say, what they say; for, you will allege as
they do, a very sottish, and very dishonest Notion. What an abominable defeat
have they found out? It Is an astonishment to think, how they have all
unanimously embraced this filthy Conceit, and how they have ordinarily taken
pleasure, to post from Whimseys to impostures, to profit the lazy Brutality of
such as devoted themselves to Solitariness, and quickly to advance the Fame of
these miraculous Men in the World, whose illustrious Memory they Celebrate from
so vile an Original. Do they call this Philosophizing? Is it worthy of God, to
say, that he has this kindness for the Devil, to countenance these
abominations, to allow them the favor of being Fruitful, which has been
refused to the greatest Saints, and to recompense these Fiends, by Creating for
these Embrios of iniquity, more Heroique Souls, then for those who have been
formed in the Chastity of Legitimate marriage? Is it not a disparagement to say
with your Doctors, that the Devil can by this detestable Artifice: make a
Virgin conceive during her sleep, without any prejudice to her Virginity? Which
is as absurd as the story which Thomas Aquinas, (otherwise a most Solid Author,
and who knew a little of the Cabal) forgetting himself, relates in his
Sixteenth Quodlibet, of a Maid that lay with her Father, to whom he makes the
same happen, as some of the Heretic Rabins say, happened to the Daughter of
Jeremiah, whom they make to conceive the great Cabalist Ben-Syrach, only by
going into the Bath after the Prophet. I should judge, that this impertinence
was imagined by some --

Give me leave, Sir, to interrupt your declamation (said I to him) I protest,
that, to appease you, I could wish our Doctors had contrived some other
Solution, by which such pure Ears as yours, might be less offended: Or else
they should have utterly denied the matter, on which the question is founded.

What an Admirable expedient (replied the Count) have you thought upon, which
is to deny real things! Put the case that you were one of these great Doctors,
with your Gown lined with Ermin, and suppose that the Blessed Danhuzerus, came
to you as to the Oracle of his Religion --

At this moment, up came a Laquey to tell me, that a young Lord was come to
visit me. I would not have him see me by any means. (said the Count) I beg your
pardon Sir, (said I to him) You may guess, by this Lords Name, that there is no
shifting him off, if I should send him word that I am not to be spoken with. Be
pleased therefore to give your self the trouble of going into that study. It Is
no trouble (said he) I will make my self invisible. Ah! Sir, (cried I) No
witchcraft, I beseech you, I do not understand that Sport. What ignorance is
it, (said the Count, Laughing and shrugging up his shoulders) not to know, that
to be invisible, is but to put before ones self, something contrary to the
light! He went into my study, and the young Lord came, almost at the same
instant, into my Chamber: Of whom I Craved pardon, that I did not wait upon
him up.

Discourse the Fifth.
THe great Lord being gone, and I come back from waiting on him to his Coach,
found the Count of Gabalis in my Chamber. It Is a great loss to us: (said he to
me) that this Lord who has now taken his leave of you, must one day come to be
one of the Seventy two Princes of the Sanhadrin of the new Law; had it not been
for that, he would have been a worthy Subject for our holy Cabal; He has a Wit
profound, quaint, vast, sublime, and bold. Look here upon the Figure of
Geomancy, which I have cast for him, during the time that you have been talking
together. I never saw Happyer Points, and such as marked out so fair a Soul.

Behold this Terms of Geomancy.
MOTHER, What Magnanimity she gives him? This Terms of Geomancy.
DAUGHTER will procure the Purple for him. I wish ill to him, and his Fortune;
For this reason, that it takes from Philosophy a Subject, which perchance may
surpass you. But, where were we, when he came?

You speak to me, Sir, (said I) of a Blessed Person, whom I never saw in all
the Roman Callender; I think you called him Danhuzerus. It Is true, (pursued he)
I remember it. I was saying to you, that you should put your self in the place
of one of your Doctors, and suppose, that the blessed Danhuzerus came to lay
open to you his Conscience, and say to you:

Sir, I come from beyond the Alps to wait on you, at the report of your
Wisdom; I have a little scruple, which gives me some trouble of Conscience.
There is in a mountain of Italy, a Nymph who keeps her Court there: a thousand
Nymphs serve her, almost as Beautiful as she; likewise handsome Men, very wise,
and very honest persons. Thither they come from all the Habitable Earth; they
love these Nymphs, and are beloved by them: There they lead the sweetest life
of the World. They have most beautiful Children by those whom they love. They
worship the living God: They hurt no Man; And they hope for Immortality. I
walked one day up this mountain, and pleased the Queen of the Nymphs: she
became visible and showed me her Charming Court. The Sages, who perceived that
she loved me, respected me almost, as if I had been their Prince: They exhort
me to listen and yield my self to the Sighs and Beauty of the Nymph. She
relates her passion to me; Nor forgets she any thing, that may touch my heart:
And in fine, declares that she shall die, if I will not Love her; and that, if
I will love her, she will acknowledge, her self obliged to me for her
Immortality. The Reasons of those Wise men, have convinced my Spirit, and the
Attractions of the Nymph have gained my heart. I love, I have very hopeful
Children by her* But in the midst of my Felicity, I am sometimes troubled, when
I remember, that the Church of Rome does not at all approve of this. I come
therefore, to you, Sir, to consult you, that I may know, what this Nymph, these
Sages, these Children, may be; and in what estate is my Conscience. Come on,
now Master Doctor, what answer will you make to the Lord Danhuzerus?

I would say to him, (answered I.) My Lord Danhuzerus, saving the Respect which
I owe you; You are a little mad, or else, your Vision is Witchcraft; Your
Children, and your Mistress, are filthy Fiends; and I am of Opinion, that your
Conscience is seared to some purpose.

With this Answer, my Child, you might very well merit a Doctor's Cap: But
never to be received into our Society (continued the Count, with a great Sigh).
Behold the barbarous Disposition of all the Doctors of this Age! A poor Sylphe
dares not show his Head amongst us, but he is presently taken for a Fiend. A
Nymph cannot labor to become Immortal, without passing for an unclean Spirit:
And a Salamander must not show himself, lest he be accounted a Devil; and the
pure Flames, which compose him, for Hellfire, which he carries along with him.
They have contrived, that they may dispel these Suspicions, to make the Sign
of the Cross, when they shall appear; Kneel down before the Divine Names, and
pronounce them too, with Reverence: And yet all these Precautions are vain. Nor
can all your Tricks ever procure, that they should be reputed Enemies of God,
whom they Adore more Religiously, than those who fly from them.

Very good, Sir, (said I to him) You think, it seems, that these People are
wondrous Devout likewise. Very Devout, (answered he) and very Zealous for the
Deity. The excellent Discourses, which they make of the Divine Essence, and
their admirable Prayers, do greatly Edify us. Have they Prayers too? (said I to
him) I should be glad to see One of their making. It Is easy to satisfy you,
(replied he) and to the end, that I may clear you from having any suspicion,
and that you may not suspect me for the Contriver of it: Listen to that, which
the Salamander, who answered in the Temple of Delphos, taught the Pagans, and
which Porphyrius relates. It contains sublime Theology: And you will see by it,
that he received not from these Sage Creatures, any other Doctrine, than that
the World should Worship the only True God.

THE Salamander's Prayer.
IMmortal, Eternal, Unspeakable, and Sacred Father of all Things! who art
carried upon the Chariots of the Spheres, which always roll about. Ruler over
the Etherial Armies, where the Throne of thy Power is raised: from the high Top
of which, Thine all-piercing Eyes behold All, and thy pure and holy Ears hear
All. Help thy Children, whom thou have loved from the Birth of Ages. For thy
Bright, thy Great, and Eternal Majesty, shines above the Earth, the Heavens,
and the Stars. Thou art raised above them, Oh the sparkling Fire! There thou
give Light, and entertainest thy Self with thine own Splendour; and from thy
Essence, flow forth Eternal Rivers of Light, which nourish thy Infinite Spirit.
This Infinite Spirit produces all Things; and makes this inexhaustible Treasure
of Matter, which can never fail the Generation, which always compasses it
about; by reason of the numberless Forms, with which it is pregnant, and with
which thou have filled it at the Beginning. From this Spirit, do these most
Holy Kings, also draw their original, who are round about thy Throne, and who
compose thy Court. O Father universal! O Thou Holy One! O Father of Blessed
Mortals, and Immortals! Thou have particularly created Powers, who are
marvellously like to Thine eternal Thought, and to Thy adorable Essence: Thou
have established them above the Angels, who declare thy Will to the World. In
fine, Thou have created Us a third sort of Powers, in the Elements. Our
continual Exercise, is to praise Thee, and to adore Thy Dispensations. We burn
with the Desire of possessing Thee. O Father! O Mother, the tenderest of
Mothers! O admirable Example, of the Passions and Tenderness of Mothers! O Son,
the Flower of all Sons! O Form of all Forms! Soul, Spirit, Harmony, and Number
of all Things!



What say you to this Prayer of the Salamanders? Is it not very Wise, very
Lofty, and very Devout? And likewise very Obscure, (answered I) I once heard a
Preacher paraphrase upon this; and he proved by it, that the Devil, besides the
other Vices which he has, is above all, a great Hypocrite. Alas! (cried the
Count) Then, What Recourse have ye, to betake your selves to, O ye poor
Elementary People! Ye tell Marvels of the Nature of God, Of the Father, Of the
Son, Of the Holy Ghost; Of the Assistant Intelligences, Of Angels, and Of the
Heavens! Ye make admirable Prayers, and ye teach them to Men: And yet after
all, ye are but Fiends and Hypocrites!

Sir, (interrupted I) you do me no pleasure at all, in invoking, on this
manner, this sort of People. Alas, my Son! (continued he) Be not troubled, that
I call upon them; but that your weakness hinders you from admiring hereafter,
that you saw not so many Examples, as you will wish you had done, of their
Alliance with Men. Alas! Where is the Women, whose Imagination your Doctors
have not Corrupted; so much, as that she thinks not but with Horror, on this
Commerce; and trembles at the very Aspect of a Sylphe? Where is the Man, who
flies not from the Sight of them, if he pretends but never so little to be a
virtuous honest Man? How rarely do we find a Man of worth, who desires their
Familiarity? Nor are there any but Debauched Persons, or Covetous, or
Ambitious, or Impostors, who seek for this Honor; which yet they shall never
attain to, I assure you: For, The Fear of the Lord, is the Beginning of Wisdom.

What then (said I) shall become of all these Airy People, since all such as
are Honest, are so set against them? Well, (said he) The Arm of God is not
shortened; and the Devil shall not draw to himself, all the Advantages, he hopes
for, from the Ignorance and Error, which he has vented to their prejudice: For
besides the Philosophers, who are a great number, and remedy it the best they
can, by utterly Renouncing Women; God has permitted all these People, to use
all Innocent Arts, which they can contrive, to converse with Men, without their
Knowledge. What do you tell me, Sir? (cried I) I tell you Truth, (pursued he)
Do you believe, that a Dog may have Children by a Woman? No, (answered I.) Nor
a Munky? (added he) Neither, (replied I.) Nor a Bear? (continued he) Neither
Dog, nor Munkey, nor Bear, (said I to him.) For that is impossible, without all
doubt: It Is against Nature, against Reason, and against Common Sense. Very
good, (said the Count) But are not the Kings of the Goths, descended from a
Bear, and a Swedish Princess? It Is true, (said I) the History says it. And
were not the Pegusians, and Syonians of India, (replied he) Born from a Dog,
and a Woman? I have read that too, (said I to him.) And had not that Portugess
Woman, (continued he) who was exposed in a Desert Island, Children by a great
Munkey? Our Divines, Sir, (said I) answer to that, That the Devil, taking the
Shape of these Beasts -- You are going to allege again, (interrupted the
Count) the Nonsensical Imaginations of your Authors. Pray, comprehend once for
all, that the Sylphes, seeing themselves taken for Devils, when they appear in
Human Shape, to diminish this Aversion, which is had against them, take the
Shapes of these Beasts; and so address themselves to the wanton Frailty of
Women; who are affrighted at a Lovely Sylphide, but not at a Dog, or Munkey. I
could tell you many Tales of your little Bolognian Dogs, and certain pretty
Ladies in the World: But I have a greater Secret to teach you.

Know, my Son, that many a one thinks himself the Son of a Man, who is the Son
of a Sylphe. Another thinks, that he is in Bed with his Wife; and without ever
knowing it, he Immortalized a Sylphe. This Woman supposes, that she is
Embracing her Husband; and she is Hugging betwixt her Arms, a Salamander: And
that Girl durst swear when she awakes, that she is a Virgin; that has had in
her Sleep, an Honor that she little dreamt on. So the Devil, and the
Ignorants, are equally abused.

Well, (said I) But could not the Devil awaken that sleeping Maid, to hinder
this Salamander from becoming Immortal? He could do it, (replied the Count) if
the Sages did not take an order for that: But we teach all these People, the
way to bind the Devils, and to make Opposition to their subtle Endeavors. Did
I not tell you, the other day, That the Sylphes, and the other Lords of the
Elements, were very Happy, when we showed them the Cabal? Were it not for us,
the Devil, their great Enemy, would sorely disquiet them; and they would be
hard put to it, to Immortalize themselves, without the Maids knowing it.

I cannot (replied I) sufficiently admire the profound Ignorance we live in: We
always believed, that the Powers of the Air, do often assist Lovers, in
attaining what they desired: And it seems, the thing is clearly otherwise; For
the Powers of the Air, have need of the Assistance of Men, to serve them in
their Amors. It Is just as you say, my Son, (pursued the Count) The Sages give
Succor to these poor People; without them, Alas, too unhappy, and too feeble,
to resist the Devil: For, when a Sylphe has learnt of us, to pronounce
Cabalistickly the powerful Name of NEHMAHMIHAH; and to join in form, with the
most delicious Name ELIAEL, all the Powers of Darkness, take their Flight; and
the Sylphe enjoyes peacably, that which he Loves.

So was that ingenious Sylphe immortalized, who took upon him the shape of the
Lover of a Lady of Sevil; The History is well enough known. The Young Spanish
Lady was fair; but as Cruel, as Fair. A Castillian Gentleman, who loved her to
no purpose, took a Resolution one morning, to leave her, without speaking to
her; and to Travel, till such time as he should be cured of his unprofitable
passion. A Sylphe finding this Fair one to his likeing, thought it his best
course, to lay hold on this opportunity; and Arming himself with all that,
which one of our Sages had taught him, to defend himself with, against the
Stratagems, which the Devil, envious of his good fortune, might contrive for
the disappointing him. He goes to see the Gentlewoman taking the shape of her
absent Lover. He complains, sighs, and is repulsed: He presses, he Sollicites,
he perseveres. After many Months, he works upon her, makes himself beloved; he
persuades; and in short, is happy. There was born from their Loves, a Son,
whose Birth was kept secret; and the Address of this Aeryal Lover, managed
privately, from the knowledge of her Parents. The Love continues; and she is
blessed with a second Great Belly. In the mean time, the Gentleman cured by
Absence, comes back, to Sevil; and impatient to see his inhumane Mistress
again, makes all the have he could to tell her; That at last, he is in a
condition of Displeasing her no more; and that he is come to declare to her,
that he had done Loving her.

Imagine, if you please, the Astonishment of this young Woman; Her Tears, her
Reproaches, and their Surprising Dialogue: She affirms, that she has made him
happy: Which he denis, And would have reminded him, that their Child was in
such a place; that he is the Father of it; and that she is bigg of another,
which he is also Father of. He is obstinate, to disown all. She Throws her self
against the ground, and Tears her Hairs: The Parents come running in at her
Cries, the desperate Lover continues her Complaints, and Invectives. The
Gentleman produces Testimony, that he had been absent the space of two years.
The first Child is sought for, and found; and the second was born in the right
Term.

And what part played the Airy-Lover, (interrupted I) all this while? I see well
enough, (answered the Count) that you are displeased, that he should forsake
his Mistress, leaving her to the Rigor of her Parents, and to the Fury of the
Inquisitors. But he had reason to complain of her: She was not devout enough;
for when these Gentlemen immortalize themselves, they work seriously, and live
very holily; That they loose not the Right, which they came to acquire of
Sovereign good: So they would have the person, to whom they are allied, live
with exemplary innocence; as may be seen, in that Famous Adventure of A Young
Lord of Bavaria.

He was not to be comforted for the Death of his Wife, whom he loved
passionatly; A Sylphide was advised by one of our Sages, to take upon her the
shape of this Woman: She was persuaded to it, and presents her self to the
afflicted young Man, saying; That God had raised her from the dead again, to
comfort him in his extreme Affliction. They live together many years, and had
many Lovely Children together: But the young Man was not so honest, as he
should be, to retain his discreet Sylphide. He swore, and spoke lewd uncivil
Words: She reproved him sometimes. But seeing that her Cautions were
unprofitable, she vanished one day from him, and left him nothing but her
Gloaths, and the Repentance of his not having followed her Holy Councels. Thus
you see (my Son) that the Sylphes have sometimes reason to vanish away: And you
see, that the Devil cannot hinder, any more than your Capricious Doctors, the
People of the Elements, that they should not labor, with success, to their
immortality, when they are assisted by some of our Sages.

But, in good earnest, Sir, (said I) Are you persuaded, that the Devil is so
great an Enemy, to these Suborners of Pretty Matdens? A mortal Enemy, (said the
Count) especially to Sylphes, Nymphs, and Salamanders. But, as for the Gnomes
or Pharyes, he does not hate them so much, because they, as I believe, you have
heard say, affrighted by the Terrible distraction, which the Devil's make in
the Center of the Earth, choose rather to live Mortals, than run the Risque of
being so Tormented, if they should acquire Immortality. Hence it comes to pass,
that the Gnomes, and the Devil's their Neighbors, have a very great Commerce.
They persuade these Gnomes, who are naturally great Friends of Man, that it is
to do him great service, and to deliver him from great perril, in obliging him
to renounce this Immortality. By this, they engage them to furnish him, whom
they can persuade to this Renunciation, with all the money which he shall
demand; To prevent the dangers, which might threaten his life, during a certain
time, or some such other Condition, as shall best please the Man or Woman, with
whom they make this unhappy Compact. So the Devil, wicked as he is, by his
Treaty with this Gnome, makes the Soul of a man become Mortal, and deprives it
of the right of Eternal Life.

How Sir! (cried I) These compacts, in your opinion, of which the Demonographes
relate so many examples, are they not with the Devil? No surely (continued the
Count) has not the Prince of the World, been chased out of it? Is he not shut
up? Is he not bound? Is he not cursed and damned from off the earth, and Throne
down to remain at the bottom of the work of the Supreme Architect; can he mount
up into the Region of Light, and there make his concentred Darkness
resplendant? No, He can do nothing against man. He can only inspire the Gnomes,
who are his Neighbors, to make these propositions to such men whom he most
fears may be saved, to the end that their Soul may die with their Body.

Then do you believe, (added I) that the Souls dye? They dye, My Child
(answered he). And those who make these compacts (pursued I) are not they
damned? They cannot be (said he) for their Soul dies with their body. They are
quitted then at an easy rate (continued I) and are but slightly punished for
having committed so Enormous a Crime, as renouncing their Baptism, and the
death of Christ.

Do you esteem it (replied the Count) a slight punishment to reenter into the
Black Abyss of Nothing? Know that it is a far greater pain, than to be damned;
for there is still a remainder of Mercy, in the Justice which God exercises
against sinners in Hell. Since it is a great favor not to consume them in the
Fire which burns them. To be Nothing, is a greater Misery, than to be in Hell:
This is the Doctrine, which the Sages Preach to the Gnomes, when they call them
together, to make them understand, what an Injury they do themselves, to prefer
Death before Immortality; and Nothing, before the Hope of Eternal Happyness;
which they justly might lay claim to, if they would ally themselves with men,
and not Solicit these Criminal Renunciations. Some of them who believe, we
marry to our Daughters.

Do you preach the Gospel then to these Subteranean people? Sir (said I to
him). Why should we not? (replied he) We are their Doctors, as well as of the
other People of the Fire, of the Air, and of the Water: For the Philosophic
Charity, is extended indifferently to all the Children of God. For, as they are
now subtle, and more clear, than commonly the Children of Men; so are they more
Docible, and more capable of Discipline, and listen to the Divine Truths, with
an Attention and Respect which astonishes us.

It must needs be a Ravishing Sight, (said I, smiling) to see a Rosy-Crusian
Philosopher, in a Chair preaching to all these little Gentle-Folke. You shall
have the Pleasure of it, my Son, when you please, (said the Count.) And if you
desire it, I will assemble them this very Evening, and Preach to them at
Midnight. At Midnight (cried I!) I have heard say, that That is the Hour of
their Sabbath. At this the Count fell a Laughing: You put me in mind (said he)
of all the Fooleries, which Demonographers relate, concerning this Business of
their Imaginary Sabbath. I could wish, for the rarity of the Conceit, that you
would believe them too.

Alas! For those Tales of the Sabbath, (replied I) I do not believe one of
them. You do well, my Son, (said he) for (once more I must tell you) the Devil
has not the Power to sport himself so with Mankind, nor to treat or correspond
with them; muchless, to make himself Adored, as the Inquisitors believe. That
which has given Rise to this Popular Report, is, That the Sages (as I have been
telling you) assembling the Inhabitants of the Elements, to Preach to them the
Mysteries of the Secret Sciences, and their Morality: And as it ordinarily
happens, that some Gnome, being convinced of his gross Error, and apprehending
the Horror of being reduced to Nothing, consents to his Immortalization: Then
has he a pretty Maid given him, is Married; and the Wedding Celebrated with all
the Rejoicing, which so great a Conquest, as has then newly been made, requires.
These are those Revellings, and Tokens of Joy, which Aristotle says, were heard
in certain Islands; where nevertheless, they could not see any Body. The Great
Orpheus was the first, who convocated the Subterranean People: At his first
Sermon, Sabasius the Antientest of the Gnomes, was Immortalized; And it was
from this Sabasius, that this Assembly took its Name; in which the Sages
addressed their Discourses to him, so long as he Lived: As it appears in the
Hymns of the Divine Orpheus. The Ignorant have confounded these Things; and
taken occasion to make a thousand Impertinent Stories, and to describe an
Assembly, which we convoque not, but to the Glory of the Sovereign Being.

I did never imagine, that this Sabbath (said I to him) had been an Assembly
for Devotion: Yet it is (continued he) a most Holy, and most Cabalistick one:
Which the World will not easily be persuaded to. But such is the Deplorable
Blindness of this unjust Age, that Men still do besot themselves with a vulgar
Report, and will not suffer themselves to be undeceived. The Sages have a fine
time of it that the Sots are believed before them. A Philosopher would have a
worthy Task, to take a Survey of all the absurd Falsities, and Chymaeras, which
have been forged; and to give manifest Proofs against them. For, whatsoever
Experience, or whatsoever solid Reason he might employ, Should there but come a
Man in a Square Cap, and write underneath, This is False; Experience and
Demonstration have no more Force; and it is no more in the Power of Truth, to
Re-establish its Empire: Men will believe this Square Cap, before their own
Eyes.

The Famous Cabalist Zedechias, was moved in his Spirit, in the Reign of your
King Pepin, to Convince the World, that the Elements are Inhabited by all these
People, whose Nature I have been describing to you. The Expedient to bring all
this about, was in this manner; He advised the Sylphs, to show themselves in
the Air to all the World. They did it with great Magnificence: These Creatures
appearing in the Air, in Human Shape; Sometimes ranged in Battle, Marching in
good Order, or standing to their Arms, or Encamped under most Majestic
Pavillions: At other times, on Airy Ships of an Admirable Structure, whose
Flying Navy was tossed about at the Will of the Zephirus's. Well, and what was
the Issue of all this? Do you think, that this Ignorant Age fell into a
Consultation, about the Nature of these Mavelous Spectacles? The People
presently believed, that they were Sorcerers, who had gotten a Power in the
Air, there to exercise their Conjurations, and to make it Hail upon their
Cornfieldsd. The Learned Men, the Divines, and the Lawyers, were presently of
the same Opinion with the Rabble. The Emperors also believed; and this
Ridiculous Chymaera got such Credit amongst All, that the Wise Charlemaine, and
after him Lewis the Debonaire inflicted grievous Torments on all those
pretended Tyrants of the Air. See this in the First Chapter of the Capitularies
of these two Emperors.

The Sylphs, seeing the People, the Pedants, and the Crowned Heads also, thus
taking up Arms against them, resolved to make them lose this Evil Opinion,
which they had of their Innocent Fleet; and to manifest themselves wholly and
clearly to Men in all Places; to let them see their Beautiful Wives, their
Commonwealth, and their Government; and then to come down into the Earth, in
diverse Parts of the World. They did, as they had projected; and the People who
saw these Men descend, remove thither from all Places, already possessed with
an Opinion, that they were Sorcerers, who had left their Companions, to throw
Poison upon their Fruits, and into their Wells: Being transported with the Fury
which Inspired them with such Imaginations, they dragged these Innocents to
Punishment. It is incredible, what a great Number of them were made to suffer
by Fire, and Water, over all this Kingdom.

It chanced one Day amongst others, that at Lions, there was seen to descend
from one of these Airy Ships, Three Men, and a Woman: All the City gathered
together about them; crying that they are Magicians, and that Grimoaldus, the
Duke of Bennevent, the Enemy of Charlemaine, sent them to destroy the Harvest
of the French. The Four Innocents said what they could, for their
Justification; that they were of that Country; that they had but a little while
since, been carried up into the Air by Miraculous Men, who had caused them to
see unheard of Wonders; and had entreated them to give a Relation of them. The
enraged People would not hear their Defense, but went about to Burn them; when
it happened, that the good Man, Agobard, afterward Bishop of Lions, who was a
Monk in this City, and having acquired a great Authority amongst them, passing
by, came to appease the Tumult: And after hearing the Peoples Accusation, and
the Defense of the Accused, gravely declared, that both one, and the other were
false: That these People had not descended down out of the Air; and that, what
the others affirmed to have seen, was impossible.

The People believing more what their good Father Agobard, had said, than their
own Eyes, were Appeased, set at Liberty the Four Ambassadors of the Sylphs, and
received with Admiration, the Book which Agobard writ, for Confirmation of the
Sentence, which he had given: So the Testimony of the Four Witnesses, became
invalid.

In the mean time, they having escaped the Punishment, were at Liberty to
relate what they had seen; the which was not altogether without Fruit: For, if
you well remember, that Age of Charlemaine was very fruitful in Heroic Men:
For it may be conjectured, that the Woman, who had been amongst the Sylphs,
found Belief amongst the Ladies of that Time. So that, by the Grace of God,
many Sylphes were Immortalized: Many Sylphides also became Immortal, by the
Relation which these Three Men gave of their Beauty; which thing induced the
People of those Times, to apply themselves to philosophy, more than before. And
hence proceeded all those Stories of Fees, or Fairies, which you find in the
Amorous Legends of that Age of Charlemaine, and his Court. All those pretended
Fees, were Sylphides and Nymphs. Have you read these Stories of Heroes and
Fees? No, Sir, (said I to him.)

I am sorry for it (continued he) for they would have given you some Idea of
the State, to which the Sages have resolved one day to reduce the World. Those
Heroic men, those amors of the Nimphs, those journies to the Terrestial
Paradise, those enchanted Palaces and Groves, and and all those charming
adventures which there we read of, are but a little Idea of the life which the
Sages lead, and of what the World shall be, when they shall make Wisdom-raign
therein. None shall be seen there but Heroes; the meanest of our Children,
shall have the force of Zoroaster, Apollonius, or Melchisedeck, and the
greatest part of them, shall be accomplished as the Children which Adam had had
by Eve if he had not sinned with her.

Did you not tell me Sir (interrupted I) that God would not that Adam and Eve
should have had Children; that Adam should only have meddled with the
Sylphides, and that Eve should not so much as think on any but the Sylphs, or
the Salamanders? It Is true (said the Count) they ought not to have got
Children, by that way which they did. Does your Cabal then Sir (continued I)
teach some invention for Man and Woman to make Children otherwise than by the
ordinary Method? Yes, believe me, does it (Answered he). I beseech you Sir
(pursued I) do me the favor to teach it me. Hold, Sir, you shall not know that
to day, an't please you. (Said he to me smiling) I will revenge the People of
the Elements, on you, for having had so great trouble to undeceive you, of
their being thought Devils. I doubt not but you are now come out of your Panick
fears. I leave you therefore, to give you leisure to meditate, and deliberate
before God, which species of Elementary substances, it will be properest for
his Glory, and for yours, to make sharer of your Immortality.

I shall go, in the mean time, to recollect my self a little, in order to the
discourse which you have put me upon making to the Gnomes, to night. Do you go
(said I) do expound to them, some Chapter of Averroes. I believe (said the
Count) that from thence might be drawn a very good subject; for I have a design
to preach to them of the excellence of Man, to induce them to seek out for an
alliance with us. And Averroes after Aristotle has held two things, which it
would be well that I should clear. The one is of the nature of the
understanding, and the other is of the Sovereign Good. He says, that there is
but one sole Understanding Created, which is the Image of the Uncreated, and
that this only Understanding suffices for all men: This requires explanation.
And concerning the Sovereign good, Averroes says, that it consists in the
conversation of Angels; which is not Cabalistick enough. For Man during this
life, may, and is Created to enjoy God, as you will ere long perceive; and as
you will make trial of, when you shall be in the Rank of the Sages.

So ended the Discourse with the Count of Gabalis. He came again the next
morning, and brought me the Sermon which he had made to the Subterranean
People: It Is very mavelous! I would give it you, with the remainder of the
entertainment which a Viscountess and I had with this great Man, if I were sure
that all my Readers had a right understanding, and would not take it ill, that
I should divertise my self at the expense of Fools. If I see that they will
oblige my Book, as much as it will do others; and that they do not do me the
unjustice to suspect me, as though I would give credit to the secret Sciences
under pretense of making them Ridiculous; I may continue to make my self merry
with the Count of Gabalis, and suddenly give you another Tome.

THE TRANSLATOR'S Animadversions ON THE Foregoing Discourses.
I Have ventured to Translate, at my vacant Hours, (being much affected at the
odd Curiosity of the Cabalistick Sciences) this Tract, somewhat resembling a
Philosophic Romance, as Fabulous and Weak, as an Old Monk's Legend. In it, you
will find the Cabalist to be a miserable Blind Creature, fit for a Dog and a
Bell; yet in his own Conceit, more seeing than all the World, and best
qualifyed for the Office of a Guide: Much Devoted to idle Traditions; by which
crooked Line, he measures Religion and Reason: A great Hater of Women; yet much
addicted to Venery, in a Philosophic Way. In a word, A Creature of much
Choler, and little Brains. The Madness of him, may make you Laugh; but his
Folly, will sometimes grieve you.

I presume, none but a Frenchman, would at first, have taken the pains to
Collect, and give such Credit to these Cabalistick Whymseys, as my Author seems
to do: That Nation being so Airy, and so Amorous, may boast it self, if it
please, sprung from the Sylphes, those Brisk Inhabitants of the Air, mentioned
in this foregoing Treatise. I shall not envy them, if they say, Pharamond, the
Founder of their Kingdom, was Begot by the Salamander Oromasis, or any other of
his Fiery Successors; who for his GLORY only, shall make offensive Wars upon
his peaceful Neighbors; and whilst he Lives, shall be the Incendiary of
Europe, to gain after Death, the Name of Nimrod, a Mighty Hunter: That Nations
may be said, like Hares, to have fled before him. Yet, to the Comfort of an
Englishman, the Greek Historians tell us, That Xerxes, who sailed upon the
Continent, and walked upon the Deep; who was so imprudent, as to whip Neptune,
and to bluster with the North Wind; was at last, easily beaten by the People;
who trusted, by the Order of Providence, in Wooden-Walls. But, as to this
Cabalistick Discourse, which my Frenchman has gathered for us, with pretense
of deriding it; but indeed does not, to much purpose; seeming rather, like some
Habitual Liar, by long Continuation in Falsehood, not to observe it; It may not
be unsit to answer its vain Hypothesis, from Authors; as it pretends to defend
it self, in abuse of them.

Heathen Writers, both Philosophers and Poets, never make mention, but of two
Intellectual Beings, besides the Gods; viz. the Demigods, and the Souls of
Men. The Semidei were always esteemed by them Immortal, from the good Pleasure
of Jupiter; whom Plato introduces, speaking to them thus: Vos quidem,
Immortales esse non potestis, sed mea potestate Immortales critis. You indeed
may be Mortal; but through my good Pleasure, you shall be Immortal. As to the
Souls of Men, because upon solid Reasons, they could not deny their
Immortality; and since they were not able to understand the Circumstances of
our future State, they were necessitated (not knowing how to dispose of the
Souls of Men after Death) either to allow of Pythagoras his Transmigration,
which was a Marching of the Immortal Tenant, from one House to another, after
its Lease was expired: Or else, according to Virgil, who had it from Plato,
That the Soul desired to be Incarnate again, after its Purgation in the Elizian
Fields. Rursus and incipiunt in Corpora velle reverti.

But in all Ages, Speculative Men in their nicest Metaphysics, could never be
thought well in their Wits; who presumed the Existence of Semi-homines,
Half-Men, and Women, that inhabited the Elements, Creatures compounded of
Material Souls and Bodies, Inferior, yet Superior to Man, in Faculties and
Powers. Strange Contradiction! That Beings, consisting only of Matter, should
act impossibly against their Nature: Since Matter, according to the Axioms, and
Statute-Laws of all Philosophers, whether Academicks, Peripateticks, Stoics,
or Cynicks, is not able to act, or think really. Now, to overthrow the
Assertion of these Elementary People at once; and by undermining the
Foundation, to destroy the Superstructure: Let us consider, what can be more
Absurd, or Fallacious in Logic, and Philosophy, than to beg a Principle of a
Thing, that cannot be; and then to fasten a Conclusion, from most Erroneous
Premises. To propose a Creature, whose Essence and Form is Mortal, and
consequently Material; Yet at the same time, to make this Creature Divine in
its Faculties, Acute in its Operations, and Superior to Man in its
Understanding, either as to Divine, or Human Objects; which can proceed from
nothing, but an Immortal, and Immaterial Cause. Let any thinking Person judge,
whether such Notions do not more deserve Hellibore, to purge them, than
Disputation to confute them? And, whether Bedlam be not the fittest Accademy,
for the Believers?

This Cabalistick Fancy, certainly in its Original, seems exactly to mimick the
Follies of the Alcoran. The Poets of old feigned three Gods, to piss in an Oxes
Hide, to make the famous Orion: So the Ingredients of Arianism, Judaism, and
Ethuicism composed a Religion obliging to the Carnal Turk; Thus a Profane
Interpreter of the Old and New Testament, with the false conceptions of Heathen
Philosophy, soon degenerate into a Cabalist. Sometimes the Venial Follies of
many passages Created Laughter in me; But I was grieved at the rambling
Profanation of some places of Holy Scripture: Pinge duos Angues Sacer est
locus. Pers.Amongst others, as to his perverting the sense of Adams eating the
Apple, to lying with his Wife. I will gravely, if it be necessary, make Answer
in the Orthodox words of St. Augustine, De Civit: Dei. Lib. 14. Cap. 26.
Praeoccupante peecato, exilium de Paradiso ante meruerunt, quam in opere
ferendae propaginis tranquillo arbitrio convenirent. They first finned, and
were banished out of Paradise, before they attempted the propagation of
posterity.

Then if these Elementary People, by nature, are Good, Just, Holy, and
Honourers of God; How dare they rob him of his Honor, by permitting the
application of it, to themselves? as in this story, amongst other Vnscholastick
Errors, of History and Chronology.

Oromasis, according to their Chymaeras, being Prince of the People which
inhabit the Fire, had two Children, by Vesta the Wife of Noah, viz. Zoroaster
and Egeria Zoroaster a great Hero, and the Inventer of Magic is reported by
Justin to have been King of the Bactrians, yet was overcome by Ninus, for all
his magic and valor, living after this computation about the end of Noah's
Life. Now, how do the Cabalists know, Noah's Wife, (supposing her name was
Vesta) not to be dead before her Son Zoroaster was Born; and if Justin
mistakes, as it is very probable, he may, and calls him Zoroaster, whom Ctesias
calls Oxiartes King of the Bactrians: For Pliny doubts very much, whither
magic be of so long a standing, and if Xanthus the Lydian a very Ancient
writer reckons but 600. Years between Zoroaster and Xerxes; Then Zoroaster must
live an Hundred Years afthe Wars of Troy, and our Cabalist must look for
another Hero, or else conclude the Son to be Born 800. Years after Noah's Wife
was dead, presupposing she lived as long as Noah.

But then, How could Egeria the Daughter, mentioned to be Born in the Ark, Live
till the time of Numa Pompilius, whose mistress she was, though very old, of
about 1600 Years standing.

For is it reasonable, that she should last out so long? since the Offspring of
these Elementary People being Men and Women, and of mixed substances must not
unproportionably exceed the Common life of Man. For Rome was built about 1194.
Years after the Death of Noah; Therefore I would always advise Romantic and
Cabalistick Writers, if they would have Fables pass smoothly, to avoid gross
absurdities in History and Chronology: Besides, according to them, this Egeria
impiously instructed her Lover, (contrary to the pretended desire, or piety of
the Elementary People) to Worship her Father Oromasis, under the Type of the
Vestal Fire. Thus you see how all things of Divinity and Humanity are made a
Chaos.

-- Congestaque eodem
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.
As to the Oracles, where my Author seems most pleased: It Is very easy to
prove, who inspired them, but I will confute the Cabalist, from Porphyrius,
because he affects him so much. He lays down in the preceding book for a maxim;
That the Devil is not at Liberty, to ramble at his pleasure; nor could it be
he, that spoke in Oracles; for he never would say any thing against his own
Interest, as he must, if it were the Devil that pronounced them; Therefore that
the Oracle must be spoke by some one of the Elementary People, who, knowing
God, spoke so reverently of him. To this I propose but one Oracle out of
Porphyrius; and if he will grant any of the Elementary People to speak it, I am
satisfied, and must conclude them, (if he can prove their being) to be worse
than Devils.

Porphyrius in his Book (...), says that enquiring of Apollo, to what Deity he
should Sacrifice, for the reducing of his Wife from Christianity; The Demon
answered in Greek Verse, according to this sense. You may sooner write upon the
Water, or by stretching out your Wings, Fly like a Bird through the Air, than
recover the senses of your wicked Wife, once polluted after that manner. Let
her go where she pleases, persevering in her empty fallacies, singing Hymns to
her Crucified God, with most vain lamentations, whom upright Judges Condemned,
and an Ignominious Death destroyed.

I will not pretend, in this place, to med^le with this Cursed Porphyrius,
since St. Augustine has done it so fully for me already in this case. De Civ.
Dei. Lib. 19. Cap. 23.

Now if the Devil spoke here, the Cabalist is undone, and if a Sylph uttered
this, he is as much Gravelled, therefore according to his own precarious
supposition, let him avoid the Dilemma if he can.

I will detain the Reader no longer, only let him as he reads this, or any
piece of this kind, both laugh and wonder, at the extravagant boldness of Man's
imagination, and think in what danger of Shipwreck, that Vessel is, which has
too much Sail and too little Ballast. Lastly, That the safest way in Divine and
Humane speculations will be to try all things, at GODS SACRED ORACLES, which
make a Man the best Philosopher, and best Christian.

-- Exemplaria Sacra
Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. line 23. read Devoto. p. 8. l. 24. r. German Lord. p. 10. l. 20. r. in
of a most. p. 40. l. ult. r. Theophrastus Bombast. p. 43. l. 4. for which r.
whom. p. 42. l. 8. for of this Judgment r. in this Point. p. 85. l. 5. r.
unpowerful exhalation. ibid. l. 19. r. Man. p. 88. l. 3. r. his Folly. p. 92.
l. 17. Daimonas. p. 95. l. 16. for seen r. heard of. p. 96. r. Rodrigo. p. 114.
r. the one and twentyeth Chap. p. 115. l. 22. for Loins r. Loves. p. 116. r.
Numa Pompilius. Translat. Animadv. page 2. lin. 27. for Imprudent read Impudent.


