MORE Sad and Lamentable NEWS From BRISTOL, In a Sober LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN
of that CITY TO HIS FRIEND IN LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for (...)

Bristoll the 19th of April, 1682. SIR,
YOurs of the 15th Instant I received, observing its Contents to advise that
Bristol is become the great Scene of News, many persons being desirous to hear
frequently from hence; I shall for your Satisfaction give an Impartial Account
of the late Occurrences amongst us. In the first place I have to acquaint you,
that I formerly received a little Book you sent me, called, The Sad and
Lamentable Cry of Oppression and Cruelty in Bristol, which on its reading over,
I find to be true in matter of Fact, and what I can from my own Observation and
Credible Information stand to and confirm, since that Book came abroad. The
Meetings of all the Dissenters continue to be disturbed with equal vigor as
formerly: The Quakers forcibly kept out of their Meeting House, hold their
Meetings constantly in the Court before it, (a custom (you know) proper to
those people, whom nothing but a Goal debars them of Meeting together. (At
these Street-Meetings they are not very Numerous, and them for the most part
Women, there being above Fourscore of their men at this time actually in
Prison, and several others of that Party out on Security to appear at Sessions.
The other Dissenters meet sometimes privately in their several Houses, and
sometimes publicly in the Fields, and out-parts of the City: But they are
narrowly Watched in both, and Hunted after by the Informers and Spies employed
on purpose, who are so Eager at their work, that they Disturb and Rout both as
soon as ever they have any notice of them.

For the discovery of the private Meetings in the City, these Church-Drivers
are so Year, that if they hear a Prayer, Singing of Psalms, have a Suspicion,
or any sham Information of a Meeting in a Dissenters House, away they Hurry,
Break open his Door, or enter his House through their Neighbors, run up and
down all the Rooms, to the Affrightment of the Women and Children. And all this
without producing a Warrant, or bringing any Badge of their Office. In these
Boisterous Practices (I assure you) they have been found, when no such thing as
a Coventicle was or could be found. By this judge the Distraction these poor
people are in: What adds to it, is, that being disturbed of their public
Meetings, they cannot have that small favor the Conventicle Act allows them,
that is, of Meeting in their private Families: For at Sessions Hundreds are
Prosecuted upon Statutes made against Papists, and at the Bishops-Courts: The
Lay Officers are busy Tooth and Nail to load them with (...) that so, having
delivered them to the Devil, they might prepare them for the Jailer, which is
the portion of several already. The Rigor and Severity of these Proceedings
makes several Industrious and Wealthy-Dissenters quit their Callings, and
remove their Families to a more quiet Station, by which means many of the Poor
are like to want Bread. The City generally to decay in its Trade, and the Kings
Interest considerably too lessened in its Revenue; the Proof of which will be
fully made out by casting up the Custom-house Books at the years end, to which
I refer you.

The noise of Breaking open Houses, and carrying away Goods, is at present
abated, little Distresses having been made of late, which I Impute, (...) To
their being sensible of the Error, and Unlawfulness of most of their former.
And next to their want of Subject to make a Conventicle of; for there being at
this Ins^ant no other public Meeting but that of the Quakers. The Informers
are so forward to break up that, that they generally disperse them at their
first coming together, or before they come to that Exercise of Religion, as to
know, whether it differs from the Liturgy of the Church. Their Preachers,
whether of the City or Strangers, are presently caught up and carried to
Prison; so they (which you know is Customary) sit Silent, whereby the Informers
lose the opportunity of the Benefit of a Conventicle; however, rather than want
work, they strive to make a Riot of this Silent Meeting. The manner of it is
thus, When the Informers come to disturb them, one of the Gang without
produceing any Authority, makes Proclamation [peremptorily] in the Kings Name,
for all persons to depart; which if not presently complied with, then to their
work they fall, that is, to Hale, Push, and drive away the Women and Children:
For the men they take ost times two or three of the chief, commit and lead them
to Prison, where commonly they are detained one Night, or so, on this
Authority, and then the next day convened before a Magistrate, and sent to
Newgate with a Mittimus for breach of the Peace. Now, I mention Newgate, I
cannot let it pass without saying somewhat of the Doleful Condition of those
Quakers that are now Prisoners, whose Case indeed would force Commiseration
from any one, that is either Conscientious or Christian: For in the first place
the Goal, is in its self so Noisome, that it has been Presented by several
Grand-Juries, and next so strait that these poor People have scarce Room to
stand or lie one by another. In one Room there is Nine Beds; and in another
small Gallery under the Roof of the House, Six Beds; and in another Room 14
Foot Square, Seven Beds. There are Beds also placed in several little obscure
Holes, not fit for any to Lodge in: But what is worst of all, these places afford
them not Lodging enough, but some are forced to Lie in Hammacks, some on the
Floor, and some on the Table Board of the Hall, which is the common through Fair
of the Goal. By this unreasonable Crowding them in a Nasty Goal, several of the
Prisoners are grown Sickly, and some put forth of the Prison Sick; many are the
Consternations of the Sober and Judicious people of this City to think what the
Tendency of these things will be; for besides the decay (...) Trade
aforementioned, and want of Employment for the Poor, etc. The Lives and Health
of these the Kings Protestant Subjects, and others of the Populous City, are
thereby greatly endangered.

You know, Sir, Application has been made both Here and Above for a Redress;
and what little success it has hitherto produced: For the Qu^kers had by their
Friends no sooner obtained an Order of Council for the Enlargement of the Goal;
in which I must do our Magistrates that Right, a^ to confess they were ready to
obey it, and had by their Report manifested no^ only the Truth of the Quakers
Complaint, but their own willingness to ea^ them: But Mr. Knight one of the
Sheriffs (the Dissenters grand Prosecutor an^ Informer) being then in London,
wrote peremptorily to the Jailer not to obe^ it: And also, as he intimated in
that Letter, procured an Order to Rever^ that Order of Enlargement; on which
Foot the Prisoners continue. The several Prints at that time will tell you,
that this Sheriff had also the Honor of Knighthood conferred upon him; so in
my following Relation I shall observe him with that distinction.

Since the Return of this new Knighted Sheriff (the Pageantry of whos^ coming
in, you have ^ully in Thompson's Intelligence, set out to his way o^ Advantage)
the Prosecution of the Dissenters have been with a Severity n^ way short of the
former, toward the Quakers it exceeds, thus, that is, the New Sir John (for by
the way we have an Old Sir John Knight in this City^ that is a worthy
Magistrate, and truly Loyal Churchman) is more Bluf^ than formerly, Cracks
highly of his Power and his Orders, and not satisfied with barely Committing
the Quakers to Prison, and their Stowing them in Heaps, but he must break their
Meeting in Prison too, which I presume is no more Warranted by Law, than many
other of his Actions are.

Since the Prison being thus made their House, I cannot find any Clause in the
Conventicle Act that prohibits their Meeting together, and for more with them.
However our New Sir John is not willing it shall be so, but comes to the Prison
to disturb them; with him, he brings, the last of March, his Elder Brother
Informer Mr. Helliar, and another young Informer of the same Name: The second
of April he brings his Companion or Secretary Brand, who is one that triumphs
loudly in his Masters Honor, and Reports that he was called at Newmarket one
of the Pillars of Bristol: These coming to Prison Meeting the days aforesaid,
made there a grievous ^ggle. Our New Sir John and Old Helliar Menacing the
Prisoners with Irons, Dungeon and the Gallows. Sir John tried to scare them by
Threatening to draw out his Doughty Sword, and Hales, Pulls, and Throws on the
ground several of the Prisoners there met; Old Helliar thrust his Cane at the
Faces of several of the Prisoners; and the Sheriff took one man by the
Shoulders, Haling him with all his strength to the Stairs head, and then
forcibly threw ^im down Stairs backwards, which fall had in all likelihood
broke his Neck (...) his Limbs, had not some on the Stairs Providentially saved
him: His Cruelty stopped not here, but he commands the poor man into the
Westhouse, the common Receptacle for Fellons between Sentence and Execution,
and there continues him to this day: The Prisoners asking him why they were so
Severely used, he Answers them with a Huff, and Talks Big of his Power and
Orders. This Unnatural, and Unpresidented Severity occasions great
Dissatisfaction to all Worthy Persons, who are concerned to see His Majesty's
Goal made so near to resemble an Inquisiton, and the Sheriff to Act the place
of a Lord Inquisitor.

Last Sunday this Sheriff, that is, our New Sir John came to the Quakers
Meeting, and with him his usual Associates and Fellow Informers, Mr. Helliar,
Oliff, Lugg, Casse, Tilley and Patrick, Brand and Summers. The first six being
a Set of Constables pact together as the only persons of the City for such
work: These disturbed the Meeting, Haling out, pushing and driving away the
Quakers, many of whom, both men and women, they, as is usual, took Authority to
Commit to Bridwell, where Eleven of them were continued all Night, sitting up
by the Fire for want of Lodging.

Please to Note, That the taking upon them this Authority is so common with
them, that in their Discourses and Actions, they all alike Imp the place of
Justices of the Peace; the meanest Tool among these Informers menaces with his
power, Commits with more Imperiousness, and Releases with more freedom, than is
common for any of our Aldermen, who still, to give them their due, sent the
Women home as soon as they were brought before them. The Mayor calling to our
New Sir John, and asking, What they did, and for what they were Committed? he
Answered, That they were all at a Meeting, said nothing; so he knew not what
they were about, unless they were plotting to break open the Prison, and get
away their Husbands.

To satisfy you with my distinction, and calling some of these Informers mean,
I assure you, it is their proper Title, they being here fully known so, and in
all their other qualifications, that the naming them to an honest Bristoll Man,
presently furnishes you with their right Character. Mr. Helliar has precedence
as a person of an Estate, one noted for -- and famous for his experience and
great cunning in these practices, but our New Sir John carrys the Bell, for he
is certainly the Son of once a truly worthy and Loyal Magistrate, who bred him
a Merchant, and placed him a Factor at Me^is: Since I write only News from
Bristoll, I shall say nothing of the ruggle he drove there, but come to his
Character here, where for his Loyalty I refer you to the Observator and
Thompson's Intelligence, and have this further to add to it, that is, He now
abounds in an Estate of at least sevenscore pound a year, he has part of two
Ships, and a stock in Trade, besides the Improvement he is daily making in his
present new Calling. Yesterday the Quakers-Meeting were again disturbed by our
New Sir John and his man; The Constables came not with him, they by a Compacted
agreement having placed (...) and had for their Company several Fiddlers, a
Drummer, with a Drum, also a Flagg and Arms; for this Company Victuals and
Liquor were provided to carry on the designed Revel and Riot; just as the
Sheriff came, the doors of the Meeting House were threw open, and the Fiddlers
began to play on their Fidles. The Sheriff smiling asked, What was the meaning
of this? Tilley one of his Brother Informers answered, They meant to be merry,
and came there to Dance. To make good his word, they attempted to take hold of
several young Women to hale them in, who fearful of being abused by so vile a
Company, held fast by the Ancient Women; upon which two of the said Girls with
the Women, who sheltered them were by the Sheriff committed to Bridewell, and
with them two more for reproving their Lewdness. The manner of the Quaker
Woman's reproof was thus, Well Sheriff Knight, said she, I see that though we
cannot be suffered to serve God, these shall to serve the Devil; our peaceable
Meetings you seek to make Riots, and here you your selves are Rioting and
Revelling to a great excess. Oh! these doings are a shame to Bristoll, which
was once reputed a sober and well Governed City: Now it is altered for the
Profane, Drunkards, Revellers and Whore-masters are Countenanced, but those
that fear God made a prey of; surely God will visit heavily with his Judgments
for these crying sins.

To proceed, The Meeting being thus dispersed, these Constables, Informers and
Company still continued in the Meeting House, Eating, Drinking and making a
clamorous noise; visited they were by some of the same Complexion, whose Names
I may furnish you with another time. In the Interim I have to tell you, that
having well drunken in the Lower-room, they then went up Stairs to the Tenement
of a late Widow, and there at the top of the House they sung, made Huzza's,
and Revelled till about three in the Afternoon, when being weary, they left
their place; and to show their power, Tilley he goes to Bridewell, and releases
the six Women. Just before this Revel broke up there happened a very pleasant
passage, that is, the Informers being got to the Upper Tenement of the Quakers
Meeting house, had then the view of the House of a Quaker, against whom these
Blades have an Inveterate spleen, in that he was one that went to White Hall to
complain of their Illegal proceedings, this they manifest by inquiring every
Meeting day after him, and menacing how they would manage him for his
Petitioning, supposing they were now levelling their thoughts at him, their
heads swimming with the height of their Station and strength of their Liquor,
they dreamed or fancied a Conventicle at his house, so away they came, and
beset it on this suspicion, he being then with his Wife and Mother abroad at
Dinner at a Relations House, and having left in his House three small Chil^ren
and his own Servants only, knocking at the door, the Servants were ^earful to
open it to so rude and boisterous a Company, so one of them, that (...), E.
Summers a Rascally Pockified Butcher, goes over a Neighbors Wall and ^ters his
Garden, then went and opened the Street door, letting in the oth^ ^formers,
that is, Tilley, (...) Casse (...) out doors, whether fearing their Entry was
unwarrantable, or that they waited for a supposed prey, I know not; but whilst
they were without doors, Tilley enters and walks about the first Floor within
doors; Summers, Patrick and Casse runs hastily up Stairs to the very Terret of
the House, Ransacks every Room and Closet above, searched the Cellars,
Wash-house, and Outhouses below Stairs; and finding none in the House but
Children and Servants, away they departed. When I last spoke with the
Gentleman, he told me, He hopes he lost nothing, however should I be so served
and be at home, I think I should be loath to let the Gentlemen go without
Examining their Pockets, knowing that both Law and Gospel would from their thus
entering a House, make them all great Trespassers and shrewdly suspected of
being Thieves and Robbers.

I have now given you a large account of passages here, which you may freely
Communicate to all your Friends, and give them assurance of the certainty and
truth in all particulars, I doubt not but several Letters this Post makes
mention of this latter part of it, and that the Quakers themselves will take
care to Print this as remarkable. I would give you leave to Print my Letter
also, but that I expect the Lying Observator, or some such Mercenary
Pamphleteer will in their next Dialogue call it a Libel against the Law; and
with a few downright staring Lies, confute it all; as the Observator did the
little Book aforementioned; you know it is common for them to term the giving an
Informer his true Character, and publishing their noble Acts the Arraignment of
the Government, whereas no Magistrate is any way concerned.

I shall now draw my long Letter to a Conclusion, which indeed has swelled in
its bulk much above my former intention, albeit the Subject is so Copious as
'twould fill a Volumn.

Next Week our Sessions begin, the Consideration of the proceedure of which
makes us big with expectation, the Indictments of Recusancy against Scores of
Protestant Dissenters are like to come to an Issue; as also the Trial of the
Quakers Meetings, as to making them Riots, I will not be so injurious to my
Countrymen as to conclude aforehand, that such Profecuters will have such
Juries, having great Confidence in the integrity and care of the Mayor and
Justices, to see that the Juries be worthy and prudent men, of which this City
(to speak without boasting) can afford good plenty. Our Sheriff Lane I
understand is also solicitous in this point, who, to give him his due, is a
quiet and worthy Gentleman, but I am informed our new Knighted Sheriff sticles
somewhat against this, which the Dissenters not without cause grumble at, he
being their great Prosecuter and Informer, they think he ought to be passive.
The Quakers murmur heavily at it, and says, It justifies their Complaint above,
that they can have no relief below. When our Sessions is over, you may expect a
short and true account of its proceedure. (...) time, I beg your excuse in
tiring your patience in so long a^ (...) etc.


