LETTER Concerning the present State OF PHYSIC, And the REGULATION Of the
Practice of it in this KINGDOM.

Written to a Doctor here in London.

(...).

Hipp. de dec. Hab. LONDON, Printed for Jo. Martyn and Ja. Allestry, at the
Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1665.

Imprimatur.

Mar. 30. 1665. Joh. Hall, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.

WORTHY SIR,
NOw I am safely arrived here, and retired from the noise and importunity of
public business, I have a little leisure to consider the Civilities I received
from you at London, and thank you for them: But my Lady -- is most particularly
sensible of the favor you did her, in sending her that excellent Syrup of your
own preparation; and as well for the good effects she has found of it, as for
your most exquisite manner of preparing it, she ceases not to commend it
infinitely to her nearest Relations, and other Persons of Quality, who will
very shortly, I know, desire you to take the trouble of making some more of it
for them. And as her Ladyship has been wont always to condemn the Syrups,
Conserves, and other Medicines of the Apothecaries, as nauseous, fulsome, and
unhealthy, compared with those which her self and other Ladies of the Country
make, without regard of expense or charge, to have them perfectly good; so now
she does it much more, in consideration of this which you have sent her.

These discourses of her Ladyship put me in mind of what past in that
excellent company of Virtuosi at Sir Thomas -- House, where you and I had
lately the honor to receive a noble entertainment. And in truth all then
present did very much resent the unhappy estate of the profession of Physic,
as it now stands in this Kingdom, both in respect of the worthiness of the
thing it self, and its mighty concernments in humane life, and the society of
mankind; as also, as it is an honorable way, wherein all the Gentlemen of
England have been ever accustomed to breed and educate some of their Children.
And in both these respects there is no Gentleman in the Nation, but ought to
take himself concerned to secure it so far from the rude pretenses of vain and
bold men, that in the first place it may be really serviceable to those ends
for which Heaven mercifully gave it, and also may be a decent and worthy means
of subsistence, as it has hitherto been, to persons of ingenuous Birth and
liberal Education, who shall in pursuance of those noble ends address
themselves to the Study of it.

Now because you know very well that my curiosity and inclination have ever led
me to a more then ordinary consideration of that which you profess, you will
the less wonder to find me offering some propositions, which, in my poor
opinion, will remedy the present defects both in the method and practice of it,
restore it to its primitive and most excellent form, and effectually establish
it in that degree of honor and estimation which all Ages have so justly had
for it.

And whereas I have several times found both your self and some other
Physicians of my acquaintance possessed with apprehensions, because our House did
not pass the Patent, by His Majesty lately granted to the College: though I
will not make my self guilty of so much rashness as to censure the advice by
which that affair was governed; yet I verily persuade my self, if instead of
that long Patent De novo, you had followed the example of your Ancestors, who
finding some defects in the first Act of their Incorporation, made in 14. H. 8.
Chose rather to bring into the Parliament small Additional Bills, praying such
new powers as might enable them to put in execution the true intents of the
first Act, as that of 38. H. 8. In which they desire the privilege of visiting
the Wares of Apothecaries: and afterward, Primo Mariae, another Bill requiring
the Magistrates to be assisting to them in the execution of this Power, which
was forgot before. And likewise another clause was desired, commanding Goalers
to receive and keep in safe custody such Prisoners as should from time to time
be committed by the Authority granted to the College, till they should by them
be thereof discharged: I say, if some such course as this had been taken, I
make no doubt but the zeal and care of this House is such for the honor and
advancement of all true Learning in the Nation, that it would have passed
without much debate: But considering the length of the new Charter; the great
numbers of men of several sorts that made opposition, and pretended high
exceptions against it; the many weighty and important things at that time upon
their hands, and so the little leisure they had then to examine a business of
that nature, as they ought to do; It is to me no great wonder that it was for
the present laid aside.

I have great hope, That whatever may be proposed for the effectual advancement
of this noble Art, that does not only serve the necessities of humane Life,
but also furnish Philosophy with so great a number of real and useful
Experiments, will be sincerely regarded and considered; from the particular
genius and inclination of the Age wherein we live, which to me seems in a
peculiar manner directed to the contemplation of Nature: And although many
admirable Spirits flourished in the former Age, and labored in most kind of
humane knowledge; yet the honor of the true method of penetrating into the
causes of natural things is due only to ours: For, excepting the Divine Wit of
Copernicus, none that I remember of that time did any thing of moment in
natural Philosophy. And I look upon Galileo as the first that introduced any
sound and real speculations in that way, by first discerning the necessity and
use of Geometrical Theories in the considerations of Nature. This fortunate
beginning was well pursued by Kepler, and brought to a great degree of
perfection by D. Carts, whose incomparable Books have kindled in men's minds
such an ardour of searching into the causes of things, that the great Spirits
of our time seem all in a flame; and not only such persons as have been bred
in Letters, and Study, but men of all Conditions and Businesses, even Princes
themselves are touched with this inclination, as the Prince Leopoldo in Italy,
but especially His Most Excellent Majesty, who has set on foot the greatest
design for this end that ever any Nation saw, by Founding his Royal Society for
the advancement of Natural Philosophy by Experiments, which will certainly be
as Immortal as his own Name and Fortunes.

If then we consider how much the business of Physic, well constituted and
managed, will not only administer infinite occasions to the speculative men of
this busy and enquiring Age; but likewise of how much greater importance all
its Experiments are, both to the public, and to every one in particular; we
need not doubt but His Majesty will believe that His College of Physicians is
worthy of the same Royal Care, that other Princes, his Predecessors of Famous
Memory, have had for it: And the Parliament afford that Countenance and
Authority, which shall be requisite for it in Affairs of so great Consequence.
And I easily persuade my self, That if that most Learned and Excellent Society
of Men would take so much leisure from their Affairs as to consider the most
effectual ways of advancing all the Desiderata of their Profession, and
supplying the present Defects of it; they would not only have the Countenance
of the Government, but also the Thanks of it, and of the whole World.

In the mean time give me the favor to deal frankly with you about this
matter; as one also a little transported with the same passionate love of real
and useful Philosophy which I have noted in others; and besides, have a
particular kindness for their most deserving Profession.

The Imperfections then which I note in the present Method of exercising
Physic in this Nations are these: It loses all the noble opportunities it
might have for the Advancement of it self, and of the knowledge of Nature in
General. It is more exposed to Errors and Mistakes, dangerous to the Life of
Man; and lastly, it is too great a charge to the People when they stand in need
of it. All which I conceive to happen by receding from the ancient Form and
Method of Practice, which came early into the world with Physic it self, and
is in all considerations most natural to it, and was indeed the use of former
times, till good Learning came to be overthrown and laid wast by the furious
irruption of the Goths. In those Ages, that which now stands divided between
the Surgeon and Apothecary, was the care of the Physician himself, who did
not think it too mean a work to dress Wounds, set Bones, travel in the
inquisition of Herbs, Stones, Metals, compound Medicines, with his own hands;
and do innumerable other things necessary for this Profession, which are now
accounted the ministry of inferior Persons: And as the quitting of this noble
way was the most fatal thing that ever fell upon this God-like Profession; so
doubtless the true means of restoring it to its first Beauty and Divine use,
were to resume the course of wiser times, and settle it again in its ancient
Constitution. But because a long course of time has so confirmed this unhappy
evil, and that out of those Parts of Physic (for such they really are) which
the Physician has despised, as below him, are risen two very worthy Societies
of men as well in this as in other Nations, I look upon it for many respects as
a thing extremely unreasonable to undertake such an alteration as the restoring
of that ancient way would necessarily introduce: yet I do not despair but that
an expedient might be thought on, which although it do not arrive to the full
perfection of that method, yet it approaches (I think) nearer to it then the
present way, or any other I have yet heard of; and is likewise very facil,
ready, and practicable, not overturning the present state of things; so far
from doing injury to the Surgeons or Apothecaries, as it serves rather to
preserve for ever a true and right understanding between them and the
Physician, and to defend them all against the assaults and pretensions of
Mountebanks and other indirect practisers of Physic, and yet comprehends a
great deal of the true way of the Ancients abovementioned, so as it maybe
fairly hoped that it will fully answer the greatest part of those ends we have
already spoken of, and for which Physic has been so valued in the world; and
all this without any great trouble, expense, or difficulty either to the
ancient Practitioners of this City and Kingdom, or to such as now enter into
this Profession.

Now the Idea I would represent, does particularly regard these three things:
First, to render Physic of greater service and use toward the advancement of
Natural Philosophy, which is so universally the design of the present Age.
Secondly, To make it more effectual for the great ends of preserving life, and
the restoring of health. Lastly, That these ends may be obtained with less
charge and hazard to the people then heretofore.

And for what concerns the Philosophical consideration of Physic, I must beg
the pardon of such as you call Rational Physicians, if I so far dissent from
them, as to believe Physic (such as it is at present) rather to be a mass of
noble Experiments, in which Philosophy might find excellent matter to write
upon, than a Science perfectly formed and established upon sound and
unquestionable verities. For, If we contemplate the common principles
explicated in the Physiological part of it, we shall find them very barren and
unfruitful of such Notions as are presumed to come from them: and very far from
opening a prospect into those most intricate and numberless Phenomenon which
happen in the Body of man, and instead of that good which might well be
expected from principles of true and demonstrated Reason, by which you might
have been directed to such a Methodus medendi as should grow out of the true
knowledge of the causes of things. These principles have produced two great
evils. 1. Instead of the true way of the Ancients, of educating Youth in
exercises of Anatomy, visiting the Sick with their Masters, examining the
nature of Simples in Fields and Gardens, practicing to compound Medicines with
their own hands; they are bred only to Disputation and the fond Controversies
of Books. And 2dly, They have caused the cares of Anatomy, inspection of
Vegetables, Minerals, etc. (although from these arise the greatest part of
those Experiments which are to be the foundation of a Medical Philosophy) to
lie unobserved and neglected in such hands as are no way capable to make a true
use of them. Therefore for the effective application of the principles of a
better Philosophy to the noble Experiments of Physic, in which vast design Des
Carts has resolved to spend the whole remainder of his life; it will be
necessary to bring again those Experiments into the hands of such persons who
know how to manage and employ them for the service both of Philosophy and
Physic.

I look upon your learned College of Physicians as the only company of men in
this Kingdom, who are in a just capacity of advancing this good design; being
such men, as (without the vanity of over-admiring our selves) may truly be said
to have advanced Physic more these last forty years, then any one Society of
Physicians in Europe: Especially, since I hear they have made so great an
accession of worthy and ingenious persons to their number, and that not only
of such as are residing in London, but also in all other parts of the Kingdom;
by which means, a noble correspondence may be established, concerning the
Diseases incident to several parts, as Where they take their rise, and what
their motion and progress is, as was of late years observable in the Rickets,
etc. The nature of the respective Soils, as to Vegetables, Earths, Minerals,
Metals, etc. Alterations of Weather and Seasons, and many other things relating
to the Business of Physic. Also by this increase of their number, you have the
assistance of so many worthy persons for the carrying on of this excellent
design.

I should think it therefore advisable in the first place, that your Learned
Society would divide all their affairs (after the example of the most
Honorable Assembly of the Nation) among several Committees to be assigned for
that purpose. And although the Physiological part, which takes upon it self to
explicate the causes of all that follows after, be I confess in order of Nature
the first, yet will it be found the last in order of Time: as being indeed the
result, product, or issue of many laborious and careful Experiments, which are
first to be made in the other parts of this Noble Art, before a Medical
Physiology can be well and firmly constituted.

Therefore your first care will be (in my opinion) to appoint the Committee for
Anatomy's, which should consist of such a sufficient number of men, as that the
whole business of Anatomy might be distributed in easy proportions amongst
them all. As for instance, to some the consideration of the Brain should be
assigned, to others of the Heart, to others the Juyces of the Body, to others
the Bones, and the like, which you know better how to digest then I: And these
to be considered as well in all other Animals, as in the body of Man, that so
by comparing one with another, we may come to investigate their true and
genuine uses: Inspection also to be made into all morbid Bodies that can be
procured (for which reason all or any Member of this Committee to have free
access to the several Hospitals) to find out the Anomaly's which Diseases
introduce: Likewise these considerations should be in part Geometrical, noting
the just figure, weight, and proportion (as near as can be) of every thing, and
that not only of its whole bulk or manifest cavities, but by the advantage of
the Microscope, as far as may be discerned, of its more minute parts, their
frame, and texture. Partly also Physical, according to all their sensible
qualities, partly Chemical, by the Analysis of the fire, or any convenient
Menstruum. Nor would this create much trouble to any man, being divided into so
many hands; and yet the general design would advance more in a few years this
way, then it could by the single industry of particular men in a whole age. For
neither this nor the other Committees should be required to bring in an account
of their proceedings above once in a year, nor to meet together above once a
month, unless they or any number of them should be willing to meet oftener to
discourse of their affairs, and suggest Experiments to one another.

After this manner, another Committee should be instituted for the History of
Diseases. (For what I design to propose concerns only matter of Fact, and the
true stating of Experiments in order to the building a Philosophy upon them.)
By the History of Diseases I mean a perfect and exact Narrative of those Signs
which you call Diagnostick and Prognostic, together with the experienced
method of Curation: And I think a work of this nature well performed would be
one of the most useful things to a Physician in the whole world; and I note it
as one of the great Desiderata in this Art: all which should be done as well
out of all the best Authors, as from their own Practice and Observation. For as
to Medicaments, by which the effect is done, that which ought to be esteemed
matter of Fact is so obscure, and the Experiment so uncertain, that unless they
can meet with some effectual operations of Simples (which will require both
good Learning and Judgment to observewell) as yet this part will afford little
matter for the consideration of a judicious man.

Then the whole Materia Medica, both simple and compound, should be referred to
the examination of another Committee; every member whereof should have one,
two, or more Simples or Compounds (either Mineral, Animal, or Vegetable) the
nature and virtues of which they should labor by all means possible to find
out, as by color, taste, scent, infusion, decoction, destillation before and
after Fermentation, and all other possible ways, etc. Endeavoring in this
manner to find out what things are most operative with or without any
exquisite and elaborate preparation, by which Chemists do often rather destroy
then heighten the virtues of the Simple: Also for compounds to enquire the true
method of mixing things together, that some may not annihilate the force of
others, and so altogether become ineffectual, which will produce an incredible
alteration in most of the Pharmacopaea's now in use, bring in the true and
ancient way of medication by Simples, and so furnish us with real Experiments
both of use to humane life, and also to the advancement of Philosophy, being
without doubt the most easy and effectual way (by dividing a work so vast
amongst so many) to form and build up such a natural History both of Galenical
and Chemical Medicines as has been long desired, but never yet seen in the
world. And this were a more likely and hopeful way, then to put the business of
Chemistry (which as I hear some do so importunately labor for) into the hands
of a few men (for the most part) unlearned, and unprovided of such principles
and helps as should make them able to reason and conclude intelligibly from
that brave stock of Experiments which this Art affords: And for this cause
only it has been (until of late) so unserviceable to Philosophy, and produced
nothing but idle and extravagant Theories, such as those of Paracelsus and
Helmont; who, if they had been as good Philosophers as they were Operators,
would have done a great deal more service to mankind.

Lastly for Medicaments themselves, and the application of them to the cure of
Diseases, which is the principal thing the generality of mankind expects from
Physic; I take that not to be the business of any one or more Committees, but
of their whole number united in one common consent; and I am persuaded it were
no difficult thing to take such a course here, as might secure your Practice
entirely to your selves, and hinder others, who now are suspected (how justly I
do not say) to go about to usurp it; take away the excessive charge of Physic,
which renders it very burdensome to the people, and less profitable to your
selves; and lastly, make it become more effectual and powerful for the curing
of Diseases, and preserving the health and life of Man.

And all this seems to me to consist in the execution of one facil and easy
thing, That is to say, That the College of Physicians would please to enact,
under a severe Penalty, That from henceforth none of their Members should make
use of the common and more modern way of sending Bills to Apothecaries Shops;
but instead of that, To buy their Physic of the said Apothecaries more or
less, as their practice shall requi^e. Together with express order, That no
Physic should be given to any Patient without setting it first down in such
manner and form as was accustomed before in the Bills sent to Apothecaries,
with the Patients name, Year of our Lord, and day of the Month; and every such
Bill to be filled up and kept by the Physician. And the Physic so bought to be
dispensed at home to the Patient by the Physician himself, or his Servant, (or
some young Student, educated under him for that and all other things
appertaining to his Art) at reasonable rates: The Physician not to demand or
expect any other payment but for his Physic only, unless he be sent for out of
his own House, and then to be paid his accustomed Fee, according to the Ability
of the Patient. Yet this not to prejudice any other Physician of the College,
who would take on him the Trouble and Charge of preparing all his Physic
himself, which was the use of the Ancients.

The reasons of this Proposition, and the advantages it brings are very many,
and of great consideration. 1. It appoaches as near to the genuine and true
Method of Hippocrates, Galen, and other great Masters of Physic, as the
present constitution of things will admit. And though your Self very well know
what they did this way, yet give me leave to put you in mind of some passages
of Hippocrates and Galen to this effect; for which I was lately beholding to
Dr. -- our worthy friend; He first acquainted me with the Letter of Hippocrates
to an Herbarist his acquaintance, to provide him things for the Cure of
Democritus, where he demands only Simples, as Juyces and Tears of Plants, which
he orders to be sent in Glass Vessels, and Leaves, Roots, and Flowers, which he
bids him put up in earthen Pots well closed; he directs him to the time of
gathering them, and the place, which was not difficult for him to do who was so
well knowing of their Natures, since he tells us how often he visited his
Gardens, and contemplated with wonder that Mysterious place the Earth, which
brings forth (...)
Animals, Plants, Food, Medicine, and Riches. And these Simples so bought and
received were by himself to be prepared and compounded, as occasion should
require. I need not describe to you the Physicians Shop out of the same Author,
who has a whole Treatise of it; I shall content my self with a passage out of
his Book, (...). The conversation and manners of a Physician, which evidently
shows, how that Physicians of that time, did not only dispense their own
Medicines themselves, but make them too in Shops of their own, by Hippocrates
called (...). His words are these, A Phycsiian, says he, ought to have his
Shop or (...) provided with plenty of all necessary things, as Lint, Rowlers,
Splints; all sorts of Chirurgical Instruments; also of Medicines, as for
Wounds, for the Eyes, etc. always ready prepared. Let there be likewise (says
he) in readiness at all times another small Cabinet (as it were) of such
things, as may serve for occasions of going far from home; have also ready all
sorts of Plasters, Potions, purging Medicines, so contrived that they may keep
some considerable time; and likewise such as may be had and used while they are
fresh. The advantage of this will be very great; for when you come to a Patient
you will be more ready and certain what to do, having all things prepared by
you for your occasions. Which is indeed a most excellent reason to persuade
this course, and much better then the hasty and praecipitate way of writing
Bills.

And for Galen, the same worthy Person has informed me, There are so many
things in him to this effect, that it would be too great a vanity for me to
tell you how he traveled to Cyprus to enquire the nature of Metals, see
Pompholyx, Cadmia, Diphryges, Vitriol; and brought home such quantity with him
as might serve him all his life; how he visited Palestine for its rich Balsom,
and the Bitumen found there; or how curious he was at Lemnos, to see the Terra
Lemnia there: he went likewise to Crete, Alexandria, and several other places
for the same end, and most earnestly conjures all who designed themselves to
this Study to do as he did, and provide against the frauds and abuses of
Impostors; notwithstanding the great expense necessary for such an undertaking.
And a little after complains of a sort of men, who contented themselves to know
Simples out of Books, Because (says he) the knowledge of sensible things can
never be acquired but by frequent inspection, and often repeated views. I need
not add that he had a Repository, which he called his (...) (from whence the
name of Apothecary came) where he tells us his Medicines were always under his
Eye, or in his hand. To acquaint you that he made the Emperors Treacle with
his own hands, or dressed the wounded Gladiators himself; nor ever gave any
Medicine of which he had not first tasted and smelt, nay, made experiment of it
(he says) upon his own person, and how he was hated by the Roman Physicians
for using Simples and plain Medicines; would from me to you be extremely
impertinent, who know all this so much better then I. I shall content my self
for the present to rectify a mistake of some who think that there was a trade
of men in Galens time, such as our Apothecaries now are: but this proceeds from
want of understanding the ancient sense of the word Pharmacopola, which in
those times signified not an Apothecary, but such a person as we now call a
Mountebank; one who sold Physic in Markets, Fairs, and other places of public
Concourse: And these were ever reputed at Rome among the basest and meanest men
of the Town, and were obnoxious to the common Laws made against Rogues and
Vagabonds, as Pliny has noted; And if there were nothing else we might take
their Character from Horace.

Ambubaiarum Collegia, Pharmacopolae,
Mendici, Mimi, Balatrones, hoc genus omne
Moestum ac sollicitum est Cantoris morte Tigelli.
And out of Max. Tyrius, We shall find (says he) that there is no kind of
good thing but some evil will endeavor to counterfeit it; so a Sycophant will
imitate an Orator, a Sophister a Philosopher, (...) And a Quack will pretend
himself a Physician. And for the Word Apothecary in Scripture, it is so well
known, that word means only sellers of rich Ointments, Perfumes, Balsoms, (...)
and such other Cosmeticks as were in use in those Countries (which sort of men
were after by the Greeks called (...) and (...) and among the Romans from the
place they inhabited Seplasiarii, and Vnguentarii:) that I shall not give you
any further trouble about it.

2. The second reason for this Method is this: The Physician is hereby obliged
to make himself thoroughly acquainted with the Nature, Goodness, and exact
Preparations of Medicines now sold by the Apothecary, whether Simple or
Compound. Otherwise he will not know how to lay out his money, and may easily
be imposed upon by the dishonesty of another, to the ruin of his Patient, of
his Reputation, and consequently of his Livelihood and Subsistence. For what
ever accident may happen from the ill preparation of the Physic, it will now
become the fault of the Physician, whose ignorance, or neglect it was, that he
did not provide what was good for his occasion.

3. For the reason before alleged, The Physician will be also engaged to
frequent visits of the Apothecaries Shop, to view his Simples, and consider his
manner of preparation; from which he will likewise gain many opportunities of
Improving Medicines already in use, both as to their Essicacy and Operation,
and also as to their Taste and Scent, which ought to be one great part of a
Physicians care, and is now too much neglected; although nothing can be more
his interest then this. He will be also more able to invent new Medicines, and
bring in the use of Simples yet undiscovered: Lastly he will have frequent
occasions of observing many excellent Phenomenon, which now pass unregarded
through the hands of Apothecaries and their Servants, for the use and service
of Philosophy.

4. This renders the Physician much more acceptable to every Patient, and
affords him many real opportunities of gaining his hearty kindeness and
affection, which others now enjoy: and also takes away the Scandal and
Reflection which is cast upon the Physician by some Apothecaries, and upon both
the Physician and Apothecary by Mountebanks, and those that call themselves
Chemists. For the first, Although the writing of a Bill and directing proper
Remedies for every Distemper be the result of the pains, and careful Study of
many Years, and the Physician that prescribes well may justly be said (under
God Almighty) to be principal in the cure of the Disease; yet an ordinary
Patient is not sensible of this, but thinks it very hard to part with ten
shillings for a few words in Paper; especially when he must go from thence to
the Apothecary, and there be at another extraordinary charge for what was
prescribed, and also use some means beside, to oblige the Apothecary to prepare
it well: Whereas if the same Physician should, instead of that, give the
Physic it self that is to be taken, at a reasonable and moderate price,
assuring the Patient of his care to prepare it as it ought to be, and also his
counsel and advice for nothing (unless sent for out of his own house) he must
needs infinitely gain the heart and good will of every man. Besides many
occasions would be offered of giving to the Poor for nothing, which is
Christian Charity; and sometimes also to the Rich themselves, of which a wise
man will know how to make an honorable and discreet advantage, and put
frequent obligations upon them. For the second, I remember well the
Apothecaries counsel laid a great and unhandsome scandal upon all your
College, and that in public, before a Committee of our House, affirming you
incompetent to visit their Shops, or to make a judgment of their Medicines;
and though it was then said with much rashness and passion (there being so
great a number of your Learned Members excellently knowing this way) yet I wish
there had been no cause to think it in some part true. But this will for ever
prevent all calumny of that nature; for now you will understand them better
then the Apothecaries themselves. On the other side, the Mountebanks, Chemists,
etc. have nothing to boast of so much, as the making their own Physic,
recommending their great industry and care to find out and prepare exactly the
best of Medicines: and accusing the Shops of dull, enactive, and slight
preparations, and your selves of too much delicacy, pride, sloth, and
ignorance, for not providing better, and taking pains (as they pretend to do)
in searching into the Rich and large Stock of Remedies, which the wisdom and
bounty of Nature has created in so great plenty for the benefit of men.

5. This will restore the ancient, true, and only fit way of breeding up young
Students in this Faculty: That is to say, in exercises of Anatomy, knowledge of
Herbs, mixing and compounding Medicines, visiting the Sick under the direction
of a grave Physician; not as they are now for the most part, in speculative
discourses only, and reading of Books. Thus was the late famous Dr. Wright the
younger educated under Dr. Fox, and was the first Physician that dissected at
the College, which till his time had ever made use of Surgeons in their
public Theater. And while the young Physician employes his industry in such
services as these for the elder, he gains, (besides what is learned from Books
and Authors) the long experience of the other, sees his Patients, hears him
discourse of their several cases, considers the Medicines provided for them,
and observes their several effects: All which advantages you now in vain give
away to Apothecaries, to whom the Practice of Physic does not belong. And if
this has been the course that all mankind has ever taken to raise and
propagate Practical Arts and Trades of daily use in humane life, why should it
not be used in Physic, which is a Practical Art of so much greater
consequence? especially if we consider how dangerous the errors of this
Profession are, and how necessary a Practical Education is for any man that
intends the exercise of it, as Galen, and more particularly Hippocrates, often
inculcates, and the nature of the thing makes it evident. I need not tell you
how it was confined till the time of Hippocrates to one single Family, under a
curse not to communicate it to any other, nor reckon up the many famous men who
were Galen's Masters, from whom he learned this Art, and whom he mentions with
so much honor. Yet give me the favor to recall an excellent Passage of
Hippocrates to this effect. He advises a Physician when he carries his
Disciples with him to (...).
a Patient, to appoint in his absence such a one of them to observe the Patient
as is well advanced and studied in this Art, and knows what is fit to be done,
and how to give him an account of the case, that so he may be ignorant of
nothing that is material, though he could not be there himself. These things
considered, if a person of three or four years standing in either of our
Universities (for none else should be entertained by any) should agree with a
Physician for a reasonable consideration and acknowledgement to be made (which
was held very honorable in Hippocrates age, as appears in his Oath, and was
the practice at that time) to live with him till he be Doctor in that Faculty
(being obliged to take his Degrees in due time with performance of all the
accustomed Exercises: nor to be admitted to them without the Certificate of the
said Physician, both concerning his Time and good Deportment.) Or if a person
already Bachelor in Physic should contract to stay till he become Doctor,
taking his Degrees, as was before expressed: and these two absolutely prohibited
Practice till they have taken the degree of Doctor: Or if any already Doctor
should contract for as long a time as he and an elder Physician can agree (not
to Practice during his continuance with him, without his knowledge and consent)
I should think for the reasons alleged, it were the best and most desirable
way to institute men for that Profession, and might with great facility be
brought into practice, and is at this time the use of many parts of Italy. Nor
does a Physician run half the fortune of other men who breed up Youth to their
Trades, since the old Physician will ever be held by the world for the more
able man. Nor let any man think to disgrace this Method as Mechanical, by the
imputation of taking Apprentices; since the word Apprentice is entertained by
the honorable Profession of the Law, whose younger Students have been called
Apprentices to the Law; but however this be, it were very fond for so poor an
occasion, to neglect a thing that is founded upon the evidence of true reason
it self. Nor indeed should they be received in the capacity of Servants, or
under that name, but rather of young Students, Friends, or virtuous Companions
to be instructed in this worthy Profession; the drudgery of all things resting
wholly upon some ordinary Servant kept by every one for the uses of his Family:
and I make no doubt but there are very many ingenious young men in England, who
would be very glad, and take it for a great honor, to be thus received by some
of the Grandees, and great Practitioners; and their Friends believe whatever is
bestowed on them in this way very well and honorably employed.

6. This will bring all sorts of men both rich and poor to apply themselves
immediately to the Physician, and so in a short time quite overthrow the
practice of Mountebanks, and other Persons ignorant of the Art of Physic, who
now take upon them to administer it, contrary to the Laws of the Nation, and to
the great prejudice and damage of the people: For it is not to be thought, but
all men who have occasion to use Physic would much more willingly address
themselves to a sober and intelligent Physician, then to this sort of men: But
first, the charge of advice is great, and then as great the charge of Physic,
at the Apothecaries; which things so affright the ordinary sort of people, that
they very unwillingly come to a Physician, and many perish for want of due
help. And I am persuaded if there were no other reason then this, every
Physician who is touched with Conscience, Honor, or Philosophy, will be very
glad to entertain some expedient, that may remove the scandalous Reluctance
that most people have of using this Profession.

7. This will render the practice of Physic more successful, plentiful, and of
no less advantage then before: As for the success; besides that the Physician
may justly have a greater confidence in his Physic, now he takes care himself
to have nothing but what is good, than he could before when it was made up out
of his sight; he has also the opportunity of seeing every Disease in its first
rise, and beginning, which gives him a mighty advantage for the true
understanding and cure of it. And for the increase of his Practice the bringing
so many people of all sorts to him for advice, who before durst not come, will
much enlarge his Business and Experience, and not make his Profit less: for
though he gain nothing more, by the Physic he gives, than what will barely
recompense the trouble of himself and his Minister for dispensing it; yet he
will not lose, since in all acute cases, and such as hinder the Patients
attendance in person, (and he is seldom sent for in any other) he must
necessarily be brought home, as he now is to all people of condition.

8. The trouble of undertaking is but little, especially after the first
entrance into it, and valued with the great good it will bring to so noble a
Faculty; and the great case, profit, and advantage it affords to an Elder
Physician, not unworthy of consideration. First the ancient Physician may
employ the eye, hand, and youthful vigor of the younger to aslist the
frailties of Age, and humanity. Also it will take off much of the labor of
visits in his own person, or when called up unreasonably at Nights, or when he
goes into the Country to other Patients, or to refresh himself a little from
the toils of Business: For the people would find greater satisfaction in the
visits of another Physician bred under him they so much confide in, than when
he is forced to send his Apothecary. On the other side the Physician himself
would be much better satisfied in the report of his Patients case, as
Hippocrates has excellently noted.

9. In some respects, this way is much better then that used by the Ancients of
making all their Physic at home. 1. It is less troublesome; public Shops
being now open, furnished with all sorts of Medicines commonly used, or where
all such Physic may be suddenly and dexterously prepared which any man shall in
particular desire for his own occasion. 2. It Is less expensive, for now every
man buys only so much as he shall have use for, be it more or less; so that
the charge of money thus laid out is exactly measured to the proportion of
every ones practice: such as are but just entered into business, will
accordingly expend but a small matter in Physic, and that too may easily be
dispensed by themselves, with the assistance of an ordinary domestic servant,
remitting a great many things, as, common Clysters, etc. to the Patients own
making, giving him only the ingredients, as is now the use of the Physicians in
Paris. 3. It Is more certain: for a man that provides his own Physic, and makes
it himself, will never know well how to estimate his quantities; he will have
sometimes too much which turns to loss; or too little, and so want when he has
occasion to make use of it; but now he buys only what is necessary, and can
never want, unless you suppose all the Shops in Town exhausted; for there will
be nothing in common use, but one or other Shop will afford it: to which we may
add, that he has now his choice of what is both cheapest and best, whereas the
negligence of a Servant might either make a thing ill, or in the making spoil
it so, that he might begin a new, though present occasion may require it for
use. 4. It will enlarge the materia Medica, and make a greater variety of
Practice, which must needs be of excellent concernment, unless we think (as
some over-bold men have lately don) that nature has made so ample provisions in
vain: but they who provide at home, will be lead (to save expense as much as
they can) to confine themselves to a very scanty and narrow method of Practice:
as some foolish persons know no other Medicaments but what are made from
Mercury and Antimony, despising all the royal Apparatus of Gods Creatures
beside; though we cannot doubt but the vast alterations, and various
dispositions of Bodies, Climates, Diseases were particularly aimed at by Nature
in her so infinite and magnificent provisions of help. And though I do not deny
that Medicaments, Antimonials, and Mercurials decently prepared are of
wonderful efficacy; yet it is so well known they cannot perform half that is so
idly promised by their admirers at all times, and in all bodies; and that a
mean and ordinary decoction has in some cases effected what they could not do.
5. By preserving the public sellers of Medicines or Pharmacopolae, you comply
with the present State of things which cannot well admit any other change then
what has been said.

10. And whereas many apprehensions, and suspicions have lately arisen between
the Physician and Apothecary, as if the Apothecary did invade the Physicians
practice: This way will for ever most entirely and absolutely secure his
Practice and Profession to himself. For now the Apothecary will never see a
Physicians Bill (from which they always take direction) nor the Patient
himself, and so be utterly ignorant of that case for which the Physic is
prepared and used; nor will he hear the Physician reason and discourse of the
due times and manner of administering it, or explain the nature and cause of the
distemper, nor have occasions of officious intervening between the Physician
and Patient, nor dispense the Physic with praise of his own great pains and
care in preparing it, as he was wont to do: so that he will quickly free
himself of the imputation some now lay upon him, and be for ever unable to do
the Physician that injury which is now supposed to be done by some of them. All
this the Physician obtains by only concealing his Bills (the writing of a Bill
being, as I may say, the mystery of his Trade) in which therefore he does
nothing but what is held most reasonable among all men.

11. This will likewise secure the Physician another way against the supposed
usurpation of Apothecaries: for if any Apothecary shall take on him to practice
Physic, upon notice given to the College, it may be enacted among your selves
(without troubling the Parliament for new power, and without the envious way of
sining and imprisonment) That no Physician shall buy any Medicines of such
Apothecary till the College be fully satisfied that he is sensible of the
injury done to them, and will cease to do the like for the Future.

12. It gives every Physician as many, or more opportunities of doing kindness
to his particular friends that are Apothecaries: And that is, by being himself,
and engaging as many Physicians as he has interest in, to become their
customers.

13. As to matter of Consultation among Physicians, it is here sufficiently
provided for by fileing up Bills of all the Physic they give; and therefore
this is to be required of every man by the College, under severe Penalties.
And if any man have particular Medicines of his own which you call Nostra, the
case is here the same as in the former way. For I am informed, every Physician
is obliged to acquaint the College with them if it be required. Besides, this
filing of Bills (or entering them into a Book) may have another excellent use:
For doing it Alphabetically, a Physician may by some private note discern a
great while after, which of his Medicines had a good effect, and which had not,
or failed, and in what Tempers of Body, and how to accommodate himself to the
same persons at other times: and lastly, may from hence (if he pleases) produce
great numbers of observations, which may well deserve the Public, and be
highly useful to Posterity. And it would be very much for the good of their
Profession, If no Physician would for the future write any thing in the
practice of Physic but what had been experimented by himself, and that all the
practitioners of it would be more careful to set down such remarkable accidents
that come under their observation.

14. This way by making the Physician a perfect Master of the Materia Medica,
has these three great effects, besides what has been mentioned already. 1. It
renders him more able to discover the use of Simples, when he has occasion to
travel into Foreign Parts, so enlarging both Physic and Philosophy with new
and useful discoveries. 2. He will be more fit to serve the Prince in His Navy
or Army; where, if his stock of Medicines be all spent or corrupted, without
this knowledge he is utterly incapable of providing himself a new, to his own
dishonor, and prejudice of others. 3. By observing the several mutations that
happen in the preparations of things as well Simple as Compound he will be
assisted to consider what effects like them may happen upon their mixture with
the Blood, and other juyces of the Body, and to give a huge light to the
reasons of the Phenomenon both in Health and Sickness. Of this that very worthy
person Dr. Willis has already given the world an excellent taste, and promised
an entire Discourse upon that subject, which would be of vast use, and in which
he stands indebted to the public.

15. It is a generous and worthy thing, that Physicians should be knowing in
the materia Medica, as was Hippocrates, Galen, and all the old Masters of this
Science. It has been already said how great the endeavor of these brave men
was, to acquire a perfect understanding of all they made use of. And without
doubt it is a thing most indecent and unnatural for a Physician to despise the
knowledge of that by which all his great works are to be effected. In the old
and heroical times of Physic, Medicines were excellently called (...), The
hands of the gods: And I think it is the highest sort of shame to see a
Physician at a loss for Medicaments in the Country, where Nature, the
bountiful provider of them has so rich and large a Shop open, because he wants
his Apothecary to write to, or the knowledge of the things themselves, or the
way how to make use of them.

16. This way has in many great respects the advantage of the common course of
writing Bills to the Apothecaries. For in the first place, by seeing the very
things they administered, by mixing, ordering, compounding them as they have
occasion, by consideration of the tastes, scents, and colors of Medicines, and
how variously all these are changed and altered by the mixture of several
things together, they will be much more able to preserve in memory what is
proper and useful for every Distemper, then by reading their names in Books
only, and so direct better, and with greater ease, and certainty. Likewise by
understanding the true ways of mixture, and being acquainted with the tastes
and scents of things, a great many errors will be avoided, and Physic be
rendered much more pleasant and palateable: Finally, a great many excellent
Experiments will be drawn from it, for the use of Philosophical speculations.
Now in the present Method of your Bills, either the Physician depends wholly
upon the memory of what he has read in Books (which Galen greatly condemns) and
then we shall never hope to promote this Art beyond its present limits,
although it is well known there are so great treasures of powerful and active
Medicines yet undiscovered: Besides, if we do not exactly remember the very
proportions and measures of every thing in every Medicine (which is impossible)
we cannot reasonably hope well from it, because (as my Lord Bacon observes) the
Experiment was made in such quantities only, which when we alter, considering
the nature of things a priori, are altogether unknown to us, we know not what
we do. And though Physicians commonly endeavor to provide themselves rather of
the general materia medica then of particular Receipts, yet if we duly weigh
the strange alterations that happen upon the blending several things together,
and the unexpected results of quite different qualities, the unpleasing scent
and taste they acquire many times, especially if their proportions are not
precisely just, we shall not think it strange, that so wise a man as that great
Person was, blamed this last and uncertain way. And as to the common
proportions and quantities by which Physicians govern themselves in the usual
forms of Medicines, they vary so much, according to the several natures of
things, that whoever is not well acquainted with the things themselves shall
never be able (as Galen notes) to direct as he ought to do. And none will doubt
but any Physician could make a better Apozem, Potion, Julep, or the like, by
measuring the Proportions of each ingredient by his taste and scent, then by
writing a Bill from the unexact proportions of Authors, especially if he be not
very well acquainted with the things he prescribes. In a word, neither these
proportions themselves, nor their Books had ever been at all, if Physicians had
not in former times been knowing in all Simples, examined their virtues and
tempers, inquired into their effects, and mixed them with their own hands.

17. Lastly, if any still think this way too troublesome, and are unwilling to
excuse a little trouble for so many great conveniences both to themselves and
their whole Profession, there remains yet another expedient for them, which
they may make use of, without doing prejudice to those, we are contented to
enter into the course already proposed: They may (if they please) have an
Apothecary of their own, and send their Bills to be made up by him as now they
are; provided only, 1. That the time and manner of using it be not set down;
nor 2. The name of the Patient. 3. That it be not sent by the Patient, but by
their own Servants. 4. That it be returned to the Physicians again with the
Physic it self, to be filled up by them with the Patients name added, or entered
into a Book, as was said before; and the Physic so made and provided by the
Physicians order, to be fetched at their own houses (as it is now at the
Apothecaries Shops) or from thence sent home by their own Servants to the
Patient.

Now if we consider how this way respects the Apothecaries, it is evidently a
fair and moderate course between them and the Physicians, not taking away, nor
lessening any of the privileges and immunities granted to them by their
Charter, or which they claim, and enjoy as Freemen of this City, or other
Cities and Corporations. For it hinders not their making and selling of Physic
to any that please to buy of them, which thing only belongs to their Trade: To
visit the Patient, feel his Pulse, consider his Urine, discourse of the state
of the Disease, and prescribe proper Remedies for it, is the business and care
of the Physician. So that I dare presume no Apothecary who is content to live
on his own Trade without invading the Profession of another (and I doubt not
but the greatest number and ablest men among them are such) will think ill of
it; but rather be pleased to see, that for the future all causes of jealousy
and suspicion between Physicians and them, will for ever cease, the interests
of both be preserved, and the practice of Mountebanks and Quacks brought to
nothing.

2. It will very much conduce to the profit and advantage of the Apothecary:
For now the people finding encouragement to address themselves to the
Physicians, who before to decline the charge and expense of a Doctors advice,
went only to the Mountebank, who made and gave all his Physic himself; It must
needs come to pass, that the Apothecaries must provide and vend much greater
quantities then they could before; And thus all that which went away to Quacks
and other ignorant pretenders be brought into the hands of the industrious and
careful Apothecary.

3. It will insensibly lessen that exorbitant number of Apothecaries, which
makes the Trade burdensome to it self, and scarce a competent subsistence for a
man after he has spent a good sum of money, and seven years or more in an
Apprenticeship to understand it. For as things are now, while the Masters or
their Servants are employed by the Physician to visit his Patients, and carry
Physic about, if an Apothecary have great business, he will be under a
necessity of taking several Apprentices, else he cannot perform such
attendances abroad, and the business of the Shop too: And this has made so vast
an increase of the Trade within a few years, as has rendered it but a mean way
of livelihood to a great many, and very dangerous to the sick: Now as their
number will by little and little grow less, so the Trade will become better,
and they who are of it, both for skill and estate much more considerable.

To come now and consider how much more this way is for the common good and
welfare of the people, and in general of all men. First, it mightily abates the
charge and expense of Physic: and this is the only reason, why so many persons
not of the poorer sort only, but even some others of a better condition, daily
put themselves into the hands of Mountebanks and other ignorant persons, to the
great prejudice of the lives and health of men. Also many Poor of this City and
other places ( to the high dishonor of Religion) perish for want of necessary
help; whilst on the one hand they are terrified by the Physicians Fee, and on
the other by the unconscionable and unbounded prices of Apothecaries. A course
therefore is taken here, that all sorts of people may apply themselves to the
Physician both for advice and Physic too, at moderate and reasonable rates:
Nor can it be thought the Physician will use a greater excess in the prices of
his Physic than others have done, because he does not depend upon the gains of
the Physic he sells to such as come home to him, but (as he did before) upon
the Fees which he receives from persons of condition and ability, when he is
sent for out of his own house: For the trouble of selling his own Physic to
such as shall come to him, he takes upon him only to advance the public
interest, satisfy himself more in his own Profession, serve Philosophy,
minister to the necessities of the Poor, consult for the greater security of
all, and to gratify and oblige those Patients whose more ample condition of
life makes them able to pay such Fees as have formerly been accustomed. But if
any man should sell at as dear rates as others have before, yet is it to be
considered, that then nothing is paid for advice, which till now was a great
and particular charge of it self; and, beside, Physic cost as much as now it is
supposed to do. So that according to this Method, the charge of advice is
wholly taken off to the great ease of the people, who will have at least both
Advice and Physic too, for the same rate which they before paid for Physic
alone. But I dare not allow a supposition so unreasonable, and so much not only
against the honor, but also against the interest of every Physician: for admit
he should make his Patients pay (as has been formerly done) for the formalities
of a Bill, as for a Clyster, a Potion, or Julip, half a Crown or more, and not
for the Ingredients, which (it may be) never cost six pence: I say, if any
should take this course, it would quickly be his utter undoing; nor would any
Patient make use of him another time: but especially they would extremely
murmur to pay him those Fees which otherwise he might justly expect, and upon
which it is his interest chiefly to depend, and not upon the inconsiderable
gain of the Physic he sells, and chiefly when that slight gain shall make him
so great a loser; whereas by neglecting so poor and mean a profit he may have
so handsome and generous occasions offered him of obliging his Patients in such
a manner, as to get much more then he could have done by his Physic. And if I
may take a conjecture from your self, and some other Physicians my
acquaintance, these of your College are such as would scorn from Patients so
civil as to pay the ordinary Fees duly, to take more for their Physic then
what it barely cost; nay, often would give it for nothing. And yet if they
should make some small advantage, it might be allowed them for the money they
lay out, for the trouble of themselves and Servants to make up and dispense the
Physic, and still it would cost the people much less then before. And that all
persons would very frankly allow this, we have little reason to doubt, if we
consider,

2. The many advantages all men receive this way in the more speedy, safe, and
effectual cure of Diseases, both in respect of the Physician, the Disease, and
the Physic it self. 1. The Physician administering his Physic himself will be
under a necessity of taking greater care to have all he uses very good, and
most exactly prepared: for no man can now lay the fault upon the neglect or
ignorance of an Apothecary. It rests altogether upon himself, and he becomes
responsible for it: also by this means secret mischief by poison, or other
ways is more easily prevented, when the public knows where certainly to
charge it then when it is divided among several parties who transfer the fault
from one to another. And since the Commonwealth must trust some body, they may
as well trust the Physician as the Apothecary: for though he write a Bill never
so good and wholesome; yet if it be not made as is prescribed, any kind of
mischief may follow: And, as far as the Apothecary or his Servant is now
believed for making Physic according to prescription, so far ought the
Physician to be credited, for using only such Physic as appears by his Bill
filled up or entered; and this is no more then what is now allowed to every
Mountebank and Chemist, and what all ancient times have securely put into the
Physicians hand. 2. In respect of the Disease; it is now the general
unhappiness both of Patient and Physician, that he is never almost sent for,
till things are brought to extremity, and all opportunities of curing near
lost: where, if the Disease had been encountered in the first rise of it with
powerful and convenient Medicaments, the Patient had been again restored to
Health, whose life it may be must now answer for the first omission. 3. In
respect of the Physic it self; for the Disease thus met in the beginning is
often carried off with a little matter, which neglected, requires a long and
chargeable course. Again, the public may be assured, That all Physic shall
now be as good as the Apothecary can make it (else no Physician will buy it of
him) or the Physician possibly contrive it, for his own honor and advantage.
Thus in a short time will the Shops of Apothecaries be rid of all that
unwholesome trash, that too many now abound with; and the poorer sort of them
who are forced to buy of others to set up as for the Country (which commonly
is the refuse of their Shops) will, as they justly deserve, be quite
discouraged. For though such stuff might serve well enough to make up a
Physicians Bill, who is not present to see what ingredients are used, yet they
can never vend them to a Physician himself that comes to buy. Likewise the
visitations of Apothecaries Shops will be more frequently, carefully, and
sufficiently managed. And lastly, Apothecaries will be more in their Shops, and
not leave things to raw or negligent Servants as is too often done; for not
being sent about by Physicians to their Patients, or with Physic; nor engaged
in any quacking practice of their own, they will have more leisure and
opportunity to attend making good Medicines, which is their proper business.

3. The charge of the people for Physic will be much lessened both as to the
quantity and quality of it. For now many Physicians are forced to abandon my
Lord Bacon's counsel, who advises by no means to recede rashly from any
experimented Receipt or Form; because this would bring them into the contempt
of Apochecaries, and also discover their practice so, as the Apothecary might
use it to their prejudice, as some have done: Not to mention how many are
obliged to write a great deal more then is necessary, putting in things of
great price and little effect to serve dishonorable interests.

I have heard some worthy Members of your College wish also that a new
Pharmacopoea were agreed upon: But it was quite of another Nature from that now
in use: For although this be better than any other extant. Yet I know they well
understand, it has many things that need Reformation: but that is a business
that requires mature consideration, and the present perplexity of affairs will
not permit it; yet I think you are not unwilling the world should know, you can
take notice where it is defective, as well or better than any of those men, who
would go about to disgrace it with vain and impertinent clamors taken out of
Zwelfer and some other Writers. It was wished that the Shops instead of the
Medicines now commonly made, were furnished with Simples only. Of which, such
as are best and most effectually used with a little, or an easy preparation,
as powdering, infusing, boiling, and the like, should be so kept as might
longest preserve their virtue and operation: and such as are most operative by
a more curious way of preparing, as in Tinctures, Extracts, Essences, Elixirs,
Spirits, Syrrups, Juyces, Robs, Conserves, etc. to be likewise in such manner
prepared, as may retain their virtues most, and likewise render them most
durable. By which means, although the present expense of making them be more,
yet considering their long duration, it will in effect be less then it is in
the present Method. The Physician that comes to buy will be able to make a
better judgment of their goodness, and may use them either either simple
(which was the way of ancient times) or compound them as he sees occasion, by
which he will likewise come to observe the many and great alterations that
happen from mixtures of several things together; he will also be more able to
make them gustful and palateable; thus preserving the Tone of the Stomach,
which is so much destroyed by ordinary Physic, that in Chronical Distempers it
may be doubted whether it do not more hurt this way than it can do good
another. Likewise in all compositions he will be sure to have the virtues of
every ingredient, which will scarce be found in the compounds of the Shops, as
has well been observed by Zwelfer: yet he himself is not without his faults in
the same kind too, as my little experiments have informed me: In a word,
Simple Medicines thus prepared and kept, are not so subject to corrupt by the
usual fermentations of mixed things, and so will be more effectual for the use
of such Physicians or Surgeons as have occasion to carry them abroad with
them (as Hippocrates has well noted;) or such as are employed in the Service of
His Majesty's Armies or Navies.

But, not to give you too much trouble with my long Letter, if we please to
consider the strange and intricate variations of Diseases, brought in partly by
new Diet, discoveries of new places, the nature of particular Soils, and how
these are mixed, combined, and complicated both with the old, and with one
another; it will be the rather necessary to put something of this nature in
execution. I have often heard your self, and several others of your ingenious
Colleagues discourse well and substantially on this Argument, which makes me the
more wonder at the late Writer of Medela Medicinae, who would, contrary to his
own reason and conscience, endeavor to persuade the world, that this was a
thing altogether unthought of, not only by your College of Physicians, but all
those who are commonly called Galenists: and yet he himself has said no one
thing in that whole discourse, concerning this matter, that can be pretended
new, for which he has not cited the very Books, and words of some Galenist, or
Methodist, as he calls them: And to me it seems the greatest Argument in the
world on your behalf, why his Majesty and the Parliament should show you all
manner of kindeness, that such various and irregular changes daily appear in
the Distempers of humane Body: For if we allow Physic to be altogether
Empirical (as he pretends) it must needs follow, that in such things he ought
to be esteemed most able and sufficient, who is furnished with most and best
Experiments, either from his own observation, and these are properly his; or by
reading of Books, which afford him the experiments of all the rest of the
world, and can best conclude and argue from the Analogy, Correspondence, and
Harmony, they have to one another; so that a studied Physician must in all
consideration of reason have far the advantage of any other. But it is alleged,
You are too rigoroufly confined to the rules and methods of the Ancients, who
had few or no experiments of this kind; and likewise neglect that high and
more potent way of Medicine, which the Chemists only know how to make use of.
But it is evident, this is a very unkind and unjust imputation; for though in
the former age, when Chemistry first began to show it self in Europe, It was
condemned for its novelty and dreaded as full of dangers; yet for any to affirm
in these more illuminated times that Physicians so oblige themselves to ancient
Methods, as to despise or not consider the differences and alterations of
several times, Regions, Dyets, Tempers, changes of Diseases caused by these;
The new and more exquisite ways of preparing Medicines: If he be a man of
learning and understanding, he must needs be thought to abuse his own reason
for some particular interest; since he brings so great a scandal not only upon
many worthy private persons, but upon the freedom and ingenuity of the whole
age; whose happiness and honor it is to be unconfined, and disdains the
Pedantry of being enslaved to any name or sect whatsoever: and when an
Inquisition of truth comes before them, can as little regard the names of
Hippocrates and Galen, as of Paracelsus or Helmont: and as freely make use of
any thing it finds good in these, as reject what is untrue or mistaken in the
other. And to measure the temper of the present time by that of the past, is so
great an injustice, that I will desire no other instance to show it, then out
of that Book. For those very men who were (as he says) at first condemned by
public censure of the College of Paris, Sir Theod. Mayern, and Quercetan,
came by his own confession, in after times to be held and reputed among the
greatest Physicians of their Age: nay further, to see how little you despise
Rational Chemistry; One of these very same men Sir Theod. Mayern, a great
Chemist, and an excellent Physician, was one of the chief men of your College
in his time, and had a great share in making the Pharmacopoea.

Since then your selves look upon Rational Chemistry, as an excellent way of
enquiry into the natures of things, and managed with sound Reason and
Philosophy, an excellent way also of preparing Medicines; since you are as much
conversant in Chemical Authors as any others, and have as many and more
assistances, of learning and experience to judge of them (by which I am sure
you discern every day, as many vain and absurd things in the best of them as
any pretended Chemist can find in the Pharmacopoea) since you condemn no sober
person that loves this noble Art, but such idle and vain men only, or, to say
most softly of them, such melancholy Operators, who being wholly destitute of
those principles that should make them able to judge with reason of their own
experiments, and transported with the novelty and strangeness of things they do
not understand, boldly adventure through the lives and blood of men, to make
trial of such preparations, of which they (lighting on them by accident only)
neither understand the reason, nor the use; since I say these things are so,
you ought not to believe the wise men who govern the Affairs of the Kingdom
will ever consent to take away so important a part of Physic out of the hands
of so many ingenuous, learned, and inquisitive men as your College now
consists of, or so much discountenance an honorable Profession, and way of
educating Youth in the Nation, and give it to such as these; especially since
the very Philosophical freedom you own and profess, has raised you so far above
the poor and empty name of any Sect or party. If therefore your Committee for
the materia medica be settled, as before was said, it will more improve
Rational Chemistry in all its parts, then any design these men can pretend to;
Particularly in the Analysis of Vegetables, hitherto almost wholly untouched,
which will I doubt not afford more noble as well as more amicable Medicines then
Minerals. And in pursuit of that, if you would address your selves to his
Majesty and His Honorable Council, and assure them you are ready to erect a
public Laboratory, for the use of his Majesty's Subjects, where all Chemical
Medicines fit to be used shall be well and faithfully made upon the Faith and
Authority of the College, and expressly appoint, that all Apothecaries whose
Physic you shall think fit to buy, shall provide all their Chemical things
from thence; unless any Physician be satisfied to let him prepare them with his
own hand, nor to permit the use of any other Chemical Preparations to any of
your own number, except he himself make and prepare them You have no reason to
doubt but all wise men will think you are as able to perform, as those, who if
they could do but one hundredth part of what they so impudently promise, would
be equal in fortune and estate to the greatest Princes of the Nation. And if to
all these real performances you please to add a little of outward show and
appearance, and assume at convenient times, and on public occasions, the
decent use of those Ornaments of Habit, and other Insignia, which the wisdom of
our Ancestors has thought fit, upon grave and deliberate advice of Princes and
Universities, to bestow upon your Profession; you will find it was not done in
vain, and that they well considered, with these things the wise in all Ages
have been wont to govern the frail and weak understanding of the vulgar. And
that among those who are no good Judges of real worth, it is the only way to
secure it, both from being affronted and contemned.

I hope you will excuse the much freedom I have used with you, the truth is, I
have so great a zeal to see something of this nature effected for public good,
that if your own particular interest joined with it, will not prevail, I could
desire it may be thought advisable to provide for it by public Authority:
that so the burdensome charge of Physic might be removed, and that noble Art
rendered of more ample consequence to the world, the professors of it be so
encouraged, as Gentlemen may think it a worthy course of breeding for their
Children, that Philosophy may receive the benefit of its many excellent
experiments, that a right understanding may be ever preserved between
Physicians and Apothecaries, that every man in particular may find greater
comfort in the use of those numerous Remedies, that Almighty God has provided
to succor us in our afflictions: and last of all, that as our Nation has had
the honor of one of the best things that ever was discovered in the Theory of
Physic, The Bloods Circulation; so it may give an example to all the world of
the best, and soundest, and most rational way of Practice. With her Ladyships
Service presented to you, I remain,

Sir, Your assured Friend and Servant. T. M.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13. line 23. read had, p. 20. l. 20. r. require. p. 21. l. ult. r.
Friend. p. 22. l. 18. insert Of. l. 20. dele that. p. 24. l. 2. dele there. p.
29. l. 23. r. unactive. p. 34. l. 25. r. his. p. 36. l. 2. r. worthy l. 8. r.
unseasonably. p. 37. l. ult. r. must p. 38. l. 32. del. so. l. 23 r. what. p.
42. l. 23. r. for. p. 45. l. 12. r. lax. p. 60. in mar. l. (...)


