THE EXCEPTIONS Of Mr. EDWARDS, in his Causes of Atheism, Against the
Reasonableness of Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures, EXAMINED; And
found Unreasonable, Unscriptural, and Injurious. ALSO It Is clearly proved by
many Testimonies of Holy Scripture, That the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is the only God and Father of Christians.

London, Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

To the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the
Scriptures.
SIR,
IN reading your Book of that Title, I readily perceived your Design, intimated
in your Preface, to be therein most industriously and piously pursued: So that
you have, with full Evidence of Scripture and Reason, showed, against the
manifold obscure and tedious Systems, that the Fundamentals of Christian Faith,
necessary to constitute a Man a true Member of Christ's Church, are all
comprehended or implied in this plain Proposition, That Jesus is the Messiah:
Whereby you have happily provided for the Quiet and Satisfaction of the Minds
of the honest Multitude or Bulk of Mankind, floating in Doubts and Fears,
because either they cannot understand, or can find no clear Evidence in Holy
Scripture, of those intricate Points required to be explicitly believed upon
pain of eternal Damnation. You have also argued clearly the Reasonableness and
Usefulness of the Christian Revelation against Atheists and Deists. These
things considered, 'twas no marvel, that the Systematical Men, who gain both
their Honor and Profit by the Obscurity and Multitude of their Fundamental
Articles, should raise an Outcry against you, like that of the Ephesians
magnifying their DIANA. They have more cause for it than Demetrius had. But
that they should traduce your Work as tending to Atheism or Deism, is as
strange from Reason, as many of their Articles are from Scripture. And that Mr.
Edwards has done it, and forced it in among his Tendencies to Atheism, is, I
think, to be imputed to the Co-incidence of your Book's being published, and
striking strongly upon his inventive Faculty, just when it was in hot pursuit
of the Causes of Atheism, rather than to any the least Color or Inclination
that way, which Mr. Edwards can spy in it in his cool Thoughts: For I am much
persuaded on the contrary, that there is no Atheist or Deist in England, but,
if he were asked the Question, would tell Mr. Edwards, that their obscure and
contradictious Fundamentals were one Cause or Inducement to his casting off and
disbelief of Christianity.

In this Mind I have undertaken to vindicate your Doctrine from the Exceptions
of Mr. Edwards against it. But whether I have done it as it ought to have been
done, I cannot be a competent Judge. If I have mistaken your Sense, or used weak
Reasonings in your Defense, I crave your Pardon: But my Design in this Writing
was not to please you, (whom I know not) nor any Man whatsoever, but only to
honor the One God, and vindicate his most useful Truths. I am,

SIR, Your very humble Servant.

Mr. EDWARDS 's Exceptions against the Reasonableness of Christianity,
examined, etc.
IT seems to me, that Mr. Edwards, printing his Causes of Atheism, whilst the
Reasonableness of Christianity was newly published, was put upon it by his
Bookseller, to add some Exceptions against that Treatise so much noted for its
Heterodoxy; that so the Sale of his own Tract might be the more promoted:
whence it comes to pass, that his Notes being writ in haste, are not so well
digested as might be expected from a Person of his Learning and Ingenuity. In
page 104. he takes notice of A PLAUSIBLE CONCEIT, which has been growing up a
considerable Time, etc. but tells not his Reader what that Conceit was, till he
has charged it upon a very Learned and famous Author, whom he is pleased to
call a wavering Prelate, and another of the same Order, and a Third of a lower
Degree; but more particularly, fully and distinctly, upon the late Publisher of
The Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. Here at length in his next Page, he
tells us, That this Author gives IT us over and over again, in these formal
words, viz. That nothing is required to be believed by any Christian Man but
this, THAT JESUS IS THE MESSIAH. I think if he had not been in haste, he would
have cited at least two or three of those Pages, wherein we might find those
formal Words, but he has not one, and I do not remember where they are to be
found; for I am almost in as much haste as Mr. Edwards, and will not seek for
them. It Is true, he says, That all that was to be believed for Justification,
or to make a Man a Christian, by him that did already believe in, and worship
one true God, maker of Heaven and Earth, was no more than this single
Proposition, That Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ or the Messiah. But then he
takes to be included in this Proposition, 1. All synonimous Expressions, such
as, the Son of God; The King of Israel; The sent of God; He that should come,
He of whom Moses and the Prophets did write; The Teacher come from God, etc. 2.
All such Expressions as show the manner of his being the Christ, Messiah, or
Son of God, such as his being conceived by the Holy Ghost and Power of the most
High; his being anointed with the Holy Ghost and Power; his being sanctified
and sent into the World; his being raised from the Dead, and exalted to be a
Prince and Savior after the time he was so, etc. 3. Such Expressions as import
the great Benefits of his being the Messiah; as having the Words of Eternal
Life; his having Power from the Father to remit Sins, to raise the Dead, to
judge the World; to give eternal Life; to send the H. Spirit upon the Apostles
whereby they might work Miracles, and preach the Light of Life to Jews and
Gentiles, and the like. For all those Quotations of Scripture which the Author
(as Mr. Edwards observes) has amassed together out of the Gospels, and the Acts
of the Apostles, which take up about three quarters of his Book, for the proof
of his Proposition, are indeed expository of the meaning of that Proposition,
and are included in it. Not that it was necessary that every one, who believed
the Proposition, should understand and have an explicit Faith of all those
particulars: for neither the Believers during the Life of Christ, nor the
Apostles themselves understood many of them, no nor presently after his Death
and Resurrection; for they had still diverse erroneous Opinions concerning the
Nature of his Kingdom, and the preaching to the Gentiles, and other things. And
in the beginning of Christ's preaching, though Philip believed that Jesus was
the Messiah, the Son of God, the King of Israel; yet he seems to be ignorant of
his being born of a Virgin, for he calls him the Son of Joseph, John 1. 45. But
as he that believes that William the 3d is the true King of England, etc.
believes enough to make him a good Subject, though he understands not all the
grounds of his Title, much less all his Power and Prerogatives that belong to
him as King: So he that believes upon good Grounds that Jesus is the Messiah,
and understands so much of this Proposition as makes him, or may make him a
good Subject of Christ's Kingdom, though he be ignorant of many things included
in that Proposition, he has all the Faith necessary to Salvation, as our Author
has abundantly proved.

But Mr. Edwards says, This Gentleman forgot, or rather wilfully omitted a
plain and obvious Passage, in one of the Evangelists, GO TEACH ALL NATIONS,
etc. Mat. 28. 19. From which it is plain (says he) that all that are adult
Members of the Christian Church, must be Taught as well as Baptized into the
Faith of the Holy Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and then they must
believe it: and consequently more is required to be believed by Christian Men,
than that Jesus is the Messiah. He infers from this, You see it is part of the
Evangelical Faith, and such as is necessary, absolutely necessary to make one a
Member of the Christian Church, to believe a TRINITY in Unity in the Godhead;
or, in plainer Terms, that though God is one as to his Essence and Nature, yet
there are three Persons in that Divine Essence, and that these three are really
the one God. I must confess, that if Mr. Edwards's reasoning be good, the
Author is totally confuted, three quarters of his Book at least are writ in
vain, and the old Systems must stand good; and the Bulk of Mankind will
certainly be damned, or it will be a wonder if any of them be faved. But give
me leave to tell him I do not see, what he says we do see: that Text will well
enough consist with our Author's Proposition. For I would ask him, whether the
Apostles followed this Commission or not: If they obeyed it, then in Baptizing
in the Name of Jesus the Messiah, and exhorting those to whom they preached, to
be baptized in the Name of the Messiah, after their preaching the Messiah to
them, they did in effect baptize in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
otherwise they did not pursue their Commission; for we never find them
baptizing in those express Terms, but always in the Name of Jesus the Messiah,
or the Lord Jesus, or the Lord, and the like. So that Mr. Edwards must either
charge the Holy Apostles with Ignorance of, or Disobedience to their Lord's
Command, or acknowledge that they did really baptize in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, when they did but expressly baptize in
the Name of the Son or Messiah; forasmuch as all that were so baptized, did
believe in the Father of that Son of God, as implied in the Son, and in the
Holy Ghost, as the Anointing of the Son, and which also was given to those that
were so baptized. But as for his Inference, viz. That it is absolutely necessary
to believe a Trinity in Unity in the Godhead; or that God is one as to his
Essence and Nature, yet there are three Persons in that Divine Essence, and
that these three Persons are really the one God: This will condemn not only the
Unitarians, and the Bulk of Mankind, but the greater part of Trinitarians, the
Learned as well as the Vulgar. For all the real Trinitarians do not believe one
Essence, but three Numerical Essences. Here Dr. Sherlock, Dr. Cudworth, the
Bishop of Gl. the late Archbishop, Mr. H -- w, and all that hold as the
Council of Nice did, with that Council it self, and the whole Church (except
some Heretics) for many Centuries, are by Mr. Edwards expunged out of the
Catalogue of Christian Believers, and consequently condemned to the horrible
Portion of Infidels or Heretics. The Mystery-men, or Ignoramus Trinitarians,
they are condemned too; for they admit not any Explication, and therefore not
Mr. Edwards's. There remains only Dr. South, and Dr. Wallis, and the
Philosopher Hobbs, who (Mr. Edwards says) is the great Master and Lawgiver of
the professed Atheists, page 129. and that Party which have the absolutely
necessary Faith of three Persons in one Essence. But if you ask these Men what
they mean by three Persons: Do they mean according to the common sense of
Mankind, and especially of the English Nation, three singular intellectual
Beings? No, by no means, that is Tritheism, they mean three Modes in the one
God, which may be resembled to three Postures in one Man; or three external
Relations, as Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier; as one Man may be three Persons, a
Husband, a Father and a Master. This is that Opinion of Faith, which the
Ancients made Heresy, and Sabellius the Head of it. Thus it is absolutely
necessary to make a Man a Christian, that he be a Sabellian Heretic. But
perhaps Mr. Edwards may be of Mr. H -- w's Mind, for he says, These three
Persons are really the one God; but then, no one of them singly is so, but
every one a Third of God: If so, Mr. Edwards is indeed a Unitarian, for he
gives us one God only; but then he is no Trinitarian, for he has put down the
Father himself from being God singly, and so the Son and Holy Ghost.

As to what he says of being Baptized into the Faith and Worship of none but
the only true God, that has been answered a hundred times. He cannot look into
any of the Unitarian Books, but he will find a sufficient Answer to that
Inference. Were the Israelites baptized into the Worship of Moses? but they
were baptized into Moses, 1 Cor. 10. 2. Or when the Apostle Paul supposes he
might have baptized in his own Name; Did he mean that he should have baptized
into the Worship of himself as the most high God?

Then Mr. Edwards minds his Reader, that the Author had left out also that
famous Testimony in Joh. 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word [Jesus Christ] and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God. Whence (says he) we are obliged
to yield assent to this Article, That Christ the Word is God. Here Mr. Edwards
must mean that this is a Fundamental Article, and necessary to Salvation;
otherwise he says nothing against his Author, who has prevented his urging any
other Text, not containing a Fundamental, in his Answer to the Objection from
the Epistles and other Scriptures. For (says he) page 299. They are Objects of
Faith -- They are Truths, whereof none that is once known to be such may be
disbelieved. But yet a great many of them, every one does, and must confess a
Man may be ignorant of; nay disbelieve, without Danger to his Salvation: As is
evident in those who allowing the Authority, differ in the Interpretation and
Meaning of several Texts. -- Unless Divine Revelation can mean contrary to it
self. The whole Paragraph ought to be read, which I have abridged. And if this
Text of John 1. 1. be not one of those, that by reason of its difficulty and
variety of Senses, may not be disbeliev'd in Mr. Edwards's Sense, then I will
be bold to say, There Is no such Text in the whole Bible. To it I say, 1. He
dares not trust his Reader with the clear Text, but thrusts in his own Sense,
In the beginning was the Word (Jesus Christ:) and then 2. Makes his Fundamental
Article not from the Text, but from what he has inserted into the Text thus,
Christ the Word is God. But will Mr. Edw. stick to that? Is he of Socinus's
Mind, that by the Word is meant the Man Jesus Christ, born of the Blessed
Virgin, and anointed with the Holy Ghost? I think he is not. Or does he mean
that Christ was the Firstborn of every Creature, as he is called, Col. 1. 14.
The beginning of the Creation of God, Rev. 3. 14. By whom God made the Worlds,
and is therefore a God? I think Mr. Edw. might be called an Arian, if that were
his Sense. What then does he mean? He does not mean that either the Body or
Soul, or both united to constitute a Man, or the Anointing of the Holy Ghost
added to that Man, was the Word; though by reason of those he had the Name of
Jesus, and by reason of this he had the Name of Christ. He means by the Word, a
second Person or Mode of God. Now how fairly he calls this second Person a Mode
of God, Jesus Christ, when it was neither Jesus nor Christ, nor any part of
him, let his Reader judge. In the beginning was the Word] that is, (according to
him) before the Beginning, and therefore from Eternity, God in a second Mode or
Person did exist: and the Word was with God] i. e. God in the second Mode was
present with God, even himself in the first Mode or Person: and the Word was
God] i. e. God in his second Mode was himself; or otherwise, was the Father
himself and the Holy Ghost; for he tells us before, that the three Persons [or
Modes] are really the one God: but if the Word is really the one God, as Mr.
Edw. understands the Term God in this Text, then the Word is the three Persons,
or else he is not really the one God, which the three Persons only are. Now if
this be a clear Text to build an Article necessary to Salvation, and the
Worship of another Almighty and only wise Person upon, besides the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; let all that have any reverence for God or his
Gospel judge! Besides, can he alledg one Text out of all the Old Testament, or
out of the three former Gospels, where ever by the WORD or Logos (as they love
to speak) is meant any such preexistent eternal Person? If there be none such,
it seems to be no little Defect in the Holy Scriptures, that the World should
be 4000 Years old, before any part of it heard any thing of a second personal
God, equal to the First, and who had therefore as much Right to be known and
worshipped as the First: Nay, and that that Person, the Word, should have no
mention made of him in the Gospels or Sermons of Christ or the Apostles till
above threescore Years after the Ascension; for it for it was so long (as
Ecclesiastical Historians tell us) before the Gospel of the Apostle John was
written, all the Churches and Believers we read of in Scripture, having been
gathered and converted before.

Next Mr. Edw. tells us (p. 107.) there is added in verse 14. another
indispensable point of Faith, viz. That the Word was made Flesh, i. e. That God
was incarnate, the same with 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifest in the Flesh.

One would have expected that Mr. Edw. undertaking in short to confute a
Proposition, that the Author had spent three quarters of his Book (which
consists of 300 Pages) in proving; and for which he had alleged perhaps an
hundred clear Texts of Holy Scripture, should have produced some clear Texts
against him, and not such as need Explanations; and when he has explained them,
leaves them far more difficult than before. We have spoken already of the Word
that was said to be God in the first verse of that Chapter; and now in the 14th
the Word must signify God: but, 1. Are not the same Words and Terms taken in
different senses in the same Context, and that too, when they come nearer
together than at thirteen verses distance? Thus the word Light in ver. 5.
signifies an impersonal Thing; but in the 7, 8, and 9th verses, it denotes a
Person, which John was not, but Jesus was, to wit, the Revealer of the Word or
Gospel. 2. The Father was God too, and if God was Incarnate, how will it be
avoided that the Father was Incarnate? And if it cannot, then Mr. Edw. will be
a Patripassian Heretic. 3. It must be acknowledged, that Mr. Edw. has given a
wonderful learned Explanation of the Phrase -- was made Flesh; far more Learned
than that of the old Justice -- Invasion is Invasion. The Vulgar and Unlearned
may understand something, when it is said that one Thing is made another Thing,
as when Water was made Wine: but I doubt they will stare and know nothing, when
one tells 'em that a Person was Incarnate; much more when they read Mr. Edw.
saying, That God was Incarnate, will they not gladly return from the
Explanation to the Text? and then it will run thus, God was made Flesh. But was
God indeed turned into Flesh, and ceased to be God, as the Water turned into
Wine ceased to be Water? I Am sure Mr. Edw. never intends to make that an
indispensable Point of Faith, as he calls this, That God was Incarnate. But
this is a very hard case, that the generality of the World (which God so loved,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting Life) their Salvation or Damnation should still
depend on the belief of, not only obscure Texts, but of much more obscure
Interpretations of those Texts. Whether shall we go for the Sense of God was
Incarnate? He sends us to 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifest in the Flesh. But he might
know that that reading of the Word GOD in that Text is a Corruption, and that
instead of God was read which in the Council of Nice, as the accurate
Examination against Mr. Milbourn has fully proved; however allowing that
reading, has given a rational Sense of it. Thus we are sent for the Sense of an
obscurer Interpretation of an obscure Text, to a corrupt One. Whither shall we
go next? It Is very like that Mr. Edw. may next time send us to the Athanasian
Creed, when the Scriptures fail him; That Creed says, It is necessary to
everlasting Salvation, that one believe rightly the INCARNATION of our Lord
Jesus Christ, -- That he is God and Man -- perfect God and perfect Man -- One
Christ, not by Conversion of the Godhead into Flesh, but by taking of the
Manhood into God: So then the sense of the Word was made Flesh, will be this,
God was Incarnate, that is, not by being made Flesh or Man, but by taking Man
into God; that is, God is now perfect God and Man. Well, but since God is a
Person, and Man another Person; perfect God and perfect Man must unavoidably be
two Persons: but this is the Heresy of Nestorius Archbishop of Constantinople,
An. Dom. 428. but how shall we help it? For to believe God and Man not to be
two Persons, we directly contradict our Belief of God's being perfect God and
perfect Man. If we say with Apollinarius, An. Dom. 370. That God and Man are
not two Persons but one, because the Man had no Human Soul or Understanding,
then we contradict God's being a perfect Man, and are condemned to eternal
Damnation, as Apollinarian Heretics. And if for solving these Difficulties, we
should think good to hold, that indeed there were two Natures in Christ when
God was made Flesh, but upon the Union the Human was swallowed up of the
Divine, and so there was one Nature made of two; then we incur the Anathema of
the Eutichian Heretics.

And it follows (says Mr. Edw.) in the same verse of this first Chapter of St.
John, that this Word is the only begotten of the Father; whence we are bound to
believe the Eternal, tho ineffable, Generation of the Son of God.

Answ. Could Mr. Edw. be so weak as to think any Body but one deeply
prejudiced, would approve of either of his Inferences from that Clause? either
the Eternal Generation, or that we are bound to believe it as an Article
necessary to Salvation? Does he not know that Jesus is the only Son of God, by
reason of that Generation which befell him in Time? Does he read of any other
Son that God generated of a Virgin but Jesus? See Luke 1. 35. Did God ever
sanctify and send into the World in such a Measure and Manner, any that were
called Gods or Sons of God, as he did Jesus our Lord? See John. 10. 35, 36, 37,
38. and Chap. 3. 34. Did he ever give such Testimony to any other? Did God ever
beget any other Son by raising him from the Dead to an immortal Life (Acts 13.
33.) by anointing him with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, Heb. 1. 9. By
setting him on his Righthand, making him to inherit a more excellent Name than
Angels, even that of SON in a more excellent Sense, Heb. 1. 3, 4, 5. By
glorifying Christ, making him an High Priest, saying unto him, Thou art my Son,
this Day have I begotten thee? Is not Isaac called the only begotten Son of
Abraham, though Abraham had other Sons? But for Mr. Edw's Eternal Generation,
there is not one Tittle either in this Text, or in all the Bible; and yet he
has the Confidence to bind the Belief of it upon Mankind, upon pain of
Damnation: I wish he would not be so rash, but more reverent in so tremendous a
Point.

Next, he finds our Author faulty in not taking notice, that we are commanded
to believe the Father and the Son, John 14. 10, 11. and that the Son is in the
Father, and the Father in the Son, which expresses their Unity. Wonderful! Did
our Author indeed take no notice that we are commanded to believe the Father
and the Son? when he all along in his Treatise makes the Messiah, Christ, Son
of God, terms synonimous, and that signify the same thing; and cites abundance
of Texts to that purpose; so that the belief of the Father and the Son, is
required by him in the whole three quarters of his Book, which Mr. Edw. takes
notice he spent in proving his Proposition. Did Mr. Edw. write these Remarks?
Or did some body else add them to his Book of the Causes of Atheism? As for the
Unity of the Father and Son, expressed he says by these words, The Son is in the
Father, and the Father in the Son; Does he think his Reader never read that
Text in John 17. 21. That they [Believers] all may be one, as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, with ver. 23. Or that
other Text, 1 John 4. 16. He that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in
him? But for the word Unity, which he uses, if he means by it any more than a
close Union, it implies a contradiction, that two should be one; that a Duality
should be an Unity. This (says he) is made an Article of Faith by our
Savior's particular and express Command. He must mean, that Mr. Edwards's own
sense of that Text is commanded as necessary to Salvation, else he says no more
of that than the Author allows concerning both that and other Scriptures. If he
means his own sense, then I think he is an inconsiderate and rash Man; for I
have showed that his sense is contradictious.

Here Mr. Edw. calls in question the sincerity of our Author, and, page 109.
says, It is most evident to any thinking and considerate Person, that he
purposely omits the Epistolary Writings of the Apostles, because they are
fraught with other Fundamental Doctrines, besides that one which he mentions.

I will not question Mr. Edwards's sincerity in what he writes, but I question
much his due considering what he writes against. Does not our Author make in
effect the same Objection against himself, page 291. and answer it in fourteen
pages, even to the end of his Book? but Mr. Edw. takes notice of very little of
it. And the most of that he does take notice of, he answers with a little
Raillery upon the Bulk of Mankind, the unlearned Multitude, the Mob, and our
Author. His note upon these Phrases, is, Surely this Gentleman is afraid of
Captain Tom, and is going to make a Religion for his Myrmidons. -- We are come
to a fine pass indeed; the venerable Mob must be asked what we must believe.
Thus he ridicules the Doctrine of Faith, on which the Salvation or Damnation of
the Multitude depends, and the Grounds of our Author's Design; who finding in
Holy Scripture, that God would have all Men to be saved, and come to the
KNOWLEDGE of the Truth; the Gospel was preached to the Poor, and the common
People heard Christ gladly; that God has chosen the Poor in this World, rich
in Faith; he concluded (when he had overcome the prejudices of Education, and
the contempt of the Learned, and those that think themselves so) that the
Gospel must be a very intelligible and plain Doctrine, suited to Vulgar
Capacities, and the State of Mankind in this World destined to Labor and
Travel; not such as the Writers and Wranglers in Religion have made it. To this
Mr. Edw. answers (besides what I have noted above) and is forced to agree, That
all Men ought to understand their Religion: but then asks (as of a positive
thing not to be doubted) if Men may not understand those Articles of Faith
which he had mentioned a little before, pretended to be found in the Epistolary
Writings, [which are generally formed not in Scripture-Terms, and about which
there is such endless Contentions] when they be explained to them, as well as
our Author's Article, Jesus is the Messiah? Nay he is confident that there is
no more Difficulty in understanding this Proposition [The Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, are one God or Divine Nature] than in that other of our Author (see page
120.) when yet the World knows to its Cost, that this Article has exercised all
the greatest Wits of the Church these fourteen or fifteen hundred Years to
understand the Terms, and take away the Contradictions: and at this Day the
English Trinitarians have most fierce Contentions among themselves about the
meaning of it. The nominal Trinitarians agree with the Unitarians, that the
Realists, that hold three real Persons, are Tritheists; and the Realists agree
with the Unitarians, that the Nominals or Modalists destroy the Reality of the
Eternal Son and Holy Ghost, and are Patripassians or Sabellians. Besides, Mr.
Edw. knows that each of these Parties are at vast difference among themselves;
they easily find Inconsistences or Contradictions in one another Explications;
so that supposing there be but ten different Trinitarian Hypotheses, (I think
there are more) every one has mine against him, all which he looks upon as
faulty; and they on the other Hand do all reject his. They reject them I say,
not, as the Bishop of Sarum, in his Letter to D. W. page 56. would paliate
Matter, as having the same Acts of Piety and Adoration, though different ways
of Explaining, either the Unity of the Essence, or the Trinity of the Persons;
but as having different Acts, except we can have the same Idea's when we
worship three Gods, as when we worship one only; or when we worship one
all-perfect Person, as when we worship three such; or when we worship one real
Person, and two nominal Ones, as when we worship three Equals; or when we
worship one self-existent God, and two dependent Gods not self-existent, as
when we worship three Self-existents, and the like. Again, Mr. Edw's
Proposition is never once found in Holy Writ; but our Author's often expressly.
He uses Terms in such a Sense as they are never used in Scripture, for Divine
Nature is never put there for God; nor does the word GOD, or one God, ever
signify Father, Son and H. Ghost, but always one singular Person; and
throughout the Holy Scriptures from the Beginning to the End, God is spoken of,
and spoken to, as one only Person, and by Terms and Pronouns that signify
singularly, and never otherwise. God indeed does twice or thrice speak of
himself Plurally, as Persons of Dignity and Dominion do often. But our Author
both his Words in Form, and his Explications are all taken out of Scripture;
and in the Days of our Savior and his Apostles, there was no difficulty in
understanding them. The most illiterate Fishermen and Shepherds, and Women,
knew what was meant by Jesus, and what by Messiah: The only Question was,
whether the Proposition Jesus is the Messiah, was to be affirmed, or denied.
But notwithstanding all this, Mr. Edw. says, Truly if there be any Difficulty,
it is in our Author's Proposition; why pray? For here is an Hebrew word first
to be explained before the Mob can understand the Proposition: But by his
favor, the word Messiah is by our Translators adopted into the English Tongue,
and the common People, the Rabble (as Mr. Edw. is pleased to call them)
understand it as well as they do the Christ or the Anointed, and also the
Explications of those Terms, provided they use to read either themselves, or
hear others read the Holy Scriptures. But the word Messiah was in our Savior
and the Apostles Time most common among the Jews: therefore our Author
designing to represent the Preaching and Faith of that Time, chose to use it
more frequently than any other Term, see page 30. But I presume Mr. Edw.
brought in this Objection, only as a Diversion. If he really think as he says,
it is a sharp Reflection upon all the Learned Trinitarian Controvertists upon
this Point; except they take it more heartily for an Invitation to their
Reverences and right Reverences, to come to the most Learned Mr. Edw. to inform
their Understandings, and solve all the Difficulties that make them at so great
Odds one with another: And it is to be hoped he will give such a clear
Explication of the Trinity, as will satisfy the Mystery-men or
Ignoramus-Trinitarians, that at length they may understand what they now
profess to believe without Understanding.

But to return, for all this will seem a Digression except the Reader please to
remember it is for a Vindication of our Author from Mr. Edw's hard charge, of
purposely omitting the Epistolary Writings, because fraught with other
Fundamental Doctrines besides that one which he mentions: Among those, Mr. Edw.
reckons chiefly and more especially -- The Doctrine of the ever to be adored
Trinity, eminently attested in those Epistles. This Doctrine he has given us in
his Proposition above discoursed, and has attempted to show (against Matter of
Fact in all Ages, and especially in this present Time) that this Fundamental
ought not to have been omitted because of its Difficulty or Unintelligibleness;
for it is (he says) less difficult than that of our Author, Jesus is the
Messiah; but how successfully I leave to consideration. But if it be
Unintelligible, or Contradictious, at least to the Bulk of Mankind, then it is
impossible it should be a Fundamental Article; and therefore our Author needed
not purposely to omit the Epistolary Writings of the Apostles, for fear of
finding it there, since Mr. Edw. himself cannot find it there, nor in the Bible.

But what says he to our Author's full Answer to the Question, about the
Usefulness of the Epistles, though the Belief of many Doctrines contained in
them be not necessary to Salvation? Our Author answers, 1. That he that will
read the Epistles as he ought, must observe what it is in them is principally
aimed at; -- for that is the Truth which is to be received and believed, and
not scattered Sentences in Scripture Language, accommodated to our Notions and
Prejudices. What says Mr. Edw. to that? 2. [for I abridg] There be many Truths
in the Bible, which a good Christian may be wholly ignorant of, and so not
believe; which perhaps some lay great stress on, and call Fundamental Articles,
because they are the distinguishing Points of their Communion. What says Mr.
Edw. to this? 3. The Epistles were writ to those who were in the Faith, and
true Christians already; and so could not be designed to teach them the
Fundamental Articles and Points necessary to Salvation. This he shows from the
Address of all the Epistles, or something noted in them. 4. Their resolving
Doubts and reforming Mistakes, are of great Advantage to our Knowledge and
Practice. 5. The great Doctrines of the Christian Faith are dropped here and
there, [He has cited some such Passages in the Proof of his Proposition]. -- We
shall find those necessary Points best in the Preaching of our Savior and the
Apostles. 6. The Epistles, besides the main Argument of each of them, do in
many places explain the Fundamentals, and that wisely, by proper Accommodations
to the apprehensions of those they were writ to. Which he shows particularly in
the Epistle to the Romans, and that to the Hebrews; also in the general
Epistles. At length, These Holy Writers (says he) inspired from above writ
nothing but Truth; and in most places very weighty Truths to us now; -- But yet
every Sentence of theirs, must not be taken up and looked upon as a Fundamental
necessary to Salvation, without an explicit Belief, whereof no Body could be a
Member of Christ's Church, etc. For (says he, page 299.) it is plain, the
contending Parties on one side or the other, are ignorant of, nay, disbelieve the
Truths delivered in Holy Writ, as I noted before.

This little I have transcribed out of our Author for the sake of those, who
perhaps have not his Book, but have Mr. Edwards's, and that it may appear how
unfairly (to say no worse) Mr. Edw. deals with our Author, saying, page 111. He
passes by these inspired Writings with some contempt; also he suggests his
insincerity to the Reader. But I have seen a Letter from a Gentleman of no
ordinary Judgment, who says, -- Mr. Edwards has not only mistook Mr. Lock, but
abused and belied him: for he says, Mr. Lock cites only the Gospels and Acts,
but declares (or insinuates) his contempt of the Epistles, as if they were not
of like Authority with the Acts or Gospels; but Mr. Lock has no where intimated
any such Opinion. His Book (says he) shows, He has read the Scriptures with
very great Observation, as well as Judgment; he suffers nothing to escape him,
that belongs to the Subject he manages.

He names our Author Mr. Lock, which I am assured he does by common Fame and
Conjecture; he has no other Grounds for it, as neither have I, no more than Mr.
Edwards. Whether we are mistaken or not in his Name I know not, but I think I
have proved that Mr. Edw. is much mistaken in his Judgment concerning his Book,
or has perversely censured him and it. He is so far from contemning the
Epistles, (as Mr. Edw. accuses him) that whoever will take the Pains to reckon,
he will find he has quoted them, and referred to them near FOURSCORE times. And
Mr. Edw. is no less Injurious in his Censures upon other Writers: In the very
Socinian Doctrine it self (says he) there seems to be an Atheistical Tang. For
proof, he cites the Considerations on the Explications of Doct. of Trin. page
5. Where (says he) the Self-existence of God, which is the Primary,
Fundamental, and Essential Property -- of the Deity, is peremptorily pronounced
by them to be a CONTRADICTION. It Is strange a Man of Mr. Edwards's Undertaking,
should give forth such a Calumny. His Ldp. of Worcester says, If God was from
Eternity, he must be from himself. That Author answers, that that is an
Espousing the Cause of the Atheists, and he gives this Reason; If God is from
Eternity, he must be of none; neither of (or from) himself, nor from any other;
not from himself, for then he must be before he was; and neither from himself,
nor from any other, because all Origination of what kind soever is inconsistent
with an Eternal Being. Is this now peremptorily to pronounce, that the
Self-existence of God is a Contradiction? or is it not to vindicate the
Self-existence of God from a false Notion of it, occasioned by the Bishop's
words? But what will Mr. Edw. say to the Author of the XXVIII Propositions,
etc. (who, they say, is the Bishop of Glouc.) who peremptorily denies, nay
says, It is a flat Contradiction, to say that the second and third Persons (of
the Trinity) are Self-existent? (Prop. 8.) Consequently neither of them is God:
because (as Mr. Edw. says) Self-existence is the Primary, Fundamental, and
Essential Property of God, which yet neither the Son nor the H. Ghost have. I
wish Mr. Edw. would either reconcile himself to the Bishop, or the Bishop to
him, before he charges an Atheistical Tang upon the Socinian Doctrine, upon
account of the denial of God's Self-existence, which he may see strongly
affirmed in the Reflections on the said Propositions, etc.

As for Socinus's denying the Praescience of Contingencies, I am not, nor is
our Author concerned in it; but which is more dishonorable to God, to be the
Author of all the Sin and Wickedness that ever was, or ever will be in the
World; or to deny his Foreknowledge of the certainty of that which is not
certain. Socinus and Crellius have denied such an Immensity of God, which makes
him to be essentially and wholly in every point of Space; because such
Immensity would take away all Distinction between God and Creature, and has
indeed an Atheistical Tang; for the greater part of Atheists hold the Universe
to be God; hence Lucan, Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris. Which
opinion, some of the Ancient Fathers have wrote against; as Clemens
Alexandrinus, and others. Mr. Edw. may charge them all with a Tang of Atheism
if he please. As for God's Spirituality, modest Divines confess it easier to
say, What it is not, than what it is. Mr. Edw. perhaps has attained to such a
perfection of Knowledge in that Matter, as may make him able to teach them what
they are now ignorant of: But Socinus nor Crellius, nor any other of them ever
denied, contrary to most express, and often repeated Scriptures, and common
Reason, the most glorious Attribute of God's Unity, which gives Excellency to
all his other Attributes: for were Self-existence, Omniscience, Immensity and
Spirituality, and all other Attributes common to more than One; where would the
Excellency and Majesty of God's Name be? How should we love and adore him with
all our Hearts and Strength, when there are others that require it and have as
equal right to it as he? But Mr. Edw. will count himself highly injured, if I
charge him with denying God's Unity: but hold a little, be not angry; If you
be, Take heed it be not more for your own sake, than for God's sake: Do you not
say, that the infinite Nature of God is communicable to three distinct Persons?
page 79. and page 120. That the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are one God, or
Divine Nature? Are not these Terms convertible? namely, That one God is Father,
Son and H. Ghost, that is, three Persons? and what are three Almighty and only
wise Persons, but three Gods? The Father is one God, the Son is one God
distinct from the Father, and the Holy Ghost is one God distinct from the
Father and Son. Thus your Proposition amounts to this, That one God is three
Gods, that the Unity of God is a Trinity of Gods. That Unity or Oneness is no
longer an Attribute of God, but Trinity or Threeness. But we cannot be heard,
let us make out your Contradictions never so clearly: nay, you impute it to us
as a heinous Crime, that we make it an Argument against the belief of your
Trinity, that it cannot be understood without Contradiction. You impute to us
most injuriously, that we are to admit of nothing but what is exactly adjusted
to Nature's and Reason's Light, page 68. That therefore the Trinity is a
Doctrine that cannot be born, because it cannot be understood, page 69. and that
the English Unitarians declare they cannot believe it, because Reason does not
teach it, page 72. This is a Topic the Trinitarians do always enlarge upon,
and urge with a great deal of Pomp in themselves, and Ignominy in the
Unitarians, as Persons that prefer their own Reasonings before Divine
Revelation how clear soever. And though this Calumny has been answered and
wiped away, and retorted upon them a hundred Times, yet Mr. Edw. will still
confidently charge it. He cites the Letter of Resolution for proof of it, and
therefore has read it, but passes by the Answer to this Imputation, which is to
be found in the very first Page of it, where thus; First, It Is not true, that
we prefer Reason before Revelation; on the contrary, Revelation being what GOD
himself has said, either immediately, or by inspired Persons; it is to be
preferred before the clearest Demonstration of our Reason. And in the Consider.
on Explic. on 4 Sermon. and a Sermon of the Bishop of Worcester, the Author says:
He utterly mistakes in thinking that we deny the Articles of the new
Christianity, or Athanasian Religion, because they are Mysteries, or because we
do not comprehend them; we have a clear and distinct Perception, that they are
not Mysteries but Contradictions, Impossibilities, and pure Nonsense.

But now that the Trinitarians do most expressly prefer their Reasoning,
Consequences and wire-drawn Deductions before Holy Scripture; besides that it
has been done in the Notes upon the Athanasian Creed, and other Tracts, I shall
show further from Mr. Edwards's Fundamental Doctrine, but now recited; if at
least the Trinitarians will acknowledge him for their Orthodox Champion.

1. It Is manifest he means by the one God, not one Divine Almighty Person, but
three such; but nothing is more evident in Holy Scripture, than that God is one
Person only. For proof of it, I have referred my Reader to the Scriptures from
beginning to end, in more than twenty thousand Texts, even as often as God is
spoken of, or to, or speaks of himself (except as I have said). But Mr. Edw.
says expressly, that his God is three distinct Divine Persons, to wit, the
Father of the Son, the Son of the Father, and the H. Ghost which proceeds
from the Father and the Son. 2. He says, that these three distinct Divine
Persons, [each of which is God in the most perfect Sense] is the only true God,
or the one God, or Divine Nature. The Proposition which he advances, as
necessary to Salvation, and more easy to be understood than that Jesus is the
Messiah, is, That the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are one God, or Divine Nature.
Whereby it is manifest, that by ONE GOD he means not one Person, but one Divine
Nature; and by one Divine Nature he means such a Divine Nature as is
communicable to three distinct Persons, see page 79. So that his three Persons
which are one God, are so one God as they communicate in one Divine Nature; in
like manner as Peter, James and John are one Man, because they communicate in
one Human Nature, as do also all the Men in the World. Now I shall cite some
Texts of H. Scripture, which do expressly declare that God is ONE; and that
cannot otherwise be understood than that he is one Person, or singular
intellectual Nature, Essence or Substance. Here let me premise first, How
Equivocally Mr. Edw. and the Trinitarians express themselves in this great and
necessary Point, on which depends our Eternal Salvation; and whereby the Bulk
of Mankind (for I think that is a far more decent Phrase than Mr. Edw's Rabble,
or Captain Tom and his Myrmadons, or the venerable Mob) cannot escape being
deluded. He and they confess also, that there is but one God, though three
Persons in that one God; but by one God they do not mean (as I have showed from
Mr. Edw.) one singular intellectual Nature, Essence, or Substance complete, for
that is a Person; and if they did, the Contradiction would presently appear to
every Capacity, to wit, that three Divine Persons are one Divine Person; but
they (as Mr. Edw.) say, The Father, Son and Holy Ghost, or the three Divine
Persons, are one God, or Divine Nature, Essence or Substance. Hereby they
conceal from their poor honest Reader, thirsting after Truth, that God is one
intellectual Perfect Nature, Essence or Substance, and make him believe by that
concealment, that though there are three Divine intellectual perfect Natures,
yet there is but one Divine Nature or God.

I am also willing to premise, that the Grecism of a solitary Adjective
Masculine, or Article without a Substantive (where the Discourse is of
intellectual Beings) does frequently, if not always connote PERSON; and our
English Translators have in many Texts rendered it Person, as the clear Sense
of the Greek Text, not as a word supplied in another Character to explain the
Text, but in the same Character as a verbal Translation. Instances of this
rendering are these among many others; Mat. 27. 24. Of this just [Person] Luke
15. 7. Ninety nine just [Persons] Acts 17. 17. -- The devout [Persons] Ephesians. 5.
5. -- unclean [Person] 2 Pet. 3. 11. What manner of [Persons.] In these places
there is nothing in the Greek to answer the word Person, but what is implied in
the Adjective.

To come now to the Texts that assert the Unity or Oneness of God, against Mr.
Edw's Trinity or Threeness; or that God is one intellectual Nature, or one
Person, against Mr. Edws's one Divine Nature, or three Persons: see Jam. 2. 19.
according to the Greek, Thou believe that God is ONE, thou do well. Gal. 3.
20. But God is ONE. Mark 12. 29. The Lord our God, the Lord is ONE, says our
Savior out of the Law, to the Scribe that asked him, which is the first
Commandment of all? And Jesus answered him, the first of all the Commandments
is, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one. And thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy Heart, etc. And in the 32d ver. The Scribe said unto
him, Well Master, thou have said the Truth, for God is ONE, and there is none
other but he. And ver. 34. -- Jesus saw that he answered discreetly. Our Bibles
refer us to Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5. whence our Lord takes this his Answer, and where we
find the same Words, which by Ainsworth are also rendered, The Lord our God,
the Lord is one. Now in these Scriptures the Numeral Adjective Masculine, being
without a Substantive and Singular, it forces us to understand in every place
Person. So that we nothing doubt but the Translators would have rendered every
where God is ONE PERSON, if they had not been prepossessed with the Opinion of
God's being three Persons; the like to which they have done in many other
Places. But in that Answer of the Holy Jesus to him that called him Good
Master, Mat. 19. 17. it is not possible to avoid it; 1. That God is a Person; 2.
That he is but one Person; and 3. That he is GOOD in an eminent Sense above all
other Persons whatsoever. For thus he says, Why call thou me GOOD? None [or
no Person] is good but one [Person] the God. How strangely perverse would it be
to understand this Text in the Trinitarian sense, viz. None, or no Person is
good but one, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost? or thus, None, or no Person is
good but one, i. e. the Divine Nature?

Again, 2. Consider we these Texts, and see what sense we can make of them, if
God be not one Person only, Mal. 2. 10. Has not ONE GOD created us? must we
say with Mr. Edw. Has not ONE Father, Son and Holy Ghost [or one Divine Nature
that is not a Person] created us? Romans 3. 30. There is one God who justifies,
etc. Trin. There is one Father, Son and H. Ghost that justifies, Zech. 14. 9.
Hebr. In that Day the Lord shall be ONE, and his Name ONE. How should the Lord
be one and his Name one, if the Lord be three distinct Persons, and his Name
Father, Son and Holy Ghost? Isa. 37. 16. O Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, thou
dwell between the Cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth; thou have made Heaven and Earth; Psalm. 86. 10. Thou art
great and do wondrous Works, thou art God alone. 2 King. 19. 19. -- That all
the Kingdoms of the Earth may know that thou art the Lord God, even thou only.
Isa. 44. 24. etc. I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches forth
the Heavens alone, that spreads abroad the Earth by my self. Nehem. 9. 6,
etc. Thou even thou art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven -- the Host of Heaven
worshippeth thee. Isa. 37. 20. -- That all the Kingdoms of the Earth may know,
that thou art the Lord, even thou only. 2 King. 19. 15. Jude 4. -- denying the
only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one God, and
one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 4. 6. One God
and Father of all, who is above all and through all, and in you all. Isa. 46.
9. For I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me. 1
King. 8. 23. Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee in Heaven above, or
in Earth beneath. -- Ver. 60. That all the People of the Earth may know that
the Lord is God, and that there is none else. Isa. 44. 6. I am the First, and I
am the Last, and besides me there is no God. Ver. 8. Is there a God besides me?
yea, there is no God, I know not any. Isa. 45. 5. I am the Lord there is none
else, there is no God besides me. Verse 6. -- There is none besides me, I am
the Lord and there is none else. Ver. 14. -- Saying, surely God is in thee, and
there is none else, there is no God. Ver. 21. -- Have not I the Lord? and there
is no God else beside me, a just God and a Savior, there is none beside me.
Ver. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth, for I am God,
and there is none else. Deuteronomy. 4. 35. Unto thee it was showed, that thou
might know that the Lord he is God, and there is none else beside him. 1 Chronicles. 17. 20. O Lord there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides
thee. Exodus 34. 14. For thou shall worship no other God, for the Lord whose
Name is Jealous, is a jealous God. Deuteronomy. 32. 39. See now that I, even I am he,
and there is no God with me. 2 King. 5. 15. Behold, now I know that there is no
God in all the Earth, but in Israel. 2 Samuel 22. 32. For who is God save the
Lord? See the same words in Psalm. 18. 31. 1 Cor. 8. 4. -- There is none other
God but one. I conclude with the first and chiefest of the Ten Commandments
given from Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. 3. Thou shall have no other Gods before me --
I the Lord thy God am a jealous God: and that of the Lord Jesus, when himself
was tempted, Matthew. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. The meaning plainly is, I am a Jew, and subject to the Law of
the Jews, I am commanded therein to worship the Lord my God, and to serve him
only.

These Scriptures do so clearly prove, that God is a Person, or a perfect
intellectual Nature or Substance, and that he is only one such; that to deny
either of these Propositions, is to me to deny the Truth of Holy Scripture, not
only in some obscure and doubtful Text, but in the Current of it, and in the
chief Fundamental of all Religion. And Mr. Edw. in asserting there are three
such Persons in one Divine Nature, renders in effect the whole Bible void and
useless for the proof of any Proposition whatsoever it be. If this, that God is
an absolutely perfect Being, and therefore a Person, (for Persons are the most
perfect of Beings or Substances) and but one such, cannot be plainly and
undeniably proved from Scripture, it is utterly in vain to attempt to prove any
thing. For it is manifest that to assert THIS, is the chief Aim and Design of
all the Holy Writers, and that they are most zealous and vehement in it. And
herein lies the Controversy between the Trinitarians and the Unitarians; we
assert with the greatest plainness, and fullness, and clearness of Holy
Scripture, as ever any thing was or can be expressed, that God is ONE in the most
perfect sense of Oneness, (which is by all Men that understand the Word) in a
personal Sense. But the Trinitarians do on the contrary contend, that God is
not One, but Three in that personal Sense, and One in a less perfect Sense;
which is not Personal, but common to many: Which is a Sense that dethrones God,
and makes him either a Third of the one God, or one of the Three, that created
and governs the World, and is to be adored by Men and Angels. For they cannot
deny but that in worshipping the Father our God, we worship one God; But they
rage against us, because we do not worship besides him, and distinct from him,
the Son as perfectly God as he; as different from him as a real Son is from a
real Father, and another Person as really God as either the Father, or the Son,
and as really different from the Father and Son, as he that is sent is from him
that sent him. And this is so evidently true, that (as I have observed) almost
one half of the Trinitarians consent with the Unitarians, in condemning the
other Party of Trinitarians as Confessors of three Gods.

But that I may give yet fuller Evidence of this Fundamental Truth of the Unity
of the Person of God against the Trinity of Persons in him, I shall in the
third place produce some Texts that ascribe some Perfections to the Person of
God singularly, and with exclusion of all other Persons in that Sense and
Degree. Such are those, where the Holy Jesus says, None [or no Person] is good
but one, the God, which I have urged before: and that in John 17. 3. where the
Blessed Son in his Prayer to God, (wherein it were absurd to say that he prayed
to himself) calls him Father, and the only true God; and that in distinction
from himself, whom he describes by the Names of Jesus Christ, him whom the
Father has sent. This Particle only, imports some Excellency in the Attribute
of true, which is here given to God his Father, above and with exclusion of all
others, or it signifies nothing. Romans 16. 27. To God only Wise be Glory through
Jesus Christ for ever. Amen. Here again the Attribute of only Wise is ascribed
to the Person of God in distinction from Jesus Christ as the Medium of the
Glory which is given to the only Wise God. 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. God is called, the
blessed and ONLY Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; who ONLY has
Immortality, etc. which are all personal Titles, from which all other Persons
are excluded by the exclusive Particle only: for there can be but one Potentate
who is King of Kings in the highest Sense, and much more when only is added.
When Christ is called King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, (Rev. 17. 14. and 19.
16.) it is manifest it is to be understood in a derivative Sense, because all
Power in Heaven and Earth was given to him as the Lamb that had been slain; and
therefore he is represented as clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood, in that 19
Chap. ver. 13. Who only has Immortality: that is, (as Dr. Hammond says) God is
Immortal in himself, (not in three Selfs) and all Immortality of others is
derived from him. In the same Sense is the Lord God Almighty called, in Rev.
15. 4. only Holy, because he only is Holy of himself; and as it is understood,
1 Samuel 2. 2. There is none Holy as the Lord. Now in these and suchlike Passages
of Holy Scripture, the Trinitarians and Mr. Edw. must understand by God three
Persons; by Father, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; by Thou, Ye; by Him, Them;
by Himself, Themselves; and those Words the Scripture has in the singular
Number, must be understood by them plurally. It Is no marvel then that they call
their Doctrine a Mystery, and that there is so much dissension among themselves
concerning it, since it cannot be understood in any Sense, which is not either
contradictious in it self, or so to the full Current of Holy Scripture.

In like manner, 4thly, all those Texts (which are not a few) in which God is
named the most High, the most high God, the Lord the most High, God most High,
the Highest; whether these Titles be Subject or Attribute, must all be
understood, not of one Person, or a singular knowing and willing Substance, but
either of a Substance that is not a Person, or else of three equal Persons: And
all this by virtue of that scholastic and unreasonable Distinction between
Person and Essence; or as Mr. Edw. words it, The infinite Nature of God
communicable to three distinct Persons, (Page 79.) which Distinction being
absurd in it self when understood, they obtrude upon the World under the Name
of MYSTERY and Incomprehensible.

5thly. Besides, that the Holy Scriptures are so abundant in those Texts that
clearly show him to be one Person only, as I have fully manifested; yet I may
still urge from the same Texts and others, that the Father only, whom the
Trinitarians acknowledge to be but one Person, is that God, that God alone, that
one God, that God who is One, the most high God, and no Person else besides
him. I produced before the Text in John 17. 3. to prove that the Perfection of
being THE ONLY TRUE GOD, is ascribed to him as being one Person only. Now I
urge from the same Text, that that Person is the Father of the Son, in express
distinction from the Son and all others. Next, that Text in 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6.
Though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth, (as there
be Gods many, and Lords many); but to us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom were all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we
by him. Which words do plainly assert, that that Person who is the one God of
Christians in exclusion of all those that are called Gods, (and in some Sense
may be so) is none but the Father; and in distinction from the Lord Jesus, who
was made Lord and Christ in a most excellent manner, after his Resurrection.
This Text must be understood by the Trinitarians thus; There is none other God
but three Almighty Persons: -- There are Gods many, and Lords many, but unto us
[Christians] there is but one God or Divine Nature, the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; each of which is the one God of Christians, and not the Father only. See
next Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. There is one Spirit -- one Lord -- one God and Father
of all. Where the one God and Father of all is clearly differenced from the one
Spirit and the one Lord. Now see Mat. 24. 36. But of that Day and Hour knows
none [or no Person] (for of necessity it must be so understood) no not the
Angels of Heaven, but my Father only. St. Mark has it -- neither the Son, but
the Father. These parallel Texts prove, 1. That the Person of the Father is the
Person of God; for none but that Person could then know the Day and Hour of
Judgment: And, 2. that the Father only is that Person of God in exclusion of
all other Persons, both Angels and Men, and of the Son himself. What shall we
say of them, who in flat Contradiction to this Scripture, and the Son himself,
assert, That the Son knew the Day and Hour of Judgment as well as the Father?
Let us next compare that Passage in 1 Timothy 2. 5. (which I cited before) with 1
John 2. 1. The former says, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and
Men, the Man Christ Jesus. The latter says, If any Man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. By which considered together, it
appears that the one God and the Father are the same Person, for only a Person
is capable of being interceded to, and the Mediator and Advocate the same: So
that the Father is the Person of God, as well as the Advocate is the Person of
the Mediator. But if the Reader desire to see this Point (viz. that the Father
only is the most high God) fully and learnedly argued and defended, let him
read Crellius's two Books of One God the Father, out of which I have
transcribed much. In what a many Places of Scripture is Christ called the Son
of God, and the Holy Spirit the Spirit of God? In every of which either God
must be taken for the Father only, or Christ must be the Son of himself, and
the Holy Spirit the Spirit of himself, both which are absurd.

Again, how many places of Holy Scripture are there, where some Prerogative is
given to the Father above Christ, as John 14. 28. My Father is greater than I?
How ashamed are the more ingenuous Trinitarians of that Answer, to this
Objection against the Deity of the Son, which says, The Son was less according
to his Human Nature? John 10. 29. My Father is greater than all. It Is manifest
from the Context, that the Son himself is included in that word ALL. 1 Cor. 11.
3. The Head of Christ is God. Christ is not the Head of himself, therefore the
Father only is God. How often do Christ and the Divine Writers call the Father
his God? John 20. 17. I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your
God. In Rev. 3. 12. he calls the Father my God four times. Mat. 27. 46. and
Mark 15. 34. he cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! His God
was only the Person of the Father, and not God the Divine Nature, which
according to Mr. Edw. is common to three Persons. Ephesians. 1. 17. -- The God of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory. Heb. 1. 8. Where Christ is called a
God, he is also said to have a God, who anointed him. Was he his own God, and
the God that anointed him? or was the Father only? John 10. 18. This
Commandment have I received of my Father. He only is God who gives Commandments
to the Son. John 12. 49. The Father that sent me, he gave me a Commandment what
I should say, and what I should speak. John 14. 31. As the Father has given me
Commandment, so I do. John 15. 10. As I have kept my Father's Commandment, and
abide in his Love. See Chap. 4. 34. and 6. 38. and 8. 29, 55. and 17. 4. and
18. 11. Add those places wherein it is clearly taught that Christ obeyed God,
Romans 5. 19. Phil. 2. 8. Heb. 5. 8. God calls Christ his Servant, Isa. 42. 1.
Mat. 12. 18. Isa. 49. 5, 6. with Acts 13. 47. Isa., 2. 13. and 53. 11. Ezekiel.
34. 23, 24. and 37. 24, 25. He is called -- a Minister of the Sanctuary, Heb.
8. 2. All these Texts, and a hundred more (say the Trinitarians) are answered
by the Distinction of a Divine and Human Nature in one Person, or the second
Person of God his having a Human Nature: So you are to understand that this
Person of God, who is here said to be a Servant, to receive Commands and obey
them, etc. is yet as perfectly Great as he, from whom he received those
Commands, who has no Prerogative above him. The Servant is as great as his
Lord, and he that Obeyed as he that Commanded, and he that is sent as he that
sent him; yea, the same God is Servant and Lord, the Obeyer and Commander, the
Sent and the Sender. When all these Prerogatives of the Father above the Son,
and consequently above the Holy Spirit, will not prove the Father only to be
the most High God; of what use can the Holy Scriptures be to us? What shall be
the Difference between Holy Scriptures and profane Writings? May not all the
Greek Fables of their Gods, be justified by the same, or such like
Distinctions? O Father of Mercies, enlighten their Understandings, and remove
their Prejudices, that they may no longer, deny thee the Glory due to thee
above all!

Neither is it to be passed by, that to the Father only is ascribed in Holy
Scripture, the Creation of Heaven and Earth, to Christ never; though in a
certain way of speaking, common to the Sacred Writers, many things, or all
pertaining to the new Covenant or Gospel, are said to be created (that is,
medelled or put into a new and better State) by him. So in that ancient
Confession of Faith, called, The Apostles Creed, the Creation of Heaven and
Earth is appropriated to the Father; and both in those Apostolical Times, and
to this day, Prayers and Praises are offered to the Father through-Christ, and
the Gift of the Holy Spirit is begged of him; which clearly shows the
Prerogative of the Father above the Son and Holy Spirit; and consequently that
he only is that Person, whom we ought to understand by the Name of GOD.

In fine, The God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of the Fathers,
and the Father of Christ, are Descriptions of one and the same Person: So Acts
3. 13. -- The God of our Fathers has glorified his Son Jesus: and Heb. 1. 1.
God who -- spoke in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets, has -- spoken
to us by his Son. So that they who make the Son to be the God of the Fathers,
make him to be his own God and Father.

But because I think it may give farther Light and Evidence to this great
Point, wherein the Glory of God, even the Father, is so much concerned; I will
yet further show from many plain Texts, set so as they may give Light one to
another; that the God of the Fathers, and the God and Father of Christians; or
our God and Father, and the God and Father of our Lord Christ; our Heavenly
Father and his Heavenly Father; his God and our God, is one and the same
Person. I present them by Couples, the first speaking of Christ, the second of
us.

See Romans 15. 6. That ye may glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Phil. 4. 20. Now unto God our Father, be glory for ever and ever.

2 Cor. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of Mercies.

Romans 1. 7. Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Col. 1. 3. We give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Ephesians. 1. 2. Grace to you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.

2 Cor. 11. 31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows that I lie
not.

1 These. 1. 1. Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Heb. 1. 8. Unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever.
Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, therefore God even thy God
has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows.

Phil. 1. 2. Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

1 Timothy 1. 2. Grace, Mercy and Peace from God our Father, and Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Ephesians. 1. 17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may
give unto you the Spirit, etc.

Col. 1. 2. Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ.

1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. Now the Lord Jesus himself, and God even our Father, etc.

John 20. 17. Jesus says to Mary, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and
to my God and to your God.

Gal. 1. 4. Who gave himself for our Sins -- according to the will of God and
our Father.

Mat. 27. 46. Jesus cried -- saying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Philem. 3. Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Rev. 3. 12. Him that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God,
and write upon him the Name of my God, etc.

2 Thessalonians. 1. 1. -- Unto the Church of the Thessalonians in God our Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

John 17. 1. -- Jesus lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and said -- Father, Glorify
thy Son.

Mat. 23. 9. One is your Father which is in Heaven. Psalm. 115. 3. Our God is in
the Heavens.

Thus we see there is one God and Father of all (Ephesians. 4. 6.) both of Christ,
and Believers the Children of God; the same Person is the God and Father of
both. It Is absurd to say, that Christ the Son is his own Father, or his own
God; so it is plainly contrary to Scripture to say, that any other Person is our
God or our Father (in the highest Sense) but the same who is Christ's God and
Father. That it is so, I appeal to the serious Thoughts of every Man and Woman
that reads the Scriptures attentively, without the prejudice of Scholastic and
confused Distinctions.

Now I shall further produce you many couples of Scriptures, which prove
expressly, that the Name of GOD (when taken by way of Excellency) and the Name
of FATHER (in Christ's Gospel) do signify the same singular Person. So that no
one is or can be God, who is not also the Father; which Term is acknowledged to
signify but one Person. This appears from the Scripture, attributing the
sending of Christ, or the Son, sometimes to God, sometimes to the Father, and
both frequently.

John 3. 34. He whom God has sent, speaks the Words of God; for God gives
not the Spirit by measure unto him.

Chap. 14. 24. The Word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's who sent me.

Acts 10. 36. The Word which God sent to the Children of Israel, preaching
Peace by Jesus Christ.

John 5. 30. I seek not mine own Will, but the Will of the Father which has
sent me.

Acts 3. 26. God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you.

John 12. 49. The Father which sent me, he gave me a Commandment what I should
say, and what I should speak.

1 John 4. 10. Not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to
be the Propitiation for our Sins.

Chap. 4. 14. And we have seen and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to
be the Savior of the World.

Gal. 4. 4. God sent forth his Son made of a Woman.

John 6. 39. And this is the Father's Will that has sent me. See ver. 44.

1 John 4. 9. In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because God
sent his only begotten Son into the World, etc.

John 5. 24. He that hears my Word, and believes on the Father that has
sent me.

Romans 8. 3. God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh.

John 20. 21. Then said Jesus, As my Father sent me, even so send I you.

Joh. 3. 17. God sent not his Son to condemn the World.

Chap. 5. 23. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which
sent him.

Joh. 6. 29. Jesus answered, This is the Work of God, that ye believe on him
whom he has sent.

Chap. 17. 25. O Father, these have known that thou have sent me.

John 17. 3. This is Life Eternal, that they might know thee (Father) the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Chap. 10. 36. Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the
World, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God?

John 16. 27. The Father himself loves you, because ye have -- believed that I
came out from God.

Ver. 28. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the World; again, I
leave the World, and go to the Father.

Ver. 30. By this we believe that thou came forth from God.

John 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son --.

Chap. 8. 18. I am one that bear witness of my self; and the Father that sent
me bears witness of me.

John 8. 42. For I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of my
self, but he sent me.

Chap. 5. 36. The Works that I do, bear witness that the Father has sent me.

Hence it appears most evidently, not only that God and the Father are the same
Person, and that the same is as plainly distinguished from our Lord Christ, as
the Sender is distinct from him that is sent; but that the Son is no more the
same God that sent him, than he is the same Father that sent him.

If Christians will still suffer themselves to be imposed upon, under the
Notion of MYSTERY, to believe that the Son of God is the same numerical God as
his Father, who sent him to do his Will, (not his own) and to be the
Propitiation (or Mercy-seat, Heb. 9. 5.) for our Sins; that the only begotten
or well-beloved Son, whom the Father (first) sanctified and (then) sent into
the World, is the same God who sanctified and sent him, that the miraculous
Works which the Son did, did bear witness, not that the Father even God had
sent him, but that the Son was that God, etc. they should no longer pretend,
that their Faith concerning God and his Son Christ Jesus, in what is necessary
to eternal Life, is clearly and plainly revealed in Holy Scripture, but that
they have learnt it by Tradition from their Teachers, which yet they can no
more conceive the meaning of, without contradiction to Scripture and Reason,
than the Papists can their Transubstantiation, which they also believe under
the Notion of Mystery. Let none say there is a wide Difference between the
Faith of Protestants and Papists in these Cases, because Transubstantiation is
contradicted by Sense, the Trinity only by Reason; for I appeal to any Man of
Sense, whether we may not be as certain that one Person is not three Persons,
nor three Persons one Person, as that Bread is not Flesh. If Protestants think
themselves excusable in that, let them not for shame blame the Papists in this.
And if both Protestants and Papists are faultless in these Points, I see not
but the Heathen Polytheists will be capable of the same Charity.

The New Testament Scriptures are so full of those clear Distinctions, and
opposite Relations, and Works of God, from the Son of God, that a Man must in a
manner transcribe the whole Volume to present them all. I have given my Reader
a great number of Texts already; I will yet point him to some more, which he
may read at his leisure. See then 1 John 4. ver. 9 to 16. 2 Pet. 1. 17. Romans
16. 27. John 6. 69. John 5. 26, 27. As the Father has Life in himself, so has
he given to the Son to have Life in himself, and has given him Authority to
execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man. The Son of God had not
this Life in himself, till it was given him by the Living God his Father, not
because he was God, but because he was the Son of Man. But what Ears can hear,
that Life and Authority were given by the same God the Father, to the very same
God the Son? Or that any Life and Authority could be given to him that was God,
who had always from all Eternity, all Life and Authority in himself, and could
never be without it? But I am pointing you to some Texts of Scripture. Read
also Romans 1. 9. Chap. 8. 3, 29, 31. Chap. 5. 10. Ephesians. 1. 3. 1 John 1. 5, 7.
Chap. 3. 21, 23. Chap. 1. 3. Gal. 1. 15. Col. 1. 10, 13. 1 Cor. 1. 9. 1 John 4.
15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God [not that he is that
God whose Son he is] God dwells in him and he in God. 1 John 5. 9, 10, 11.
Heb. 1. 1, 2. John 3. 16, 17. Acts 3. 26. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9, 10. John 5. 18. 2 John
ver. 3. Gal. 4. 4. Acts 3. 13. These Texts do undeniably prove, that God is one
Person only, to wit, the Father of the Son; and as the Son cannot be his own
Father, so neither that God who is his Father. But I proceed, see Mat. 14. 33.
and 16. 16. Luke 1. 35. Mark 1. 1. John 1. 34. and 20. 31. These are written
that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing
ye might have Life through his Name. The Apostle John did not write his Gospel
(as some pretend) to prove that Jesus was God, who was his Father, but that he
was the Christ, or a Man anointed with the Holy Ghost and Power, the Son of
that God who anointed him; and that so believing we might have Life through
him. Mark 1. 11. Mat. 3. 17. Luke 3. 22. Mark 9. 7. Luke 9. 35. Heb. 1. 5. 1
John 4. 14. Mat. 11. 27. Luke 10. 22. John 1. 14. and 3. 18, 29. and 14. 28.
and 15. 10. and 20. 17.

Against all these Scriptures, and many more that might be alleged, it is urged
that the Son is somewhere called God [or rather a God] in Scripture. To which I
answer, that both Angels and Men are called God, and Gods, and Sons of God in
Scripture; see Exodus 7. 1. -- I have made thee [Moses] a God to Pharaoh. Exodus
4. 16. compared with Chap. 3. 2, 5. an Angel is called Jehovah and Elohim; in
English, the Lord and God. Psalm. 8. 5. Thou have made him [Man] a little lower
than the Angels; in Hebrew, than the Gods. And Judge. 13. 22. Manoah said -- We
shall surely die, because we have seen God; so he calls the Angel that appeared
to him. But the word God taken by way of Eminency for the Father of all,
signifies also the God of Gods, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Joshua 22. 22. Psalm. 136. 2, etc.
The most high God, Genesis 14. 18. Heb. 7. 1. And the Lord Jesus being stoned and
charged with Blasphemy by the Jews, for saying, that he and his Father were
one, as we read John 10. 29, 30, etc. he vindicates himself by the Authority of
that Text, in Psalm. 82. 6. where it is Divinely written, I said ye are Gods,
speaking of the Judges and Princes, who received their Authority and Power from
God; and all of you Sons of the most High: and argues from it thus, Say ye of
him, whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the World, Thou blasphemest,
because I said, I am THE SON of God? Which is in effect to say, I may with far
greater right than they, be called a God, or the Son of God, who have received
from God far greater Authority and Power; being sanctified to such a Degree,
and sent among Men to preach such a Doctrine and Work, such Miraculous Works,
as plainly show, that the Father is in me, and I in him; that is, there is such
a close Union between us, as if the Father dwelt in me, and did the Works which
I do, (dwelling as it were in him) and which cannot be done by any other Power.
Whence I argue, that if in any Text of Scripture, Jesus is said to be God or a
God, (tho he himself never said he was God; Nunquam seipse Deum dixit, as says
Lactantius) it is to be understood of that Godlike Power, Authority and Glory,
which God his Father has conferred upon him; for which he is to be honored as
the Father who sent him, who anointed him, who raised him from the Dead, and
set him at his own Right Hand. So in Heb. 1. 8, 9. where in the Words spoken of
Solomon, Psalm. 45. he is called God, he is said to have a God above him, who
anointed him. Let them consider who say, the Son is God in the same sense as
the Father, how they can clear themselves of Blasphemy. Such Persons look upon
the Unitarians with Amazement and Horror, because they will not take the term
God in that Sense as themselves do: What! Deny Christ to be God, so expressly
spoken of him in Holy Scripture! In the mean time, they do not reflect upon
themselves, who make to themselves (by understanding Scripture in another Sense
than Christ understood it in) another God besides the Father, who only is the
true God. The Unitarians acknowledge and celebrate one God the Father, the
Trinitarians do so too, but they also acknowledge and celebrate two other
Persons, each of which is God in the same sense as the Father, neither of which
is the Father. Which of us are safer, and in less danger of being Blasphemers,
and worshippers of more Gods than one?

There Is nothing more manifest in Holy Scripture, than that the only true God
has given to the Son both his Being, and all whatsoever that he enjoys; he has
exalted him to his Right Hand, given him all Power in Heaven and in Earth, as
Pharaoh exalted Joseph in Egypt; only in the Throne (says he) will I be
greater than thou. But the Trinitarians will not suffer the Father to enjoy
that Privilege; They are ashamed of that Son of God (and his words) who is not
as great as his Father; though he said, My Father is greater than I. They are
ashamed of his words, who said, Of that Day and Hour -- knows none, not the
Son, but the Father only: and say in Contradiction to him, The Son did know
that Day and Hour as well as the Father, and not the Father only. They are
ashamed of his Words who said, I can do nothing of my self; I came not to do my
own Will, but the Will of him that sent me; my Doctrine is not mine, but his
that sent me; I -- do nothing of my self, but as the Father has taught me I
speak these things; I have not spoken of my self, but the Father that sent me,
he gave me a Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak; The word
that I speak, I speak not of my self, but the Father that abides in me he does
the Works. These and many other Words and Sayings of the same kind, they seem
to be ashamed of, and say, and contend for it, that he could do all things of
himself, that he came to do his own Will, that his Doctrine was his own, that
he had no need of the Father's teaching, etc. They are ashamed of those words
of Christ's; Mat. 19. 17. Why do thou call me good? none is good but one, the
God; and say none is good but Three, God and God and God, or Father, Son and
Holy Ghost.

Here let me observe to the Reader (as I have hinted above) that there is a
considerable Difference between that particle one in this Text, and the same
particle one in that supposititious Text, 1 John 5. 7. These three are one; for
here one is of the Neuter Gender, as is manifest both in the Greek and Latin,
and fignifies as the same word does in 1 Cor. 3. 8. He that planteth and he
that waters are one: but in the Text above, one is of the Masculine Gender,
and must be understood of one Person (or intelligent Being) who is good, and
none but he, to wit, the God. If they were not hindered by strong Preiudices,
they might easily see, that whatsoever they attribute to the Son, be it eternal
necessary Existence, Almightiness, or Omniscience, etc. they take away from the
Father thereby, not only the Glory of enjoying those Divine Excellencies alone,
but also the Glory of his free Goodness, and the Son's, and our Thankfulness
for such unspeakable Benefits both to him and us, as he has been graciously
pleased to give unto the Son, either in begetting him, or raising him up in
Time, or in rewarding him both for his and our Good. Nay, they make the Son
incapable of receiving those great and glorious Rewards, of all Power in Heaven
and Earth given to him, of an everlasting Kingdom, of a Name above every Name,
of exaltation to the Right Hand of God, and the like, which the Scriptures are
full of: For how could any of these Blessings be given to him that was God
always, even from Eternity? Could God sit at the Right Hand of God in any sense
whatever? These are the absurd Doctrines, which make the Trinitarians contend
so fiercely one with another, and with us. God will judge the World, and between
them and us, by that Man whom he has ordained to be Judge of the Dead and Living.

But to return to the Consideration of those Texts that are alleged for the
Son's being called God; that in John 1. 1. I have spoken of already, as also
that in 1 Timothy 3. 16. That in Romans 9. 5. is read without the word God in the
Syriac, and in the Writings of St. Cyprian, Hilary and Chrysostom; whereby it is
probable it was not originally in that Text. But Erasmus acknowledges that for
a good Reading, which points the Clause so as to render it a Thanksgiving to
the Father thus, The God over all be blessed for ever, to wit, for his Benefits
in raising up Christ of the Fathers, etc. And it seems to have been so read by
some of the Ancients, for they reckon it among the Heresies to say, that Christ
was God over all, as Origin contr. Cells. and others. In 1 John 3. 16. The word
God is not found but in very few Greek Copies; and if it be read there, admits
of a good Sense, without making God to die, who only has Immortality. As also
does that Text in Acts 20. 28. which may be rendered, Feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with the Blood of his own Son; but the truer Reading
according to the Syriac, the Armenian, and most ancient Greek Bibles, is,
Christ instead of God. Most of the Ancient Fathers read Christ or Lord. Those
words in 1 John 5. 21. This is the true God, which some refer to the Son, are
plainly to be referred to the Father, signified by him that is true, through his
Son Jesus. This [He that is true] (whose Son Christ is) is the true God.
Lastly, They urge that in John 20. 28. where Thomas being convinced by the
clear Testimony of his Senses, that Christ was risen from the Dead, answered
and said unto him, My Lord and my God: which words, whether they are words of
Admiration, respecting God that raised him from the Dead, or him that was
raised to be a Prince and Savior (Acts 5. 30, 31.) a Lord and a God; the term
God cannot signify in this latter sense, any other than a God or Christ, made
so by Resurrection. It Is a clear Case, that the Evangelist could not intend by
these words, to teach us that Jesus was God, when he tells in the last Verse,
that they and his whole Book were written, That we might believe that Jesus is
the Christ the SON of God, and that believing we might have Life through his
Name.

I have insisted long upon this Point of the Oneness of God, partly because it
is a Matter of the highest Moment in Religion; partly to show, that if our
Author had a Design (as Mr. Edw. says he had) to exclude the Belies of the
Trinity (or Threeness of God) from being a Point necessary to Salvation, it was
a Pious and Christian Design; and that Mr. Edw. has been so far from offering
any thing to prove that Faith to be so necessary, that he has not proved it a
true Doctrine; but on the contrary, I have proved it to be false, and highly
dishonorable to the ever-blessed God and Father of Christ, contrary to the
clear and full Current of Scripture, obscuring the true Glory of Christ, and
very injurious to the Peace and Hope of Christians.

But after all, whether our Author is of my mind in this Matter; or whether he
believes that the Doctrine of three coequal Almighty Persons is a Truth, but
not Fundamental, I cannot determine: but methinks Mr. Edwards's concluding him
all over Socinianiz'd in this Point, is done upon such Grounds, as will argue
the Holy Evangelists to be also Socinians: for he says, This Writer interprets
the Son of God to be no more than the Messiah: and I am much persuaded, that
whoever shall read the Gospels with any attention, will find the Holy Writers
to be of the same Mind; and our Author has fully proved it in his Book, but
more particularly from page 48. to 61. and page 95. Yea the comparing the
Evangelists in the relation of one and the same Story alone may do it; for what
in Matthew is expressed by, Thou art the Messiah the Son of the Living God, chap.
16. 16. the same is in Mark, Chap. 8. 29. Thou art the Messiah; and in Luke 9.
18. The Messiah of God. And if you compare 1 John 5. 1. with ver. 4, 5. you
will easily see the Christ or Messiah, and the Son of God, are Terms of the
same Import. Besides, the very word Messiah or Christ signifying Anointed, and
so interpreted in the Margin of our Bibles, John 1. 41. is in the 49th verse,
understood by Nathanael to be the Son of God, the King of Israel. For the Kings
of Israel in the Letter and Type, were constituted Kings by Anointing; hence
God is said to anoint David King over Israel, 2 Samuel 12. 7. and Psalm. 2. 2. he
is called the Lord's Anointed; but in verse 7. upon that very account, the Lord
said, Thou art MY SON, this Day have I begotten thee. Now as the first and
second verses of this Psalm, are by the Apostles and Believers, applied to
God's Holy Child [or Son] Jesus, who as David is called the Lord's Christ, Acts
4. 25, 26, 27. so upon God's raising again of Jesus to be a Prince and a
Savior, the Apostle Paul does expressly apply to him that glorious Proclamation
in the 7th verse, saying, As it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art
MY SON, THIS DAY have I BEGOTTEN THEE, Acts 13. 33. And the Author to the
Hebrews, Chap. 1. 4, 5. speaking of the Son's being made better than the
Angels, proves it from this, that God said not at any time to any of them, as
he did unto Jesus, [in his Type David] Thou art my Son, this Day have I
begotten thee; and in his Type Solomon, I will be to him a Father, and he shall
be to me a Son, 2 Samuel 7. 14. Moreover we have seen before, that our Lord
vindicates to himself the Name of the Son of God, by a Text out of the 82d
Psalm, where the mighty Judges and Princes are called Gods, and Sons of the
most High, John 10.

These things considered, will I think justify our Author in interpreting the
Son of God to be no more than the Messiah, or will condemn the Divine Writers
(if not the Messiah himself) in the same Crime.

Another Evidence of our Author's being Socinian, is (according to Mr. Edw.)
that he expounds Joh. 14. 9, etc. after the Antitrinitarian Mode, whereas
generally Divines understand some part of those words concerning the Divinity
of our Savior. He says, -- generally Divines, etc. By this mark those Divines
that do not so interpret, must be Socinians: the Socinians owe Mr. Edw. their
thanks, for adding to their Number many Learned and able Divines; but I doubt
those Divines will not thank him for it. But Mr. Edw. has Courage enough to
call a most Learned and right Reverend Father, Wavering Prelate, and to bring
in his Doctrine about Fundamentals, as favoring the Causes of Atheism, if he
and those other Divines agree not with him in their Sentiments.

Another mark of Socinianism is, that our Author Makes Christ and Adam, to be
the Sons of God -- by their BIRTH, as the Racovians generally do. That they
both make Christ to be the Son of God by his Birth, and that truly according to
that Text of Luke 1. 35. cannot I think be denied by any that duly considers
the Place; but that either the one or the other make Adam, who was never born
to be so, in like manner by his Birth, is Mr. Edwards's Blunder, and not their
Assertion.

I have not taken notice of the other Fundamentals which Mr. Edw. reckons in
his System, (diverse of which are not found in Holy Scripture, either Name or
Thing, expressly, or by consequence) because he insists chiefly on the Doctrine
of the Trinity; which however it is believed by Learned Men, to be in some
sense or other (they cannot agree in what sense) a Truth; yet some of the most
Learned of them do not believe it a Fundamental and necessary Truth,
particularly Mr. Limborch (than whom this present Learned Age does not afford a
more Learned and able Divine) could not defend Christian Religion, in his most
famous and weighty Disputations against the Jews, without waving that Point;
one of which we have in his Amica Collatio cum erudito Judaeo, etc. the ablest
Jew (I presume) that ever wrote in Defense of Judaism against Christianity.
Another Conference I am informed we may hope shortly to see, in his Reduction
of an eminent Person, who was upon the Point of forsaking the Christian
Religion, and embracing for it that of the Jews at Amsterdam, when first the
ablest Systemers had tried their utmost skill and could not effect it. Perhaps
Mr. Edw. means him for one, when he says, our Author's Plausible Conceit found
reception (if it had not its birth) among some Foreign Authors besides
Socinians, page 104. Indeed he had cause enough, for Mr. Limborch tells the Jew
expressly (in the Book I named, Chap. 9. Page 218.) Quando exigitur fides in
Jesum Christum, nusquam in toto novo Testamento exigi ut credamus Jesum esse
ipsum Deum, sed Jesum esse Christum, seu Messiam olim promissum, vel quod idem
est, esse Filium Dei; quoniam appellationes Christi and filii Dei inter se
permutantur. When we are required to believe in Jesus Christ, we are no where
in all the New Testament required to believe that Jesus is the very God, but
that Jesus is the Christ or the Messiah, that was of old promised, or which is
the same, that he is the Son of God; because those Appellations of Christ and
of Son of God are put one for another. So that in Company of Mr. Limborch and
other eminent Divines, as well as our English Bishops and Doctors, our Author
may still believe the Doctrine of the Trinity to be a Truth, though not
necessary, absolutely necessary to make one a Christian, as Mr. Edwards
contends.

But why does he make mention of only the Right Reverend Fathers, one Reverend
Doctor, and the foreign Divines and Socinians, as Favorers of this Plausible
Conceit, of making nothing necessary and Fundamental, but what is EVIDENTLY
contained in Holy Scripture as such; and so is accommodated to the apprehension
of the Poor, that hear and read the Scriptures, making them also capable of
being saved, though they are either ignorant of, or do not believe aright those
Truths, which, though delivered in Scripture, are yet either hard to be
understood, or difficultly inferred, or have no mark of Fundamental, either in
themselves, or in Divine Revelation; and for those Reasons cannot be made
evident to the despised common People, which the Lord Jesus came to save as
well as the Learned? He might also have charged the sixth Article of the Church
of England with this Plausible Coneeit, which has so much Evil and Mischief in
it, tending to reduce the Catholic Faith to nothing, page 122. For that
Article says thus; Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to
Salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby,
is not to be required of any Man, that it should be believed as an Article of
Faith. Observe here, that every necessary Article must be read expressly, or at
least proved thereby, and to whom is this Proof to be made? even to the WEAKEST
NODDLES of those that are required to believe it. Absolutely there is not one
Man or Woman of the venerable Mob, that (according to Mr. Edw.) can be saved,
because they cannot possibly have the Article of the three Persons that are one
proved to them from Scripture; for it is evident the Learned, even of the
Clergy, cannot prove it to one another, much less to vulgar Understandings. And
Mr. Chillingworth (the ablest Defender of the Religion of Protestants, that the
Church ever had) says (and ingeminates it) -- The BIBLE, the BIBLE, I say the
BIBLE only is the Religion of Protestants; whatsoever else they believe besides
it, and the plain IRREFRAGABLE and INDVBITABLE Consequences of it, well may
they hold it as a Matter of Opinion, but not as a Matter of Faith or Religion;
neither can they with consistence to their own Grounds believe it themselves,
nor require the Belief of it from others, without most High and most
Schismatical Presumption, Chapter 6. N. 56. Will Mr. Edwards say, His Fundamentals
are such irrefragable and indubitable Truths, about which there are among
Protestants such hot and irreconcilable Contentions? Again, that most
judicious Author lays this as the unmovable Foundation of his whole Discourse
against the Papists, viz. That all things necessary to Salvation are evidently
contained in Scripture; as the Church of England does, (see Pref. N. 30.) And
he shows in the following Paragraphs, to N. 38. That all the Jesuits Arguments
against Protestants are confuted by it. But that is not all, the same Author
after Dr. Potter affirms, That the Apostles Creed contains all those points of
Belief, which were by God's Command of Necessity to be preached to all, and
believed by all: And yet he says in the same Paragraph, That all Points in the
Creed are not thus necessary; See Chap. 4. N. 23. Now what more or less has
our Author asserted in his whole Book? For I have showed out of him, and it is
evident to the Impartial; that his Proposition, that Jesus is the Messiah or
Christ, does comprehend or clearly imply all the Articles of necessary
Christian Faith in the Creed. For, though it was sufficient to constitute a
Believer during the Life of Christ, to believe him to be the Christ, although
they had no explicit Belief of his Death and Resurrection to come; yet
afterward those Articles were necessary, being undoubted Evidences of his
being the Messiah, as our Author page 31. And therefore Mr. Edw. is very
injurious to him, in representing his Proposition, as if it were only the
believing the Man called Jesus to be the Messiah, an Hebrew word, that
signifies in English Anointed, without understanding what is meant by that
Term, see page 121.

But why should I expect that Mr. Edw. should have any regard to Mr.
Chillingworth's Judgment, and all those, the Vice Chancellor, the
Divinity-professors, and others that licensed and approved his Book, when he
has none for the Pious and Learned Bishop Jer. Tailor, and those others? Nay,
when those numerous plain Testimonies, which our Author has quoted out of the
Holy Scriptures themselves, do but provoke his Opposition and Contempt; though
the Divine Writers add these Sanctions to the Belief of our Author's
Proposition, or of those Words and Sentences that are of the same Import, and
comprehended in it, viz. He that believes shall be saved, or shall never
thirst, or shall have eternal Life, and the like: On the contrary, He that
believes not shall be condemned, or shall die in his Sin, or perish, and the
like. However I doubt not but my impartial Reader will consider both what my
Author, and what my self have said in this Point.

Having thus made it appear, that the reducing of the Fundamentals of Christian
Faith to a few, or even to one plain Article delivered in Scripture expressly,
and often repeated there, and in diverse equipollent Phrases, easy to be
understood by the POOR, and strongly enforcing the Obedience of the Messiah,
(as is our Author's Proposition) is far from having any tendency to Atheism or
Deism; I shall now retort this charge upon Mr. Edw. and show that on the
contrary, the multiplying of speculative and mysterious Articles as necessary,
which are neither contained in Scripture expressly, nor drawn thence by any
clear and evident Consequence, but are hard to be understood, especially by the
common People, having no rational Tendency to promote a good Life, but directly
to the high Dishonor of the one God, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the subversion of the Hope and Peace of Christians, as I have
manifested in one and the chief of Mr. Edw's Fundamentals, and of other
Systemers: This I say has been, and is one great Cause, or chief occasion of
that Atheism and Deism that is in the World.

1. Mr. Edw. himself tells us, That Undue Apprehensions of a Deity joined with
superstition, are the high road to Atheism, page 34. -- Therefore imposing of
false Doctrines, concerning the Attributes of God, is very pernicious, for they
are destructive of his very Being and Nature. But I have showed that the
imposing of the Doctrine of three Almighty Persons, or personal Gods, is a
false Doctrine, and destroys one of the chief Attributes of God, therefore is
(according to Mr. Edw.) destructive of his very Being and Nature, page 35.
Again, another of Mr. Edw's Fundamentals is, That full Satisfaction is made by
the Death of Christ to the Divine Justice; which Doctrine does clearly destroy
the Attribute of the Divine Mercy: for every one may readily perceive, that
full satisfaction to Justice by Punishment, cannot consist with Pardoning
Mercy; when a Judge punishes according to full Justice, he does not at all
forgive or show Mercy. But that they may not be seen to destroy altogether the
Mercy of God, they make him to inflict that Punishment upon himself in a Human
Body and Soul. Will not these false conceptions of the Deity expunge at last
the Belief of the true one? Mr. Edw. says false ones will.

2ly. Another occasion, Mr. Edw. says, Atheists take from our Divisions, Broils
and Animosities, from the many Parties and Squadrons of Sects that are in the
World, to bid defiance to all Religion. And is it not manifest that those
Divisions, etc. arise chiefly from those Doctrines that are Mr. Edw's
Fundamentals? I have intimated already, there are many Divisions of
Trinitarians, and how hotly they contend with one another, and upon Unitarian
Principles. And whoever shall but peep into Ecclesiastical History, may soon
see that their Trinity has been such a bone of Contention as has exercised the
Wits and Pens of Churchmen these 1400 Years; for so long it is, and longer
since Christians departed from the simplicity of the Faith, as it was preached
by our Lord Christ and his Apostles. And now when the Unitarians and our Author
would bring Christians back to that simplicity, in which the Gospel was
preached to the Poor, and they understood it and received it; this pious Design
is ridiculed, and the Salvation of the Bulk of Mankind is set at naught; Mr.
Edw. may well conclude that this conduct gives occasion to Atheistical Persons.

3ly. He says, page 63. When Persons observe that the very Divinity of our
Blessed Lord and Savior is tossed and torn by rude Pens -- what can they think
of the other great Verities of Christianity? But Mr. Edw. mistakes, it is not
the opposition that is made to the supreme Divinity of the Son of God, but the
asserting it, that inclines Men to disbelieve Christianity. Had many that are
now Deists, been sooner acquainted with the Doctrine of one God even the
Father, and of one Man the Mediator between God and Men, it is very probable
they would have continued Christians; for there are some that of Deists have
been reconciled to the Christian Faith by the Unitarian Books, and have
professed much Satisfaction therein. But I must confess it is a very handsome
rebuke Mr. Edw. gives to his own Party, when he blames the Antitrinitarians,
That they have provoked some of them to an undecent sort of Language concerning
these Holy Mysteries: so that some of these latter have hurt the Cause, it may
be almost as much by their Defending it, as the others have by their Opposing
it. I must lay up this for a curious Figure in Rhetoric: He cuts some
dignified Persons through the Unitarians sides; and so whoever is in Fault,
they must bear the Blame. But if the Unitarians have Truth, and necessary Truth
on their side, then they are not faulty, even as Christ and the Apostles were
not faulty, though they preached the Gospel which set the Son against the
Father, etc. and produced not Peace but a Sword: And the Reformers were not
faulty in vigorously opposing the Popish Faith, even unto Blood. But whoever
will attentively consider it, may see it is the Nature of the Trinitarian
Doctrine, that it cannot be defended without being exposed, so that when the
most Learned of the Party labor to defend it, they necessarily run into one
Absurdity or other; which being perceived by the next Learned Man, he exposes
him: and a Third sees the weakness of each of them: and a Fourth Man spies
Flaws in every of them. This produces various Hypotheses, and makes them a
Scorn to Atheists, and enclines others to Deism. For the obscuring of a
Contradiction will not take it away. Contradictions are stubborn Things, and
will never yield to any Reconciliation whatsoever. God will never be more than
One real Person, and One Person will never be Three real Persons. And if
Trinitarians will (as they do) make that a Fundamental of Religion, which
contradicts the best Reasonings of Mankind, whereby they prove the Existence of
God and his Unity, viz. That he is that Being which IS necessarily and by
himself, and so considered not in Kind, but in Act; wherefore if you suppose
more Gods, then you will necessarily find nothing in each of them why any of
them should be. Grotius de verit. Chr. Relig. in initio. And if the
Trinitarians cannot explain their Doctrine to one another, so as to clear it
from introducing more Gods than one, no marvel then that loose Men (who yet
reason as the incomparable Grotius, and other Learned Men do) do thence deny
there is any God at all. The Learned allow there is not necessarily any God, if
you suppose more than one: The Trinitarians say he is more than one; Men who
think it their Interest there should be no God, conclude thence, it is equal in
reason to believe there is no God as three. And Mr. Norris joins them with his
Suffrage in the Point; I think it (says he) a greater Absurdity, that there
should be more Gods than one, than that there should be none at all. Reason and
Relig. p. 59.

And if some Men take occasion from such reasonings as these to turn Atheists
it may easily be conceived, that Men that are more Sober, and find strong and
irresistible Reasons for the Existence and Unity of God, but see clearly that
Christians worship Three, and besides that, hold diverse other absurd Doctrines
for Fundamentals; such Men (I say) must of necessity forsake Christianity; and
turn Deists. Thus it is most manifest, that the Unitarians take the direct
Course to prevent Atheism and Deism, by letting the World see, that those
Fundamentals are no Doctrines of Christ; but that the necessary Faith of Christ
is a plain and short Doctrine, easy to be understood by the Poor, and clearly
expressed in Scripture, most reasonable in it self, and most agreeable to the
Unity and Goodness of God, and other the Divine Attributes.

I shall now in the 4th Place show how the Obscurity, Numerousness, and
Difficulty of understanding Systematical Fundamentals promotes Deism, and
subverts the Christian Faith, and that in a notorious Instance. It Is matter of
Fact, and evident to the whole World, that the Quakers are a very numerous
People, and formed into a compact Body, in which they exercise strict
Discipline, as to what concerns their Party. They will not own any other
Denomination of Christians or others for the People of God, but themselves
only; all others are of the World. They utterly disown the Scriptures as the
Rule of Faith; they decry it as Letter, Carnal, Dust, etc. Their Principle is,
that their Religion is taught them by Inspiration or Revelation of a Light
within, whereof every Man has a Measure, but they only hearken to it, and obey
it; They give the Scripture the place of bearing witness to their inward Light,
as the Woman of Samaria to Christ. They turn the Gospel into an Allegory, and
consequently make use of the Words and Phrases of the Scripture; as that Christ
is the Word, the Light, the Teacher, the Word in the Mouth and Heart; that
Christ died, and rose, and ascended, and is in Heaven, and the like; but all in
a mystical or spiritual Sense, as they call it. By all which things, and indeed
by the whole Tenor of their Books, Preachings and Professions, they appear to
be Deists and not Christians. George Fox's Book; titled, The great Mystery,
will give full satisfaction in this Point. And they have all along been charged
by other Denominations to be no Christians, and that Quakerism is no
Christianity. However retaining still the Words wherein the Christian Faith is
expressed, though in an equivocal Sense; and having some among them (as George
Keith and others) who still believed the Gospel in the proper Sense, they made
a shift to be reputed generally Christians. And indeed this Conduct of theirs
deceived even many of their own Party, which is manifest in William Rogers of
Bristol, Francis Bugg, Thomas Crispe, John Pennyman, and especially in George
Keith; who having been a Quaker about 30 Years, yet did not till within these
three or four Years discover the Infidelity of the Primitive and true Quakers,
who are deservedly called Foxonians, because holding the Principles of George
Fox their Author. But G. Keith living in Pensylvania, (where the Quakers were
Governors, and might be free to open their Minds plainly) did then perceive
they did not believe the Doctrine of the Apostles Creed, the summary of
Christian Faith, which made him preach it and contend for it more earnestly.
This provoked the Foxonians so far, that it came to a Breach and Separation,
and at length to Impeachment, Fines and Imprisonment. Then G. Keich returns to
London, where the matters in Contest between him and the Foxonians of
Pensylvania, was taken into Consideration, and had diverse Hearings by the
general Annual Meeting of Quakers, 1694, who gave a kind of a Judgment in the
Case, but no clearer Determination of the principal Matter concerning Christ
within, and Christ without, and the other Articles of Christian Faith, than
their former equivocal Expressions. The next Year 1695, at the like General
Meeting, they absolutely excommunicate G. Keith, and make this the Ground of
it, viz. that he had not given due observance to their former Order, and was
troublesome to them in his Declarations, etc. For he had still continued to
preach frequently Christianity as before. See a late Book, titled, Gross Error
and Hypocrisy detected, etc. The Reader I hope will excuse it, that I have
detained him in this long Story, because it was necessary for me first, to
prove the Quakers are Deists, and then to proceed and show,

Secondly, That the Obscurity, Ambiguity, and Numerousness of Systematical
Fundamentals, is that which is the chief Cause of their being so: For not being
able to satisfy themselves in understanding and determining the Truth and
Certainty of those Fundamentals, for the proof of which Scriptures were
alleged; but those of so doubtful a sense, and variously interpreted by
opposite Parties, that they readily embraced George Fox's only Fundamental of
the Light in every Man; that is in reality the natural Light, whereby we
distinguish between Good and Evil in ordinary; whence it is that (as says the
Apostle Paul) We (as the Gentiles) are a Law to our selves, and our Thoughts
accuse or excuse, Romans 2. 14, 15. Which is in Truth an excellent Doctrine, and
has great certainty and clearness in it. But G. Fox preaches this, not as a
natural Principle, but 1. As a supernatural Revelation: And 2. Christ being
called in Scripture, the Light that lights every Man, and the Light of the
World, because be brought the Light of the Gospel into the World; George Fox
applies these Terms and Phrases, and almost every thing that is spoken of
Christ, to the Light in every Man, and so turns the plain sense of the Gospel
into a Parabolical or Mystical Sense, and makes the Christian Scripture to
speak nothing but Deism. 3. G. Fox adds certain Observances of giving no
respect in Word or Gesture, or Title, nor speaking as others speak, nor
saluting as others salute, nor paying Tithes, nor using the Sword, nor swearing
in common Form, etc. and all as inspired Dictates, that so the only People of
God might be separated from all the World, and they serve admirably for that
purpose. Now if you consider the experimented certainty of their Principle, the
Light within, that accuses and excuses, and their Persuasion that it was a
Divine Inspiration, which also was confirmed to them by their giving obedience
to those Ceremonies which were so contrary and offensive to the World, and
exposed them to much Suffering; [All suffering for Religion, especially for a
clear Revelation from God, confirming the Sufferers in their Persuasion:] You
may clearly perceive it was the Uncertainty, Obscurity, and Intricacy of their
former Principles, which induced them to embrace G. Fox's Religion, which is
all dictated by the Spirit of God in every Man. Whence it is, they upbraid
other Professors with Doubtfulness and Fallibility; and every one of them
counts himself as infallible as the Papists do the Pope. How can ye but delude
People (says G. Fox) that are not infallible? Mist. p. 33.

Lastly, The Obscurity, Uncertainty, and Multiplicity of Fundamentals, is that
which has given an Argument to Popish Priests and Jesuits, wherewith to seduce
Protestants to Popery. For evidence of this, I shall mind you of a Paper
written by a Jesuit, in the late King James's time, titled, An Address
presented to the Reverend and Learned Ministers of the Church of England, etc.
The purport of which is, That all things necessary to Salvation are not clearly
contained in Scripture, as Protestants hold; because the Belief of a Trinity,
one God and three Persons, is necessary to Salvation, but not clearly contained
in Scripture. Then he goes about to show, that the Scriptures commonly alleged
for the Trinity, admit of another sense. He goes the same way in the Article of
the Incarnation. Thus supposing these Articles to be necessary to Salvation (as
Protestants hold) and not clearly contained in Scripture; it follows that the
undoubted Certainty of them must be found in the Determinations of the Church;
and then that Church which professes Infallibility is the only Refuge; and I
believe as the Church believes, supplies all other Articles. No Certainty any
where else; but Certainty must be had in these Points. Here the making of those
Articles Fundamental, which cannot be clearly proved from Scripture, subverts
the Sufficiency and Clearness of Scripture, and sends poor Protestants to Rome,
for the Certainty and Infallibility of the Christian Faith.

They did so glory in the strength of this Argument, that the Jesuit-Preacher
in Limestreet, read their Paper, and made the same Challenge in his Pulpit,
where he had a great number of Protestants that went out of Curiosity to hear
him.

Having thus (as I presume) vindicated our Author, and shown the Mischiefs of
Mr. Edw's Fundamentals, I may now take my leave of my Reader. Only I am first
willing to let Mr. Edw. know, that I have not undertaken this Defense out of
any ambitious Humor of contending with so Learned a Man as he is; nor would I
have made opposition to him in any other Point of Learning or Divinity: but
Fundamentals every Man is concerned in, and ought to know, and to be assured
that he holds them all. Eternal Salvation is a greater thing by far than any
Empire, and will therefore justify and exact our utmost Care and Endeavor for
the obtaining it. So that in these Considerations of Mr. Edw's Exceptions -- I
have done my Duty to my self; and that I have published them, I am persuaded I
have therein done a great Charity to my Neighbors, the Poor and Bulk of
Mankind, for whose Salvation (I hope) I should not think it too much to lay
down my Life, however Mr. Edw. speaks so scoffingly of them, even where their
eternal Happiness or Misery is deeply concerned.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 9. Col. 2 l. 0. for a read or. P. 11. col. 2. l. 14. r. perfect Man. P.
14. col. 2. l. 8. f. mine r. nine; l. 14. r. palliate the.


