A LETTER From a GENTLEMAN in IRELAND To his BROTHER in ENGLAND, Relating to
the Concerns of IRELAND in matter of TRADE.

Licensed,

Roger L'Estrange.
March 26. 1677.


LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Langley Curtiss, in Goat-Court upon
Ludgate Hill. 1677.

Honored Brother,
I Have lately received yours, wherein you give me account of the Fall of your
Rents, the Cheapness of your Wools, the decay of your Manufacture in England;
and you ascribe the cause of it principally to Ireland; which is a double
Melancholy to me, that you, first, who are the Head of our Family, should find
your self so straightened* that you cannot support its Dignity with the same ease
and plenty that you did formerly: but that I, then, who have for you all the
affection and tenderness of so dear a Relation, should be engaged in a Country
and Interest opposite* as it seems to yours, and accessory to your ruin, there
is nothing worse could happen to me, then that it were real. And yet, did I
find my self here in a more happy condition, I could better relish your
complaints, and my opportunity of serving you, would extinguish in me all other
sense of your misfortunes. I should take an innocent pride out of a younger
Brothers fortunes to supply the Elder. For as in Timber, the sap descends in
Winter, so it is but natural and reasonable, that in hard times the Branches
should pinch to succor the Root of the Family. But alas, the case with us is
far otherwise, so destitute of affording you help, that we can scarce find our
selves a subsistence: but so absurd is our calamity, that we labor under
abundance of want in a most plentiful Country. And what aggravates it the more,
is, that you in England concur to it; not by accident only, but upon judgment
and deliberation: as if you had entertained a maxim of destroying us for your
own preservation, and pulling off that Twig which at one time or other might
save you from sinking. Your Head aches, your Heart trembles, your Liver
ulcerates; yet all your Diseases and Distempers must be attributed to Ireland,
which lies and swells, you think, like the Spleen upon the side of England.
Whereas, if you could cut it off, you would fin^ your selves by the loss of
such a Receptacle much impaired, but no advantage either in your Health or good
Humor. It is you in England only, that have been the cause both of your own
and our sufferings, and have a mind, I doubt, to continue so. But, that I may
not spend your time in Recriminations (which is the solace of the Desperate) I
shall strive to convince you of it by Reason (which is the Remedy of the
Curable.) And therefore I shall discourse it with you with that freedom which
the necessity of the Case requires, and which is most suitable to the intimacy
of our Fraternal Relation; the best Emblem of that Correspondence which were to
be wished between the two Nations for their Mutual Happiness.

And because what is freshest in memory, does most affect the Understanding, I
shall date this Argument no further back then the Kings blessed Restoration:
that Caroline period, from which, as a second Creation of our lesser world, it
were proper to reckon a New Style; and, were it of the same labor, to have
reformed both the Times and the Calendar. That seasonable return had filled all
minds with so general a satisfaction, that it seemed no man had cause, or
leisure, or inclination to wish worse to others, or themselves better. And as
the rest, so we in Ireland (happy because contented) lived in a condition
tolerable to our selves, and serviceable to England. For without busy
prospects of greater advantage, we gave our selves in a manner wholly to that
harmless and primitive course of breeding Cattle; which we transported to you,
and sold at easy rates in your Markets: wherein we had but that single, you a
manifold profit; both in the Gross, by stocking your Grounds therewith to feed
them; and in the Retail, by those several Commodities that arise in the
Slaughter; the Tallow, the Victual, the Hides, and the Fleeces, all which
turned to account of the respective Trades therein concerned. And, which is yet
more weighty to consider, we did not hereby drain away your Money to hoard it
up, or brood upon it in Ireland: but very simply and honestly, as soon as we
had received it with one hand, we laid it out again with the other, with you
for your Manufactures, or for the Foreign Commodities of which you were our
Merchants; or else it went to furnish such of our Nobility as resided in your
Court for their Expenses. And it requires much subtilty to invent what more you
could have desired of us, and how either in Commerce we could be more
subservient, or in Policy we could be more dependent upon you, then by this
means we were rendered, without attempting or dreaming on our side of any
further intercourse: all the benefit of Ireland redounding to you, while to us
there remained no more but a bare livelihood. And yet after some years that
things had continued on in this tenor, all on a sudden, and, if we were
rightly informed, not without some repugnance at first in His Majesty, the
Importation of our Irish Cattle is by Act of Parliament prohibited. And (to
clench it the faster, and to set (if I may so say) a Spell upon His Majesty's
Power and Prudence, lest he might upon occasion redress it for the future) it
is in a Magical and severe term of Law declared to be a public Nuisance. What
could be the reason, it is not for me to conjecture, much less to determine.
But whatsoever less and invisible Spring might, as is usual in other great
affairs, animate this motion, it cannot be otherwise in so numerous and prudent
an Assembly, so involved in the Interest of their Country, and sensible of
their own, but it must have been represented under the most specious,
colorable, and necessary Arguments; That by this Importation, your own breed
of Cattle decayed, your Markets were glutted, and your Rents starved. Wherein
give me leave to say, that it happened to you as with men who having run
themselves out, do set up late for Frugality; they entertain themselves with
every Project that first presents it self, and what is next, does always seem
most reasonable. For admitting that some of your Counties might be prejudiced
by the Importation of our Cattle, yet whatsoever profit accrued to others by
it, did, upon the mutual necessities of all, circle into the common Stock of
your Nation. And it seems to me, that whatsoever private Obligation a
Parliament Man has to the place where he is elected; yet, when once he comes
to sit, his Trust and his Mind is enlarged, and he does no more consider
himself as the Politician of a Shire, or the Patriot of a Borough, but as a
Representer of the Universality. Whereas otherwise, if any County, one or more,
chance to be more fertile then other in Members of Parliament, and they Act by
such narrow Measures; the Decision would be by Multitude, not by Reason;
Arithmetic would be Logic, and the greater Herd, as among Cattle, would carry
it. You best know how that matter went who are one of them; and however your
opinion stand in other things as to us in Ireland; yet I need not Divine your
thoughts on this Question, serving as you do for --, and so the Bias of your
Interest there corroborating the general rectitude of your Judgment. And if the
business were now to tell Counties, I have been lately assured by some from
England, that those Counties that find themselves not benefited, and those that
are really aggrieved by this Act, do by this time upon Experiment and second
thoughts, make up the greatest party. For, if we account like Merchants by
Profit and Loss, all the Profit that can be made by this Act, returns only to
such Counties which are proper for Breeding, or the deeper Feeding of Cattle of
your own growth; whereby they do but raise the price upon their Neighbors, and
Monopolize the rest of your Nation. These other in the mean time have their
Grounds thrown up into their own hands, which used to be stocked with our
lesser Cattle, that served them, as small Money does poor People, for Change at
the Market. And your whole Nation has hereby lost in great measure the Vent of
their Home and Foreign Commodities to Ireland, and wholly the increasing
Product to you of our Cattle in specie. But as to the Political point, you did
herein, as much as in you then was, cut off all that stronger, as more Natural
dependence of that Kingdom upon yours, and necessitate your selves to govern it
rather by the force of Authority, then by the influential benignity of
Interest. It were too tragical to describe to you the surprise and astonishment
with which the first News of that Act seized and affected us. Our condition did
contrarily resemble his in the Fable, who saw every thing turned into Gold that
he should have fed upon, but we could only feed upon that, which before we
converted into Money. It may best be compared and conceived by the decrying of
Coin, whereby he that was one day Master, as he imagined, of great Wealth,
finds the next morning nothing but an unvaluable lump, wherein to contemplate
his Poverty. What was to be done in this exigent? when we were reduced to the
perfect state of Boccaneers, to kill Cows and surfeit our selves on the
Carcasses, that we might sell the Hides to the next charitable Foreigner that
chanced to visit us.

Being thus to begin the world again, and constrained to look out for a new way
to sustain Nature, we took council of necessity. Our Commodities out of which
we could subsist, were either our Corn, our greater Cattle, or our Sheep. For
the Irish Corn, it could serve us only to Market with among our selves; being
by reason of the Climate, not so large, firm and dry a Grain, that it should be
proper for Transportation: And consequently we Plowed no more then might serve
us yearly from hand to mouth for our own spending. For our Cattle, we continued
the breeding of them, and employed part of our grounds to feed them: Finding,
for the proportion, more Advantage by Victualling it out to Foreigners, then
what we had formerly by their Wholesale in England. But that Vent was nothing
equal to what those Tracts of Land, that lay idle before us would have
furnished: And therefore we betook our selves more generally to the Grazing of
Sheep, in which you know, how numerous Flocks, and wide Pastures are managed by
one Shepherd. So that this course did best suit with our Purse, that could not
answer any more expensive profit; and with our Dispositions, that are not made
for Laborious improvements; and with your Jealousy, who interpret our industry
as Theft, and that we defraud you as often as we make the least attempt to work
out an honest Living. So that the Wool now was the only thing that we had to
rest upon: And you were provided with sufficient Act of Parliament to be the
only Mart for it: It being made Felony to Transport it into forain parts; and
Confiscation to Import it to you, otherwise than crude and unmanufactur'd. And
yet, having thus again patched up a slender Subsistence and method of being, we
had re-composed our selves, enjoying Poverty and Ease, and leading an
Arcadian-life, solaced among the Sheep with our Pastorals. We had left
muttering any more at your Act against Irish-Cattle, and only smiled, as in a
Triumph, not of Malice, but of Reason, to see that you were now the persons
agrieved; and if not yet convinced of the cause, yet laboring under the
effects of it. For, whereas some Co^^ties only could complain of our Cattle,
the cheap^^^s of Wools was become a general incommodity to your whole Nation.
For, I believe, as you were ready enough to imagine, that by importing upon you
all the Wools of this Kingdom, yours were partly choked; having more of your
own upon your hands already, than, in the present state of Trade thorough the
World, your own Manufactors could work, or your ^^^chants vend beyond Sea.
Although, we paying the King's and Lieutenant's Duty, which is at least Two
shillings for every Stone, beside the fraught of the Ships that bring it over,
and the other charges of Factorage and Market, are competently guarded from the
danger of underselling you. For, by this means it is easy to compute, that in
respect to your Wools, ours are sold at that which Merchants call Fifty per
Cent. disadvantage. Yet, as the Trade of our Cattle injured you before, so now
our Wools grow toward a Nuisance: what was lawful for us and profitable to you,
you prohibited; what you constrain us to, you accuse: you are neither well full
nor fasting; I know not what you would have, unless you could furnish us with a
breed of Sheep that bore no fleeces. Is it not the same, that those fleeces
bear no price? But though those Gentlemen among you whose Rents depend much
upon that product, do doubtless find their Estates by the late cheapness of
Wool much reduced; yet I shall, ere I close this Letter, show you that our
Irish-wool is the least accessory to it. And however, your Kingdom does so
abound with native Commodities (which, were you not so in love with the forain,
would multiply to you in Treasure and Bullion) that you might well, or much
better than we, dispense with the common calamity upon that Trade, who have so
many more to trust to: Whereas this is in a manner the only one that is left
us, and that too fails us. For it is not to be presumed that, while your own
Wool sells not, you will out of good nature prefer ours at a Market: Nor that
you are so newfangled, as much strangers as you make us, that you will enquire
out for la Lained' Irlande, and make it your mode to wear it. But it remain^ a
^eer Drug, although you are those that will be the Ingrossers. In this
condition, miserable to our selves, and yet subject to your envy, what can be
propounded for our relief, or toward your satisfaction? Shall we steal our Wool
beyond Sea? which yet were but to steal our own goods; that you will say would
be a greater prejudice to you. Shall we manufacture it at home? That, although
a double benefit to us, would seem to you a double inconvenience. And yet there
is no third way left, unless, like your Spiders, to weave out our own Bowels.

And here it may not be amiss to inform you, something better than I perceive
you are at present, concerning the state of our Manufac^^re in Ireland: not so
much because it is in it self grown so considerable that it deserves mention,
((...) of all Virtues, Industry is the last of which you will have cause to
accuse us) as by reason it has of late made a great noise with you, as things
usually do that are most empty. About ten or twelve years ago (before your Act
against the Irish Cattle) some Western Cloathiers finding, so early, and upon
other reasons than are now suborned, that Trade decaying, and many of them
reduced to extreme Poverty, removed themselves and their Families over into
Ireland; invited by the cheapness there of Wool and of Livelihood. These
erected then a Manufactory (great in respect to Ireland) at Dublin, which has
been carried on ever since, and increases daily. There came also over, much
about the same time, Sixty Families from Holland, setting up another at
Lymerick; which by occasion of the succeeding Wars decayed. But after these,
more of the English Cloathiers came and fixed about Cork and Kinsale, where
they continue, and are grown not inconsiderable. Some French have since
resorted to Waterford, to make Druggets there, and other Commodities of their
fashion. And about a year or two ago, some Merchants of London raised another
Manufacture at Clonmel, managing it by their Agents. Some small Attempts of the
like nature may be met with here and there in the Countries, but not worth
sp^^king of. These are the Crimes of which we are gu^^^y before any Law to
prohibit us: it were more allowable to plant Poison than Manufacture with (...)
and we lie it seems under such an Obloquy and Clamo^^ (...) which as far as I
can judge by your Letter, you also listen to) that, as to import our Cattle to
you is a Nuisance, and to export our Wools is Felon^; so, by gradation, to
erect here a Manufacture ought to be no less than Treason. And yet there is
more Cry than Wool in all this matter: For I dare, and do assure you, that,
modestly speaking, the whole quantity of what we work up in Ireland, amounts
not to the half of what any one Cloathing-County in England. Of what Importance
Manufacture is to us, appears more than sufficiently by this jealousy of it
that you have conceived, and by that Life which so small but active a Particle
insinuates into this poor and idle Body of a Nation. If it were Promoted as
carefully as it is Discouraged, it would make his Majesty's Revenue here rise
with more Ease to the Subject, and proportionably increase it for the future.
It would replenish the Country with People, raise the price of our Lands, and
wear off the Barbarity of the common Irish, when once they were inured to
Labor: For Industry is the first step to Civility, and the securest pledge to
Government; those that will take pains for their own living, being the least
inclined to invade another Propriety. If those that are the Heads of such
Undertakings reside with you in England, all the Product they should make here,
would return over to you into the common Stock of your Nation: If they do not,
but reside with us, we indeed receive the Advantages abovementioned; but to you
there is no other difference, than that you are Rich on this side of the water.

All that can be objected reasonably (for none, I hope do officiously malign
us) is, that you are however the nearest Neighbors to your selves, and
whatever becomes of us, sink or swim, you must provide that you suffer not by
us, either in exhausting your People, whereof you are already not too numerous;
or by diminishing your Trade, which is already much decayed. As to the danger
of depopulating you, which is the first, it is a thing you can only presuppose
and imagine, but which we, were it a thing to be wished, could never hope for.
God forbid (if it be lawful to make so unnecessary and vain a request) that any
accident or extremity should cause you to exchange Middlesex for Lemster, and
prefer Dublin before London, to be the Imperial Seat and Chamber of the
Monarchy. It is indeed, as the profit of an Husbandman, to have his Land full
stocked with Cattle; so of a Prince, to have his Dominions manned with a
proportionable complement of People. And one of our Countrymen interessed in
both Nations, has therefore well calculated how much the Public misses or
gains in the person of every Individual. The Bodies of Men are not only
estimable while living, but when dead: And, were it not to play the Coqueten in
Trade, I could demonstrate what prejudice the Nation receives by the burying of
every Englishman beyond Sea; and how far the Smith, the Iron-monger, the
Joyner, and the Curate, with several other Trades, are thereby damnified, and
our Neighbors advantaged. And I could then dispute, that an Act against Oaken
Coffins were no less necessary at home for preserving your Timber, than that
for Flannel-shrowds was for the encouragement of your Woollen Manufacture. But
if this of the Dead seems ridiculous to you, pardon me if I say, that were we
not of the two the more melancholy Nation, neither could we refrain from
smiling at this your frugality of the Living. For, how can we think you serious
in so speculative and remote a Consideration, that, as to us, it is rather a
Case put, than what can ever be presumed to fall out in practice. For, while
herein you represent the Weaver, who overshooting his Shuttle into the Wall,
although a Bachelor, wet his cheeks and his Manufacture to think, how if his
only son had received that blow, his Majesty had lost a Subject, and himself
the stay of his Family; you nevertheless at the same time, and while at Peace,
transport yearly many thousands of English to be killed in the Wars, and are
become the Magazine of men to your Neighbors. You do not only send out yearly
swarms of men to your old Colonies, but, wanting, it seems, Hives for your
multitude, you do every day increase your new Buildings at home, and abroad
design new Plantations. And even your Merchants, incorporated with others,
whose greater quality may suppose them to be Statesmen in that particular;
yet, instead of bringing over more Gold from Guiny, do, as I am told, so
inhanse their sole Trade of Negroes, that your Planters, not able to go to the
price, are forced to load their Ships continually with English Servants. And,
if there were this penury of people with you, it is probable that you would
find out Employment for so many idle persons that, as I observed when I came
last over, notwithstanding those constant draughts beyond Sea, do both Natives
and Forrainers pester you still at home, and so incumber your Streets and your
Highways, that a man of business can scarce pass without justling. Therefore
it is time for you to quit this Notion, which you so many ways slight in
effect, and contradict in practice, and in our case is so singular: unless you
will affix your inhabitants like Trees to the Soil, and lay as severe an
Injunction against your English men's going abroad, as that wherewith you have
impounded our Cattle at home in Ireland.

That which may afford more appearance of reality is, that our Woollen
Manufactures interrupt the Vent of yours. But I have already shown you how
slender a quantity is wrought up with us; so small a pittance, that it cannot
affect even your Norwich, much less your whole Kingdom: nor is there yet any
Law (I hope will not) to interdict us what, if real, were so necessary. The
Dutch, the French, any Forrainer have Liberty, and make use of it, to work with
us; and shall either the Irish or English of both Countries be rather debarred,
whether Rich from planting Manufacture, or whether Poor from laboring it in
Ireland? I know not that ever it entered into your minds to forbid your English
the purchasing of Land among us: and what reason is there greater to hinder
them from employing their Money with us upon any other occasion to private and
public advantage? But what do I instance in Land, a thing the most improbable;
and to which, as it stands with us, the English can at present have no
temptation? when, beside the novelty, weakness, and mutability of Titles, every
thing from which the profit might result, is rendered so incommodious to us, and
unpracticable, that as the Tenant has only his Labor for his Pains, so the
Purchaser, instead of Rent, can only have his Land for his Money. Therefore I
submit it to you to choose any more particular and proper instance (if such
there be) where English men's Estates lie under such a perpetual Tuition, and
others may administer to him that is yet living. But this Clamor has so
little of a public spirit in it, that it savours rather of that envy which is
among little Artificers, or meaner Merchants that trade or factor in the same
Commodity: For there is indeed no man but does in some sort prejudice another;
no Trade but is to the detriment of another Trade in some measure: yet these
are all reconciled in the public Convenience or Necessity; otherwise every
County, every Company, every Member would stand in another way, and there
should be no end of Divisibility. But, if you were in earnest, methinks it
would better require your good Husbandry and Inspection to rectify those,
whether Trades or Persons, that suck out your very blood, transvasating foreign
Juyces into your Veins; and that, while they export your Treasure and Bullion,
prey upon your Vitals. And to discover such others, who, under the quality of
English Merchants, are, as is said, but Factors for Aliens, and daily spirit
away the Wealth and Strength of your Nation beyond Sea. But however you judge
and dispose of your Domestic Affairs, suffer not your selves, in regard of us,
to be imposed on by false suggestions against your own and our Interest.

For the deadness of your Manufactures, as well as ours, proceeds not from
their interfering with one another, but from much differing causes, wherein it
may befit you, first to consider (for I will not, to the dis-reputation of so
many worthy Merchants, affirm what is reported at this distance) whether
several of those Companies that are entrusted and empowered with the sole Trade
of your homebred Commodities in remote Regions, do not for their more
excessive advantage, forbear to buy up that quantity which so great a part of
the world as lies stretched out in their Patents, but unvisited in their
Traffic, would take off, at a more moderate profit. And whether they do not,
for what Quantity they do utter, methodize their buying so artificially, to
such times, conditions, and restrictive regulations, practicing upon the
Manufactors necessity, that the poor men lie at the Merchants mercy, and their
goods lie so long upon their hands, till they are forced to receive any rate
from the single Chapman's discretion. For, whether it be so or no in this
particular, there is that general malignity in Commerce, that the rich Buyer
does set the Dice always upon the necessitous Seller: as in the most plentiful
years of Corn, the Ingrosser never thinks the Market low enough. But a more
evident and certain reason of yours and our consuming for want of Consumption,
is the Wars, with which formerly and of later years, Europe has generally been
infested. So that in most parts thereof, which were usually supplied from you,
the people have been much impoverished, and thereby necessitated to be their
own Clothiers first, and from thence enabled, Industry increasing, some of them
to furnish their Neighbors. And to this several of your own Subjects have
concurred, who either not finding themselves well and easy at home, or enticed
over by greater profit, have instructed Forainers in the whole mystery of
Clothing, till they now have made (...) Staple Commodity, and outdo yours for
perfection, and, what between their finer and courser Manufactures, can both
over and under-sell you at any Market; where you too, that were the sole
Merchants, do often condescend to be their Chapmen. Thus by the reciprocation
of humane affairs, that Trade which the Wars, upon the Forainers refuge with
you, first introduced, is upon occasion of the Wars revolved back again, and
the Drapery restored to them in great measure, even by means of your own (...).

But the grand spring of this whole matter lies in France. That King is a most
vigilant and potent Prince, strong in Arms, in Council, in Treasure, and in
People, and who measures Justice by his Interest. And accordingly, ever since
he manifested himself, and assumed the whole direction of his own affairs, he
has made war to all Europe: with his Sword, against his Enemies; but against
his Friends, (and Enemies also) by Traffic; which is indeed, as the more
just, so the most effectual way of destroying them. But, among all, none has
on this latter account more suffered than the Subjects of England. For, beside
the Wines, which we purchase at most excessive rates, and for the most part
with pure Money, (although, if it pleased the King and Parliament, there might
more generous Wines and upon better terms be imported from Italy and the
Mediterranean) and beside those Trinkets, of which we are so fond, and to the
making of which the French Genius was formerly most adapted: He has, now for
many years, applied his people to the more solid Trades of Cloth, Silk, and
Stuffs, indeed of all things valuable; embracing in effect, or in projection,
the universal Monarchy of Commerce. Never did any Prince, except our own,
addict himself so wholly to the encouragement of Trade and Navigation.
Therefore he has not only promoted the building of Merchants-ships, to carry
in and out; but provided himself also of a formidable Navy, fit to justify
whatsoever he shall think reason to attempt. He has both trained up his own
Subjects to Sea, which before they nauseated, and allured over great numbers of
your best Mariners into his service. To this, he has either wholly prohibited*
or which is tantamount, laid so excessive Impositions upon all (...)
Manufactures, and other Merchandises which were vendible there, that they are
in a manner totally excluded, and you have no Commodity to exchange with, but
whatever you have of his (and have it you will whatsoever it cost you) must be
bought with the Penny. Insomuch, that I have seen here a particular, drawn up
as it is said in your Parliament, wherein they computed, beside the Lucrum
cessans, that your Nation sustains a clear loss of Eleven hundred thousand
pounds yearly by the French Trade. And what would any private man's Estate with
such Husbandry come to in a short period? ^^^eby the French, that were before,
at best, but the ^^llainers of Europe, are now become, or pretend to be, the
Cape-merchants; and their King gives, not only the Mode, but the Garment to
all Christendom, and the World puts it self into his Livery at their own
Expenses. Well may you in England complain of the death rather than deadness of
your Manufacture, when from this cause it receives such an obstruction, even to
suffocation, when you are not only deprived of that general and gainful vent
that you had formerly in France it self, but in all other places where you
traffic you meet the French now at every turn; and the Foreign Post brings
News from all parts that they are before you, and have under-sold you in the
same Commodities.

And to this Disease so mortal, and which it is beyond any private man to
remedy, your selves do more particularly contribute, by those vast quantities
of Wool which, they tell us here, are daily, and now more than ever transported
for France; (a thing that you always prohibit, but it seems you always
tolerate) so that in effect Cal^^ is still no less your Staple than while it
was formerly under the English Dominion. I will not excuse our selves in
Ireland from the same Crime, although in less proportion: For wheresoever any
Commodity is so ^pent up, as with us, it will force it self a vent one way or
other. But you have, as I hear, a Militia, that in defiance of all Authority,
convoy their Caravans of Wool to the Shallop with such a strength, that your
Officers dare not offend them: while whatsoever we do of that kind, is more
modest; and wheresoever it loses its way afterward at Sea, it is first entered
for England, and pays, as I told you before, both the King's Duty, and that to
the Lord Lieutenant, for License: So that, as we cannot Trade, so neither can
we Steal with you on equal terms.

By this time I hope you are satisfied and convinced, that Ireland deserves not
your Complaint, but your Pity: and that those things which some have ascribed
to us, are but the common Calamity of both Nations, occasioned by the Flux of
Humane Affairs, and Accidents of the present Conjuncture through Europe: and
therefore that you will not only consult how to redress our common Grievances,
but that you will also remedy those more particular Pressures that we suffer by
or under you. For Ireland is indeed a Country situate with great advantage for
Commerce, and especially toward the Western and Southern Navigation. The Ports
are many, and of the most capable and commodious. The Soil is fertile, and
where not, yet pregnant, in many places with Minerals, and elsewhere large and
well grown Woods, fit to be shaped out into Navies; with such convenience for
building, that I have often wondered how, in such scarcity of Timber, you have
not sometimes thought of having one Chatham at least in Ireland.

Nature has indeed been kind to us, were You so likewise. But you prohibit our
Cattle, you restrain our Wool; our Manufacture is intolerable; you forbid our
Trading with any Foreign Commodities in your own Plantations: what we buy
there, we must enter in England; and before we land it, must make a second and
more dangerous Voyage, to pay you double Customs. We are in all things, indeed,
treated by you like, or worse than Aliens. In the mean time, we pay Quit-rents,
Chimney-money, Excise, Customs; and have been as ready as you to Supply his
Majesty upon occasions with Taxes extraordinary. Nor yet is the Revenue easier
to us, by being collected by Farmers.

It would require an exquisite memory, to tell you of any late Act of State
relating to Ireland, that has not, one way or other, turned to our prejudice.
And yet, though unhappie, we are Constant; nor has it ever yet been in your
power to disoblige our Affection, much less our Loyalty. But I can answer for
my self: who is he that can enter a perpetual Guaranty for a whole Kingdom? The
most Sacred Ties will not hold, when worn out continually by ill usage. How
incident it is to a Woman to be Debauched, if she find not the Contents of
Marriage! especially if she be Idle, have entertained former correspondence
with one that appears more potent, and who promises to maintain her in an
higher Equipage. If any of your Neighbors should be at leisure to apply both
Force and Courtship to this Kingdom when it were in ill humor, it must be of
an extraordinary Virtue to resist the Temptation: and should he gain its
Good Will, he would make you pay afterward what Alimony he pleased. You might
then too late compute how necessary it had been to preserve and cherish it by
all means possible: what damage, what diminution you receive both in your
Honor and Revenue. Another would know how to improve, and against your selves,
those Advantages that you have slighted: and this Island which, partly by the
Natural, but more by its Political Situation, lies like a Mole sit to shield
you from Foreign Winds, to repel the Neighboring Seas from breaking in upon
you, and to make England the most quiet Station of all Europe, (Insula Portum
efficit) would in a Strangers power serve him as a Bridge to land upon you more
commodiously. For it is not so old as true a Saw, That He who will win England,
must begin with Ireland.

In conclusion, the same aspect that Sicily has to Italy, that, in all
Parallels, has Ireland to England: and it concerns your utmost care that you
govern it not after the Spanish manner, lest you prepare it to Revolt unto
another Dominion. Therefore I would humbly advise you, Brother, in particular,
no more to look upon us (which is the Common Error) as a distinct, but as a
conjunct Interest and People; and to do your part, what we are now rather in
show, to Consolidate us really into your own Substance. You have told me, I
remember, formerly, how many miles of barren Hills the City of Genoua has, at
vast expense, taken into their Fortifications; with that Inscription at the
Entrance: Ne munimenta Naturae Hostis verteret in Pericula. But what Method to
use in particular, I am not capable to delineate; nor were I, yet neither am I
proper to prescribe to your Parliamentary prudence. For even Physicians, when
sick, distrust their own Skill, and submit to another's Counsel.

Whether you will think sit to reverse your Act against our Cattle, I know not;
nor can I answer for the Effect that it would produce. But I have often
observed how gladly Waters that have been diverted return and fall again into
their former Chanel.

That you should make any Act to encourage Manufacture with us, is what can
scarce be expected; but I hope you will make none to discourage it. For, as it
requires no Physician to tell, that to keep a man warm is good against a Cold;
so I, though no Politician, dare say in general, that it concerns you to use us
kindly, and to indulge us in all things that tend to Civilize, Cultivate, and
People this Nation; whereby you will or may have, within ten hours sail of you,
a Plantation worth all those other that weaken you at so great a distance,
while we should always be at hand, and within call, not more ready to defend
our selves than you, upon the first insult of an Enemy. By how much you have
used us to expect less, the less will oblige us. We will allow you easily to
make, what we are, younger Brothers of us; only use us as Brethren, not as
Slaves. For it is an equal oppression, to command men to make Brick without
Straw, and where there is both Brick and Straw to countermand it. The most
adequate President whereby I can represent to you both our Conditions, and what
to do in our case, is that of Abraham and Lot in the 13th of Genesis. Abraham
was, like you, very rich in Cattle, in Silver, and in Gold: but Lot had only
Flocks and Herds, and Tents. And, as they journyed, their substance ^as so
great, that they could not dwell together: but there was a strife between the
Herdsmen of Abraham's cattle and the Herdsmen of Lot's cattle; and the
Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land. And Abraham said unto
Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, betwixt me and thee, and between my
Herdsmen and thy Herdsmen, for we are Brethren. Is not the whole land before
us? If thou will go to the left hand, I will go to the right; and if thou
depart to the right hand, then will, I go to the left. And Lot lifted up his
eyes and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where,
and Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan. Abraham dwelt in the land of Canaan.
The Text is so plain, and applies it self so easily betwixt us, that it needs
no Commentary. Only Abraham here was the Elder Brother; but, being several
ways the richer, seems therefore, out of a natural equity and condescension, to
have left the choice to Lot, who was the Son of the Younger, and had nothing
but his Flocks and Herds to trust to. Whereas we shall willingly submit to the
Order of Nature and of our Government, desiring you to choose for us. And so God
direct you in all your Councils, to His Glory, the Honor of His Majesty, and
to the Wealth and Welfare of both Nations: which is the constant Prayer of

Honored Brother, Your most humble Servant, and most affectionate Brother.
Dublin, Jan. 15. 1676/7.
FINIS.

