A NARRATIVE OF THE Adventures OF LEWIS MAROTT, PILOT-ROYAL OF The Galleys of
FRANCE.

Giving an Account of his Slavery under the Turks, his Escapes out of it, and
other strange occurrences that ensued thereafter.

Translated from the French Copy.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Brewster, at the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1677.

A Narrative of the Adventures of LEWIS MAROTT, Pilot Royal of France, etc.
IN the time when His Most Christian Majesty, the present French King, was in
Provence, an Officer of the late deceased Queen Mother, walking in the
principal place of Arles, where the Court was at that time, perceived a man,
who by his habit of a Mariner, by his short hair, his great Mustachoes, and his
tan'd countenance, made him judge, that he was neither of that Town, nor one
belonging to the Court: and for as much as he earnestly looked upon all those
which were then a walking there, he seemed to look about whether he could not
know some one or other there: which occasioned the aforesaid Officer more
diligently to consider him; which when he had done, he imagined that he had
seen him in some place heretofore. And afterward coming nearer to him, he
demanded of him, Whether he had ever been in Barbary? Several times (replied
this unknown person); but (pursued he) did I never see you at Tunis? At that
very word the tone of his voice, and some lineaments of his visage, made him
remember it was Captain Marot, with whom he had been some time at the Consuls
of Tunis about eight years since. After the mutual embraces of one another, the
aforesaid Officer coming to understand of him, that he was come from Rome to
Arles with Letters of Recommendation from Cardinal Antonio to Cardinal
Mazarine, to try if he could obtain the place or office of Pilot-Royal of the
Galleys belonging to the French King, thought that he ought to assist him to
the uttermost of his power, at leastwise to get him some acquaintance and
friendship in a Court, where he knew not to whom he might address himself to be
introduced. And as he remembered, Marot had heretofore made the recital to him
of his extraordinary Adventures, he doubted not but this might be a very fit
means whereby he might win the friendship of those whom he might have need of.
This obliged him to bring him to dinner to the Office of the Queens Gentlemen
of the Chamber, where he presented him to the company as one of his most
familiar friends, and as one that deserved to be succored in the extremity
which his Courage and the traverses of his life had cast him into.

All of them gave him a very good reception; and being prompted by curiosity,
they asked him many Questions, which he could not immediately resolve; which
was the occasion that for the satisfaction of the whole Company at one and the
same time, so soon as Dinner was done, he made relation of his whole History
near upon the matter in these very words.

I Am (said he) of this Province, born in the Town of Ciontat: My Parents were
such as had more Honor for their patrimony, than Goods of Fortune. And
forasmuch as I had always a particular inclination to the Sea, I was not above
ten or twelve years old, when I made my first Voyage, which was to
Alexandretta, in a Polach of Ciontat. After I had served some years as Moussy,
that is to say, Captains Boy; considering the small Fortune I was like to meet
with in my Fathers House, I took up a resolution to endeavor to obtain mine by
the Sea, which, as you know, Gentlemen, is the true theater of Fortune. And
forasmuch as the way to make ones self capable of higher employments, is to
begin by such as are lower and more laborious; I entered my self as Mariner in a
Vessel that was bound for Alexandria. This Voyage was followed by many others,
for the most part succesful; insomuch that I had already got something whereof
to make some small beginning of Traslique by a Voyage from Alexandret to
France. We were therein about thirty men, as well Mariners as passengers; our
Navigation was succesful enough, till we came to Maltha, where we sounded;
there the Chevalier de Bois Bandrand, having a mind to return from thence into
France, embarked in our ship.

Steering our course very succesfully, we perceived one morning four sail that
gave us the chase; we were not above four leagues from the small Island of
Africa, called Pantellerie, where the disposition of the season was so contrary
to us, and so favorable to our pursuers, that though we were becalmed, yet
they had a very good wind; insomuch that they approached near to us within a
Cannon-shot, in less than two hours.

Knowing them now at last to be Corsairs of Tunis, we disposed our selves to
the Combat, notwithstanding the great inequality of our Forces: All of us took
up a resolution rather to lose our lives than our liberty.

Immediately they attacqued us, and plied us so well with their Cannon, that
after we had engaged some ten hours, many of our men being dead, our Vessel
almost having lost all her tackling, and being ready to sink, they boarded us
at last, and became Masters of our ship.

When I saw the fury of the first onset was great, and that the Turks although
they were already Masters of the ship, bastinado'd the first Christians that
they got into their hands; I climbed up speedily to the top of the Main Mast. I
let half an hour pass, they not perceiving all the while that I was there.
Seeing now that all was appeased, and that they began to think upon remedying
the disorders of the ship, I put my self in a posture of working; and hearing
that many of them called the chief Commander Mustapha Raiz, I also tendered my
self to him, and calling him by the same name, demanded of him, if it should
please him I should do such or such a thing. Now I knew well enough that it was
convenient to do it at that time, insomuch as he said to me, Do it presently. I
made use of this stratagem, that so coming into their hands not till their fury
was over, and till I had made my self known to them, and qualified them by some
small service that I did for them, I might avoid their Bastinadoes that I so
stood in fear of. This succeeded so well to me, that I was in a manner the only
person that was exempt from their cruel treatments.

After we were all chained, the Turkish Vessel and the Prize made sale toward
Tunis; where, so soon as we were arrived, we were parted amongst those that
were sharers, as being owners of the Pirate ship. The Bashaw chose me for his
Dividend, and sent me into a place called the Bath, which is in a manner a
little Cloister, wherein he kept good store of slaves; I found there some of my
Comrades; and for as much as I have always had the advantage of being well
known, some Merchants of Provence which were at Tunis, coming to hear of my
misfortune, came to see me, and one amongst them lent me seven or eight
Piasters. This small sum of money did marvellously accommodate me, and gave me
the occasion of helping the Chevalier de Bois Brandrand, and my other Comrades,
the greatest part of which being much wounded, and without any money, were in a
most miserable condition. That I might succeed in this affair the more
prositably for them, and the more commodiously for my self, I asked the favor
of the Guardian Bachy of the Bath, to give me leave to do what I could toward
the getting of something whereby I might help them, that so they might be
recovered from their wounds the sooner.

He having given me this liberty, I bestowed five or six Piasters in Tobacco,
and some other small trifles, which I sold by retail. God blessed my small
Trade in such a manner, that in a very few days I saw my money doubled. And for
as much as I am a man of that humor, that what I gain easily, I spend in like
sort, I got together one day the aforesaid Chevalier, my Captain, and seven or
eight of the principal of our Comrades, and brought them to a Tavern to make
merry, and paid for them all, and afterward gave them over and above each one
a Piaster. We were in this condition, when the Galleys of Algiers touched in at
Tunis, to go to the Levant; and in regard that we belonged to the Levantines,
they gave us to them of Algiers, who promised them in exchange, to go to the
Coasts of Italy, to take some slaves of those Countries, and to re-deliver them
the same number; because that our Patrons, willing to return to the Levant, had
rather have Italians than us. So now we are all in Galleys, except the
aforesaid Chevalier, who remained in chains at Tunis.

The Galleys of Algiers and Tunis being ten in number, set forth, and arrived
together at the Coasts of Calabria, and by the Counsel of a Runnagate of that
Country they surprised by night a small Town called Otaya, they sacked it, and
pillaged it, and made slaves of all that could not save themselves by flight.
In all my life I never saw a like desolation; all was halled pell mell into the
Galleys. Great store of Monks and Nuns had the same treatments; even many
Infants that were yet at the breasts, were made Captives before they knew what
liberty was.

The Galleys having sailed up and down near the shore for almost the space of a
day, waited, if any of the neighboring places would come to redeem any one,
according to the custom. But no body coming, whether it were for want of money,
or charity, or else that there were hardly any more persons upon that Coast,
they took toward the Levant, and carried away all those miserable and
unfortunate people.

Our Voyage was very quiet till we came to Valone, where the Christian Army
having surprised those ten Galleys of Barbary, they were constrained, as all
Europe knows, to fall upon the shelves or quicksands; where after they had
landed us all, they left the Galleys to the Christians, and conducted us all to
Constantinople. There it was that these new slaves were sold, excepting two
fair Damsels that were presented to the Grand Seignior.

For my part, falling into the hands of one Murdat, or Amurat, at that time
Bassa of Cyprus, I was put in a Galley, which parted thence shortly after with
some others for the Sea.

Several years past, that I was continually in this misery; Voyages were often
made: but because I am afraid of troubling you too much, if I should reckon up
all the particularities, I will come to the most important point of all my
History.

Twelve years had lingered away since the loss of my liberty; neither did I find
my self as yet in any likelihood of being able to recover it. Now the Galley in
which I was, meeting with four others of Constantinople, in the parts of
Alexandria of Egypt, those that had the command of it, having a mind to refresh
themselves there for some weeks, caused all the Oars to be carried to the
Magazines that are near the Port, that thereby they might take away all
occasions from the Christians of laying any design for their flight.

These necessary means being taken away from them, and all the slaves being
under the chains, except the Scribes, the Captains were also without fear of
any such thing happening, and only left about twenty Soldiers for the guard of
each Galley.

Long it was that I had meditated upon some means for saving my self alone, or
at leastwise with some few of my Comrades, but I found no possibility thereof.
That small knowledge which God had given me for the affairs of the Sea, had
always been hurtful to me; and my Patron loving me as being a necessary person
to him, often told me, that I should never hope to return into my Country, and
that he would have me dye with him. Moreover, knowing me to be of an active
spirit, and fit for contriving any thing, he made me be looked to more narrowly
than the rest; insomuch that I did not know almost either what to do or think.
I saw nothing whereon to found any hope of liberty: and considering with my
self that I was to pass the rest of my life at the Oar, those long years
presented themselves to me, being accompanied with so many inevitable miseries,
that if it had not been for the apprehension of changing them into greater, I
had endeavored to terminate them by giving my self death. This thought alone,
I say, of being always chained to a Galley, bruised with blows, ill fed, almost
naked, exposed to the rigors of cold and heat, and never to lie in a bed, did
so incense my Courage to enterprise all that I could for my deliverance from
these miseries, that those designs which were least possible and most
perilous, seemed to me easy and without danger.

Under this consideration it was, that I enterprized to make an insurrection
among the Chiourmes of the five Galleys, and to cause them all to embarque in
one.

I confess at first I was astonished at the greatness of this Design, and the
difficulty of executing it. To which much was added by the improbability that I
foresaw there would be to keep the secret, before that so many slaves of diverse
Nations, of different Persuasions, of Religions and Humors opposite one to
another, could be well instructed therein, and come to an agreement about the
means and time of the execution of an Enterprise so perilous. But being fully
resolved to revenge my self, to save my self, or to dye, I put all to the
hazard, having nothing to fear the loss of.

I had always done whatsoever I was able, to make my self beloved of the
Soldiers, and by the Slaves that were ne^r to the Bench that I belonged to. The
which that I might the better effect, I gave them part of those dried fruits,
and other trifles, that the Captain of the Provincial ships had heretofore
given me. Yea, and forasmuch as I had from time to time sent me from my
Country some moneys, I also treated these Companions of my misery, so that
they commonly called me in that Galley, The Rich Slave.

Now about this time, and in the conjuncture whereof I have spoken, having by
good fortune some money by me, I invited all the Scribes of the Galleys to come
on Friday to dine with me at my Bench, that so under this pretense I might
discover to them my design with more ease and less danger of suspicion. The
Scribes (as I told you) are without any other Irons but one shackle upon their
legs, that so they may be able freely to perform their function. They failed
not to come about noontide, which was the hour that I had appointed them.
There was near us a Turkish Soldier that narrowly watched us, and who being not
willing to let us meet together thus, but upon condition that we spoke always
the Frank Tongue, which he understood, troubled us much, in regard that he not
leaving us one minute, I could not propose my affair to my Guests: I thought it
expedient therefore, that to make him the less severe an observer of our
discourse, and of our actions, it were best to engage him to dine with us,
which he did without any great invitation. All dinner long (which continued a
pretty while) there past several discourses of our Adventures and Combats;
which was so far from advancing my affair, that it spent that time which I
destined to make a declaration thereof unto them; insomuch that I despaired
almost of discovering any thing that day; whenas God put it into my mind to
take out a Prayer Book called the Hours of our Lady, which I had in my Packet:
and turning my self to the Turk, who having dined gratis, was of the best
humor imaginable: Mustapha (said I unto him, for so he was called), we
Christians have a Custom amongst us, whenever we meet together, to say certain
prayers which our Religion orders us: will thou give us leave at present to
pray to God out of this book? with all my heart (replied he) pray as much as
thou will. And thereupon he took the Flaggon, and drank once more a good
draught of Wine, although according to his Religion it was counted a great sin.
Then seeing my self in a good way, I opened my book, and said in the Arabic
Tongue, Bissmylah, which signisies In the name of God. At this word the Turk
touching his Turbant, said, Ah good word! I went on, and making a show of
reading (mine eyes being fixed upon my Book) I said in our Country Language
(which the Turk did no ways understand, and which the most part of my
Companions understood in a competent manner): My dear Comrades, I made use of
the occasion of this repast, to communicate to you a design whereon our liberty
depends. If you approve of it, to every proposition that I shall make, say,
with a bow of your head at the same time, Em challah, that is to say, And it
please God. And if you shall find any thing which you think cannot, or ought
not to be done, you shall say Straffilla, which is as much as to say, God
forbid: and so afterward, I shall propose other means according to your
liking. By this stratagem we may (under pretense of praying to God) deceive
this Turk that spies our actions: And I am apt to think, that hearing us often
pronounce that adorable Name, and seeing us lift up our eyes to Heaven, he will
easily be persuaded that we are in this holy exercise.

Whereupon I proposed to them all the Enterprise in the order that I had
projected it, and in what manner, and when it seemed good to me to execute it.
All which was so conformable to their sentiments, that at every article lifting
up their eyes toward Heaven, they said all with one consent, Einthalla. Even
the Turk himself, being mollified by the very prayers which he thought we made,
put himself into a posture of praying after his fashion, saying, Allah he ill
allah Mehemned Resall allah; that is to say in Arabic, There is no other God
but God, and Mahomet his Prophet.

After dinner the Scribes returned each one to his Galley, and as we had agreed
among our selves, communicated the Enterprise in gross only to the Vogavans (or
chief Rowers) of each Bench, enjoining them to keep the Secret till Friday
following, when they might discover it to all the rest of the Slaves.

Friday amongst the Turks, is what Sunday is amongst the Christians. Now it was
the consideration of the time which these Infidels employ in Praying in their
Mosches, or Temples, which made us choose it as more fit than any other for this
our design.

This day so much desired, being arrived, and a little while after those who
from the top of their Towers are appointed to call the people together, had
ceased, judging that the greatest part of the Turks were at their Prayers; I
arose bolt upright upon the highest part of the Bench that I belonged to, and
cried out many times with all my might, Vive St Jean and fuora Cadena, for that
was the word we had agreed upon Upon this very moment the ^250 slaves of the
Levant readily repeated the same words, crying out in a horrible manner, and
making a most dreadful noise with their Chains, they laid hold of all the
Agabys or sticks that support the Tents of the Galleys, and rushing with fury
upon the Soldiers, knocked down all them that put themselves in a posture of
defense. The rest being surprised, and troubled at the unlooked-for
insurrection, cast themselves in a desperate manner into the Sea, and entrusted
that pittiless Element with their Lives and Liberties, which we would have
taken from them. In the mean while the Scribes unchaining in great haste the
Vogavants, in regard they were the stronger, and part of them unloosing the
Chains of their Companions, whilst the others sight against the Turks, in less
than half a quarter of an hour the five Chiourmes, or five Seats or Benches of
Rowers, were freed from their Fetters. Then it was that this good beginning
putting courage into all their hearts, in a little while they fully defeated
the Guardians of the Galleys.

This being done, we laid hold of their Cimeters, and those who had none,
provided themselves of sticks, Agaby's, and pieces of the Banisters of the
Galleys which we had broken.

When I saw that they were all ready, I cried as loud as I could, Fuora. At
this instant we went out of the Galleys excepting 100 men, who stayed to guard
that wherein we were resolved to embark our selves.

All the Sentinels in the mean time having seen our Combat from the top of
their Towers, had advertised the Town thereof, insomuch as at the moment we
began to march toward the Magazin, the Cannon of the Castles and of the Town
were discharged upon us, but slew few of our men; the opposition that we found
at the door of the Magazin, was much more great. About 200 Turks that were most
concerned in our flight, were come forth of the City first of all, and by a
continual firing of their Muskets, killed above a hundred of our men in a
trice. Nevertheless for all their resistance, we so inveloped them, that I
believe there hardly escaped ten of them.

Afterward the door of the Magazine being forced open, 200 of our men loaded
themselves with sifty pair of Oars. Those that remained, made an alley, by
standing in two ranks, and caused them to march in the middle of us with all
speed imaginable. Now it was, that the Turks running thick-and-threefold out of
the Town, and coming upon us, put us almost in a condition of being able to go
no further: The Combat began again afresh much more furiously than before.
Store of our people, even those that carried the Oars, fell down dead by their
continual firing. But in regard that we fought not only for liberty, but also
to shun those horrible punishments which we were sure to bear if we fell again
into their hands, it is no wonder if we passed through every difficulty that
opposed our March. And although the enemies were much more than we, and
increased every moment, yet we entered (in despite of all their attempts to the
contrary) into our Galley, after that we had killed above four or five hundred
of their men. It is true, that an equal number of ours, near upon the matter,
lay dead also upon the place.

Being now embarked, about Eight hundred of us, the Oars were fitted with an
incredible promptitude, and with a thousand shouts of joy we began to Row with
a fury that cannot be comprehended.

What an agreeable spectacle was it for us to see all the people of Alexandria
run together to the shore-side? What joy was it to us, to see our selves free
by so honorable an Adventure, and to revenge our selves in this manner of them
who had caused us to suffer so much, thus robbing them of that which was most
dear to them? But this beginning was too happy for slaves: the consequence must
be attended with a different success, to moderate the excess of our joy.

We set forwards with the transport and efforts of Fugitives: We were already
almost out of Cannon-shot, whenas with one shot which came from a Tower, the
Mainmast of our Galley was cut off, and fell into the Sea. Immediately seven
or eight of us betook our selves to one of the small Boats attending upon the
Galley, to regain and sit this piece which was so important to us.

While we were in this employ, those of our people who governed the Cannon,
having a mind to fire as frequently as they could, charged with so much
precipitation, that they scattered up and down in the Galley almost as much
powder as they made use of; insomuch as when they were firing against the Town,
it happened by sad misfortune, that the fire of our Cannon getting hold of the
powder which was scattered up and down, and afterward also of some Barrels of
powder which were not far off; the Galley was in a moment all on a fire. Those
which were at the Stern above us, thinking all lost, betook themselves to the
small Boat with us.

In this confusion we were separated from the Galley a pretty handsome
distance; and that which contributed to our ruin, was, that a great wind
arose, which drove us back toward the Haven; and night came on apace, which
robbed us of the sight of the Galley.

In this strange extremity, any condition seemed more tolerable to us, than
that of returning into the state of slaves. We sailed with so much force, that
notwithstanding all the fury of the wind, which was contrary to us, we made a
shift to reach the main Ocean.

About midnight we perceived near us a Barque of the same bulk with ours, and
which went the same way. After that we were some time in doubt what it might
be, we at length knew that it was our second Cague or small Boat, wherein many
of our company had cast themselves, following our fortune, and to avoid the
peril wherein they thought themselves to be by the fire, which took hold of the
Galley; which nevertheless was not much endamaged, and was saved (as afterward
we came to understand) in Candy, with the rest of the slaves that were therein.
And forasmuch as the Sea was very rough and tempestuous, we durst not come near
one another, only we cried one to another as loud as we could, that we should
not separate our selves, but keep the same way.

Thus we continued our course forwards, although it were with very great
difficulty. The break of day beginning to appear, we hoped that the weather
would become more favorable; but far from this good luck, the wind increased
rather about Sunrising; insomuch as whatever we could do (it being impossible
for us to keep our course) we were constrained to strike sail, and leave our
selves wholly to the mercy of the wind, which cast us upon a place called Cape
Blanc, some few leagues from Alexandria, and there split our Vessel.

What sudden change was this; of so advantageous and favouraable a beginning!
Scarcely did we set sight of our Liberty, but she fled away from us, and left
us in the Country of our very Enemies, of our Judges, and of our Masters, from
whom we expected little compassion in our miseries. We were so cast down and
troubled, as well with this consideration, as with our weariness and hunger,
that we were near upon an hour lying upon the ground, before we testified any
care either of life or death, of liberty or slavery.

At last a Vogavant that was of Russia, being a very sturdy and courageous
fellow, rising up, My Companions (said he), never had we more need of a good
heart, than at present: we must arm our selves with resolution: there is
nothing lost if we will but labor with diligence. Of our two Barks which you
see split there, we may make one which may contain us all: and as for victuals,
those that are the stronger amongst us, must go and search out for some upon
the Land, though it be with the peril of their life. Courage therefore, my
Brethren, and let us not suffer our selves to be cast down with sorrow, which
cannot restore us our liberty.

This discourse caused us to recollect our selves a little, and to take heart.
All of us rose up, and having made a review of our company, we found our selves
to be fourscore and thirteen, whereof fifty were sent to seek out for Provision
under the conduct of the Russian, whilst the rest were employed to gather
together the relics of our shipwreck, and make thereof one Barque, which was
almost in a condition to be made use of that very evening.

Whenas our company returned from their quest of provision, the Country
thereabouts being desert, and uninhabited, they b^ought back nothing but Dates
and Carobs (or St. John's bread) and other fruits of the Country, and that in
so small a quantity, that it could not serve at the furthest for above three
days, for so many as we were. The next day the Tempest being much increased,
and there not being any likelihood that it would quickly cease, we were in an
inexplicable trouble about what course we should take.

The Barque was made ready, as much as the weather, the place, and the want of
Utensils and other necessary things would permit. But to set forth to Sea at
such a time as it was, this was to precipitate our selves to a certain death:
and then on the other hand, to wait till the wind changed, it was no less
perilous. For it was thought (and truly we were not deceived therein) that in
all probability our Patrons seeing the danger we were in, would be easily
persuaded that we should either return back, or be cast upon some coasts of
Egypt, and that so they would not fail to send in the quest of us. To return to
Alexandria, had been to seek out our execution; and if we should leave the Sea,
and take our journey southward, we should cast our selves into the hands of
certain Alarbes, Heretics of the Mohammedan Religion, that hold it as an
article of their faith, That he amongst them that kills a Christian, infallibly
gains Paradise. What must we do then? After much consideration it was at last
resolved, that it being the surest way to leave Alexandria as much as we could,
we should set forward toward Tripolis of Barbary, along that Coast; and that
we should leave the common Road a little on one side, and that we should take
our marches only by night.

Thus it was determined, and thus executed. We left therefore our Bark behind
us, and took our journey with that small provision which we had. Some
proposed it as expedient to go and get more first; but for fear of being
discovered if we should stay longer in that Country, and under a hope of
finding more of those fruits in our journey, we neglected this advice, which
nevertheless we repented of a hundred times afterward. For at the end of three
or four days, we saw, together with the end of our provision, our misery
commence anew more cruel than ever before. The more we set forwards, the more
we found the Country desert, dry, and destitute of all Commodities; no Water,
no Fruits, no Inhabitants, but Lions, Tigers, and other the like furious
creatures. In a word, we were reduced to that extremity, that we must eat
nothing but grass during some days: and thus being weakened by this ill
nourishment, as also the want of water, and the tiresomness of our journey,
still as we went along, there continually dyed some one or other of our
company, of them which were of the weakest constitution; insomuch that the
eighth or ninth day after our shipvvrack, there was remaining not above eight
and twenty of the fourscore and thirteen that we were at first. The hunger
and cruelty of some Russians that were in our company, was so great, that
having perceived a little Negro that ran away from them, and clambered up a
high rock to save himself, when they had at last caught hold of him, they cut
him into morsels, and roasted him by little and little in the Sun, and
afterward eat him.

Thus still advancing toward Tripoli, we began to find the soil more fresh
and grassy, which made us think that there was Water not far off. To
conclude, making toward two great Palm Trees which were on the left hand,
five or six hundred paces from the Sea, we found there-under a very fair spring
of fresh water, and very clear; thus with a joy that cannot be explained, we
quenched our thirst, and rested our selves above three hours.

At the very moment that we were ready to part thence, and to pursue our
journey, we perceived from the side of Alexandria, a body of Horse which made
toward us: we easily imagining what it might be, thought our selves utterly
undone if we were discovered: and forasmuch as the coast thereabouts where we
lay, was destitute of any thing that might favor our flight without being
perceived, we concluded that we must continue lying close in the same posture
as we were, and that it may be those people might pass by without seeing of us:
in effect, we saw them make their way upon the shore side, without turning in
the least to that side on which we were.

They were already over against us, or rather somewhat beyond us: We said one
to another, Now we are safe. But at this very moment we saw two Horsemen
separate themselves from the rest of the Troop, and come a hand-gallop toward
us.

Now therefore judging either our flight or defense to no purpose, we put our
selves in a posture neither of the one nor of the other. Thus these Soldiers
having perceived us, and knowing us to be those that they looked for, make a
sign to the rest of the Troop to come on; and immediately one of the two, whom
I knew to be a Runagate of Ci-four in Provence, said to us, Ah poor wretches!
your fortune had been much less cruel, if you had sunk to the bottom of the Sea
in the midst of the Tempest, than to fall again into our hands.

Scarce had he made an end of this fair complement, when the whole Body
environed us, calling us a thousand Rogues and Rascals, and testifying a very
great joy for having found us again. Those that were the most devout of the
number, went aside, and performed their Sala, which is their ordinary prayer,
to thank Mahomet for this happy success of their search.

These Barbarians, which were about 150 (and the same number were gone, as we
understood, on the other side Alexandria, toward Rosette) bound us
immediately; that is to say, our hands behind our backs. And after they had
dined, and rested themselves about an hour, and had given us some Beans, which
we eat upon the ground, like horses, being not able to make use of our hands:
They loaded us four and four in a company upon Camels, two on each side, as
Faggots.

In this deadly posture, some hours past in journeying along: but at last these
cruel guides perceiving that many amongst us were not able to continue long in
this posture without being killed, set us upon the ground, commanding us to
follow them a foot, although we were indeed very weak and tired. The fear of
being put upon the Camels again, made us force our selves as much as we could,
insomuch that at the beginning we traveled pretty well But because their
Horses and Camels went a good pace, we could not resist a weariness which quite
overwhelmed us; so that we were fain to declare to the Turks, That it was
impossible for us to follow them: And they imagining that blows would do that
upon us which spurs did to their Horses, they gave us good store of Bastinadoes
for to make us march on the faster. Our weakness having rendered this violent
remedy unuseful, they were at last constrained to let us travel in such manner
as the condition wherein we were would permit us to do. Many days were past
wherein we had traveled eight or ten leagues a day, not having any thing else
but Beans for our sustenance, which we eat as I told you upon the ground, after
the same manner as Horses eat their Oats.

Being arrived at a place where some of the Arabes had their residence, they
staid to make their repast, and rest themselves at a Dowars which was not far
off. The Dowars in Africa are for the most part fourscore or a hundred Tents
made of Goats hair, ranked in order very near to one another, and set round in
such a manner, that they take up a great deal of ground by their circumference.
Under each Tent dwells a Family of the Alarbes; and their whole society is as
it were a movable Town: for in regard there are in those Countries great
store of waste Lands, and uninhabited, when they are a weary of staying in
one place, they go to another.

It was in one of these Dowars that we staid, as I told you before. The Men
and the Women are all naked, without testifying any sign of shame thereof. We
were a little astonished thereat, forasmuch as it was a thing not very
ordinary in those coasts. But our miseries were at such an extremity, that we
little considered those of others, neither had any list to trouble our selves
with those things that did not concern us.

So soon as ever these Alarbes savv us in a condition so deplorable, they gave
us to understand that they had pity of us; especially the Women (who are
commonly more compassionate than the men in all places) tenderly pitied us, and
made what haste they could to bring us something to eat. Their Charity truly
was very abundant tovvard us. It had been a long time we had eaten nothing
that was either good or warm, insomuch that we filled our bellies so full with
many pots of good Rice which they had set before us, that we were e'ne ready to
burst; and if the want of food had before made us sick, for this time the
excess of it made us so much more; nevertheless there was not one of us that
dyed.

This our journey continued under our ordinary sufferings, until we came to
Pompeys Pillar, which is not far from Alexandria. There while they stayed to
rest themselves and eat, a Horseman went to the City, to carry the news of our
recovery, insomuch that a great number of people of both Sexes, and all ages,
came to meet us out of curiosity, and for to revile us. The Wives and Children,
and other kinsfolk of those we had killed in the combat, were the first of all;
and being not content to overwhelm us with revilings, they had also stoned us
to death, if the Turks that conducted us, had not hindered them.

At last we arrived at the City, being as well tormented with the Hues and
Cries of the people, as with the Severities that were past, and with the fear
of what was to to come. So soon as we were all made safe, and had our chains
put upon our legs, we were since told, that those that were interested in our
return, held a Council; and forasmuch as the passions of these people were
different, the advices of what they should do with us, were different also:
Those that were rich and cruel, concluded upon our death, and preferred the
pleasure of revenging themselves, before a small advantage of their own. Those
amongst the interested persons that were poor or covetous, being not able fully
to satisfy their revenge, without doing themselves some inconvenience in
regard of their profit, gave counsel that they should bastinado us, but that
with such moderation, that the Fugitives might be punished, and their profit
preserved. Some others being somewhat more kind in appearance, but in effect no
whit less cruel, said, that we were punished enough by the evils which our
slight had caused us to suffer; and that if so be there wanted any thing to the
expiation of our Crimes, the labors either of the Earth or of the Galleys
might make it up. My Patron, as being one of the most powerful amongst them, at
last reunited all their opinions in his own, which was to send us back to the
Oars, to make us find our punishments in serving of them, more than ever we had
done before.

Now behold we are again at the Oars; after some days employed in the
preparation of our departure from thence, we sailed slowly toward the
Archipelago. During this Voyage, we began to repent of our flight, by reason of
the doubling of our labor and blows, and the cutting of us short in our
ordinary provision. This cruel treatment was the cause that when we arrived at
Pacomo, a small desert Island, neighboring to Anatolia, we were the most part
of us nothing but skin and bones.

We anchored in a kind of Gulf, whose Banks were of an easy access, and
covered with Woods that were pretty thick: And forasmuch as the mind of one
that is in slavery, is hardly ever employed about any thing so much, as the
seeking out of some way or means of saving himself; it is not a thing to be
wondered at, if I meditated on a second flight, being founded on the
circumstances of the place and night that now approached. All seemed easy to
me, provided I were but freed of my Chains; and this indeed was the greatest
difficulty, and the most important point, in regard that I despaired in a
manner ever to accomplish it for want of Utensils necessary hereunto.
Nevertheless, feeling my Legs, I perceived that my Patrons severity in his
punishing me by so many Bastinadoes, and my fasting, had even given me a means
of unchaining my self.

In effect, the night being come, and it being very dark, command was given
that every one should take his short Night-Coat, and go to sleep. And in regard
that while they are a preparing themselves for this purpose, there is commonly
a great noise and hurly-burly in the Galley, I took occasion, after I had put
on my Night-Coat, to try what I could do (during that clinking of chains) to
get my foot loose from mine: I succeeded well therein, but not without great
pain to my self, by reason of the ankle bone that hindered my Chains from
coming off.

This done, I put my self in such a posture as the rest were in, but with a
design of employing my self to a much better purpose. You know (Sirs) that
there belongs to each Bench a place with a very large hole for the necessity of
the body; the only liberty that is given us in the Galleys to move any where,
is to go to this place when we have occasion; and it is for this purpose also
that the Chain is as long as the Bench. Now therefore so soon as I perceived
that all were asleep excepting the Sentinels, who usually are no where else but
at the fore or hin-deck, I rose up to go to this place, crying, out as loud as
I could, Ala banda (this is the word with which they are to give notice of it,
upon pain of being bastinado'd).

Being therefore seated thereon, I gently lift up* my Night-Coat by little and
little, somewhat higher than my head; and so staying it upon two small sticks,
which I fixed upon two planks, I found that it could stand so without my aid,
and that by the favor of the night it might easily deceive the eyes even of
the Sentinels themselves: this conceit being fitted in such a sort, that it
seemed to be my self all the while, and did likewise hinder them from seeing
what I did underneath. First I got my Legs through, afterward all the rest of
my body, without any great difficulty; and afterward swimming with as little
noise as I could (and as softly, we being between two waters), I happily at
last got to land without being perceived in the least, leaving behind me my
Night-Coat, which without doubt was severely threatened with Bastinadoes for
being too long upon the Stool.

So soon as I came to land, I betook my self as soon as possibly I could to the
Wood to hide my self therein, and to wait for the day, which appeared a little
while after; for it was about that time of the year when the nights are the
shortest. Afterward taking my progress continually from the place where I left
the Galleys, in a few hours I perceived my self on the other side of the Isle;
and I was so lucky, as to meet with a Vessel of Maltha that had arrived there
to take in water, the Captain of which took me aboard with a testification of
much joy, and gave me both Clothes and other things, whereof I had great need:
for when I took my flight, I had nothing on me but my Galley-drawers, and a
little Doublet of Canvas without sleeves.

That I may not be too tedious in my Relation, We happily arrived at Maltha;
from whence a little while after I parted in a Vessel that was bound for
Provence, which after ten or twelve days sail, arrived most happily at Cioutat,
my dear Country. I leave you to judge of the joy that I had therefore, after so
long and so cruel a slavery. My Mother, who by chance was standing on the
shore-side when I landed, was ready to dye for joy so soon as I had made my
self known to her, forasmuch as she saw me return back again alive, and in good
health, after that she had so many times bewailed me, as one that was dead.

I admired the change that Fortune and Death had caused in that Town in a few
years space; some that I had left poor, were become rich; and many that were
rich, were become poor. The greater part of those which I knew, were dead; and
their place was filled up with others that I knew not at all, and whom I had
left in their infancy, or such as were not at that time born. In a word, All
things in my Country appeared in another manner than was the Idea which I
preserved in my mind of it.

You may imagine perhaps (Gentlemen) that my Adventures are come to an end, in
regard that I am returned to my Fathers House, and that there is little
likelihood that after I had escaped so great perils, I should engage my self
another time in an occasion of falling into the like again. But I told you that
my Trade was to go to Sea, and those that are accustomed to this sort of life,
are quickly a weary of the Land, and know not how to employ themselves therein.
The Dangers, the Traverses, the Slaveries, Death it self, which present
themselves so often to them, are so far from discouraging them, that on the
contrary they seem to add I know not what kind of Charms that attract them the
more. It Is a kind of life, full of various delights, and continual changes; to
day you see one Nation, to morrow another quite contrary in manners, habits,
customs, and religion; other Climates, different fruits and wines; and in a
word, all is (as it were) new, and that is it which renders this Maritine life
very divertizing; for as you know, man naturally loves alteration: How abundant
and prosperous soever the fortune is which he at present possesses, if his
life be not diversified, even his own happiness disgusts him.

Thus therefore I had not been long at Cioutat, taking my ease, but this repose
cloi'd me, and I wished for some occasion to present it self, that I might
return again to Sea; in regard, that besides all this, I thought my self fit
for nothing upon land: At last I lighted upon a Vessel, which was bound for
Alexandrette; they took me in Pilot to conduct it: the Voyage was prosperous;
and returning to my Country again, and finding a Holland Vessel ready to set
Sale for Alexandria, I embarked my self therein also, as Pilot; and we
performed our Voyage hither in three Weeks time.

Some days after our Arrival there, there came an order to the Bashaw of Egypt,
from the Grand Signior, to lay an Imbargo on all the Christian Vessels that
were found at that time in the Port of Alexandria, that so they might make use
of them to carry Men and Ammunition for one Voyage only. Thus instead of lading
our Ship with Merchandise, to return back again (as we hoped to do), our Ship
was filled with Soldiers, to be carried to Rhodes. The Wind was favorable
enough to us; we arrived there in few days.

Having weighed Anchor, I understood that Murdhat my Patron, out of whose hands
I had escaped, was at that time Bashaw of that Isle; and that he had his
residence therein.

I confess that this news surprised me, and astonished me much; and I was yet
the more troubled, when I was told, that he already knew (I don't know by what
means) that I was in the Port.

After that I had a little considered what I should do in this encounter,
knowing that I could not escape out of his hands, if he had a design of doing
me any harm; I thought it better for me to prevent him, and to cast my self
into the hands of his mercy, rather than to stay till he sent for me; and that
I might the better dispose him to my pardon, I entreated a certain Turk of
Quality, with whom I entered into acquaintance in our passage, to go to him a
little before me, and to speak to him in my behalf.

Whilst this Turk went to do me this good office, I borrowed of the Captain,
and the Principal men of the Ship, all that was worthy making a present of,
engaging my self to give them what money they desired for it. I had also for my
own particular some thing of curiosity; to wit, fine Linen Cloth, Glasses, a
Watch, and some other knacks. I made them up all very neatly in a basket, which
I carried upon my head; and in this equipage I went my way wirh a resolution to
accost the Bashaw. When I came near him, he was walking in a Gallery, and
talking with several people that were round him: Being about two paces distant
from him, I laid my basket upon the ground, and kneeling down, kissed the hem
of his Garment; saying to him, Sultan, I come to cast my self into your hands,
with all that I am worth in the world, which you see in this basket; you are my
Patron, dispose of it all, and pardon me. Long while it was, that he looked
upon me haughtily, without speaking a word to me, or making any sign that I
should rise up: At last shaking his head a little, and putting his hand on his
side, Ah Cane, Cane! said he to me; there he stopped (his eyes being fixed upon
me), and afterward addressing himself to them that were near him; Behold hold
a little (says he to them) how great the boldness is of this dog, to present
himself to me, after the injury that he has done me, in making me lose my
Galley. Call Issauf Aga hither to me, (pursued he) (this was his Lieutenant)
when he was come, Well Issauf Aga (said he) there is our man in our hands, what
shall we do with him? Go, let them give him -- At this word, Let them give him,
I thought my self a dead man, not doubting in the least, but that it was the
number of Bastinadoes that he meant: Let them give him all that he stands in
need of. Afterward looking upon me kindly, with a smiliing countenance. Rise
up Lewis (continued he) thou have done nothing but what thou ought to do;
and I love thee the more for it, and I will show thee as much, in doing thee
good; although thou have made me lose more than threescore thousand Piasters.
He would needs know afterward, in what manner I escaped the second time, and
all that happened to me afterward. I told him the whole story in particular,
and above all the adventure of the Night-Coat made him laugh, and he had the
goodness, even to tell me, that when I had escaped out of the Galley, the Commit
(being an Officer) thinking to punish me; after many threatenings, because I did
not return back again into my place at the Bench, gave great blows with his
stick upon the Night-Coat, which making it to tumble down, he was greatly
astonished, when he saw that I was not under it.

Afterward I informed him in what a condition my affairs were; and having told
him, that I was only Pilot in a Ship, he gave me a very fair Polacque, which he
had in the Port, bidding me go, and get my livelihood with this Vessel; telling
me withal, that in whatsoever ports of the Sea I should hear that he was, that
I should come to him, and that he would do me what good he could. Having said
these words, he went his way, and Issauf Aga carried me to dinner, and
afterward gave me the possession of the Polacque, with which and the help of
some Mariners, which were sent me by the Captain of the Vessel, whereof I was
Pilot, we returned to Alexandria, where having laden our Ship with what we had
mind to, we set Sail toward France; and at last happily arrived at Cioutat,
continually praising and admiring the generosity of so good a Patriot.

In a word (Gentlemen) to conclude this Narration: I will cut short, and only
tell you, that two or three years were past, wherein making several Voyages to
the principal parts of the Mediteranian, I got with my Polacque some estate,
and having learnt that the Bashaw my Patron, after his Term of being Bashaw of
Rhodes was expired, went to Tunis, to be Bashaw also of that place; I resolved
to make a Voyage thither. I cannot express to you the kindness that he showed to
me, and the good will that he testified to me, when I went to see him, all the
Merchandises that I laded my Ship with for my own share, were exempt from
paying ten in the hundred, being a Tax imposed upon the exportation of
Commodities, which all others paid. I laded my Vessel with what I had a mind
to, and for the height of his favor, he honored me with a trust, which never
had, and it may be never will have its parallel, that is to say from a Bashaw,
toward a poor miserable person, such as my self. This was (if I be not
mistaken) the third Voyage which I made to Tunis.

There remained now not above six months of the three years reign of this
Bashaw. One day he caused me to be called to his Chamber, and said to me,
Lewis, since I have been Bashaw of this Kingdom, I have got together good store
of money, which I have a design to send to Rhodes before my return thither,
that so I may divide my Estate, because of the hazard of the Sea: and in regard
there is no man in the world in whom I have so much considence as in thy self,
I put the better part of my Fortune in thy hands, without fearing any
insidelity from thee. Afterward he showed me 50 small Barrels with their heads
open, which he told me was filled with Checquines, Sultanines, Pistols, and
Piasters, and bade me to carry them to Rhodes, and to return back again as soon
as I could conveniently.

I endeavored at first to dissuade him therefrom, because of the small Forces
which I had in my Vessel, and the risque that he would run in confiding in a
man of so small value as my self; telling him, That I greatly wondered how he
could confide in me, seeing that I should scarcely be willing to answer for my
self in an affair where the Temptation was so violent, and the Fortune so great
and so certain. But all my reasons not prevailing with him, part I must.

Thanks be to God, I performed the Voyage without any ill accident; I consigned
the money at Rhodes, and returned to Tunis, where you may easily judge in what a
manner I was received.

This Generous Lord having entertained me for some days at his House, at last
gave me permission to return home; and that I might have occasion to be
sensible of his Liberality all my life long, he caused my Vessel to be laded
with Grain and other Merchandise, without costing me one farthing.

Thus did I now set sail from Tunis with Goods enough to pass the rest of my
life in a handsome manner. I already meditated with my self of a fair
settlement in my own Country; and though it was against my inclination, I
projectjected to stay and fix my self therein. But I found by experience not
long after, that the designs of man are badly laid, when they have no other
prop to uphold them, but the inconstancy of the Sea. Scarcely had we lost the
sight of the Coasts of Barbary; but a great wind accosted us with such a fury,
that though we had no other sail but the smaller one of the Mainmast, we
traversed the Mediterranean in a day and a half.

But this haste was our mishap; for when we were in sight of Italy, the storm
became so great, that not being able to keep up our sails, nor to govern the
ship, our Mast and our Sail-yard being broken, we were cast upon the Coast that
is toward Via Regia. The Vessel was shipwrackt, and all my Goods, and my sine
projects of Fortune, were sunk down to the bottom of the Sea, being happy
enough in escaping my self by swimming, with some of my Mariners.

Having repaired my self a little on the shore side, I took my way toward Rome,
where I had some friends. I learnt at my arrival, that the Pilot-Real of the
Popes Galleys was dead; and for as much as I was in some reputation for the
knowledge of Sea-affairs, I obtained that place by the help of my Friends.

I have performed this Office near upon four years, and should have continued
in it still, but that hearing that our King had a design to re-establish his
Galleys as they were heretofore, I thought it my duty to leave all, to come and
offer my Talent and my service to my lawful Prince. This is it (Gentlemen) that
brings me hither with this Passport of his Holiness, and these Letters of
Recommendation from Cardinal Antonio to Cardinal Mazarine. And forasmuch as I
know that it is hard to come to the speech of his Eminence, I was a looking as
I walked along in the place, for some acquaintance to counsel me what I should
do; and as I was troubling my head about it, I did by good fortune meet with
this Gentleman, with whom I lived heretofore some time at the Consuls of Tunis.

Thus Captain Lewis Marott finished the recital of his Adventures: Some admired
them; others praised God for his having delivered him from so many perils; and
all of them offered to serve him in what they were able. Thereupon they parted,
to go each one whither his Charge called him. And some Months after, Lewis
Marott had (not without some difficulty) the Office of Pilot-Real of the
Galleys of France bestowed upon him, and was made known to the King of France,
who honored him with a very fair golden Medal, and gave him moreover a good
sum of money, to put him in a condition of serving him.

Here let us-cease, and without any further curiosity, let us leave him to
enjoy this his last good fortune, which he has so well deserved.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. Line 19. Read that Marott, p. 5. l. 8. r. Cioutat, and so throughout.
p. 7. l. 2. r. Baudrand, p. 25. l. 13. r. Ein challa, p. 26. l. 18. r. Ein
challa.


