April 3. 1680.
I Do Appoint Robert Everingham to Print this my Narrative.

THO. BLOOD.

THE NARRATIVE OF Col. Tho. Blood, CONCERNING THE DESIGN Reported to be Lately
laid against the LIFE and HONOR of his GRACE GEORGE Duke of Buckingham.
WHEREIN Colonel Blood is charged to have Conspired with Maurice Hickey, Philip
le Mar, and several others, to suborn the Testimony of Samuel Ryther and
Philemon Coddan to swear Buggery against the said Duke. TOGETHER With a Copy of
the Information exhibited in the Crown-Office against the said Colonel Blood,
Hickey, Le Mar, and the rest.

Published for General Satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham at the Seven Stars in Ave-Mary-Lane. M DC
LXXX.

THE NARRATIVE OF Colonel Blood, etc.
AT, or about the third of January last, 1679. One Jane Bradley, a Widow, now
and then living at the Sign of the St. John's Head, alias, the Heaven-Tavern in
the Old-Palace-Yard, Westminster (mentioned in the Narrative that was lately
pretended to be Mr. Blood's (accidentally seeing Mr. Blood's Servant going by,
beckoned to him, and told him that she thought she had heard something related,
by nameless Persons, proper for Mr Blood's knowledge, and therefore bad him
tell him so, and that she would speak with him about it, when he came that way;
which she desired might be that or the next day following; thereupon the
Servant hastened home to his Masters House, and told him what Mrs. Bradley had
said.

Within few days after Mr. Blood calling, desired the said Woman to let him
know the meaning of her late message, brought him by his Man John: She replied,
and told him, that she had some reason to believe there were some damned
Designs and Plots under Agitation, tending to the disturbance and interuption
of the present established Government, and that she feared the same was as
great and dreadful, if not exceeding any that has been yet discovered.

Mr. Blood asked her, with no small surprise and astonishment, why she thought
so, and by what Ccircumstance. why, said she, here were two shabby fellows here
the other Night, that told me, they had something of great consequence, in
reference to the welfare of the public, to reveal, but that they did not know
how to do it for want of some discreet Person whom they could confide in, and
that would manage it and them warily by carrying them before the King and
Council. Mr. Blood hearing her say so, suspected that there was something in
the matter more than ordinary; and weighing her Apprehensions of the Fellows in
reference to the Eagerness wherewith she told him they expressed their desire of
being rid of this Plot (for so they called it) replied, that if she truly
thought they were fit to be taken notice of, or knew any secret that might be
to the prejudice of the public good, he would take care so to manage their
pretenses, as that he would engage to hand them to a suitable Power in order to
it is receiving what they had to offer of any kind relating to the discovery of
a Plot.

Hereupon, the said Jane Bradley prevailed with Mr. Blood to promise to call of
her again that Evening at six of the Clock.

Mr. Blood insisted to her upon letting him know, why she desired his calling
at that time, because, replied she, I and they have appointed a meeting about
that time in order to their discoursing with him about the business (she not
naming him to them.) Accordingly, Mr. Blood came much about the hour, and went
into a Room below stairs, and asked whether the two Persons she talked of came
yet or no; she replied, and told him, Yes, they were in the Balcony Room above
stairs.

Within a quarter of an hour after the Woman came into the Room where Mr. Blood
was, and told him that the said two strange fellows looked so like Rogues, that
she was of opinion they came upon the Katch as Trapans; for their behavior,
whisperings, and ill aspects, made them seem to look no less. Why, said Mr.
Blood, a man may be an honest man, though by his looks he may be thought
otherwise, for it is oft-times obvious, said he, that though the Face be the
Emblem of the Heart, and that thereby men's measures are usually taken yet a man
may be mistaken sometimes. Nay, replied the Woman, I have some other reason to
think them to be such. Curtis being drinking with them, and telling them that
Mr. Blood was the man that they were to discourse with, about being brought to
the King and Council: What, said one of them, what Blood? is that the Blood
that stole the Crown? God damn him, we will have nothing to do with him, for he
is a great Friend of the Duke of Buckingham's. And a while after understanding
that Mr. Blood was in the House, and that he was the man that was to treat with
them (shame take their Craft) they began suddenly to be under a resolution
different from that of speaking with him, as they seemed before to do if it had
been another man; for calling up Mrs. Bradley, they asked her whether Mr. Blood
was come: Yes, replied she: Why, said they, we have appointed a meeting with
other persons this night, that we did not think of when we came hither, which
we must necessarily attend, and desired to be excused for that time. Pray (said
Mrs. Bradley) do not disappoint him for he came of purpose, but could not
prevail with them. Where it is to be rationally supposed that this sudden
change of their purpose of speaking with Mr. Blood, (who Mrs. Bradley intended
to have them to, though they knew it not) either sprang from faint-heartedness
and fear of discoursing one against whom they intended to lay snares, and
ambushes, lest something might drop in by their behavior that might betray
their designs, or their being there, to be a sufficient Circumstance to prove
that Mr. Blood was tampering with them; as in he conclusion of this Narrative
they seem to charge him with the doing of. For it is obvious to see that where
a Guilty Conscience appears, to that power against which it has offended, there
is scarce need of any Testimony to prove the Guilt: for as the saying is, a
guilty Conscience needs no accuser, which may be properly alluded to this
circumstance of these two persons altering their meeting, as above. But upon
parting, Mrs. Bradley, with much ado, persuaded one of them to show himself to
Mr. Blood, that thereby it might appear they were there, and that she did not
tell a lie, in mentioning that such an appointment was to be and not to appear
so; who when he was passing by where Mr. Blood was, stepped in and told him, said
he, we have a business of great concernment to discover, but are disappointed
and pinched as to our present Leisure of discoursing with you about it, by
reason (continued he) of another appointment that we made about this hour with
others; but upon Monday morning next we will take an occasion of waiting upon
you again, and communicating to you what we are privy to: and so withdrew
immediately, accompanied with some others, supposed of his Confederates, who
were also very shye to appear to Mr. Blood. This was the first time that Mr.
Blood spoke to these men, though they seem to make out, in what you shall
hereafter see, that he has been in their company, and feasted them, and gave
them money several times before.

Upon this passage, Mr. Blood not knowing what to think of the matter, or what
these fellows might mean by a Plot, or their coming there to discover it, went
home immediately; whither within about an hour after Mrs. Bradley came, and
repeating over her former thoughts, and opinion of the two men, in reference to
their manner of Gesture, talking both openly, and whisperingly, declared her
self satisfied, by what she already saw, they were Rogues and Trapans, and that
she did fear, they had some mischievous designs upon him, and therefore bad him
to have a care of himself, by laying with all possible dispatch a prevention
and stop against any such thing (for this was her Opinion) How do you think I I
can do it (replied Mr. Blood) for I know nothing of them, neither do I know
where they live? Why, said she, I know, and so told him the Directions left
her, by Mr. Curtis, where their lodgings were. Why what will you have me do,
replied Blood again, to Strangers that I never saw before? Do, said she, seize,
carry, and get them examined before one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
where they must upon a report of this meeting, and what they told me touching a
Plot, give a satisfactory account of what they are, and what they mean, or are
privy to, relating to a Plot.

Hereupon Mr. Blood weighing the Consequence of her Advice, and considering how
much the same in it is Circumstances affected his safety and defense against any
eminent Design that might be probably threatened him, in preference to the
Trouble, and expense which the finding out of these fellows could expose him
to, especially in these dangerous times, when all men Mouths seem to be as open
as their Ears, resolved immediately to go in quest of them; and in order
thereto, went to Colonel Walcup, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
who happened to be then out of Town. Upon that he went in quest of another, and
met with Doctor Chamberlain, likewise a Justice of Peace, to whom he
communicated the whole passage at large; and told him that the behavior of the
aforesaid two Fellows toward him appeared so wry-necked (for those were his
very words) that he believed they had a Design of doing him some mischief, and
that he thought the way to prevent them in it, and the defending himself
against harm, was to get them seized and examined in order to the forcing them
to declare what they pretended to be privy to relating to a Plot or any thing
elce concerning him, and therefore desired his Warrant so to do, and that he
would please to do him the favor to go with him, in regard said he, that it
did merely concern his particular part to be out of the fear of it, as well as
the health of the Government said to be aimed at, by what these fellows
reported they knew.

Doctor Chamberlain condescended to the giving a Warrant for the apprehending
of them under the Names of Philemom Codan, and Samuel Ryther, and was as well
out of friendship to Mr. Blood as love to the public good, pleased to go in
person himself to find them out taking a long with him, a Constable or two, and
a competent number of Watchmen, and being informed that they lodged, viz. the
former at one Richard Monk a Dyers House, bearing the Sign of the Rainbow at
the lower end of Long Aker, and the other, viz. Samuel Ryther, about the Soho,
thither he went, and having taken care to speak with them at either place as
they came in, after some attendance, seized both at the latter of the said
Places, that is at Rythers Quarters, about eleven of the Clock at night. After
being seized, Doctor Chamberlain began to examine them severally, touching the
Plot they pretended to be privy to, and which they wanted a Magistrate to
reveal to, whereat they behaved themselves with much strangeness and surprise,
and very pragmatically and insolently pressed the Justice to let them know what
he meant, what the ground of his Apprehension was, or what he had to lay to
their Charge? He told them that he heard they were privy to a great and
dangerous Plot against the Tranquillity of the Government; and that to discover
the same, he understood that they did appoint a meeting that Evening about six
In order to their revealing the same, to such a person as Mrs. Bradley did
bring them to, but that when they came to the place, appointed, being at the
St. Johns-Head-Tavern, alias called Heaven, in the Old Pallace-Yard
Westminster, they ran away without giving any Account of what they pretended to
reveal when they came either to Mrs. Bradly or her Friend, and that he
understanding it was about a Plot, he came purposely to know and receive what
they had to discover of that kind.

Whereat Samuel Ryther started up and protested he knew of no Plot, nor ought
like it. The other, viz. Mr. Codan forsooth, being asked what the meaning of
their meeting at Heaven was, if they had no Plot to discover? To which he
replied, that it was about the Duke of Buckingham, who he said owed them both
several hundreds of pounds upon Account of Wages, and that they wanted some
body that was able to cope with him. How! how! replied one Thomas Curtis, that
happened to stand by, why do you say so? Did not I hear you say at such a
place, naming it, that you knew of a greater Plot yet undiscovered, than either
Doctor Oats or Captain Bedlow ever hither to confessed; to which they gave no
satisfactory Answer.

Then Doctor Chamberlain urged again, that it was not to be expected, that any
should be so overseen as to interpose between Masters and Servants about Wages,
especially so great a Person as the Duke of Buckingham was, that that could not
be the reason of their meeting as was appointed at Heaven, and therefore told
them that he could not believe, but that that was an Excuse

Upon which one of these men (seeing themselves so strictly set, and no other
pretense to escape owning that they said they knew of a Plot) starts up, and
fell violently upon Damming and sinking himself, in the presence of the
Justice, that he would be revenged on the Duke of Buckingham, and that he would
swear and do any thing that could tend to the doing him a prejudice, and that
he himself would swear Sodomy against him.

With that Doctor Chamberlain and Mr. Blood perceiving and weighing
deliberately that the result of their Cavelling in coherent Replies and
Defense, was fictitious, and sprang from their own invention; concludes, that
it was scarce worthy their further notice, and therefore the Justice told him
of the two that last spoke, that he neither did, nor would hear any thing of
the matter of Sodomy they talked of relating to the Duke; and that he was a
little unsatisfied with their evasions and quibling stories, asserting that
there was a sufficient Witness by (naming Curtis) who was able to justify
that he heard them say they had something to relate touching an Interruption
designed to the Government, and therefore pressed them both to be ingenious,
yet to no purpose.

Then Doctor Chamberlain resolving to leave no stone unturned, nor any
Circumstance unrepeated, that could contribute to the having out the Truth of
the matter from them, asked them jointly why, and what was the reason of their
running away at the sight of Mr. Blood, when they appointed to meet at Mrs.
Bradlies at Heaven, without giving an Account of what they came about? Because,
replied they, we were diffident and mistrustful of him, why so said the
Justice? Why said they, we did not judge him to be a fitting person for our
turn, in reference to what we have to offer against the Duke of Buckingham. Why
so said he? because replied they, we apprehended by what we heard, that he was
the Dukes friend, and if we did trust him he might probably betray us.

Thereupon Doctor Chamberlain taking them for idle Fellows, had them be gone,
but presently upon second Thoughts, directed them to consider of what they had
already said, and to attend upon him at his House in Essex-Building on the
Monday morning following, where he would receive what, if any thing, they
should then have to offer concerning the discovery of a Plot.

Accordingly they came accompanied with Mr. Whittaker, and Mr. Jenks, where Mr.
Blood likewise attended, and Doctor Chamberlain asking them over again the
meaning of those shuffling Stories they treated him the foregoing Saturday at
night with, they replied, they had a further Design to discover and carry on,
relateing to the welfare and Good of the public, but would come to no
particulars. Whereupon without more ado, Doctor Chamberlain dismissed them, and
heard not of them for some time after.

About the 20th of January, Sir William Waller being returned out of the
Country where he then was about this time, took occasion of sending his Man to
Mr. Blood, with directions that he would be pleased to come to him to the
Buffillo-head-Tavern near the Gatehouse in Westminster, to drink as he thought,
a Glass of Wine with him; who presently came, where finding, to his surprise,
Mr. Ryther and Mr. Codan, together with Mr Whittaker and Mr. Jenks in Sir
Williams Company, started not so much at their being there (I mean Mr. Ryther
and Codan) but at the sudden change of the dress of the said two, who from the
degree of Porter-like fellows (for such like, or worse they appeared to be when
they were examined before Doctor Chamberlain) got into fine Rigging, such as
near Clothes, good Perrivvigs, new Hats, clean Linen, Swords and all other
Accoutrements answerable, so that Mr. Blood did scarce know them, and so said
nothing for a little time.

After the drinking a Glass or two of Wine, Sir William began to open the
Matter, and told Mr. Blood why he sent for him, and withal, that he was very
much troubled at the misfortune he lately brought himself under, and that not
only upon the Account of his being a Neighbor, and a long Acquaintance, but
for some other Reasons, which he did not think fit then to mention.

What misfortune do you mean, replied Mr. Blood, I do not understand you? Why,
said Sir William, these two Gentlemen (pointing at Mr. Ryther and Codan, that
sat by) are come hither before me, to depose upon Oath, that you as a
Confederate have attempted at several times to corrupt them by money, and the
prospect of other considerable Rewards, to swear and falsely to accuse and
charge his Grace the Duke of Buckingham with Sodomy. How! What do you mean,
rereplied Mr. Blood? what is the matter, I do not know what you say?

Whereat Philemon Coddan started up, almost disguised (for Mr. Blood could
scarce remember where he saw him, because he got so finely Rigged of a sudden)
and said, Mr. Blood you would suborn us to swear Buggery against the Duke of
Buckingham. O shame on you replied Blood, can you be so Impudent, as to invent
such a thing of Mr. Blood, that is a Stranger to you, and who never saw you in
his Life, but before Doctor Chamberlain, and one time at Heaven.

At which Mr. Jenks and Mr. Whittaker sitting by, jointly interposing, stood up
and took the opportunity of backing him that last spoke, and said, come Mr.
Blood come, as God gave you Reason, Wisdom and Understanding; be honest, and
just, and Confess.

Mr. Blood being something concerned thereat, replied, saying, you that have
been these two years last past employed to asperse Mr, Blood, do you appear in
such a Game as this, is your Invention no better?

Then directing his Discourse to Sir William Waller, asked him what the matter
was, or what made those two men run away from Heaven without saying of any
thing of this kind, and why did they Damme and sink themselves, when they came
afterward before Doctor Chamberlain, that they would ruin the Duke of
Buckingham, by Oath or any other Act that could enable them to reach him. Sir
William Waller replied, that they said so on Purpose, and in Order to the
carrying on a greater Design; further asserting that these Gentlemen (for so
they were pleased to call them, were honest men, whereupon Mr. Jenks and Mr.
Whittaker jointly pressed, that they meaning Codan and Ryther, were very honest
men, and therefore desired that Sir William would be pleased to exercise
Justice on Mr. Blood in their behalf.

Sir William Waller thereat desired Mr. Blood with Civility, that he would
bring in two persons for his Bail, instancing at the same time Mr. Jarrat and
another Gentleman, that were friends of Mr. Bloods, Mr. Blood replied, that he
would take time to consider of the validity of his Advice, and wait upon them
with the result of what he would resolve upon another time, for such things
were not to be done rashly.

Accordingly Mr. Blood quitted the Company friendly and went about his business

Next morning he went to Sir William Waller to his house, where he found Mr.
Whittaker and being asked by Sir William, have you brought your friends Mr.
Blood as I desired you, no replied Mr. Blood nor will till I know for what, and
then desired a Copy of the mittimus that he was to be Committed by, for by that
said he I shall be able to know how I shall proportion my Bail.

Upon which Sir William begg^d that he would not proceed according to that
method or Course, but follow his directions, and put in Bail. Which Mr. Blood
persisted in his declining the doing of it, declaring that he would insist upon
being treated by him according to the form of Law, and therefore desired to
know what he stood charged with, by letting him have a Copy of his mittimus,
which Sir William did.

The next day a Constable came to Mr. Bloods House in the name of Sir William
and desired to speak with him, notice whereof being carried to Mr. Blood, who
happened then to be in bed; he sent his man to Sir William to tell him that as
soon as he waf up, and made an end of some Affairs that he was obliged to see
dispatched that morning at Court, he would wait upon him.

Immediately Mr. Blood got up, and went to Court accordingly, and upon his
return thence, which was within some small time after, he met a Constable at
the upper end of Kingstreet in Westminster, who desiring him to step aside a
little into an Alley that was hard by, told him he had a Warrant (mistaking a
Warrant for a Mittimus) against him from Sir William Waller, and that if he
pleased to step into any House hard by, he would follow him, without exposing
the passage to the view of any, that upon seeing a Constable in his company
might be apt to guess of his being in trouble; Mr. Blood thereupon went to the
Dog-Tavern, next door to the Gate House, whither the said Officer followed him,
and showed him his Authority from Sir William, which was in the following
words, (Viz.)

A Copy of the Mittimus by which Mr. Blood was seized, and to be carried to the
Gate House.
To the Keeper of the Gate House Westminster, or his Deputy.
WHereas Oath has been made by two Witnesses before Comit' Middlesex Clvit'
and Libert' Westm' William Waller.
me, That Colonel Thomas Blood is a Confederate in the late Conspiracy of
suborning Witnesses falsely to accuse and charge his Grace the Duke of
Buckingham of Sodomy, he having refused to give in Bail to appear the next
General Sessions of the Peace to be held for the City and Liberty of
Westminster to answer the Premises.

These are therefore in His Majesty's Name upon sight hereof to direct you to
take into your Custody the Body of him the said Colonel Thomas Blood, and him
safely to keep until he shall be delivered by due course of Law.

Given under my Hand and Seal tricessimo die Januarii, Annoque Domini 1679.
While Mr. Blood lay under the restraint of this Mittimus, (which happened upon
Saturday the one and thirtieth of January) it chanced that one of your common
Hawkers, among other things, as he went by, cried, that Mr. Blood was in the
Gatehouse, (vide the Print) where it is to be rationally supposed, that Sir
William having issued his Mittimus the day before, being the thirtieth day of
January, for the apprehending and carrying away Mr. Blood to Goal, by the
virtue of the same, and imagining that the Constable did his Duty that day
accordingly in laying of him up, the Printer had some how notice thereof
brought him, and so dispersed it. But Sir William soon heard of the mistake,
for sending upon the said Saturday, about three in the afternoon, one of the
said Witnesses from the Cock-Ale-House near Temple Bar to Westminster, to know
of the Constable how he had disposed of Mr. Blood, he found the Constable was
with Mr. Blood at the Dog-Tavern, who sending for the Constable into another
Room, asked him why Mr. Blood was not carried to Prison before that time? Why,
replied the Constable, I do not know how Sir William can justify me in what I
have done; for, said he, when Sir William gave this Mittimus, I told him, that
I durst not carry him to Goal before he was first carried by Virtue of a
Warrant before a Justice of Peace, and thence, according as the Crime appeared,
or sworn against him, Committed; and then he told me, that he would bear me out
in it, but now I find to the contrary; and besides that, I have opened the
Business to two of my Acquaintance, whom I accidentally met with here, and that
are now Constables of this Parish, who tell me, that it is in the Power of Mr.
Blood to bring me under great trouble, for my inadvertency in the thing, which
pray go and tell him, and that if Mr. Blood has a mind to go, I neither dare
nor will keep him one minute longer in my Custody.

In this interval of time, Mr. Blood taking notice of the Passage, and
observing that the Constable absented from his Company a good while, and taking
notice also, that he was suddenly called for into another Room, to speak with
one, and desirous to know who it was, or what the matter might be, sent out one
of his Friends to learn who it was, who upon his return brought word, that it
was one of the Witnesses against him, that came from Sir William Waller, but
what his Message or Business was he knew not, but that they were together in
the House. Whereupon the said Witness going back immediately again to Sir
William to tell him what the Constable said touching his incapacity of
detaining Mr. Blood without a Warrant; the Constable came in to Mr. Blood, but
did not then tell him the Passages that happened between him and the two
Constables about the danger he was in, nor the Message that the said Witness
came upon, or that he went back to Sir William for a Warrant.

Mr. Blood took occasion then of telling the Constable of his inadvertency, and
that if he (meaning himself) were a troublesome Man, he could have trounc'd
him; how? replied the Constable, and for what? For detaining me here, replied
Mr. Blood, unlawfully, for I know what a Justice of Peace ought to do in Cases
of this kind; but, says he, as you are a Neighbor, and a civil Man, I scorn to
take the advantage of you, though I might bring my Action at Law against you,
and make you pay me so much an hour for false Imprisonment.

This Discourse was scarce at an end, but the Constable was sent for a second
time out of Mr. Blood's Company to speak with this Witness, who was by this
time hurried back from Sir William, who presently, when he understood what the
Constable said of his not daring to hold Mr. Blood without a Warrant, sent him
down with one, dated the one and thirtieth of January; upon the delivery
whereof to the Constable the Witness withdrew, and the constable came to Mr.
Blood, and told him the whole story, and withal, that just then Sir William
sent him a Warrant, and what passed between him and the Witness before, and
that he did purpose to discharge Mr. Blood without any more ado, had not that
Warrant been brought him, acknowledging, that he could not answer his detaining
of him so long without it: A Copy of which Warrant, for the Readers further
satisfaction, is as follows, (Viz.)

A Copy of a Warrant sent by the Witness to seize Mr. Blood, then actually in
hold at the Dog-Tavern, by Virtue of an antedated Mittimus.
To all Constables, and other His Majesty's Officers Civil and Military.
WHereas Oath has been made by two Witnesses, That Civit' Middlesex Libert'
Westminster. William Waller.
Colonel Thomas Blood has been a Confederate in a late Conspiracy of falsely
accusing and charging his Grace the Duke of Buckingham, of Sodomy, and has
refused to give in Bail for his appearance at the next General Sessions to be
held for the City and Liberty of Westminster.

These are therefore to will and require, That you seize and apprehend the said
Colonel Thomas Blood, and if he shall refuse to give in Bail, to carry him,
and deliver him into the Hand of Mr. Church, Keeper of the Gate House in
Westminster, according to the Tenor of the Mittimus in your Hands.

Given under my Hand and Seal the one and thirtieth of January. 1679.
Here it may be most naturally inferred from the Premises, that there was
nothing more aimed at in these Proceedings, than to hurry Mr. Blood to Goal,
purposely to bring him at first under public scandal, and then to strip him of
the good esteem of his Friends, by turning them all against him, and (to
complete their work) to possess Sir William Waller, that Mr. Blood stood guilty
of capital offenses, such as Conspiracy against the Kings Laws, etc. and
therefore fit to be confined, for there lay the knack of the Intrigue; for the
original meeting of the two Witnesses at Heaven was intended only to serve as a
Circumstance of their having seen him there, and accordingly to be made use of
by them, when ever they came to prove what they were then employed upon: for
when they understood by Thomas Curtis, when they first came to Heaven, that Mr.
Blood was the Person that was to introduce them to the King and Council, in
order to their detecting and divulging the Plot that they pretended to be privy
to, exceeding in greatness, as they called it, any that has been yet discovered
by Dr Oats or Captain Bedloe, they excepted against Mr. Blood, (though they
came thither upon no other score than to furnish themselves with Circumstances)
saying, Is not that the Blood that stole the Crown? God damn him, we will have
nothing to do with him, for he is too great a Friend of the Duke of
Buckingham's. Then to publish in Print, that he was a Prisoner, to the end that
the same might be dispersed over all the Nation, and the People possessed,
(especially his Friends) that it was for high misdemeanors, and consequently
not bailable; and then for have, because his Reputation should not escape,
being gulled to take him up by a Mittimus, on purpose to run him into Prison;
and finding that way not to take, then to take him by a Warrant.

After the Warrant was thus brought, Mr. Blood and the Constable continued
together till it was about six of the Clock, (for till then no Justice of Peace
could be found) when Mr. Blood gave in Bail to the value of forty Pounds before
Sir William Poultney, to answer this monstrous Accusation, for such they made
Sir William Waller believe it to be.

Within few days after, Mr. Blood happening to meet with one Mr. Burrowes, a
Cabinet-seller in the Strand, they both by consent went to the
Kings-head-Tavern in Chancery Lane to drink a Glass of Wine, where being
accompanied by one or two more Gentlemen, Mr. Blood, among other Passages,
began to mention Sir William VVallers's unkind usage of, and behavior toward
him; whereat Mr. Burrowes asked him wherein? Mr. Blood replied, that when he
was sent for the other day by Sir William, to give in Bail to answer the
Charge sworn against him by the two Witnesses, he asked Sir William, do you
heed these Fellows? you should rather secure, and lay them by the heels, for
they did own before Doctor Chamberlain, and several Witnesses, that they did
run away from Heaven without speaking with him, because they thought he was too
great a Friend to the Duke of Buckingham, and that they then swore several
times God damn them, they would destroy the Duke of Buckingham, by Oath, or any
thing else they could reach him with; and thereupon Sir William asked them
both at that very instant of time, whether they knew or said any such thing
touching the Duke? and that they thereupon acknowledged they said so before
Doctor Chamberlain; yet Sir William did, notwithstanding that, tell Mr.
Blood, (touching him on the Sleeve) that they were both honest Men for all
this; at which Mr. Blood answered, Then the Devil is honest. Upon which Mr.
Burrowes, seeming to be very unwilling to believe, that Sir William could be
guilty of so great an error; Mr. Blood, upon his own free accord, sent his Man
to see if he could find out Sir William, and if he did, to desire him to come
to him to the Tavern, to the end Mr. Burrowes should see and hear Sir William
himself own to his face what Mr. Blood said, touching him in this Particular.
Sir William being come accordingly, Mr. Burrowes opened the matter, and, by
way of reproach, began to charge Mr. Blood with his having scandalized Sir
William behind his back, in saying; that he did dispense with the two
Witnesses, when he said they were honest Men: I do not know, replied Mr. Blood,
that he gave them a Dispensation, or that he did dispense With them; but that I
said either the one or the other, I confess; and then Sir William being asked if
he said so or no? Yes, replied Sir William, I own I said so; yet it has been
since industriously reported, that Mr. Blood took occasion of railing against
Sir William Waller before some company; and some Person thereof concerned for
Sir William, observing the same, should send for Sir William before the
Company broke up, and that when Mr. Blood was charged therewith before Sir
William by that Party who was said to be so concerned, he should deny it, which
Mr Blood is ready to prove if need be; and it is believed Sir William himself
will own it if need be.

Mrs. Bradley, the Woman at Heaven, was much about the same time brought upon
the same Stage with Mr. Blood, and it seems upon the like score; for Sir
William being jealous that Mr. Blood held correspondence with Thomas Curtis,
sent for her to know how long Mr. Blood knew the said Curtis; she told him that
she thought he never saw him but once, which was before Doctor Chamberlain;
whereat Sir William Waller, not willing to believe her Answer, told her that
she lied, it was no such thing, but that they corresponded; you may believe me,
replied the Woman, if you please, for I do not lie.

Sir William not satisfied herewith, on the 30th of January charged her with a
Constable, and caused her to be brought before him. When she came, he asked her
where her Bail was, I have them here, quoth she; who are they? said he; so she
told him; but he not liking them, commanded the Constable to do his Duty, and
carry her to Goal; the Constable hearing him so say, and knowing her to be a
Neighbor, carried her to Mr. Church his House, where she continued till next
day, when she gave in Bail before Sir William Poultney to the value of two
Hundred Pounds.

The meaning of this Passage being mentioned here is this. When the two
Witnesses came first to Heaven, and went up stairs to drink, it happened that
one of Mrs. Bradley's Acquaintance, being a Womankind, was in the next Room to
them, who suspecting them to be Bailiffs, or such like Fellows, (for their
outward condition made them look no better) she accidentally listened to know
what they might say, or came about. By and by one of them said, How shall we do
this? God damn me, said the other, we will do this Rogue Blood's business for
him, and get Oaths enough to swear against him by that time Sir William Waller
comes to Town.

Upon this Mrs. Bradley's Friend for the present said nothing of the matter to
her, but told it the next day to another Friend, who took no notice of it
neither at that time. But seeing Mrs. Bradley brought under trouble about a
fortnight after, as you heard before, both came and told her what the two
Witnesses said of Mr. Blood when they were above in the Balcony Room, and how
they swore they would do Mr. Blood's business, and would find Oaths enough
against him by that time Sir William came to Town. Hereupon Mrs. Bradley had
both before a Justice, to have them swear the Matter of Fact, which they
accordingly did; which Depositions are to be seen in due time. From whence it
may be pertinently inferred, that the said Witnesses were then brewing what
they have since broached in the following manner.

First they frame and contrive, that Maurice Hickey, alias Higgins, Robert
Smith, alias Jones, John Haley, Thomas Curtis, Thomas Blood, Edward Christian,
Arthur O-Bryan, Phillyp la Mere, and Jane Bradley, did by unlawful means and
ways, between themselves, conspire to rob the Duke of Buckingham, not only of
his Honor and Reputation, as a Peer of England, but likewise of his Life, upon
a presumption of his committing Sodomy with one Sarah Harwood; and in order to
the convicting and condemning him the said Duke of the same, they did invent,
that they the said Mr. Blood, and Company afore-mentioned, did agree with two
of the said Dukes Servants, namely Philemon Coddan, and Samuel Ryther, to pay
them several hundreds of Pounds, upon condition that they would suffer
themselves to be prevailed with to come as Evidences, and swear, when the
matter of Fact was brought to a Trial, that they did hear Sarah Harwood declare
such and such things against the said Duke; (meaning Sodomy with her, and
several others) and that, besides these several Sums of Money thus invented to
be agreed upon to be in hand paid, they should engage to secure them the said
Coddan and Ryther of considerable Annuities for Life, and the Friendship of the
best Noblemen in England, to vindicate them in whatever they did.

That previous to all this, the said Mr. Blood, and the rest of them, should be
invented to have expended sundry great Sums of Money upon these two Fellows in
Junkets, Treats, and so forth, before they could be brought to swear to this
subornation against the Duke. In manner following, viz. That the said Philemon
Coddan, and Samuel Ryther, should Sign a Paper ready drawn, wherein they were
to certify, that they did hear the said Sarah Harwood confess and declare
before them, that his Grace the Duke of Buckingham did forcibly enter both her
Privities, as far as he could go, stopped her Breath, and then sent her away; by
which conveyance the King lost his Evidence. That they were further (as they
contrived it themselves) to testify, that the said Duke ordered the said Sarah
Harwood to be murdered, or conveyed to, and sold beyond the Seas, and that he
had committed the like on several others, which they were to be ready to prove
when called thereto: And that this Instrument should be sent (by direction of
Mr. Blood, and the rest abovementioned) by Maurice Hicky to a certain place in
Bloomsberry, where he was to meet with the said Ryther and Coddan, and being
met there, to offer both or either of them that came 300 Pieces of Gold,
provided they Signed the foregoing Instrument, and if they did not, to stab
them; but if they did Sign, to give them the Gold. That Ryther being come
alone, and offered the Gold and Instrument by Mr Hickey, he should desire to
have a little leisure of perusing and pausing upon it in the next room, and
when that, to escape and run away to the Duke of Buckingham's Sollicitour, and
tell him that he was set upon in such a place by Maurice Hickey in the name of
himself, Mr. Blood, and others to sign that Paper (which he was to bring with
him) and take so much Gold for his pains, or else to be killed. And that upon
this escape, Hickey, thus outwitted, was to say, when he understood by the
Woman of the House that he was gone, that he and Partners were undone, and so
fled. And the next day after, the better to carry on the Design, without
suspicion, to bid 100 l. in the Intelligence to any that could give tidings of
this Hickey, in the following manner, viz. That whereas one Maurice Hickey had
tempted one Samuel Ryther, a Servant of the Duke of Buckingham's, to Sign to a
certain Paper, (meaning the foregoing Instrument) containing matters tending to
the taking away the Life of his Grace the Duke of Buckingham, and that he
offered him 300 Pieces of Gold for his condescension thereto; and whereas the
said Samuel Ryther did not only deny the same, but ran away; and that the said
Maurice Hickey did thereupon fly, and could not be heard of, then to bid 100 l.
in the Intelligence to any that could bring tidings of him to Mr. Whitaker.

By this any Man may plainly see, that these Fellows were not idle in carrying
on what they damned themselves they would, against Mr. Blood, when they were
overheard at Heaven, where they said we will find Oaths enough to swear
against him by that time Sir William Waller comes to Town; for when Sir William
came home, it is worth the Readers notice to remember, how he sent for Mr. Blood
presently to the Buffillo-Tavern, where these Fellows were; how Sir William was
prevailed with to press Mr. Blood to give in Bail to answer what they swore
against him; what have was made in running him to Prison, by laying hold of him
first by a Mittimus, and then by a Warrant, as by the foregoing appears; and
then to have it declared and cried about the streets, that he was in Prison,
when he was not; and how Mr. Blood was disappointed by those Hands who promised
to have them forthwith coming before that Justice of Peace in Westminster that
took examination on his behalf, to answer what he had to accuse them of, but
did not: for Mr. Blood having examined Witnesses before a Justice in the
Liberty of Westminster, before whom a Conspiracy was proved to be on foot
against Mr. Blood, and finding that these Fellows were, by the report of the
Neighborhood, fled from their Habitations, he sent a Gentleman of his
Acquaintance to Sir William Waller, to desire and require of him, that in
regard, and for as much as he had promised to take good Security for the
forthcoming of the said Persons, and their appearing before that Authority
that took examinations on his behalf, when required, he would please to produce
them, to the end they might be bound over to answer what ever Charge Mr. Blood
had to offer against them, and he thereby obtain equal Justice. Sir William was
pleased to say, that he was not obliged to take any Security for their
appearance, nor would he bring them forth, adding, that Mr. Blood was unkind
for abusing him for his civility, (meaning the Passage touching Mr. Burrowes.)
Upon this the Gentleman urged, that it was Mr. Blood's opinion that he was not
over kind to him, who had been so long his Neighbor and Acquaintance, and one
by whom he never knew any ill.

To which Sir William answered, That he had done his Duty as to the Method
wherein he took their Oaths; and as to those Circumstances which he charged him
with the neglect of, they must make them out as they can, when the Matter comes
to be decided by a Trial.

Upon this Mr. Blood's Friend came back, and gave him an account what passed
between him and Sir William Waller, and how he denied the bringing forth of the
two Persons. It Is plainly to be seen from the foregoing Circumstances, that
there was no labor spared toward the setting of Sir William and Mr. Blood by
the ears.

Whereupon Mr. Blood, not well knowing how to help himself, or what remedy to
retort to, at last he went to, and directed Mr. Thompson to put them into his
Intelligence, in the Words following, viz. Whereas Philemon Codan and Samuel
Ryther, pretended Servants to his Grace the Duke of Buckingham, did falsely
asperse Thomas Blood Esquire that he would have suborned them to swear some
notorious Crimes against the said Duke, (who now abscond themselves.) If any
can give notice of the said Philemon Coddan and Samuel Ryther, unto the said
Thomas Blood Esquire at his House over the Bowling-Alley in Westminster, or to
Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, they shall be well rewarded.

When this was cried about the streets, and a Reward proffered to any that could
tell where these Fellows were, one Mrs. Stringer, that keeps a Cup of Ale to
sell at the lower end of Long-Acre, happened to buy the Intelligence, and
knowing these Persons, when mentioned, and where they lay, came to Mr Blood's
House to let him know where they lay, under hopes, it is supposed, of receiving
the promised Revvard; but missing of Mr. Blood at home, left word at his
House, that she lived at such a Place, that her Name was Stringer, and that
she came to give tidings of Coddan and Ryther, whom she heard cried in the
Intelligence, and that if he came to her, she would tell him more of them.

When Mr Blood heard this, he sent presently to the Woman to let him know
what account she had to give of them. Whereupon she told them he sent, that
she knevv Philemon Coddan and Samuel Ryther, mentioned in Mr. Thompsons
Intelligence, very well, that Coddan lodged in the next House, viz. at Mr.
Monks a Dyer, for some time, that he was indebted to her for Drink, etc.
Whereupon Mr. Bloods Friends desired her to let them know, if she could tell
where the said Persons lay now? she told them in the City at a Shoomakers in
Walbrook; notice where of being brought back to Mr. Blood, he was advised to
have her, by Warrant, carried before a Justice of Peace, as also Mr. Monk the
Dyer, to be examined touching their knowledge of these Persons; which he
accordingly did, where being both come, Mrs. Stringer gave relation of them
both to the follovving purpose, viz.

The Justice asked her and Mr. Monk both, 1st. Whether they knevv any thing
relating to the Plot? they replied, No. Have you ever taken the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy or not? they replied, Yes: Then you know that those
Oaths bind you to be true and faithful to the King; Yes, they knevv that, they
said: Then the Justice took Mrs. Stringer singly to task, asking her, whether
she knevv Coddan, Ryther, or Hickey? Yes, said she, I know them all three
constant Companions together, and that they usually resorted to her Cellar,
accompanied great many times by other Irish Men, who were of their Gang, and
whose Names she knew not, though they all together dyeted with her commonly.
Have you taken any notice of any discourse they had when they were together?
replied the Justice. Why, replied the Woman, when they discoursed about any
thing that they would not have me, or the House privy to, they usually spoke
Irish. And being asked, whether she knew any remarkable thing or passage
relating to any of the three under present debate. Yes, said she: What is it?
Why, said she, the day after Hickey was cried in the Intelligence, and one
hundred Pounds bid to any that could discover him, she espied him go by her
door in very great have, and being indebted to her, she ran after him, and with
much ado overtook him in such a Sweat, that every drop that came from him
looked as big as a Pea; being overtook, she asked him for the Money he owed
her, for, said she, we are very Poor People, and new Beginners, and you would
do very well to pay us. Whereto Mr. Hickey replying, I am, said he, going into
the City to Mr. Coddan, and though I am disappointed at present, yet it shall
not be long before I content you; and not only that, but I will speak to Mr.
Coddan to do the like for what he owes you.

The next day, being the second day after Hickey was cried in the Intelligence
Coddan himself came to Mr. Monks, whom he owed Money to also for Lodging,
where I happening to see him, quoth the Woman, I went and spoke to him before
Mr. Monk, and told him, I saw and spoke with Mr. Hickey, said she, yesterday
about my Money, and he told me that he was going into the City to speak with
you: Yes, replied Coddan, he was with me yesterday, and told me what you said
to him. But, said the Woman, Mr. Coddan, I hear that Mr. Hickey is in the
Intelligence; no, said Coddan, you are mistaken, it is another. Whereupon he
went away, and called within two days after at Mr. Monks Shop, where I
happened to be, said the Woman, and I hear, (continued she to Mr. Coddan) that
Hickey is in the Gate House, and did not I tell you before, that I was sure it
was the same Hickey that was cried in the Intelligence the other day. Coddan
replied to Mr. Monk and she, saying, I was not willing you should take him,
because I had a mind to take him my self. Whereupon the Woman told the Justice,
that the said Coddan owing her Money, she went several times to demand it, but
to little purpose; and being lost for some time, she heard at last that he lay
in London, whither she and her Husband went on a Sunday morning to demand their
Debt, not exceeding five Shillings. He replied, Damn him, he would pay her no
Money, if it were to save her Life from the Gallows, or her Soul from Hell,
and so would not pay her one farthing, though he showed a great quantity of
Money that he had about him. At which her Husband went with a Friend to the
Gate House, where he found the said Hickey with the Campaigne Coat that Coddan
had on his back, when Hickey was in the Intelligence.

Mr. Monks Confession of his Knowledge of the said Hickey, Coddan, and Ryther,
etc.
Mr. Monk, when examined, told the Justice, that he always suspected since
first he saw them, that Coddan, Ryther, Hickey, and the rest of the Gang were
Rogues, that Coddan and Hickey lay at his House about three Weeks, whither they
were resorted to by several other Irish men, that his opinion was, they could
not get their Livelihoods honestly, being sometimes very flush of money, and
sometimes none at all; that after Hickey was in the Intelligence, he met with
Coddan, and told him, that Hickey was in the Intelligence, for he knew it by
the mark of his Hand, and that there was one hundred Pounds bid for the
apprehending of him, and that Coddan replied, he was mistaken, it was none of
him, it was another; and Coddan calling a day or two after, Mr. Monk said to
him, Did I not tell you it was the same Hickey? I, says Coddan, but I was not
minded you should take him, for I intended to take him my self.

Further Mr. Monk declared, that the said Coddan did often tell him about this
time that Mr. Blood and he did never converse together in their Lives.

When Sir William Waller, and some others, heard this, and that Mrs. Stringer
and Monk were with Mr. Blood before a Justice of the Peace, and given in some
report relating to Coddan and Ryther, he took occasion of going to Long-Acre,
and happing in hard by the Place where Mrs. Stringer and Monk lived, Coddan
sent in his own name for Mr. Monk to drink a Cup of Ale with him; accordingly
Monk came, where he found Sir William Waller, Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Jeuks and
Coddan together. After some discourse, Sir William took Monk aside, and desired
him to tell him plainly what he knew of Coddan, Ryther or Hickey, how long he
knew them, and what his opinion was of them, as to their honesty, manner of
living, and so forth, to the end, as he seemed to pretend, that if they did Mr.
Blood any wrong, things might be put to right, and the said Persons exposed to
condign punishment, as far as they were found to deserve it. Whereto Mr. Monk
replying, gave him his opinion as he did before when he was examined on Mr.
Blood's behalf, and that withal, he always took them for very loose Fellows,
and that little time would discover better what they were, and so bad Sir
William believe them, and what they said accordingly, for they were idle
Fellows in his Judgment.

Here the Reader may, with little trouble, undo the Snare, as well as unriddle
the whole Plot laid against the Innocence of Mr. Blood and others, if he will
but please to consider,

First, the manner of the two Witnesses first coming to the Woman at Heaven,
what they were overheard to say against Mr. Blood, saying (when they were told
by Mr. Curtis, that he was the man, that was to treat with them touching what
they came about,) Is that the Blood that stole the Crown? God Damn him, we'll
have nothing to do with him, for he is the Dukes Friend.

Secondly, Their saying at Heaven, How shall we do? said the same again, God
Damn me! we will do Blood 's business for him, and find Oaths enough against
him by that time Sir. W. W. comes to Town.

Thirdly, Their Confession before Doctor Chamberlain, where they acknowledged
they would have told the Plot to Mr. Blood when they met, but that they knew he
was the Dukes Friend, and therefore durst not trust him.

Fourthly, How he has been treated by Sir W. W. through the instigation of
others, and endeavored to be hurryed into Prison, first by a Mittimus, and
then by a Warrant; reported that he was in Prison, when he was not, etc.

Fifthly, How they invented the Paper which was to be signed by Coddan and
Ryther, certifying that Sarah Harwood said before them that the Duke of
Buckingham did so and so with her, etc.

Sixthly, How Maurice Hickey should appoint a meeting with this Coddan and
Ryther at a certain place in Bloomsberry, where he was to pay them 300 pieces
of Gold, in the name of himself, Mr. Blood, etc. upon their signing the said
Paper.

Seventhly, How when Hickey came (as the pretense would make it be believed)
Ryther only appeared; where it was so contrived, that when Hickey should offer
him the Paper to sign, Ryther should desire the liberty of considering on it in
the next Room, and then like a faithful Servant forsooth, to make his escape,
and run to a place hard by, where it is credibly reported his Teachers attended
his coming out of such a danger (here is a delivery with a vengeance!) and
pretend that one Maurice Hickey, and others did tempt him with so much monyes
for signing such a Paper, and that if he did not, they the said Hickey, and
Company, should stab him; that the said Paper tended to the ruin of his master
the Duke, and that therefore it was weary Proper to lay the said Hickey by the
Heels.

Eighthly, That when Hickey understood that Ryther went thus away, unknown to
him as he pretetended, he should thereupon tell the Woman of the House, we are
all undone; for the information, its supposed, of those that waited hard by,
who when they should repair where Hickey was, upon this alarm carried them by
Ryther, and that they knew Hickey was fled, were to come under pretense of
seizing him.

Ninthly, When Hickey was thus fled, Mr. Whitaker to bid 100 l. in the
Intelligence to any man that could apprehend him, and give notice thereof to
the said Dukes Attorney, living near S. Thomas Apostles. Where to their, viz.
Coddan and Ryther's never to be forgotten reproach, infamy and shame (if they
had or have any) it plainly, and undeniably appears, by Mr. Stringer, and Monks
Depositions aforesaid, that every day, both while he the said Hickey was so
cried after, and till he was taken, or surrendered, (it matters not which,
though the last is the properest and nearest to the matter) that Hickey who
thus was hunted after, and a 100 l. bid to take him, was every day in the
Company of Ryther, who pretends to refuse the 300 pieces for signing the Paper,
and might tell Mr. Whitaker where he was if he listed, Coddan might do the
same too. And being together, as Monk and Stringer make it out, Hickey might as
well then, as at the meeting at Bloomsberry, kill Ryther if he listed, and
Coddan too: And if Coddan and Ryther were such honest men as Mr. Jenks and Mr.
Whitaker said and told Mr. Blood, before Sir W. W. they were, they would
certainly have showed themselves such, by discovering Hickey to Mr. Whitaker
gratis, without suffering him to be at the charge of so much money as he
publicly bid to any that should take him: But their ill management of it makes
it evidently plain, that when the whole matter was to be brought to an issue
they did hope to make appear that Mr. Blood, etc. were tampering with these two
Witnesses before Sir W. W. to charge a false thing upon the Duke; and to make
it look the better, so to bring in this Hicand others, who, upon being pardoned
(which Hickey amongst the rest, is said to have attempted the doing of since
his confinement) were to become the Kings Evidence, and swear in Conjunction
with the rest, that Mr. Blood, etc. did tempt them to the Fact, that they
otherwise knew nothing of it; that in fine, the whole was a Contrivance to
bring an odium upon Mr. Blood and his Friends.

Immediately, upon Mr. Blood's having them thus cried after, in Mr. Thompsons
Intelligence, in order to the bringing of them to that Justice of Peace in
Westminster (before whom it was proved that they really Conspired against Mr.
Blood, etc.) to answer the same, the said two Persons thought fit, about the
16 of February, not only to make known where they lay, but in a daring
Vindictive manner to publish (the better to carry on their business) that
notvvithstanding the many disappointments the Conspirators against the Duke of
Buckingham have hitherto met with, and the ill success met with by
Subornation, yet that the unvvearied endeavors of the Popish Conspirators
seemed to find out a new way for aspersing the Kings Evidence, thereby to
fend off the hand of Justice, repeating that on the 12th of February, Mr. Blood
with others of his Creatures, sent for Mr. Thompson the Publisher of the
pretended True Domestic Intelligence, and he in his Print offering revvard to
aany that could discover them, they thereupon sent a messenger to know the
revvard, and if the revvard should be denied, to acquaint him that they were
both ready at their Lodgings in Walbrook, and had never absented themselves,
though Mr. Blood charged them therevvith contrary to his own particular
knowledge, and that Mr. Blood (after diverse messengers sent him to take
possession of the two Persons) sent word back that he would not trouble
himself further in the business, nor pay any revvard. And that thereupon on the
Saturday follovving they went to my Lord Mayor, where they complained of the
abuse done; not only to them but the Kings Evidence, and prayed His Lordships
Warrant to bring Mr. Thompson before his Lordship, who being ill, and His
Lordship being informed how these 2 Gentlemen (for so they call themselves)
came to be thus unfortunately hunted after, was pleased on the ensuing Monday,
to Issue out his Warrant for the apprehending of Mr. Blood and some others of
his Companions.

How unwilling they were to come out of London-Liberty, or appear before him
who had the keeping of those Depositions at Westminster, that were made of
these two Fellows having conspired against Mr. Blood, is clear, for had they
done so, they well knew that either they must clear that, give in bayl for
their answering the same, or go to Coal; and besides that, if Mr. Blood had
done them any wrong, it was equally, or more in their Power to have him taken
up by Warrant at Westminster, where he was every minute to be spoken with, at
his House: than in London where he seldom came; but to be taken out of London
could not serve their ends; for the English of it was, they wanted him in
London to bring him under the lash of a Fob Action or some such like thing,
thereby to expose him to the trouble of procuring bail, not to be by him there
probably obtained; or to publish that he was in Prison in good earnest, to make
amends for that false publication thereof that was formerly made, when he was
said to be in the Gate House.

Immediately upon the Neck of this, they frame an Indictment against him, the
said Mr. Blood, and several others (most of them for Company sake) in the Crown
Office, containing the whole Scene and Intrigue of this Plot; wherein Maurice
Hickey the better to disguise it, has the Honor of having the first Post
assigned him. A Copy of which Indictment, is for the Readers better information
as follows.

A COPY of the INDICTMENT.
Hilarii 31. and 32. of King Charles the Second.
THe Jury for our Lord the King present upon their Oaths; That Maurice Hickey,
late of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields in the County of Middlesex,
Gent. otherwise called Maurice Higgens, late of the Parish aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, Gent. Robert Smith, late of the Parish aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, Gent. otherwise called Robert Jones, late of the Parish
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Gent. John Haley, late of the Parish
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Gent. Thomas Curtis, late of the Parish
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Gent. Thomas Blood, late of the Parish of
St. Margaret Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, Gent. Edward Christian,
late of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Esquire
Arthur Obrian, late of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields aforesaid, in the
County of Middlesex aforesaid, Gent. Philip le Mar, late of the Parish of St.
Martin in the Fields aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Gent. And Jane
Bradley, late of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields, in the County of
Middlesex, Widow. The seventeenth day of March, In the Year of our Lord Charles
the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, etc. The Thirtieth, with Force and Arms, etc. at
the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid,
unlawfully, unjustly, nequitiously, devilishly and corruptly, by unlawful ways
and means between themselves, have practiced, conspired, intended and designed,
to dispoil and deprive his Grace the Duke of Buckingham, then and there one of
the Peers and Grandees of this Kingdom of England, not only of his honor,
estimation and reputation, but also to take his life away, and destroy his life
and dignity of Dukeship. And to cause the said George Duke of Buckingham, to be
taken, arrested and condemned to death, for detestable Crimes and Offenses of
Sodomy and Buggery, by him supposed to be committed, with one Sarah Harwood,
and diverse other persons, against the order of nature. And also for enticing or
transporting of the said Sarah Harwood beyond Sea, to suppress and take off
their Evidences, of and concerning the Crimes of Sodomy and Buggery aforesaid.
And that the aforesaid Maurice Hickey, otherwise called Maurice Higgins. Robert
Smith, otherwise called Robert Jones, John Haley, Thomas Curtis, Thomas Blood,
Edward Christian, Arthur Obrian, Philip le Mar, and Jane Bradley, to accomplish
and fulfill their most impious contrivances and practices, conspiracies, and
devilish intentions aforesaid. Afterward, and diverse days and times between
the aforesaid seventeenth day of March, in the Thirtieth Year of his now
Majesty's Reign aforesaid, and the day of taking out this Inquisition at the
Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Falsely,
unlawfully, unjustly, maliciously, nequitiously and devillishly, have
solicited, labored and en deavoured to persuade, procure, suborn, and cause
one Philemon Coddan, and Samuel Ryther, then or before Servants of the
aforesaid George Duke of Buckingham, for diverse great sums of Money, promotions
and preferments, against all truth, falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, nequitiously
and devillishly, to Swear and give in Evidence upon the Trial of the said
George Duke of Bukingham, for the Crimes and Offenses aforesaid, That the
Crimes and Offenses aforementioned were committed by the said Duke of
Buckingham; and to induce and cause those the aforesaid Philemon Coddan and
Samuel Ryther, to Swear, give in Evidence, and prove against him the aforesaid
Duke of Buckingham the Crimes and Offenses aforesaid, They the aforesaid
Maurice Hickey, otherwise called Maurice Higgins, Robert Smith, otherwise
called Robert Jones, John Haley, Thomas Curtis, Thomas Blood, Edward Christian,
Arthur Obrian, Philip le Mar, and Jane Bradley, within the time aforesaid, to
wit, between the aforesaid seventeenth day of March in the Thirtieth Year of
the King aforesaid, and the day of taking this Inquisition at the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields aforesaid, in the said County of Middlesex. The aforesaid
Philemon Coddan, and Samuel Ryther, with Wine, Junkets and other alurements,
unlawfully, unjustly, corruptively and devilishly are completed and conjoined
in the prosecution of the Conspiracy aforesaid. And then and there, to wit,
within the time aforesaid, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields
aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, Falsely, unlawfully, unjustly,
corruptly, and in prosecution of the Conspiracy aforesaid, have expended diverse
great sums of money upon the aforesaid Philemon Coddan, and Samuel Ryther, in
the whole amounting to the sum of one hundred and fifty pounds, and at their
junketting, drinking, and caressing, then and there, within the time, Parish,
and County aforesaid, did unlawfully, unjustly, corruptly, and in prosecution
of the Conspiracy aforesaid, promise the said Philemon Coddan, and Samuel
Ryther, diverse great advantages and preferments, and every one of them
promised, that if the aforesaid Philemon Coddan, and Samuel Ryther, would swear
and prove, in manner and form aforesaid, the Crimes and Offenses aforesaid, to
be perpetrated by him the aforesaid George Duke of Buckingham. And further, the
Jury aforesaid present upon their Oaths, that the aforesaid Maurice Hickey,
otherwise called Maurice Higgins, Robert Smith, otherwise called Robert Jones,
John Haley, Thomas Curtis, Thomas Blood, Edward Christian, Arthur Obrian,
Philip le Mar, and Jane Bradley, afterward, to wit, between the seventeenth
day of March, in the Thirtieth Year of the King aforesaid, and the day of
taking this Inquisition at the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields aforesaid,
in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, corruptly,
devilishly, and in prosecution of the Conspiracy aforesaid, have given,
deposited, and paid down to the aforesaid Philemon Coddan, diverse sums of
money, amounting in the whole to Forty pounds of lawful money of England, for
and toward the maintenance and encouragement of the said Philemon Coddan to go
forward, compass and perfect their wicked, unlawful and devilish machinations,
practices and intentions aforesaid. And that the aforesaid Maurice Hickey,
otherwise called Maurice Higgins, Robert Smith, otherwise called Robert Jones,
John Haley, Thomas Curtis, Thomas Blood, Edward Christian, Arthur Obrian,
Philip le Mar, and Jane Bradley, afterward (to wit) within the time
aforesaid, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County aforesaid,
falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, wickedly, corruptly and devilishly, in
prosecuting the Conspiracy aforesaid, did assume upon themselves, and
faithfully promise to the aforesaid Philemon Coddan, that he the said Philemon
Coddan should have the friendship and respects of some Peers, and men of Power
and Degree, And also should have a Place or Office in and about the business of
the Customs of our Lord the King, now called a Land-waiter's place, of the
yearly value of two hundred pounds, and the sum of sixty pounds in money's
numbered, and a certain maintenance during his life; if he the said Philemon
Coddan would Swear and give in Evidence, that the Crimes and Offenses
aforesaid, were perpetrated by the aforesaid George Duke of Buckingham, in
manner and form aforesaid. And further, the Jury upon Oath say, That the said
Morice Hickey, otherwise called Maurice Higgins, Robert Smith, otherwise called
Robert Jones, John Haley, Thomas Curtis, Thomas Blood, Edward Christian, Arthur
Obryan, Philip le Mar, and Jane Bradley, afterward (to wit within the time
aforesaid (to wit) within the aforesaid seventeenth day of March, in the
thirtieth year of the King aforesaid, and the day of the taking this
Inquisition, at the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields aforesaid, in the said
County of Middlesex, falsely, unlawfully, unjustly and devilishly, in
prosecution of the Conspiracy aforesaid, have given, deposited and actually
paid to Samuel Ryther, diverse other sums of Money, amounting in the whole to
fifty pounds, for and toward the maintenance and encouragement of the
aforesaid Samuel Ryther, to prosecute and compass their wicked, unlawful
designs. And that the aforesaid Maurice Hickey, otherwise called Maurice
Higgins, Robert Smith, otherwise called Robert Jones, John Haley, Thomas
Curtis, Thomas Blood, Edward Christian, Arthur Obryan, Philip le Mar, and Jane
Bradley, afterward (to wit) within the time aforesaid (to wit) within the
aforesaid seventeenth day of March, in the aforesaid thirtieth year of our now
Lord the King, and the day of taking of this Inquisition at the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields aforesaid, in the said County o Middlesex, Falsely,
unlawfully, wickedly, corruptly, devillishly, and in prosecution of the
Conspiracy aforesaid, have taken upon them, and faithfully promised the said
Samuel Ryther, that he, the aforesaid Samuel Ryther should have the Friendship
of some Peers, and men of great Estates and Degree, as also a Place or Office
in or about the Custom House Business of our Lord the King, as also money to
redeem his Estate Mortgaged by him the said Samuel Ryther, being above three
hundred pounds. And three hundred pounds more, if he the aforesaid Samuel would
Swear and give in Evidence against the aforesaid George Duke of Buckingham, in
manner and form aforesaid, that the Crimes and Offenses aforesaid were
committed by the aforesaid George Duke of Buckingham. And the Jury, further
say, upon Oath, that the aforesaid Maurice Hickey, otherwise called Maurice
Higgins, Robert Smith, otherwise called Robert Jones, John Haley, Thomas
Curtis, Thomas Blood, Edward Christian, Arthur Obryan, Philip le Mar, and Jane
Bradley, Afterward (to wit) within the time aforesaid (to wit) within the
seventeenth day of March in the thirtieth year of the King aforesaid, and the
day of taking this Inquisition at the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields
aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, Falsely, unlawfully, unjustly,
wickedly, corruptly, devillishly, and in prosecution of the Conspiracy
aforesaid, and in Order to fix and secure them the aforesaid Philemon Coddan
and Samuel Ryther to perform and execute their malicious devices, practices and
conspiracies aforesaid, have made, composed and writ, and caused to be drawn
and writ a certain false and scandalous writing in Paper. The Tenor of which
Writing follows in these English Words and Figure following. Whereas Samuel
Ryther and Philemon Coddan Gentlemen, in St. Martins Parish in the Fields, do
hereby confess and declare, That Sarah Harwood of the City of London,
Gentlewoman, did confess before us, That the Lord Duke of Buckingham was with
his Privy Members as far in both her Privy Parts as he could go with forcible
entrance, stopping her Breath, and that the said Lord Duke of Buckingham has
since conveyed the said Sarah Harwood out of the way, by which means the King
lost his Evidence. And do further declare, That since that time, the said Duke
did order the said Sarah to be murdered, and since the time is murdered or sold
beyond Sea. And do further declare, That the said Duke has committed the said
Sin of Sodomy, with several more, which we are ready to prove, when we are
required as the Kings Evidence. Witness our Hands this 12 day of Jan. 1679. And
notwithstanding all and singular the Matters in the said Writings contained,
were and still are altogether false, and scandalous and untrue, yet Maurice
Hickey, otherwise called Maurice Higgins, Robert Smith, otherwise Robert Jones,
John Haley, Thomas Curtis, Thomas Blood, Edward Christian, Arthur Obryan,
Philip le Mar, and Jane Bradley, afterward (to wit) within the time aforesaid
(to wit) within the seventeenth day of March, in the aforesaid thirtieth year
of the King, and the day of taking of this Inquisition at the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid,
unlawfully, unjustly, wickedly, corruptly, devillishly, and in prosecution of
the Conspiracy aforesaid, against the aforesaid George Duke of Buckingham's
Life, Estate and Honor, this writing in Paper to the said Samuel Ryther, then
and there did produce, show and offer, and every one of them then and there
unlawfully, unjustly, corruptly, wickedly, devillishly, and in prosecution of
the Conspiracy aforesaid, has produced, shown and offered the aforesaid Note
of the aforesaid Samuel Ryther. And then and there falsely, unlawfully,
unjustly, wickedly, corruptly and devillishly in prosecution of the Conspiracy
aforesaid, did offer and promise to give to the said Samuel Ryther a Purse of
Gold, containing three hundred pieces of Gold, of the value of three hundred
pounds, and every one of them did then and there promise to give, if he the
said Samuel Ryther would sign and subscribe the aforesaid Writing with his own
Name and Hand, which the said Samuel Ryther then and there refused to do. All
which contrivances, conspiracies, subornations and unlawful practices of the
aforesaid Maurice Hickey otherwise Maurice Higgins, Robert Smith, otherwise
Robert Jones, John Haley, Thomas Curtis, Thomas Blood, Edward Christian, Arthur
Obryan, Philip le Mar, and Jane Bradley, tend to the great hazard of the Life
and destruction of the aforesaid George Duke of Buckingham, and the manifest
perversion of the Justice of this Kingdom of England; to the ill example of all
others in the like Case transgressing, and against the Peace of our Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity.

When Mr. Blood smelt of this Indictment, and that for proof of the Contents
thereof, it was reported that it was given out by Mr. Christian and others
concerned, that among other Places of consultation: The Crown in Ram Alley in
Fleestreet, and the Bear in Holborn, both Victualling Houses, were said and
nominated; and that Mr. Blood, and Mr. Christian have consulted in those two
places, as well as treat the said two Persons with money, Treats, Junkets and
other encouragements, and large plights and promises of preferment, etc. in the
Custom-House, in order with the more ease to prevail with them to be suborned
as Witnesses in this matter. He carried with him five substantial people and
went to both places (for well he might without blush, innocent man!) and
directed the said five people to examine whether they knew of Mr. Blood, or
ever saw him with any body there? to which the people replied, (as well they
might) No; Do you know him? no, said they: did you over see this man here said
they, pointing at Mr. Blood? no, never in our Lives. All which he is ready to
justify, when need is: Besides it is very well known, that this Mr. Christian
and Blood could never to this day lay up their Horses together, as the old
saying is, so that it is very improbable that he should coact with one in an
Intreague of this make, to whom he always grudged the civility of drinking
either publicly or privately. Furthermore, if any House in London or England,
of any good repute, can say or give any Testimony that he has ever seen Mr.
Blood and these Fellows together, in company of Mr. Christian, by himself, or
all three together, Mr. Blood will contentedly acquiesce under the severest
censure.

To come to my L. Mayors Warrant, when his Lordship Issued it, for the
apprehending Mr. Blood, and others of his Crew, pursuant to the complaint of
Coddan and Ryther, it was reported (you may immagine by whom) that Mr. Blood,
nor the other Persons of Mr. Blood's company, said to be mentioned therein,
durst come into his Lordships Liberty for fear of being taken up. When the same
came to be understood by one of the Parties, he presently went into the City,
and having waited some short time about his Lordships house, he was introduced
to his Lordship, and told his Lordship that hearing it spread abroad, that he
Issued a Warrant against him, he was come to know of his Lordship what it was
for. I do (Replied my Lord) Issue a great many Warrants that I do not remember
who they are against. Why, replied Blood's Friend, reading in the Intelligence
that your Lordship had a Warrant against Mr. Blood and Friends, I thought it
might be my self; whereupon my Lord sent his Clerk to know whether by his
Entries any Warrant appeared issued against one of that name; who went
accordingly, and brought word that he did not find any, and when there is, said
the Clerk, I Will send word. I lodge, replied Blood's Friend, at Grayes-Inne, and
if there be, or when there is any thing of this kind against me, I Will wait upon
your Lordship, if I am sent for. I do not usually concern my self, replied my
Lord, with any out of my Liberty; and so went away.

A day after, Mr. Blood sent one Comings an Attorney to my Lord, to know, if
his Lordship had issued any Warrant lately against Mr. Blood, and if he did, he
came in Mr. Blood's name to know what it was for. To whom it was replied, by
another of his Lordships Clerks, there was one issued against Mr. Blood three
days before, together with one John Burry, and one Fooks.

Few days after, Mr. Whitaker took the liberty of spreading about the City
that Mr. Blood and Friends, having heard of a Warrant that was out against them
from my Lord Mayor, durst not come into London, as they usually did, for fear
of being imprisoned, reporting at the same time that he had the same in his
Pocket. This report being boasted about in the Coffee-Houses, and particularly
in one Mr. Combe's, where one of Mr. Blood's particular good friends happened
to be, the Friend replied, protesting he did not believe it, and that if Mr.
Blood's Friend did decline coming into London upon that score, he would never
own him; and withal said, I Will warrant his coming, and being there,
notwithstanding all this, to day or to morrow.

Mr. Blood's Friend hearing this, as also that Mr. Whitaker offered Mr. Combs
the Coffee-man, half a Crown in Money, to drink a Bottle of Sack with,
conditionally that he would tell him where Mr. Blood's Friend was, if he was
then in the City, or send him word when he came there; whereupon Mr. Blood's
Friend hearing this, left word that he did not fear either Mr. Whitaker or his
Warrant, and that if he had any thing to say to him, he was there to answer
him: and, said he, I am going to the Crown-Tavern, where I Will stay some time,
which pray tell him if you see him this afternoon.

To make short, by and by in came Mr. Whitaker, and afterward his Man. Mr.
Whitaker enquiring after Mr. Blood's Friend, Combs told him, that he was hard
by. Where? said Mr. Whitaker; nay, said Combs, let me have the Half-Crown
first, which he accordingly did, but with seeming anger; then he told him where
he was. Whereupon Mr. Whitaker sent his Servant with my Lord Mayor's Warrant,
who asked him, whether he would please to go before the Lord Mayor? No, said
he, I may go before any other Justice of the Peace; for, said he, your Warrant
is not Special; then one that stood by advised him to go before Sir William
Turner, and another to another: Well, said Mr. Blood's Friend, I do not care if
I go before my Lord, I Would as live go before him as any other, especially upon
this, in regard he took these People's Examination, and therefore Sweetheart,
said he, go and bring a Constable: will you not go without one? replied the
Servant. Well, said the Servant, I Will go and tell my Master, and come again.
Well, said Mr. Blood's Friend, now it is half an hour past Four, I Will stay till
Five for your Master, and no longer, and if he comes within that time, I Will go
with him before my Lord. Whereupon the Servant went to his Master, and at the
time appointed came back again, and asked whether or no he would go before my
Lord? No, said Mr. Blood's Friend, not without a Constable. Well, said he, my
Master then must take another time and opportunity.

Thereupon Mr. Blood's Friend stood up and said, Your Master has here, said he,
given Mr. Combs Half a Crown for a Bottle of Sack, to let him speak with me
when I came to the City, and see I dare do it: But, said he, tell your Master
that in recompense I Will give you five Shillings to buy a pair of Gloves, and
spend Fifteen Shillings upon him, provided he will bring Coddan and Rither to
Westminster, to answer Mr. Blood's charge. And besides, tell him farther, that
if he be the Duke of buckingham's Solicitor, I am Mr. Blood's Solicitor. So
that it is plainly seen they wanted only Mr. Blood in the City, to lay him in
Pickle.

To the foregoing Narrative it may be without digression added, that at the
bursting out of the late Divice, called the Presbyterian Plot, discovered by
Mr. Dangerfield, and broached at the Lodgings of Colonel Rotherick Mansell, in
Ax-yard, Westminster, it was fully reported, that Mr. Blood did combine and
conspire with some Persons in the World to ensnare and entangle the Professors
of the true Protestant Religion, in a Plot laid against the Government, and
that then he was to be by his own consent Seized upon, Tried for his Life, and
then upon getting his Pardon, to become the King's Evidence by betraying
several Presbyterians, which he was said to be concerned within the said
Conspiracy.

And that consequently he apprehends himself under some ill censures with some
of his best Friends in England, etc. to whom the same is said to be reported
for a real truth. The matter of Fact was as follows, viz.

When the late Parliament was dissolved, and our present one called to succeed
it, it fell out, that one Thomas Curtis was then employed by some Power or
Authority to carry down Writs into the Country to Sherifs, to choose new
Parliament Members. This Mr. Curtis being returned from his Errand, and calling
at Heaven, whether he usually resorted in Term and Parliament time, as being an
old acquaintance of James Bradley in his lifetime, Mrs. Bradley, the said J.
Bradley's Widow, asked his Opinion, in reference to his thinking whether the
approaching Parliament would sit at the appointed time or no; for it highly
concerns us, continued she, that live hereabouts, to have it sit, if it were
for no other Good but the Custom and Trade it brings, (for her livelihood
depended much upon it.) Truly, replied Curtis, I know nothing of its Sitting,
neither whether or no it continues Sitting when it meets. I am sorry in my
Heart, said she, that you can give me no better hopes, for we shall be ruined
for want of Trade.

This after some further discourse to that purpose, the said Curtis
whisperingly told her, that he heard there were Commissions a giving out: how?
quoth she, how comes that? who has them a giving? said he, Mr. Blood is one
that has Commissions to give out. And with that they both parted, being
Saturday Night.

When he was gone, she began seriously to consider of what could be the matter
or meaning of giving out Commissions, and could not purge her thoughts thereof
all that Night; and observing Mr. Blood mentioned, as also that he was a Friend
to the King, and sinking deeper into the thing, wondered what it should be, and
therefore at last thought fit to send for Mr. Blood, to acquaint him with it,
(though she never had the exchange of one word with him in her lifetime before.)

Mr. Blood after twice sending, did happen to neglect coming to her, till the
Tuesday following, as judging it was upon the score of some frivolous errand
that might tend to the begetting his Custom to her House, came at last, and
desiring her to tell him the business, she rehearsed what passed betwixt her
and Curtis, and that she doubled that though she knew Curtis as her Husband's
acquaintance, yet she did not know what his heart might be, and and that she
therefore sent for him, to give him caution as became a Neighbor.

Whereupon Mr. Blood paused a little, and began to think what to do in the
case; but at last resolved to go to some friends for their advice and
directions, what to think of as a defense against the ill effect or issue of
such a report as that seemed to threaten. And finding that it was impossible
for any judgment or Scrutiny to detect or explain the meaning of it without
some time to consider on it, advised him to pass it by, which he accordingly
did; but now understands it by the foregoing Narative.

It is credibly reported, that notwithstanding the strictness with which
Maurice Hickly has been committed to the care and custody of the Keeper of the
Gate House from the King and Council, with prohibition, that none should be
suffered to speak with him, but that he should be kept close Prisoner till due
delivery. Yet one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace is said to have
contrary thereto carried him thence to Taverns, and other public Houses at
unseasonable hours of the Night, furnished him with Money, and returned him
back again some times at 1, 2, 3 and 4 the next Morning. And Mr. Blood being
told that the same was in order to the sueing out his pardon, and escaping the
punishment justly due to his Treachery to Mr. Blood, by becoming an evidence to
put a Cavet thereto, in the proper Offices.

FINIS

