OBSERVATIONS ON THE Four Letters OF Dr. John Wallis, Concerning the TRINITY
AND THE Creed of Athanasius.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, M.DC.XCI.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE Four Letters OF Dr. JOHN WALLIS, etc.
SIR, I thank you for Dr. W's Third Letter (or rather Book) which you brought
to my House. You not finding me at home, prevented our discoursing together of
it: therefore I have given you here, my thoughts of his performance therein.
And because in this, he has reviewed and explained his former Letters; I also
will again consider them.

The Design of Dr. Wallis his Letters, considered.
HE tells us (at page 10. and 18. of his first Letter, and at page 38. of the
third Letter) what is the design of these Letters; to prove, says he, that What
are in one regard Three, may in another regard be but One: and if I have
sufficiently evinced this, I have done what I undertook. And in so doing, have
removed the great Objection, which the Socinians would cast in our way; and
because of which, they think themselves obliged to shuffle off other Arguments.
To prove his Proposition, He alleges in his first Letter; that the three
Dimensions (Length, Breadth and Height) of a Cubical Body, are but one Cube.
He adds there; to Be, to Know, and to Do, are distinct from each other: yet
it is one and the same Soul, which Is, and Knows, and Does. Further;
Understanding, Will, and Memory, are all in the same Soul. And Vnum, verum,
bonum are but the same Ens. To enlighten the dull Socinians by familiar and
easy Examples, he minds them (at page 42. of the Third Letter) that, Three
Groats make but One Shilling, Three Nobles but one Pound. He dilates upon these
Instances; especially that noble one of the Cube (of which he has, he says at
page 18. of the Fourth Letter, considered above Forty Years) in several Pages:
and he is so serious and earnest, that I verily think, the Doctor is sincere
and honest; and does indeed imagine, that this is the point in question;
Whether what are in one regard Three, may not in another regard be but One?

Therefore, Sir, I pray tell him from me; that the Socinians will grant him,
what he imagines is the thing in Question, and much more to it. They will not
put Dr. Wallis, upon proving that, what in one regard are an Hundred, a
Thousand, or even an Infinite Number, may in another regard be but One. An
Hundred Soldiers make but one Company, a Thousand but one Regiment, an
Infinite Number of Moments make but one Eternity. Tell him, the Question is,
Whether (as St. Paul expressly teaches, Gal. 3.20.) God is One? or (as Holy
Mother Church, and Alma matter Academia) God is Three? Whether there are or can
be Three Infinite, Almighty and All-wise Persons; or only One such Person or
Being? Which the Socinians, guided by natural and common Notions, think to be
as much as, Whether there are Three Gods, or but One God? They affirm the
latter, the Trinitarians the former.

But you will say; the reason why the Socinians deny that God can be Three, or
that there are Three Infinite Persons or Intelligent Beings, is, because God
being but One, cannot be Three: and here comes in the Doctor's Solution, What
are in one regard Three, may in another regard be but One. And this he proves
by Instances, as, that in a Cube there are three Dimensions, and yet but one
Cube; and several such like.

I answer; The Doctor first raises (in the Name of the Socinians) an
impertinent Objection; and then solves it by Instances. The Socinians do not
deny, that the One true God is Three Persons, because what is in one regard but
One, cannot in another be Three; of which no Man ever was so foolish as to
doubt; but for the Reasons mentioned in the First Letter of the Brief History
of the Unitarians. If the Doctor would have proved a particular Proposition, in
favor of the Trinity; this was the Proposition to have been proved, What are
in one regard Three, may in another regard be so One; that all of them
(together) are but One, and yet each of them ( singly and by Himself) is that
One. For so they say of the (pretended) Trinity. The Three Persons (say they)
together are the one true God: yet each of them, singly and by himself, is the
one true God. Each of them is so perfectly God, and that one true God; that he
has the whole Divine Nature and Essence, is an Infinite Almighty and All-wise
Person. This is that monstrous Paradox and Contradiction, that the Doctor
should have proved; and which he and his Party charge upon the Word of God it
self. This is that, which, because all other Arguments failed them, in their
Disputations with the Photinians and Arians; they at last effectually proved,
by the Imperial Edicts, by Confiscations and Banishments, by seizing and
burning all Books written against it or them, by Capital Punishmente, and when
the Papacy (of which this is the chief Article) prevailed, by Fire and Faggot.

Let us now (briefly) consider the Doctor's notable Instances. Three Groats are
but one Shilling, says the Doctor: Very well; but each Groat, singly and by it
self, is not a Shilling. Three Nobles are but one Pound: but each Noble, single
and by it self, is but the third Part of a Pound. To be, to know, and to do,
are in the Soul; so are Understanding, Will, and Memory; as also Verum, Bonum,
Vnum: but no one of them, singly, is the Soul, or a Soul. Long, broad, and
high, are Dimensions in a Cube: But long, singly and by itself, is not a Cube,
but only a Line; long and broad are not a Cube, but only a Superficies; long,
broad, and high together are the Cube. But it is far otherways in the
(pretended) Trinity. There Father, Son and Spirit together, are the One true
God; as long, broad, and high, are the Cube: and yet each of those Persons,
singly, and by himself, is (says their Creed) Perfect God, has the whole
Divine Nature, or whole Nature and Perfections of God; though (in the alleged
parallel) neither long, broad, nor high, is the Cube, has the whole Cubical
Nature, or whole Nature and Perfections of a Cube. Therefore say I, this
instance of a Cube and its three Dimensions, does not quadrate to the
(imagined) Trinity, or help us to conceive its Possibility or Consistency.

But says the Doctor (at page 9. of the second Letter,) Tho we cannot say (in
the Abstract) that Length is a Cube, and so of the rest; yet (in the Concrete)
we may say, this long thing (or this which is long) is a Cube. Just so, we do
not say (in the Abstract) Paternity is God; but (in the Concrete) the Father is
God; and so of the other Persons. The Personality is not said to be God; but
the Person is. Which fully answers the Exception.

So it is; when they find themselves distressed, by a clear either Argument or
Answer, they fly to Metaphysics, and Terms of the canting Schools. Then come
in Abstract, Concrete, Paternity, Personality, and an Infinity of other
barbarous and insignificant Words: only to hide clear Truth from Persons, who
can be shifted off with obscure and senseless Words; Words which denote nothing
that is really existent in Nature, but only the Chimera's of the Metaphysician.
Show me that Trinitarian, who dares dispute this Question (about the Trinity)
in plain English, by any sort of Arguments; whether Arguments from Scripture,
from Reason, or from Authority of first and pure Antiquity. No, no; They never
durst attempt this, nor ever will: for they know the Cause is lost, if the
People be permitted to understand it, and the Reasons for and against it. But
the comfort is; Those who are at all capable of judging these Gothish and
Vandalic Terms, are much more capable of discerning, when they are detected and
confuted. Therefore to this Flourish of the Doctor, I reply.

It Is somewhat surprising, that a Mathematician should not be more considerate;
in giving an Instance belonging to his Profession. He tells us, we may say in
the Concrete, This long Thing is a Cube. I deny it. This long Thing is only a
Line; this long and broad Thing, is only a Superficies, or one side of a Cube;
it is only this long, broad, and high Thing, that is a Cube. But if the Doctor
meant, This long Thing, which is also broad and high, is a Cube; and were it
not broad and high, it were not a Cube, but a Line, or one side of a Cube: then
this is no Parallel to the matter in hand, the Trinity. For then this
Proposition, This long Thing is a Cube, is but the same with this, This long,
broad, and high Thing, is a Cube: which will not at all help the Doctor. Long,
broad, and high of the Cube, answer, to Father, Son, and Spirit of the Godhead
or God; and the Cube itself answers to God or the Godhead: so far we are well.
But now say I; tho we may say, This long thing is a Cube, meaning this thereby;
This long Thing, which is also broad and high, is a Cube; and were it not broad
and high, it were not a Cube: yet we cannot say, the Father is God, and mean
thereby, The Father, who is also the Son, and Holy Spirit, is God; and were He
not withal the Son, and Holy Spirit, He were not God. So we must speak, to make
out the Parallel: but so to speak, All know, is Heresy; for the Father is not
the Son and Spirit, nor are they the Father. Therefore the Concrete way of
speaking, will no more favor the Doctor's Parallel, than the Abstract. And he
ought to have seen this; when he was advised of it, in a private Letter by W.
I. without publishing to the World, that even upon second Thoughts he
understood not, a Thing self-evident.

But supposing now, That the Doctor's Instances did enable us, to conceive this
particular Difficulty, in the Doctrine of the Trinity: does he not know, that
there are many more; of which himself will not pretend, that his Instances or
Solutions are at all applicable to them? I say this; because his Letters bear
this haughty Title, The Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, and the Athanasian
Creed, Explained. Do these Explications reach the tenth Part of the
Contradictions, charged on the Doctrines of the Incarnation and Trinity, and on
the Athanasian Creed? What are the Dimensions of a Cube, or the Parts of a
Shilling or of a Pound, to the chief Absurdities in those Doctrines and that
Creed? I will mention but some of them. They tell us of, a Son receiving of his
Father, being Life and Godhead; and yet as old as his Father. And these two,
Father and Son, loving one another; their Mutual Love is a Third Person and
Spirit, equal to themselves. This Spirit, though but an effect, is as early as
its Causes; and the same with them. They tell us of an Infinite Person, who is,
whole and all, united; without Lessening or Contraction of himself, to a Finite
Man. They tell us of a Perfect God and a Perfect Man, who are not Two, but One
Person; though God (they say) is Three Persons; and every Man (all know) is One
Person, because a reasonable Soul, and an humane Body are a Person. They tell
us one while, that two Intelligent Natures are but One Person: another while,
on the contrary; Three Persons are but one Numerical Nature. They tell us, each
Person has the whole Divine Nature, and cannot be separated from it; They tell
us farther, All the Divine Persons are inseparably in the Divine Nature: from
whence we have this first Corollary, that each Person is the other Two Persons;
and then this (contrary to what the Doctor holds, at page 33. of the third
Letter) that when the second Person was Incarnate, so also must the First and
Third. They tell us of a Son begotten in the most perfect Manner from all
Eternity; yet is still in begetting (for the action of Generation in God, say
they, never ceases, because that would suppose some Change in God) and ever
shall be so: and the like of the Spirit. They tell us, their Trin-Unity is but
One, as it is but One God; and is Three, as it is Three such Persons, that each
of them is (singly and by himself) a God, that is, it is Three in this regard,
that it is Three Gods: so that at length their Trin-unity is (what Dr. Wallis
all along abhors, as both false and impossible) Three, in the same regard that
it is but One. For the regard is God, in both Propositions: in the first it is
One God, in the other (though not in the bare Sound, yet in the Signification
of the words) it is Three Gods. To add now no more; whoever does not believe
all these (and many the like) Inconsistences; and that, whether he can or no;
shall be damned. They lay the greatest stress upon this Last; because without
this, few would mind the other. And this is the reason, they have so constantly
and absolutely refused to part with the Damnatory Clauses in the Athanasian
Creed: to part with them, is to give away all the other Articles.

Of these, or any of these, I think Dr. Wallis will not say, that his little
Congruities, or rather Vmbrages, are Explications or Solutions. He has offered,
but at very few of them: However, I will consider even the little he has said.

At page 34. of the third Letter he says; Let one face of a Cube, suppose the
Base, admit a foil or dark Color; while the rest of the Cube is Transparent:
-- this may someway represent Christ's Humiliation; who being equal with God,
yet took on him the form of a Servant. But can the Doctor tell me, how I may
shut up the Base of an Infinite Cube, which Base (himself supposes) is
Infinite; in a Nut-shell? For his Creed tells me, a Thing much more mavelous;
that an Infinite Person is whole and all, united to a Finite Man; and that
without lessening or contraction of the Infinite Spirit or Person.

In the same page of the same Letter, he says; God's Justice and Mercy are
distinguishable, tho in God they are not divided: accordingly some Things are
effects of his Justice; others of his Mercy: So the Power and Will of God, are
both Individual from himself: but when we say God is Omnipotent, we do not say
he is Omnivolent. -- If therefore we allow as great a Distinction between the
Persons, as between the Attributes (as certainly it is not less, but somewhat
more) there will be no Incongruity, in ascribing the Incarnation to one of the
Persons, and not to the rest. He argues here, as if the Incarnation were an
Action: now allowing him that gross Mistake, I say; if this be any Explication
of the proposed Difficulty, he must allow that one Attribute may be Incarnate
and not another. I ask the Doctor therefore; Can the Justice of God be
Incarnate, and not his Mercy: or his Power, and not his Will? But I must tell
him farther; there is a closer Connection between the Persons, than the
Attributes: The first are (according to him and his Party) in one another; the
other not so.

Again, at page 13. of the first Letter, he argues thus; If in this supposed
Cube, we suppose (in order, not in time) its first Dimension, that of length,
as A B: and to this length be given an equal breadth (which is the true
Generation of a Square) as C D: and to this Basis of length and breadth be
given (as a farther Procession from both) an equal height E F: and all this
eternally. Here is a fair resemblance of the Father, as the Fountain or
Original; of the Son, as generated from him from all Eternity; and of the Holy
Ghost, as eternally proceeding from both. And all this, without any
Inconsistence. But not without some Nonsense. He supposes the length of this
Cube to be the first Dimension, in Order, not in Time. It Is Nonsense to say,
Length is first of the Dimensions, not in Time but in Order. For Priority of
Order, must be either the Priority of Time, or of Dignity. Priority of Time,
the Doctor himself disclaims; because it would destroy his Parallel: Priority
of Dignity cannot be pretended between Dimensions; which himself too supposes
to be equally Infinite. Thus the Foundation of his Parallel is absurd and
false. But I will not stand upon it. I ask him, whether length did of itself
beget breadth, communicating to it its whole Nature? did length and breadth of
themselves, without some external Agent, generate height, and communicate
their Nature to it? If not, this is no Illustration, how the Father did himself
eternally beget the Son, and the Father and Son generate the Spirit. He
cautions me, that I would not ludere cum Sacris: He sees, I will not; how great
occasion soever be given.

The Thing which in my opinion, and I believe in the Judgment of most Readers,
deserves best to be considered; is at p. 26. of the third Letter. Solomon, as
wise as he was, -- does yet acknowledge himself to be at a loss; when he would
search out the bottom of Natural Things: and shall we then say, of the Deep
Things of God; It is impossible, because we cannot find it out? I answer, the
Deep Things of God (in the Text quoted by the Doctor) are those hidden and
secret Things, which God has prepared for them that love him; see the alleged
Text, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. These Contradictions to Reason and Scripture, are not
the Deep Things of God; but rather the Depths of Satan, (Rev. 2.24.) by which
he seeks to lead us into Polytheism and Idolatry.

But hitherto of the Doctor's Design, or Scope in these Letters; and of the
Instances and Similitudes, by which he would confirm it.

Of his Somewhats and Persons.
ONE would expect, that since they say, the Trinity is the Doctrine of the
Catholic or Universal Church, and necessary to be believed in order to
Salvation; that at least they knew and were agreed, what this Trinity is, or
what is thereby meant; else we are required to believe no Body knows what, in
order to Salvation. But so it is; there is as much Confusion, in declaring what
this Catholic necessary Doctrine is, as there was at the building of Babel,
where no one understood another. As many Writers, so many Explications of the
Trinity; neither does this happen only among the vulgar of their Learned Men;
but among their Learned of the first Class and Magnitude. When any of them
dares demand it; I will give an ample Account, of the Diversity and Divisions
among their chief Doctors: such Diversity, that they have nothing left in which
they agree, but only the word Trinity; but sure the Word, without the Notion,
is not Necessary to Salvation, because it is confessedly Unscriptural.

Let us consider an Instance of this, which has lately happened. First comes
forth Dr. Sherlock, the Churches well-known Champion against all Her Foes; that
is, against all those who believe the Holy Scriptures without reserve, and
believe the Church only so far, as they can see and judge that she agrees with
Scripture and Reason, a Fault not to be purged with Sacrifice nor Offering, for
ever: this famous Combatant tells us; The Trinity is Three Infinite Beings,
Minds or Spirits, each of which is singly and by himself a God; yet they are
all but One God, because Mutually Conscious; that is, because they perfectly
and intimately know one another Thoughts and Actions. He is so sure, this is
the very Doctrine of the Trinity; that to say the contrary, is (he says) both
Heresy and Nonsense. This was spoken like a Vindicator: for all that, not two
Persons of forty in his own Party do believe him. They plainly see, that if one
Infinite and absolutely Perfect Being, Mind or Spirit, be one absolutely
Perfect God, as all both Philosophers and Divines confess he is; then of
necessity, Three such Beings are Three Gods: and Mutual Consciousness may make
them a Cabal or Council of Gods; but never numerically One God. The Learned of
his own Party know, that this Opinion of Dr. Sherlock, is the Error or Heresy
of Abbat Joachim, condemned in the fourth General Council of Lateran, Anno 1215.

The next is Dr. Wallis, who has been studying this Point, above Forty, and
toward Fifty Years; as himself says, Letter 4. page 18. After so long
Consideration, He is not pleased with former Explications; but advances one
that is equally New and Cautious. The blessed Trinity is (says he, Let. 2.
page 3.) three Somewhats; and these three Somewhats we commonly call Persons:
but the true Notion and true Name of that Distinction, is unknown to us. He
again owns this to be the true Sense of his first Letter, at page 8. of the
Second; and often in his following Letters. We may call this Explication, Dr. W
's Three New Nothings: for three Somewhats, that have neither true Notion nor
true Name, are to Us and to Him also, but so many Nothings; or rather Somewhats
less than Nothings, for Nothing has at least a Name.

It is plain, Dr. Wallis spoke after this manner, only to avoid the
Inexplicable Difficulties and Exceptions, to which (he saw) former Explications
of the Word Trinity, were liable. And if he had gone no farther in his
Attempts, upon this Subject; the clamorous Socinians (as he calls them) would
not have charged his Doctrine, with Impossibility or Inconsistency. But in his
Third Letter he has so described these Somewhats, or Persons without Notion or
Name; as to involve himself in Labyrinths, out of which all the Metaphysics of
which he is Master, will never lead him.

He says, Let. 3. page 39. These Somewhats, till my Answerer can furnish us
with a better Name, we are content to call Persons; which is the Scripture Word
at Heb. 1.3. But I deny, that Persons is used of God, either in that Text, or
elsewhere in Holy Scripture. The Scripture-Word every where is Person. In the
Text by him alleged, the Son is said to be the Image of God's Person;
therefore God is but One Person: and therefore these (pretended) Somewhats must
not be called Persons; because this is not only, not the Scripture-Word, as the
Doctor unwarily said, but is contrary to Scripture.

He says, in the Letter and Page last quoted, The Word Persons (when applied
to God) is but Metaphorical; not signifying just the same, as when applied to
Men. And again at Let. 3. page 31. We mean thereby, no more but somewhat
analogous to Persons. He repeats both these, very often in his Letters. Now
this is to say, that what we call Persons in God, are not indeed Persons, not
truly or properly Persons; but somewhat there is in God, we know not what,
which in some regard answers to Persons. It had been tolerable, tho not
intelligible; if the Doctor had here held his Hand: but in his Explication of
the Athanasian Creed, where it was necessary to be somewhat Orthodox, he is in
a contrary Story. For he says ( Let. 3. page 13.) The Three ((...)) are
((...)) truly Persons, or properly Persons. And at page 66. of the same Letter,
he approves of that as the better Reading, and clearer Sense.

What a Task has he imposed upon us? We must believe a Trinity of Somewbats.
For Peace sake, we are content to be Fools, and believe we know not what. But
will this do? No: you must believe these Somewhats are Persons. But the
Scripture is against it. No, no; for this Distinction of Persons, has neither
true Notion, nor true Name. Upon this condition, we are contented: for if the
Distinction has neither true Name, nor true Notion; we may affix a Notion and a
Name by way of Explication, which may agree to the Descriptions of God in
Scripture, especially with that in the First Commandment. Is all done now?
There is one thing behind; but it is only this; You must believe the Somewhats
to be but Metaphorical Persons, somewhat Analogous or like to Persons, not
truly and properly Persons; and also, that they are truly Persons and properly
Persons. The Doctor will not deny this is worse than Egyptian Slavery, of
making Brick without Straw; for that was only hard, not impossible. And I
cannot think the Doctor is so rigid, but that upon this Remonstrance to him, he
will discharge us of believing his Explications, which he must needs own to be
contradictory, and therefore impossible to be believed.

It is evident to me, that Dr. Wallis has thought but very slightly (tho, it
seems, very long) of the Trinity. For afterward, he retracts this last, that
the Somewhats are truly and properly Persons; and explains them to be Three
such Persons, as the Sabellians anciently, and now the Socinians, never
opposed, but are ready to admit. Letter 3. page 4. He says; Henry, William,
Nassau, is but one Man, and one Husband. James, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of
Ormond, is not three Men, or three Chancellors. By these Comparisons, the three
Persons are but three Names or Titles of God, as the Sabellians held; and being
rightly explained, the Socinians do not deny. But he goes on. Tully says,
Sustineo unus tres personas; i. e. I being but one Man, do sustain three
Persons: that of my Self, that of my Adversary, and that of a Judge. He did not
become three Men, by sustaining three Persons. -- If among us, one Man may
sustain three Persons, without being three Men: why should it be thought
incredible, that the three Divine Persons may be one God, as well as those
three other Persons be but one Man? Again at page 62. of the same Letter; The
same Man may be said to sustain diverse Persons, and these Persons to be the
same Man, that is, the same Man as sustaining diverse Capacities: as was said
but now of Tully, Tres personas unus sustineo. And then it will be no more
harsh, to say the Three Persons (Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) are but one God;
than to say, God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, are (
He should have said, is) but one God. -- It is much the same thing, whether of
these two Forms we use. -- A King and an Husband (tho they imply very different
Notions, different Capacities, different Relations, or different Personalities)
yet may both concur in the same Man. So also a King and a Father, a King and a
Brother. Again, Let. 4. page 25. We say; God the Creator, God the Redeemer,
and God the Sanctifier (or in other Words, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) are
this one God. At page 33. of the same Letter, he makes a different Person to
be only a different Consideration or Respect; and in the next Page, not a
Thing, but only a Mode. Now how can he, who believes such a Trinity of
Somewhats or Persons, as this is, write against the Socinians? They believe
this Trinity, as much as Dr. Wallis. They allow, there are in God three
Somewhats and Persons; meaning thereby, as Dr. Wallis explains them, three
Names or Titles, three Capacities or Respects, three Relations, three
Considerations, three Notions, three Modes. They believe, there are in God
these three Modes, Notions, Considerations, Capacities, Names or Titles; God
the Creator, God the Redeemer, God the Sanctifier.

If this be Dr. Wallis his Abiding Sentiment, concerning the Trinity; then if
it be below his Character and Dignity, to permit himself to be called a
Sabellian, or a Socinian; the Socinians and Sabellians, in honor of him, are
content to be called Wallisians. And if you ask a Sabellian, How God the
Creator, the Redeemer, and the Sanctifier, may be called God the Father, Son
and Holy Spirit? He will answer; Almighty God as Creator is called the Father,
or God the Father, because by Creation he is Father of all things: as the
Redeemer, he is called the Son, or God the Son, because he redeemed us by his
Son the Lord Christ: as the Sanctifier, he is called God the Holy Spirit,
because he sanctifies us by his Afflatus or Inspiration. The Socinians do think
this is an harsh way of speaking, yet for Peace sake they would admit this
Explication.

The Doctor's Explication of the Athanasian Creed, considered.
IT was with great expectation, that I began to read Dr. Wallis his third
Letter; because it bears this ambitious Front, An Explication and Vindication
of the Athanasian Creed. I supposed, He would attempt to assoil all the
Difficulties and Contradictions, objected to it; at least, those in the Brief
Notes on that Creed. But he meant no more by this Title, but this; An
Explication of the Damnatory Clauses, in the Athanasian Creed. This was to me a
wonderful Disappointment. However, I will be content to consider, what Dr.
Wallis thought worthy to offer. He says Let. 3. page 4. Whosoever will be
saved; before all things, it is necessary, that he hold the Catholic Faith.
Where, says the Doctor, before all things, is as much as Imprimis; importing,
that it is mainly necessary, or is a principal Requisite. Was there ever a
greater force put upon words? It Is before all things necessary, says the
Creed; that s, says the Gloss, It Is a principal Requisite. I always thought,
there had been an immense difference, between Necessary and Requisite: and that
abundance of Things had been mainly or principally requisite, which yet were
not indispensably or before all Things necessary. But which of these Athanasius
meant, the next Clause puts out of question.

Which Faith, says the Creed, except every one do keep whole and undefiled,
without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. The Grammatical and obvious Sense
of these words, is this; That Man or Woman shall perish everlastingly, who does
not believe and profess this (following) Faith, which is indeed the Catholic or
Universal Faith; without taking ought from it, or adding ought to it. No, says
Dr. Wallis; the Greek word is not (...) totam or whole, but (...) salvam sanam,
sound or safe. And says he, farther; As a Man may be said to be sound and safe,
notwithstanding a Wart or Wen; or even a Wound or a Maim; so long as the Vitals
are not endangered: So the Catholic Faith is sound and safe, so long as there
is nothing destructive of the main Substantials or Fundamentals. This is a
mavelous reasoning, and such as the Doctor will very hardly persuade any to
believe it. Is a Man safe and sound, when his Legs and Arms are shot off; so
long as the Vitals are not endangered, but entire and safe? God deliver me, and
Dr. Wallis too, from such Soundness and Safeness. And if the Catholic Faith is
sound too, as he says, so long as the Substantials and Fundamentals remain; it
will follow, that the Faith of the Church of Rome is sound. For all
Protestants, but the Socinians, grant; that Church retains all the Substantials
and Fundamentals: yet her Faith, they confess, is unsound; because of the
erroneous Additions to the Substantials and Fundamentals. The Doctor therefore
shall do well, to think again of this part of his Explication. But whereas he
would confirm these Perversions, of the true intention of the damning Clauses
in this Creed, by criticizing on the word (...); I must plainly tell him, he is
grossly out in his Criticism. It Is not, says he, (...) totam or whole, but
(...), salvam, sanam, sound or safe. Is not (...) indeed the same with (...)?
If he pleases to consult his Lexicons, he will find that (...) is rendered
integram, perfectam, whole or perfect: so that the sense of this Article, is,
That Faith must be kept perfect, whole or entire; nothing must be added to it,
nothing taken from it.

Let. 3. page 8. And the Catholic Faith is this; that is, this is one main
Part of the Catholic Faith. I confess, at this rate of expounding, a very
tolerable Sense may be made of this Creed, and of the Alchoran. If before all
Things, necessary is only, mainly requisite: if whole and undefiled may be true
of a Faith, which is neither whole nor undefiled; but sound only in
Fundamentals: if the Catholic Faith is only part of the Catholic Faith: what
Creed or Book may not be expounded to a sound Sense?

Let. 3. page 11. The Holy Ghost is of the Father and of the Son; neither
Made, nor Begotten, but Proceeding. Here is no Anathematizing of the Greek
Church. It Is said indeed, he does proceed, and so say they: but not that he
does proceed from the Father and the Son. And it is said he is of the Father
and of the Son: but whether by Procession from both; or, if so, whether in the
same manner, is not said, but warily avoided. -- And those who are better
acquainted with the Doctrine and Languages of the present Greek Churches, than
most of us are, do assure us, that the Differences between them and us, are
rather in some Forms of Expressions, than in the Thing it self. To this I
answer: The Doctor had as much reason to deny, that in this Article the Spirit
is said to proceed from the Father, as from the Son. For the word Proceeding is
so placed, both in the Greek and English as to refer to both, or to neither.
Besides, Proceeding is (he knows) the very Characteristic of the Spirit; so
that if he is of or from the Father and the Son (which, the Doctor will not
deny, is expressly affirmed in this Article) it must be by proceeding from them:
which since the Greeks deny, it is manifest their Doctrine is here condemned.
What he adds of the present Greek Churches is not true: it is certain they hold,
that their Doctrine is condemned in this Article; and therefore in return to
Athanasius his Complement, that they shall perish everlastingly, they
pleasantly answer, He was drunk when he made this Creed.

The Athanasian Creed has this Conclusion; This is the Catholic Faith, which
except a Man keep faithfully, he cannot be saved. How can Dr. Wallis elude
these plain words; which are not annexed to any Generals, as he (though
untruly) says of the other Damnatory Clauses, but are as it were the Label and
Seal, affixed to the whole Creed at the end or bottom of it? But what cannot a
Wit, and a Learned Man do; at least, what will he not attempt? He gives us a
large Interpretation of this Clause, at page 19. of his third Letter: but the
sum of it is this: This is the Catholic Faith, i. e. this is part of that
Faith, which all Christians do and ought to believe. Which Faith except a Man
keep faithfully, he cannot be saved, i. e. which Faith except a Man truly
believe it, as to the Substantials of it, though possibly he may be ignorant of
many particulars thereof, he cannot be saved: Which is, as if the Doctor had
said: Whereas the Athanasian Creed concludes, with these formidable and
seemingly plain words; This (before related) is the Catholic Faith, which
except a Man keep faithfully, he cannot be saved: Athanasius meant nothing
less, than to damn all those, who do not entirely believe his Creed. No, no,
that good Man intended only this. This Catholic Faith is part of the Catholic
Faith; and if you would be saved, you must believe this part of the Catholic
Faith, in part, in the Substantials of it. Which Substantials, as I said
before, are only these two Generals; that there is a Trinity in Unity, or three
Somewhats in one God; and that Christ was Incarnate. This last may most easily
be received by all Parties; for all Souls are Incarnate; and Partakers of Flesh
and Blood, by Incarnation or Incorporation. I leave it with the Reader to
judge, whether the Doctor has interpreted, or eluded this Creed.

I believe, Dr. Wallis had a charitable Intention, in the pains he has taken,
to find out a favorable Sense of the words of this Creed. But on the other
hand, it looks not well, that he should put as great a force on the words of
Socinus, to make him speak impiously and heretically, as he has on the words of
Athanasius, to make him speak Orthodoxly or Charitably. This is the next thing
I will consider in his Letters.

The Opinions charged on Socinus, and the Socinians.
IN his first, third and fourth Letters, He has charged the Socinians with
Opinions; which not only subvert the Authority and Belief of Holy Scripture,
but endanger all Religion and Piety toward God. Let. 4. page 3. He says
that; He takes his whole charge against the Socinians, as granted. He adds, at
page 5. of the same Letter, that, There is reason to suspect, that the
Socinians have some other odd Tenants; which they think fit rather to conceal
than to deny. What those odd Tenants are, he tells us, at Let. 1. page 16.
that, There is neither Angel nor Spirit; that, the Holy Scriptures are not the
Word of God, nor yet the Doctrines therein contained. He there gives his
reason, why he suspects, and would have others suspect them of these horrid
Opinions. Because they spare not to let us know, that were this Doctrine of the
Trinity delivered in Scripture, in words as express as could be, they would not
believe it. There can be nothing more false, or disingenuous, than this Charge.
I will examine it, Part by Part; and the (perverted) Quotations, by which he
would prove it to the Unlearned Reader.

Let. 1. page 5. They (the Socinians) tell us; How clear soever the
Expressions of Scripture be, or can be, to this purpose, (i. e. to prove the
Doctrine of the Trinity) they will not believe it; because inconsistent with
natural Reason. The Doctor very often in these Letters, makes it a great and
inexcuseable Crime in the Socinians, that because the Trinity is inconsistent
with Natural Reason, therefore they will not believe it, even though it were
expressed in Scripture. But what if the Trinitarians themselves are of this
opinion; that, what is inconsistent with Natural Reason, or with our common and
congennit Notions, is not to be believed, though the words of Scripture be
never so express? Dr. Sherlock sure is (now) no Socinian, but a Trinitarian;
yet at page 151. of his late Answer to the Brief History, and Brief Notes, he
puts in his own Name this Question, and answer to it. Suppose, that the natural
Construction of the words (of Scripture) import such a sense, as is contrary to
some evident Principle of Reason? Then I will not believe it. How, not believe
Scripture? No, no, I will believe no pretended Revelation, which contradicts
the plain Dictates of Reason. The Professors of Franeker, who are not
Socinians, (as the Doctor mistakes, Let. 3. page 38.) but Trinitarians of the
most rigid Sect; for they are Calvinists of the cut and die of the Dort Synod;
and otherways could not be in the Pension of the States of the United
Provinces: those Professors, I say, by confession of Dr. Wallis, published a
Thesis to this effect: If Reason dictates to us any thing otherwise, than the
Scripture does; it is an error to say, in such case, we are rather to believe
the Scripture. It Is no new thing, that Writers who undertake to discuss
Questions which they do not thoroughly understand, should frequently and very
grossly contradict themselves. Dr. Wallis himself is in this very oversight.
While he is warmly charging the Socinians, with Sadducism and Impiety, for
affirming (as he untruly says) that, they would not believe what is contained
in Scripture, if contrary to Reason: while I say he is charging the Socinians
with this Doctrine, as an impious and unchristian Opinion; he himself not only
believes, but professes it. Let. 1. page 8. In this case (the Question of the
Trinity) the Revelation seems so clear (to those who believe the Scripture)
that we have no reason to doubt of it; unless the thing be found really
impossible, and inconsistent with Reason. What is this but to say; Though
Revelation be most clear, yet if the thing be impossible, and inconsistent with
Reason, we have reason enough to doubt of it? Would Dr. Wallis now be content,
that his Reader should infer from hence, that he is a Sadducee, believing
neither Angel nor Spirit; or an Atheist, or at least a Deist, not believing the
Scripture, or that the Doctrines thereof are the Word of God; as he, most
rashly, and most uncharitably, has intimated concerning the Socinians?

In my former Answer to him, I opposed to this charge of the Doctor, the clear
words of Socinus, of Sclichtingius, and of Smalcius. The first of these says;
The way of Reason is too fallible, in a Matter depending on Divine Revelation;
such as the Christian Religion is. The second says; If any thing appear to be
contained in Scripture; whatever Reason may say in contradiction to it, Reason
must of necessity be deceived. The third says; Religion and Holy Scripture have
many things above Reason, and therein they highly commend themselves; but
nothing which is contrary to Reason. As a small Light to a great one, so Reason
is not contrary to Scripture. Let Frantzius tell us of any one Sentence of
Scripture, which is contrary to Reason; and then let Reason be silent in the
Church. Socinus de Author S. Scrip. p. 16. Sclichtingius adv. Meisn. de ss.
Trin. p. 68. Smalcius contr. Frantz. disp. 4. p. 137.

To these Citations Dr. Wallis answers; He tells me of some Socinians, who have
so much respect for the Scriptures as to say, Scripture contains nothing
repugnant to Reason, and what does not agree with Reason, has no place in
Divinity. Since the Doctor is not pleased to observe what my Quotations prove;
I must desire our Reader to observe, and to judge between us. I think they
clear the Socinians of the scandalous Imputation, which the Doctor seeks to
fasten on them.

Let. 3. page 45. As to the suspicion I had of some of their Sentiments:
Socinus (Epist. 5. ad Volket.) does absolutely deny, that the Soul after Death
does subsist. But let us hear the words of Socinus, not as they are dockt by
this Author, but as they are in that Epistle. Satis apparet me sentire, non ITA
vivere post hominis ipsius mortem, animam ejus; ut PER SE praemiorum poenarumve
capax existat; cum in ipso primo homine, totius Immortalitatis rationem, uni
Gratiae Dei tribuam, i. e. I hold, that a Man's Soul after his Death does not
so live, as that by it self, or of its own Nature, it is capable of Reward or
Punishment. In the very first Man, I attribute his Immortality to the alone
Grace of God. In a word, the Opinion of Socinus was this, That there is no
Natural Immortality in Man, but he has it by the Grace and Gift of God.

Let. 3. page 46. Socinus in his Tract de Eccl. says thus; I am not to regard
what other Men teach or think, or have before now taught or thought; whosoever
or how many soever they be, or have been. And if, says Dr. Wallis, Whosoever
are not here to be extended to the Sacred Writers; he tells us of them
elsewhere. It appears, that the Doctor would have it thought, that these Words
are meant of the Writers of Holy Scripture, as well as others; at least, that
it is doubtful whether they were not so intended. Therefore here again we must
hear Socinus himself. Cumque res Divinas, Humana ipsa per se ratio assequi
nequeat; ad Divinam patefactionem consugiendum est. Nec attendendum quid
Homines, praesertim ques nec vitae Innocentia, nec Divinum aliquod certum
Testimonium commendat, doceant sentiantve; vel antehac docuerint aut senserint;
quicunque illi tandem aut quotcunque sint, aut fuerint, i. e. Since Human
Reason cannot of it self attain the knowledge of things Divine, we must have
recourse to Divine Revelation; and not mind what Men (especially who are
recommended to us, neither by their own Probity, nor by the Witness of God)
teach or think; or have taught or thought; whosoever, or how many soever they
be, or have been. I know not what could be said more truly, or more like a
Protestant.

Dr. W. Let. 3. page 47. As for me (says Socinus, de Servat. page 3. c. 6.)
tho it were found written in the Sacred Monuments, not once, but many times; I
would not for all that believe it so to be. And a little before, having first
told us that the thing was impossible; He adds: When it does plainly appear (or
when he thinks so, whatever all the World think beside) that the thing cannot
be, tho the Divine Oracles do seem expressly to attest it, it must not be
admitted; and therefore the Sacred Words are, even by unusual Tropes, to be
interpreted to another Sense than what they speak. To this I say, either
Socinus was a gross Heretic, or an Apostate from Christianity; or those who
have furnished Dr. Wallis with these Quotations are as gross Falsifiers: for I
cannot suspect, that Dr. Wallis himself would forge such Calumnies to blacken
another Man, especially a Noble Person, long since dead, and who never did him
any Injury. The very words of Socinus are these. Nonnulla in ipso (nempe
Christo) reperta sunt quae ejusmodi satisfactionem penitus excludunt. Quare
nequeo satis mirari, quid eis in mentem venerit, qui nobis primi Islam
Satisfactionem fabricarunt. Cum ea quae fieri non posse aperte constat, Divinis
etiam oraculis ea facta fuisse in speciem diserte attestantibus, nequaquam
admittantur; (and idcirco sacra verba in alium sensum quam ipsa sonant, etiam
per inusitatos tropos explicantur;) nedum tunc pro compertis and plane veris
affirmentur, atque aliis obtrudantur, cum ne verbum quidem in universis sacris
literis de ipsis extet. Nam si vel unus saltem locus inveniretur, in quo
Satisfactionis, pro peccatis nostris Deo per Christum exhibitae mentio fieret;
excusandi fortasse viderentur. Ego quidem etiamsi, non semel sed, saepe ID in
sacris monumentis scriptum extaret; non idcirco tament ita rem prorsus se
habere crederem, ut vos opinamini. In English, thus; There are some things in
our Lord Christ, which plainly exclude such a Satisfaction. Wherefore I cannot
sufficiently wonder, what was in their Minds, who first devised that
Satisfaction. Those things, of which it is manifest that they cannot be, are not
admitted (he means, by Interpreters and Commentators) though the Scriptures do
as it were seem to affirm them expressly; (and therefore the sacred Words are,
even by unusual Tropes, interpreted to another sense than what they sound;)
much less are they affirmed for apparent and plain Truths, or forced upon
others, when there is not a word about them in the whole Scripture. For if even
but one Text were found, in which there were mention of Satisfaction, made to
God for our Sins by the Lord Christ; they might perhaps be excused. For my
part, though IT (he means this word Satisfaction) were extant in Scripture, not
only once, but many times; I would not for all that, believe the Thing to be
altogether so as ye hold it. These last words are left out in the Doctor's
Latin Quotation, and in his Translation; and what Socinus plainly intended of
the custom and manner of Interpreters or Commentators, that the Doctor
represents as Socinus his private Sentiment, and the rule of interpreting by
him only used and advised. But any one who understands Latin, and reads Socinus
his own words at length, which I have before repeated, will see, Socinus meant
only thus much: This word Satisfaction is no where extant in Holy Scripture;
and if it were, yet we need not therefore believe the vulgar Doctrine about the
Satisfaction; both because there are in the Lord Christ himself several things
which exclude such a Satisfaction; and because all Interpreters have recourse
to (even unsual) Tropes, when the Scriptures seem to affirm things which would
be manifestly false, if we interpreted them by the mear sound of the Words. I
suppose Socinus might have in his Thoughts, that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4.
I am the living Bread which came down from Heaven, if any Man eat of this Bread
he shall live for ever; or such like Texts: in which it cannot be denied, that
the Tropes are harsh and unusual in the Western Languages, though they were not
so in the Eastern.

Let. 3. page 4. They are Socinus his own words (Epist. ad Balcerovic. Jan.
30. 1581.) The contrary Opinion (with Augustin's leave, and others of his mind)
seems to me so absurd and pernicious; that we must rather put a Force, how
great soever, upon Paul's words, than admit it. At Let. 4. page 2. and often
elsewhere, the Doctor repeats these words as if they were spoken of the
Doctrine of the Trinity. But the thing is not so. The Question touched in that
Letter, is whether the Context of Romans 7.14, etc. I am Carnal, sold under Sin,
etc. is to be understood of Paul himself, and every other regenerate Person, or
not? Socinus denies, they are spoken of Paul, or other regenerate Person, and
adds that a Force (how great soever) is rather to be used to the words, than to
admit such a pernicious Opinion; that is, than admit that St. Paul or a
regenerate Man is Carnal, sold under Sin, etc. These words are indeed
hyperbolical; but considering the occasion, capable of (and intended in) an
honest sense; as any candid Man will acknowledge.

Let. 3. page 44. He says; Sandius, that great Friend of the Socinians; and
Promoter of their Cause, published a Thesis against the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost, and was so answered by Wittichius, that a Friend of Sandius (and his
Partner in maintaining that Thesis) did after the Death of Sandius publish to
the World, that Sandius himself was satisfied, and changed his Opinion. This
Matter is both unskilfully and unfairly related. First, Sandius was no
Socinian, but an Arian; and not only often wrote against the Socinians, but
endeavors in that very Thesis (mentioned by the Doctor) to confute the Opinion
of the Socinians about the Holy Ghost. Secondly, As Sandius denied the Divinity
and believed the Personality of the Holy Spirit; so it came into his Mind, that
perhaps by the Holy Spirit is meant the whole kind of Holy Angels or Spirits;
as by the Devil and Satan, is often meant the whole Race of wicked, apostate or
fallen Spirits. This Opinion he calls a Paradox, Problema, Paradoxum, and
propounds it to be disputed by Learned Men; himself alleging the Arguments for
it in the aforementioned Thesis. Wittichius so replied, that (as Sandius his
Associate reports) Sandius was satisfied, not of the Divinity of the Holy
Spirit, but that the Spirit is One Person, (as the Arians always held) not more
Persons or Spirits.

I said in my former Letter, that a Respondent for his Degree at Oxford, put
for one of his Questions, such a Thesis against the Socinians, as Dr. Wallis
objects to them, viz. That they preferred Reason above Scripture; and that his
Learned Antagonist (tho neither then, nor since a Socinian) made it appear that
the Respondent had not read the Books of the Socinians, but accused them by
hearsay. I added, That if Dr. Wallis were urged to defend his Charge against
the Socinians; I doubted, he could acquit himself no better than that Candidate
for his Degree did. The Doctor has increased my Suspicion by his third and
fourth Letters; for I cannot believe of him, that he would knowingly and
deliberately pervert the Words of Authors, long since dead, and who never did
him wrong by Word or Deed. Therefore I suppose his Quotations were borrowed
from S. Maresius (or perhaps from S. Lubbertus) who cared not what he said of
any Adversary, especially of a Remonstrant or a Socinian. But were this whole
Accusation of Socinus as true as it is notoriously false; the Unitarians (though
they are by others called Socinians) do not think themselves concerned in it:
for they do not profess to follow Socinus, but the Scripture. If Socinus has at
any time spoken erroneously, or unadvisedly, or hyperbolically; it is not
Socinus who is their Master, but Christ. As great Chillingworth somewhere says,
the Bible, the Bible, the Bible, is our both Rule, and Guide: not Calvin, not
Luther, nor Socinus, but the Bible.

I am come now within sight of my Conclusion; it only remains, that I answer
briefly to some exceptionable Passages, and incompetent Answers, to what I had
objected in my first Letter. I may be very brief, because the Doctor, as is the
custom of eloquent Men and Orators, has said but a little in a great deal.

First; Whereas he has up and down in these Letters, objected several Texts
against the Socinian Heresy of but One God; and in defense of the Catholic and
Orthodox Doctrine of Three Gods: as to those Texts which he has only cited,
without enlarging or criticizing upon them, I refer my self to the Explications
in the Brief History of the Socinians, and to the Defense of that History. He
says ( Let. 3. page 42.) that Dr. Sherlock has confuted that History. I
observe, that the Orthodox Writers cry up one another Books, as clear
Victories; though those Books are as contrary to one another as they are to the
Socinians; and if any one of them has confuted the Socinians, he has at the
same time confuted all his own Party, and even Holy-mother Church her self. If
Dr. Sherlock has confuted the Brief History, he must needs too have confuted
Dr. Wallis his four Sabellian Letters. If he has proved, that there are Three
Infinite Intelligent Beings, Minds, and Spirits, then he has confuted those
that say, the Trinity is Three Somewhats, without true Name, or true Notion;
Three Capacities or Respects, Three Names or Titles of God, Three Modes or
Relations to his Creatures, namely Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier. And if
Dr. Wallis has proved this last in his celebrated Letter, he has without doubt
confuted Dr. Sherlock; who asserts Three Infinite Spirits and Beings; who are
one God, only as they are Mutually Conscious, or know and feel one another
Minds and Actions. And both of them have confuted Mother Church, who has in
several General Councils Anathematized the Doctrine of Sabellius, whom Dr.
Wallis follows; and the Heresy of Philoponus and Abbat Joachim, who are
followed by Dr. Sherlock. That a Sabellian should tell a Tritheist, he has
confuted the Socinians, is such a Complement, that if the Vindicator does not
take it for a Jeer, he is (without doubt) so much a Gentleman, as by way of
requital to publish to the World in his Next, that Dr. Wallis has eternally and
irrefragably confuted the Neighbor, and the Neighbor's Friend.

In the mean time, I cannot but wonder, that the Orthodox Writers being so
badly agreed, what their Trinity is, that they have nothing left in common
among them but only the word Trinity: I wonder, (I say) that they should so
earnestly contend for a Word, which themselves confess, is neither found in
Scripture, nor was known to first and pure Antiquity. The two great Reformers,
Luther and Calvin, were not so much taken with this Word, as we are now adays.
M. Luther (Postil. major. Dominic.) says; The word Trinity sounds odly, and is
an humane Invention. It were better to call Almighty God, God, than Trinity. J.
Calvin (Admon. 1. ad Polonos) says; I like not this Prayer, O Holy Blessed and
Glorious Trinity. It savours of Barbarity; -- the word Trinity is barbarous,
insipid, profane, an humane Invention, grounded on no Testimony of God's Word,
the Popish God, unknown to the Prophets and Apostles.

I observed in my former Letter, that our Savior says, John 17.1, 3. Father,
-- this is Life eternal, that they know Thee (the only true God) and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. Or, Jesus Christ thy Messenger. I alleged this
Text to prove, that only the Father is the true God. The Doctor (at Let. 3.
page 51.) gives three Answers. And of these, the first and third are contrary
to and destructive of one another; if the first is true, the third must be
false; if the third be true, the first is false. For the first supposes, that
by Father here is meant only the Person of the Father, or the first Person in
the Trinity; the other supposes, that by Father is meant God in the most large
sense; so as to comprize the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. I will examine the
three Answers severally.

1. He says; I should have considered, that it is not said, Thee only, to be
the true God; but Thee, the only true God. The restrictive Only is not annexed
to Thee, but to God. His meaning in plainer terms is this; I should have noted
the vast difference between these two Forms, Thee only, the true God; and,
Thee, the only true God. If the objected Text had been in the first of these
Forms, the Socinians had undoubtedly gained their Point; but the latter (which
is the Form in the alleged Text) does them no service. This may be called a
Fineness, a Subtlety, a Querk; not an Accurate Reasoning, or a real and true
Distinction. For, first; There is no difference in the Signification of these
Propositions: Thee only, the true God; and, Thee, the only true God: the last
is as exclusive of all other Persons besides the Father, as the first. As there
is no difference between saying, Thee only, Leopold, the true Emperor of
Germany: and saying, Thee, Leopold, the only true Emperor of Germany.
Secondly, If there were indeed a difference between these two Forms, yet the
latter is as hurtful to the Trinitarians as the former. They will not have it
to be here said, the Father only is the true God; no, no, that destroys the
Trinity: but, the Father is the only true God. I say now, if this last does not
destroy the Trinity, it certainly confounds the Persons, which in their Creed
is no less Heresy than the other. For seeing in the Trinitarian Hypothesis, God
or the One true God is Father, Son, and Holy Sprit; these words, Thee Father
the only true God, must be to say, Thee Father, the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit. But this is Heresy, it confounds the Persons; it makes the Father, to
be Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Thus the Doctor's first Answer has two Faults;
it is founded not on a real, but chimerical and imaginary Distinction; and it
implies Heresy.

2. He answers; The words may be thus expounded. To know Thee, Father, to be
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent. Or thus, to know
Thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, to be the only true God. This
Interpretation is generally rejected by the more Learned Trinitarians, because
it apparently destroys the Divinity of the Holy Spirit. For if the Father and
Son, be the only true God, it remains, that the Spirit either is only a
Creature, as the Arians and Bidellians say; or the Power and Inspiration of
God, as the Pholinians and Socinians affirm. I believe the Doctor was aware of
this unlucky Consequence, and therefore advanced a third Interpretation, which
himself seems to approve, because afterward he repeats and urges it again.

3. He says; The Scope of the place may be this; to set forth, that there is
but One true God (though in this Godhead be Three Persons, Father, Son, and
Spirit:) and the Doctrine of Redemption, by Jesus Christ whom God has sent:
Which Things the Heathens knew not. Now according to this Answer, Father in
this Text is God, as comprizing the Three Persons, Father, Son, and Spirit; and
Jesus Christ, is the Man Jesus Christ, or Jesus Christ as Man. But I would know
how it comes to pass, that the particular Title and very Characteristic of the
first Person, is here given to the Son and Spirit? At this rate of
interpreting, how shall we ever distinguish the Persons? One while we are told,
Father is the perpetual and incommunicable Character or Description of the
First Person: another while, Father is the Three Persons, even Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit. But so it is, They that maintain a false Opinion, must answer
according to the present Exigence; sometimes this Thing, sometimes the
contrary: only Truth is stable, coherent, consistent with it self, always the
same. Farther, That by Father here is meant only One Person, not Three Persons,
is clear by this, that otherways our Savior should have said Fathers, not
Father. For Three Persons, who All have the relation of Paternity (as this
Answer supposes) are as much Three Fathers, as they are Three Persons.

Next, I objected 1 Cor. 8.6. But to us, there is but One God, the Father, of
whom are all Things, and we in Him; and One Lord (or Master, i. e. Teacher)
Jesus Christ, by whom are all Things, and we by Him. Or rather, Jesus Christ,
for whom are all Things, and we for Him. For all Things were originally created
for Him; that is, with Intention to subject them (in the fullness of time) to
Him, as their Principal and Head, under God. To this the Doctor answers as
before; It is manifest, that One God is here put in opposition (not to
Plurality of Persons in one Deity, but) to the many Gods of the Heathen; and
our one Savior against their many Saviors. But I do not know, that the
Heathens distinguished between their Gods and their Saviors, as the Doctor
here and many other Interpreters suppose. He should have said, our one Master
or Teacher to their many Teachers, to the numerous Professors of different
Philosophies among the Heathen. But the One God is opposed, not only to the
Many Gods of the Heathen, but to all other Persons, but ((...)) the Father. I
ask as before, How could St. Paul call Three Persons (...) the Father; and how
this Characteristic of the First Person can by him be given, to the Son and the
Proceeder: is not this plainly to confound the Persons? He that confounds the
Characters, necessarily confounds the Persons. If the Apostle had known and
believed the Divinity of our Times, he must have said; To us there is but one
God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and one Teacher, Jesus Christ as
Man. Nay were that Doctrine true, he had more reason so to speak to the
Corinthians, than we now have. For they were Novice Christians, to whom it was
necessary to speak of so high a Point, in the most explicit open and plain
Terms. We may therefore certainly infer, that when he teaches them, To us there
is but One God, ((...)) the Father; he meant to deny, that there is any other
Person but the Father, who is or can be God.

Let. 3. page 57. He objects, Romans 9.5. Of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever; Amen. He observes hereupon, that
in the Greek it is (...), which answers to JAH and Jehovah. And, that Christ is
again called (...) at Rev. 1.8. as appears by ver. 11, 13, 17, 18. He says
farther, that the above cited Text in its full Emphasis, is thus; Of whom as
concerning the Flesh Christ came, that Being over all, the ever blessed God.
Amen. But first, The word Amen makes Nonsense of this whole Criticism and
Translation. If the Doctor had translated this Text as Erasmus, Curcellaeus,
and the Socinians do; Of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, God who is
over all, be blessed for ever: it had been proper for the Apostle to conclude
such a Doxology or Thanksgiving, with Amen. But it is Nonsense to say Amen, to
these words; Of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, that Being over all,
the ever-blessed God. Every one sees here is no occasion for Amen. But this
Criticism and Interpretation of the Doctor, has another fault. For if, as the
Doctor says, (...) be that Being over all, and answers to the Hebrew Jah and
Jehovah; and if Jesus Christ be that Being over all, Jah, and Jehovah, the
ever-blessed God, he must be Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: for according to the
Trinitarians, (...) Jah Jehovah, the Being over all, the ever-blessed God, is
these Three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. I say therefore, the
Doctor's is not a good Translation, because Jesus Christ is not Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. He says, the Lord Christ is called (...) at Rev. 1.8. I deny
it. And I give this reason; because at ver. 5. Christ is distinguished from,
and opposed to (...), who is mentioned at ver. 4. He cannot be that Person or
Thing from which he is distinguished, and to which he is opposed; for
Distinction and Opposition suppose that Persons and Things are diverse. But the
Doctor says, it appears by ver. 11, 13, 17, 18. that at ver. 8. the Lord
Christ is called (...). He doubted his Reader would not believe him if he
recited the Words, therefore he warily refers only to the Verses. I deny, that
in any of these Verses the Lord Christ is called (...). And ver. 18. (one of
the Verses quoted by him) demonstrates, that Jesus Christ is not (...), the
Being over All, the ever-blessed God. For there it is said of him, I am he that
lives, and was dead. Dorh it agree to (...), to Unchangeable JAH, to Immutable
Jehovah, that BEING over All, the ever-blessed God; that he lives, and was
dead?

Let. 1. page 2. He objected, 1 John 5.7. There are Three that bear record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these Three are One. I
answered, 1. They are one in their Testimony; they witness the same thing: not
one God. So Calvin, Beza, Erasmus, Vatablus, and the English-Geneva Notes
interpret. But the Doctor likes it not. He says, Vnum sunt, they are One; and
Vnum sumus (at John 10.30.) We are One, must signify one thing, one in Being,
one in Essence. For so Adjectives of the Neuter Gender, without a Substantive,
usually signify both in Greek and Latin. Now I desire him to give me but one
Instance in any Author, Sacred or Profane, where Vnum sunt they are one, or
Vnum sumus we are one, do signify (as he says) one in Being, one in Essence, or
one numerical Thing. When our Savior says (John 10.30.) I and the Father are
One, it is certain from his own Explication elsewhere, that he means not one
numerical Thing, one in Being, one in Essence, or one God. He prays at John
17.22. -- That they (the Disciples) may be One, as We (the Father and I) are
One. This Passage tells us, how we are to understand John 10.30. I and the
Father are One. For the Disciples could be no otherways One, but One in Design,
Interest, and Affection. But they were to be one, as Christ and the Father are
one: therefore the Unity of God and Christ, is an Oneness or Unity of
Affection, Design and Interest. Even as St. Paul, speaking of Himself and
Apollos, says, 1 Cor. 3.8. He that planteth, and he that waters, are one. He
means one in Design; in the design of planting and propagating the Gospel. 2.
I excepted against the Authority of this Text, because it is wanting in all the
Ancient Translations, and all Manuscripts of Note. He makes light of this, and
says, Whole Epistles are wanting in some Copies. It Is true, that, before
Printing was in use, 'twas not very common to find the whole Bible in one
Manuscript; for People generally wrote out for their use only such parts of the
Bible as they most esteemed. Some had only the Four Gospels, some added the
Epistles of St. Paul, some the Catholic Epistles. But whoever wrote out an
entire Book, or Epistle, never presumed to add any thing to the Text, or to
omit any thing. But the objected Text was in no Copy of the Bible, I mean, in
the Text of such Copy, before St. Jerome brought it out of the Margin of some
Copies. It was at first a Marginal Note, and by him made a part of the Sacred
Text. It is never cited by any of the Fathers, till after his time. It is now
indeed in St. Cyprian's Book De Vnitate Ecclesiae, but the Critics have all
noted, that no Credit is to be given to that Book, as we now have it. For in
that little Tract of but Four Leaves, they observe 288 Alterations and
Additions.

Lastly; The Doctor says, (...) in this Text, and (...) at John 10.30. agree
so well; that it is a strong Presumption they are from the same Pen. But, 1. I
observe, (...) are not the Words of St. John at John 10.30. but of our Lord
Christ; and I have already accounted for them. 2. If it be so strong a
Presumption, that (...), They are one, are indeed St. John's Words, because we
find (...), We are one, in his Gospel: it is a much stronger Presumption, that
they are St. Paul's Words, because he has the very Words (...), They are One,
1 Cor. 3.8.

Let. 1. page 2. He says, The Form of Baptism (Mat. 28.19.) is, in the Name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. He adds, Let. 3. page 31.
We are baptized to the joint Service and Worship of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; and for ought appears, in the same degree. No, the contrary appears,
because we know that the Son is but a Man, and the Spirit either an Angel, or
the Power only and Inspiration of God. But for this matter I refer the Reader,
and (if he pleases) the Doctor himself, to the Brief History, page 77, 78, 79.
and to the Defense of that History, page 37, 38, 39, 40.

I am not aware, Sir, that there is any thing more in the Doctor's Letters
necessary to be considered. I conclude therefore, with desiring you to give my
Acknowledgments and Thanks to Dr. Wallis, that he was willing to spend some
part of his time, which he knows how to expend so well, in seeking to instruct
and reduce the Unitarians, and particularly the Socinians. That they are not
convinced by what he has said, does not (they confess) lessen their
Obligations to him. They desire it may not lessen his Charity to them; since
it is not in Men's Power to believe as they will. They profess he has written
like a Man of Wit and Letters; like a Gentleman, and like a Christian:
Therefore they will always hear Dr. Wallis as a Father; and if there be a
necessity at any time to reply, they will answer respectfully. Sir, I am Yours.

FINIS.

