A MOST SERIOUS EXPOSTULATION With several of my Fellow-Citizens In reference
to their standing so high for the D. Y's Interest at this Juncture of time.
Gentlemen,
I Hope no discreet and honest Person will look upon it as any Presumption, but
as necessary Counsel, humbly to caution you (my Brethren) with my self in time
well to consider, whither you are running: What it is that you are doing? Above
all, it behooves you to consider it at this time, why should we delight in our
own Destruction and help forward our own Ruin? Perhaps you may think that is
strange and impossible, that any should be so weak, but yet it is no new thing,
for some to be blinded, deluded, and beguiled, it is but what is and has been
too common in all Ages: though certainly for any Nation or Number of men to
endeavor or effect their own Destruction, is one of the severest Judgments of
God that can befall a People, I pray God, none of you may come under this
Curse, of having Eyes and Ears, and see and hear not, Hearts, and will not
understand.

2. But it is to be feared, that too many among you are running headlong the
Pathway of Destruction, by endeavoring to foment Division amongst those that
are Protestants, and not only to keep open, but to widen the Breach betwixt the
Church of England and other Protestants of different Persuasions; whereas
neither of you can ever be safe if you do not both unite and join hand in hand
against the Common Enemy, viz. the Papists and Popery, as the Case now stands
with us.

This indeed may be unminded by many of you by Reason there are so many Blinds
daily endeavored to be put upon us under the Notion of the Church of England,
whereas the Name of the Church of England is only made use of (by the Jesuit
Party) as the Papists Stalking-horse, and not by the true Sons of the Church of
England, but to blind them; as Coleman's Declaration runs all in the name of
the Church of England, though designed and penned by him and other Papists, the
greatest Enemies, in Truth, to the Church of England. And no Doubt but most of
the Pamphlets that now come out under that Notion, are of the same Stamp,
forged by the Jesuits, those Firebrarnds of all Europe; you may easily guess at
them by their Extenuating the Plot, and advising us not to have any Fears, but
to lessen our Guards in the City, by their endeavoring to create and increase
the Divisions betwixt those of the Church of England and other Protestants,
which I am sure no sincere hearted Son of the Church would do at this time, but
would disown and disclaim all such Proceedings as spurious; you may easily know
of what Kidney they are by their pleading for a Popish Successor, etc.

Now Sirs, permit me to expostulate the Case, and tell you whoever you are that
are for the D's Interest, in the Circumstances as he now stands with England,
are you not most certainly (if you do but rightly understand your selves) for
these three Interests, viz. First for the Pope and Papists Interest --
Secondly, for the French Interest -- Thirdly for Arbitrary Government.

I pray you consider, you that are for the D. in the Circumstances he has at
present brought himself and the Nation under (by his Adhering to, and so much
countenancing the Papists and French Interest) are you not in plain English,
against these three things, though it may be ignorantly, yet in the sequel it
may prove so, viz. 1. Against the Interest of the Church of England and the
Pretestant Religion. 2. Against the Interest of England your Native Country. 3.
Against the Interest of all Parliaments, and so against your own Freedoms and
Liberties as you are Englishmen.


Solomon says, A wise man's Eyes are in his Head, and are not a Fool's too? Yes,
but he makes no Use of them to foresee the Evil and avoid it; and that we may
not come under that Denomination, let us most seriously ponder and consider
these Particulars, for it is no less than your Religion, your Lives, your
Liberties, your Estates, and your All that is concerned in the Consequence of
it.

Now to demonstrate not only the Probability of its being so, but the Certainty
of it, and the Impossibility of its being otherwise in all humane Appearance, I
shall beg of you but to consider of these things over again, viz.

First, If you stand for the D's Interest, do you not undoubtedly so far stand
for the Pope and Popish Interest, yea, Jesuits and all (the worst of Papists)
and by this you will give the greatest Blow to the Church of England, that ever
it had since it was a Church; pretend what you will for the Church of England,
while you are for the D. you are certainly the greatest Enemies of it; if you
are for a Popish Successor, or the D. as a Romanist; you are in Truth Enemies
to the Church of England in Particular, and the Protestant Religion in General.

For can you once imagine that by bringing in a Popish Successor, you will not
inevitably set up Popery? Will such a Successor, think you, have so much Love
for another Religion as his own, or for those of another Profession (whom by
his Persuasion he is obliged to esteem all damned Heretics) as for those of
his own? therefore will it not naturally follow, that he will advance the one
and discountenance and depress the other? nay, do you forget, that so far as he
could, he lately did the same, when he was in Power, so that the most ready way
to get into Office or Preferment, was either to turn Papist, or be a Favourer
of them, and then such were quickly brought in, made Governors of our Castles
and Garrisons, Captains and Colonels of our Forces, yea, even Captains of our
Men of War, besides hundreds of Places at Court no less than Lord High
Treasurer of England, witness Clifford, and lately one of the Clerks (if not
more) under the Treasurer Danby must be a desperate subtle Roman Catholic, for
it seems he could find none so fit for him; and what will the Effect of this be
in a little time think you? Will not this be a great weakening to the Church of
England, to lose so many Members as by these doings have within this ten years
been seduced from her, and so many of her Members turned out and kept out of
Places of Trust, Profit and Honor, whilst her Enemies are placed in them? and
will not this think you, cause great Numbers to become Roman Catholics, some
for Favor, some for Fear, some for Offices, and others for Profit and by
Persuasion, besides very many by Example, who look upon it as a great Piece of
Godliness, or at least good Policy, to be of their Princes Religion? I wonder
any man can be so weak as to think these Doings will make for the Intrest of
the Church of England, surely such must strangely be infatuated; and Besides
consider, for you to endeavor to make one who is a Papist Head of the Church
of England, you labor thereby to make our Church a great Monster; for if our
Head reckon (as he then must) us his Body, Heretics, rotten and damned,
where is our Body? Where will be our Church? What Agreement between the Head and
Body? Will it not inevitably run into Confusion? shall we have a Father of our
Church, who by his own Faith is obliged, as much as he can, to destroy her, and
is bound by the Romish Principles to deal with her as a Harlot? therefore if
you set up his Interest, farewell Church of England, farwell Protestant Religion
in England, there is no Medium in the World, considering the Power, when in his
hand, and the implacable Restlesness of the Jesuits. Therefore seriously
consider of it, you see plainly that so far as you are for this Interest you
are against the Church of England.

Is it possible you can forget Queen Mary's days? the number of Martyrs that
then suffered? enough to show you the sad Effects of a Popish Successor's
coming to the Crown; and will you desire to send your Selves, Wives, Children,
Fathers and Mothers to the Stake to be burned for Heretics? Read the Book of
Martyrs, if these things so easily slip your mind: Oh! never forget her fine
Wheedles to the Suffolk men, to assist her coming to the Crown, the fair
promises she made them; not to alter the least point in their Religion, yet
as soon as she thereby obtained her End, she burned more of them than of any
County in England else: Remember how many she martyred in the space of four or
five years; consider what havoc she would have made with the Church of
England, had she Reigned forty or fifty years: undoubtedly she would not by her
good will have left one Protestant alive all over England: I say, consider,
would you have it so again? will you endeavor to put the Protestant Religion
in as great hazard of the same Persecution once more? Oh! let your Tongues
rather cleave to your Mouths, or your right hands perish: Use your utmost
Endeavors to prevent it, whilst, in some measure, it is in your Power, least,
in a little time the Papists with their tricks put it out of your power, and
when too late, you may relent with anguish of Soul, and without Remedy.

Secondly, If you are for the Succession of the D. are you not for the French
Interest; so consequently against the Interest of England, your Native Country?

That this is so, I beg you consider how the D. is linked with the French K.
that cruel, blood-thirsty -- *.

How the D. has all along espoused the French Interest, appears by the Letters
brought to light in the Trial of Coleman, (the D's chief creature) there was no
doubt about those Letters, no not so much as denied. I pray do but call to mind
some of those Expressions in reference to the D. viz. page 45. Knowing the
Interest of our King, and in a more particular manner, of my more immediate
Master the DUKE, and his most Christian Majesty to be so inseparably united,
that it was impossible to divide them, without destroying them all.

His Majesty [the French King] was pleased to give order, to signify to his R.
H. my Master, that His Majesty was fully satisfied of his R. H's. good
Intentions toward him, and that he esteemed both their Interests but as one
and the same; that my Lord Arlington and the Parliament were both to be looked
upon as very unuseful to their Interests.

Page 46. Father Ferrier -- begged his R. H. to propose to his most Christian
Majesty what he thought necessary for his own Concern, and the advantage of
Religion, and his Majesty would certainly do all he could to advance both, or
either of them.

-- I communicated it to his R. H. to which his R. H. commanded me to Answer,
as I did on the twenty ninth of the same Month, That his R. H. was very
sensible of his most Christian Majesty's Friendship, and that he would labor
to cultivate it with all the good Offices he was capable of doing for his
Majesty, [the French King] that he was fully convinced their Interests were
BOTH ONE; that my Lord Arlington and the Parliament were not only Unuseful,
but very DANGEROUS both to. England and France; that therefore it was necessary
they should do all they could to dissolve it. page 53. I did communicate this
Design of mine to Monsieur Ravigney, who agreed with me, that it would be the
greatest Advantage imaginable to his Master, to have the D's Power and Credit
so far advanced -- page 54. If we can advance the Duke's Interest one step
forward, we shall put him out of the reach of Chance for ever. -- Then would
Catholics be at rest, and his Most Christian Majesty's Interest secured with
us in England, [mark that] beyond all Apprehensions whatsoever; -- Our
prevailing in these things would give the greatest BLOW to the Protestant
Religion here, that ever it received from its birth.

Page 55. If the D. should once get above them, (after the tricks they have
played with him) they are not sure he will totally forget the Usage he has had
at their hands. For my part (says he) I can scarce believe my self awake, or
the thing real, when I think on a Prince in such an Age as we live in,
converted to such a degree of Zeal and Piety, as not to regard any thing in the
World, in comparison of -- the Conversion of our poor Kingdom, which has been
a long time oppressed, and miserably harassed with Heresy and Schism, etc.

See the whole Letter in the D's own name in page 66. and 67. it being too long
here to recite; but, in short, the D. gives therein all Assurances imaginable
to the French King's Confessor.

Above all that passage in another Letter, page 69. ought never to be
forgotten, viz.

We have here a Mighty Work upon our hands, no less than the Conversion of
three Kingdoms, and by that perhaps the utter subduing of a pestilent Heresy
which has domineered over great part of the Northern World a long time; there
were never such hopes of Success since the Death of our Queen Mary, as now in
our days, when God has given us a Prince who is become (may I say a Miracle)
zealous of being the Author and Instrument of so glorious a Work -- that which
we rely upon most, next to God Almighty's Providence and the Favor of my
Master the Duke, is the mighty mind of his most Christian Majesty. -- I must
confess, I think his Christian Majesty's Temporal Interest is so much
attracted to that of his R. H. (which can never be considerable but upon the
Growth and Advancement of the Catholic Religion) that his Ministers cannot
give him better Advice, etc.

I think, Gentlemen, here is enough, (and too much, God knows) to convince any
wise man in England: Possibly we might have had enough to have filled a Volume,
had not Coleman had time (after he was questioned) to burn so many of his
Papers; these Letters aforesaid he only left as inconsiderable, and not worth
his destroying.

Thirdly, If you are for the D. so consequently for a Popish Successor: are you
not for Arbitrary Government, and against all Parliaments: is it not too
notoriously known, that the D. hates our Parliaments with an implacable hatred;
none ever set himself against our Parliaments more than he; therefore, if he
Succeed, adieu to all Parliaments: must you not expect to be Ruled by Force; if
you submit not to that, will he not call in Force enough from France, with whom
he has had such a strict League, and who would be glad of such an opportunity
to Assist him; so that you must expect nothing but a French Slavery at the best.

Besides, it is not unknown, that the D. is a Wilful Person, and naturally most
obstinate; if you put the Power in his hands, he will not easily forget what
our Parliaments have done, but would be glad to put an End to them; and then
you must lie wholly at the mercy of ambitious Courtiers, and merciless
Soldiers.

Sirs, Be not so weak as to let any of those specious Discourses, spread abroad
by the Jesuits, under the Notion of the Church of England-men, (as Coleman's
Declaration was) to advance the D's Interest, or a Popish Successor, deceive
you: be not deluded, beguiled, and lulled asleep, but be Watchful, Sober, and
Considerate; look before you, and take care of your approaching Election of
your Parliament Men; choose such as you have had experience of already to be
Courageous and Faithful in this time of Danger to this our City, and the
Protestant Religion: for if that once goes, our Liberty goes with it. Remember,
Popery and Slavery are linked together: from which, Good Lord, for ever prevent
and defend us.

FINIS.

