Doctor Wallis's LETTER Touching the DOCTRINE OF THE Blessed Trinity Answered
by his FRIEND.
Honored SIR,
I Read your Letter touching the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, you were
pleased to send me, with a great deal of Attention and Satisfaction; and
thereupon went to visit a Neighbor of mine, one that is reputed a modest
Gentleman, but one that is also reputed an Unitarian or Socinian. I showed him
your Letter, and made no question, but it would Convince him, as it had done
me, that they who denied the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Three
distinct Persons to be each of them God in the most perfect Sense of that Term,
and yet but One God, were in a very dangerous and palpable Error. But I found
my self greatly mistaken; for be presently told me, that you had unfairly
represented them, charging them with an Opinion which they abhor, to wit, That
how clear soever the Expressions of Scripture be, or can be, to this purpose,
they will not believe it, as being inconsistent with Natural Reason. And
therefore though they do not think fit to give us a barefaced Rejection of
Scripture, yet they do (and must they tell us) put such a forced Sense on the
words of it (be they never so plain) as to make them signify somewhat else.

He told me he did very much wonder, and was sorry for your sake, that a Man of
such Reputation for Learning and Piety, should be guilty of so much
uncharitable rashness against a Party of Men, which even some of their
Adversaries being Judges, are both Learned and Pious, though Erroneous. If it
were not their hearty Zeal for one of the great and clear Attributes of God!
(the God and Father of our Lord Jesus) his Unity; What (says he to me, with a
most compassionate Concern) should make them expose themselves to all manner of
Obloquy, Reproach, and Detestation of almost all that go under the Name of
Christians, in these Parts, to the utmost of Injuries and Perfections, the loss
of their Employments, Estates, Liberties, Countries, and some of them of Life
it self, by the violent Death of Heretics? Neither do they this from an
Enthusiastic Heat, nor yet upon the account of some indifferent, or next to
indifferent things in the Worship and Discipline of the Church; it is no less
than the Incommunicable Nature of the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, that they suffer for; hoping for their Reward through the Faith of
those Promises revealed by Christ our Lord, and recorded only in the Holy
Scriptures. The Authority whereof none have maintained with stronger
Reasonings, nor are more diligent in searching out the true Sense of them, nor
are more ready to submit to their Dictates. He said moreover, That it was too
common, for even Learned Men to charge die Unitarians, under the Name of
Socinians, with such Sayings as their Adversaries charge them with by
Consequences, without reading their Books. Nay, it is well known at Oxford,
that one in an Act there, disputing for his Degree in Divinity, took a Thesis
to maintain, to the very same purpose with that which your Friend avers against
the Socinians, but his Learned Opponent having read their Books, did so baffle
him, that it appeared the Respondent had not read them; but took his
Testimonies from their Adversaries. I would fain think otherwise of Dr. Wallis;
but he gives me here too much cause to suspect him; I will appeal to you (says
he) whether he does not.

Then he fetched me Socinus de Authoritate S. Script. and read in page 16. Quod
enim ad Rations attinet, haec nimis fallax via est in re quae ex Divina
patefaction pendeat, qualis est Christiana Religion. For as to Reasons, this is
too fallible a way in a Matter which depends on Divine Revelations, such as
Christian Religion is. Next he brought Sclichtingius, another eminent Writer
that followed Socinus; He in his Book Adv. Meifn. de SS. Trin. p. 68. His
Adversary had said, That Holy Scripture only is the most perfect Rule of Faith
and Life. To which Sclichtingius answers That if de rebus, clarissimis verbis
in Scriptura consignatis, etc. it be touching Points expressed in Scripture in
most clear words, so that no Man of a sound Mind can doubt of the Sense of
them, then he grants it; and that chiefly, because it is most certain, That the
Scripture contains nothing that is repugnant to manifest Reason, or that
implies a real Contradiction: But if it treat of obscure Matters, every one
sees that it cannot be determined without Reason, which yet is not to be
setch'd in, as if it could be opposed to Scripture, affirming or denying any
thing, but only to declare, whether such a thing be contained in Scripture, or
not? If it appear to be contained in it, whatsoever Reason may still say in
Contradiction, it must of necessity be deceived. This, says my Gentleman, is a
clear Account of the Socinians Judgment in this Point, and is a direct
Confutation of what you have read me out of your Doctor's Letter. He added yet
another of their great Men, Smalcius contr. Frant. Disp. 4. p. 137. Nulla enim
est Christianae Religionis particular, etc. There is not the least part of
Christian Religion, which does not accord with Reason, and that Opinion, which
does not agree with Reason, can have no place in Divinity. As a small Light to
a great one, so Reason is not contrary to Holy Scripture. Let Frantzius, or any
body else, tells us of any one Sentence of Holy Scripture that is repugnant to
Reason, and then let Reason be silent in the Church. Religion and Holy
Scripture has many things above Reason, and therein it highly commends it
self, but nothing which is contrary to Reason. Of these two last Passages the
learned and candid Dr. Tennison takes notice (in his Book The Difference
betwixt the Protestant and Socinian Methods) in Abatement of his Charge against
some Socinians for exalting Reason too much. Perhaps (says he) your Friend,
Dr. Wallis, had read that Book, but took no notice of the Quotations in the
Margin. And if he were put to it, to maintain his Charge, viz. That they do (and
must, they tell us) put such a farced Sense on the words of it [the Scripture]
(be they never so plain) as to make them signify somewhat else: I am persuaded
he would acquit himself no better than the Candidate in Divinity I told you of.

He was much concerned at the Injuriousness of this Imputation; and said, He
thought there was no sort of Protestants, of different Sentiments from the
Public, that were so inhumanly dealt with as the Unitarians; for they are so
far from denying there are Three Persons in One God, and asserting only One, in
opposition to the plainest Scriptures, that they are thoroughly persuaded, the
whole Scripture, wherever it is plain, is on their side. For does not every
Text in the whole Bible, that speaks clearly of the most High God, speak of him
as One single Person, except only two or three obscure Passages in Genesis?
Neither can we have any Idea or Conception of God, but Person is included in
it, taking Person for an intelligent Being; so that all plain and clear
Scriptures militate for them; and the Trinitarians, or those that say there are
Three Persons in God, or that Three Persons are all one God, as your Doctor
says, have no Scriptures left, but those that are obscure. And that they are
obscure, appears clearly by this; That there is scarce one Text alleged, by
them, which is not otherwise expounded, and in consistency with the Unity of
the Person of God by their Writers. You may see a great number of these Texts
and Expositions, in a Book entitled, Scriptura S. Trin. Revelatrix, under the
Name of Cingallus.

Your Doctor (proceeds he) names but two Texts, for he rakes his Opinion for
granted, as sufficiently proved by others. His first Text is, 1 John 5.7. There
are Three that bear Witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these Three are One. One would expect now that the Learned Doctor,
naming but two Texts, should cull out those that were strongest for his
purpose; and yet this Text is so far from being clear and strong, That, 1. it
has not the Authority as other Scriptures have; for it appears not in the most
ancient Copies of the Greek, nor in the Syriack, nor Arabic, nor Ethiopick,
nor Armenian Bibles, nor in the most eminent Latin Bibles. It Is not urged by
the Fathers in their Disputes about this Question. It Is wholly rejected by
some, and counted doubtful by almost all Learned Men. You may see (says he) in
Dr. Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury, his second Letter in his Travels, how
variously and uncertainly that Text appears in Ancient Manuscripts. Here my
Neighbor craved my Pardon, went to his Closet, and presently brought me a
Greek Testament, printed at Strasburg by Wolfius Cephalaeus, Anno 1524. in the
beginning of the Reformation, wherein this Verse is wanting. Bur, 2ly, allowing
it to be Authentic, yet the most Learned, even of the Trinitarians, understand
it not thus, These Three are One God, but These Three are One in Testimony, or
agree in Testimony. See Beza, Vatablus, Calvin, Erasmus, the English Geneva
Notes. As for his other Text, Matthew. 28.19. I refer you to The Brief History of
the Unitarians, etc. in four Letters, whereof he gave me a Copy. Only I desire
you (says he) to consider how clear a Proof this Text is, which must run thus:
We are Baptized in [or into] the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; Therefore these Three Persons are One God, and each of them by
himself God. As if the Israelites, by being Baptized into Moses, and believing
in the Lord, and in Moses his Servant, (so Marg. Exodus 14.31.) did acknowledge
Moses to be a Person of the most high God, though he was indeed, in some sense,
a God to them; for he was so to Aaron their High Priest: for thus it is read in
the Margin of the English Bible, printed in 1660. He shall be to thee a Mouth,
and thou shall be to him a God, Exodus 4.16. You may see the Hebrew so rendered,
Jer. 31.33. and the Greek, Heb. 8.10.

I must confess to you, Sir, I could not tell what to oppose to this Argument
of his, which showed the obscurity of our Texts; and he now made a Pause, and
expected my Answer: Wherefore to divert him from taking notice of my
Convictions, I asked him if he had any other Argument to prove that Obscurity?
He answered, Yes: And that also is taken (says he) from our Adversaries the
Trinitarians, I mean, the Romanists: For they are told by Mr. Chilling-worth,
(the Glory of English Protestants) and since that by Dr. Tennison, in his
words, thus: For Scripture, your Men deny very plainly and frequently, that
this Doctrine of the Trinity, can be proved by it. See, if you please, this
plainly taught, and urged very earnestly by Cardinal Hosius de Author. S.
Script. l. 3. p. 53. by Gordonius Huntlaeus contr. Tom. 1. Controv. 1. de Verbo
Dei, c. 19. by Gretserus and Tannerus in Colloquio Ratisbon; and also by Vega,
Possevin, Wiekus, and others. Now it is to be observed, That these Learned Men,
especially Bellarmine, and Wiekus after him, have urged all the Scriptures they
could, with their utmost industry, find out in this Cause, and yet, after all,
they acknowledge their Insufficiency and Obscurity; whereby they give a clear
Testimony to the Doctrine of God's being One Person; which to deny, were even
to deny the whole Bible.

But besides the current of all Scriptures on our side, we have many clear
Texts that prove the Father only to be God. I Will name but two: Our Lord himself
professes in his solemn Prayer to his Father, in the presence of his Disciples,
saying, This is Eternal Life, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17.3. And the Apostle St. Paul says, in
opposition to Gods many, and Lords many, But to us there is but One God, the
Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. Can any words be more express
to prove that there is but One true God, and One Person of that One God, to
wit, the Father of our lord Jesus Christ, who is opposed to him by his Names,
Relations, and Characters? Again, there be a multitude of Texts that deny those
things of Christ, which cannot be denied of God; and that affirm such things of
him that cannot agree to him, if he were a Person of God. In like manner of the
Holy Ghost. Which of both sorts you may find urged and defended in the two
Books of John Crellius, touching One God the Father; and abridg'd in
Wolzogenius's Praeparatio ad utilem Lectionem Lib. N. T. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5. So
also in your Brief History, etc. the first Letter.

I then desired to know of the Gentleman, what he could say to the Tradition of
the Christian Church; for you say, that That from the Time of Christ and his
Apostles hitherto, as well before as since, the Council of Nice has ever held
the Divinity of these three Persons, and that these three are but One God. This
also you take for granted. He answered, 1. It is the Catholic Principle of all
Protestants, that the Holy Scriptures are a complete Rule of Faith and Manners,
and clear and plain in all things necessary. Now since this Doctrine of the
Three Persons in One God, is held a Fundamental and Necessary Doctrine, it must
consequently be clear and plain to all honest Enquirers, which I clearly see it
is not, therefore I can satisfy my self concerning it, without an endless
Enquiry into the Fathers and Tradition.

2. I am sure it has not been held in the Apostles Time, nor, I believe, in any
of the Three first Centuries, nor even in the Three next, without much
opposition.

3. I think that Curcellaeus has proved, as well as any thing can be proved out
of Ancient Writings, That the Doctrine of the Trinity, about the Time of the
Council of Nice, was of a special Union of Three Persons in the Deity, and not
of a numerical, as it is now taught, and has been taught since the Chimerical
Schoolmen were hearkened unto.

4. I wonder how Dr. Wallis reckons the Christian Church, since he knows there
were diverse Arian Councils, and one of them, that of Ariminum, consisted of 550
Bishops, the most numerous Assembly of Bishops perhaps as ever was; except he
accounts A ians for Trinitarians; which if he do, then he cannot choose but
reckon Mr. Biddle for one too; for he Titles his Book, The Apostolical and True
Opinion concerning the Holy Trinity revived and asserted.

5. According to what I have given my self leave to read in the Controvertists
of these Times concerning that Matter, I mean Curcellaeus and Maresius,
Sandius, and Gardner, and Bull, Petavius, Biddle, Estwich, and Le Clerk; I
reckon Curcellaeus, Biddle, and Le Clerk to be the more free and ingenuous
Writers, and therefore more likely to give a true Judgment concerning the
Matters they enquire of.

But, 6. I conclude my Judgment with that of the great Protestant Champion
Chillingworth, chap. 6. n. 56. -- By the Religion of Protestants, I do not
understand the Doctrine of Luther, or Calvin, or Melancthon; nor the Confession
of Augusta, or Geneva, nor the Catechism of Heidelburgh, nor the Articles of
the Church of England, no, nor the Harmony of Protestant Confessions; but that
wherein they all agree, and which they all Subscribe with a greater Harmony, as
a perfect Rule of their Faith and Actions, that is, the BIBLE, the BIBLE, the
BIBLE only is the Religion of Protestants! whatsoever else they believe,
besides it, and the plain, irrefragable, indubitable Consequences of it, well
may they hold it as a Matter of Opinion, but as Matter of Faith and Religion;
neither can they, with coherence to their own Grounds, believe it themselves,
nor require the Belief of it of others, without most high and most schismatical
Presumption. I (for my part) after a long, and as I verily believe and hope,
impartial search of the true Way to Eternal Happiness, do profess plainly, that
I cannot find any rest for the sole of my Foot, but upon this Rock only. I see
plainly, and with mine own Eyes, that there are Popes against Popes, Councils
against Councils, some Fathers against others, the same Fathers against
themselves; a Consent of Fathers of one Age, against a Consent of Fathers of
another Age; the Church of one Age, against the Church of another Age. -- No
Tradition, but only of Scripture, can derive it self from the Fountain -- In a
word, there is no sufficient certainty but of Scripture only, for any
considering Man to build upon. I would not have Dr. Wallis think to impose upon
us in this Reign of a Protestant King and Queen, the Doctrine of Tradition; he
had better have done it in the late King's Time, then it would have been
acceptable to the Court.

Sir, I hope (proceeded my Neighbor) you are by this time convinced how
unjustly and unlike a Scholar the Doctor (pardon, I pray, my Resentment) has
drawn so black an Indictment against the Socinians, upon false Grounds, taken
for granted by him to be true. I am ashamed to read his words: Nor do the
Anti-Trinitarians insist on any other Ground, why they deny it, [the Trinity,
or Three Persons of One God] save only, That it seems to them absolutely
impossible; and therefore think themselves bound to put another sense on all
places of Scripture (how clear soever they be, or can be) which prove or favor
it. It Is the contradiction of that Doctrine to a Thousand clear places of
Scripture, which they insist upon, as I have showed before: But I will pursue
it a little further. Will the Doctor deny that the Person of the Father is God?
No, his Opinion asserts it. Will he then deny, That he who is God, is not
All-sufficient or Almighty? If that One Person be All-sufficient, (and he is
not God if he be not) then all other Persons, besides him, must of necessity be
superfluous, and the introducing them into the Godhead is plain Polytheism, and
a direct Contradiction to the first Commandment of the Decalogue, and to all
those Texts that assert God to be One, and consequently to those Scriptures
that speak of God as One Person, which are without number. No, they first
devised an Opinion, which is contrary to the clearest Scriptures, and the most
evident Reasons, and then they would persuade us it is a Mystery, either which
we cannot understand, and therefore must be blind to the Contradictions that
are in it; or, if we will not be so satisfied, they call us Clamorous and
Importune, and persecute us with the most odious Imputations they can invent,
and then with Fire and Faggot. But that they may seem to give some Answer to
those plain Scriptures and Reasons that shine in their Eyes, they soar aloft,
quite out of sight, with Metaphysics, or so near out of sight, that we can see
nothing but a Cloud. The Notion, of One God, and One Person that is that One
God, every Man and Woman can understand; that is, they know perfectly that One
Person that is God, cannot be Two Persons, each of which is God: and except
they had been used from their Infancy, to say like Parrots, that Three Persons
are One God, and each One of them is that God, they would easily see the
Contradictions of it. And indeed the Common People do worship God, far more
agreeable to his Will, than the Learned; for these are obliged by the
Athanasian Creed, in worshipping One God, to mind him as Three Persons, that
is, to have in their Mind the Idea of One Almighty and only wise Person, who is
One God by himself, and in the same Act to Adore two other Persons, each of
which is as much God by himself, as the former. To worship Three that are equal
one to another, and at the same time, and in the same Act to worship but One.
But the Common People worship One only Almighty and most Merciful Father,
through the Son as Mediator, except they confound them with express Mention of
Two other Persons; and then they worship expressly Three Gods, as the Learned do
always more subtly. God Almighty, even the Father, knows, he has given us a
Commandment, That we should worship him as One, the only Wise, the only Good,
the only True, the only Holy, the only Potentate, and none other as God besides
him; which Commandment is as easy to be known by all the People that have
Reason enough to understand Numbers, the difference between One and more than
One, as it is necessary to be observed; but is impossible to be observed,
because impossible to be apprehended by the Common People, at least, if the
Athanasian Doctrine be true Divinity. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is One
Lord: And, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all Thine Heart, with all thy
Soul, and with all thy Might, ( Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5.) But how shall we do to love each
of Three Persons that are equal, with all our Hearts? All the poor Laborers,
with their Wives, in the Country, and all the Tankard-bearers of London, must
go to School to Dr. Wallis, and he will teach them Metaphysics and
Mathematics, and read a Lecture to them upon the Three Dimensions, Long,
Broad, and Tall, of One Cube: They must love God the Father, who is the Length
of the Cube, with all their Hearts, and then God the Son, who is the Breadth,
with all their Hearts too, and God the Holy Ghost in the same manner too.

And if we measure this Cube with the Infallible Rule of Scripture, we find
that this Long Cube [the Father] sent this Broad Cube [the Son] on a Message,
as far as from Heaven to Earth, [ John 6.38.] and anon after sent this tall or
deep Cube [the Holy Ghost] after him, [ Matthew. 3.16.] in the mean time he abode
in Heaven himself. Moreover, this broad Cube [the Son] is not commensurable
with this long Cube the Father, neither Northward nor Southward, in Knowledge (
Mark 13.32.) or Power, ( John 14.28.) In like manner this tall Cube [the Holy
Ghost] receives of this long and broad Cube to make him taller and deeper, John
16.14.

I fancy the poor People would apprehend it better by such a Resemblance as
this: Suppose one Woman ( Mary) to be married to Three Men at once, Peter,
James, and John; I, Mary, take thee Peter, James, and John to be my wedded
Husband, etc. Here are indeed Three Persons, but only One Husband; the
Husbandhood is but One, though the Persons are Three, each of which is Husband
to Mary, and Mary is obliged, by the Contract of Marriage, to pay Conjugal
Affection and Duty to each of them. Methinks this is a more familiar parallel
than that of a Cube. I do the rather make use of this Similitude, because the
Learned and Famous Dr. Sherlock, in his Vindication of the Doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity, tells us, We must allow the Divine Persons to be real
substantial Beings, Page 47. And in Page 67. he says, The Father -- feels
himself to be the Father, and not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost: The Son in like
manner feels himself to be the Son, and not the Father nor Holy Ghost; and so
the Holy Ghost -- As James feels himself to be James, and not Peter nor John,
which proves them to be distinst Persons. Thus Dr. Wallis may see that his
Notions concerning the Trinity are old fashioned, Dr. Sherlock's are of the new
Mode. But if he desires to hare his Resemblances further displayed, I am told
he may find them sufficiently exposed in a Book, written in French, titled Le
Nouveau Visionaire against M. Jurieu.

Here I did confess indeed that Dr. Sherlock's Explanation of the Distinction
of Persons was far more clear and full than yours: But I had thought the
Orthodox would not hare granted so much, and so it seems did you too. By this
time we came near the end of your Letter; in which, he said, there were still
the same Calumnies over and over. Only he took notice of one Text of Scripture
you insert, which you had not before, namely John 1.1, 14. The Word was God,
and, The Word was made Flesh. This (says he) I confess were to the purpose; if
by the term The Word could be meant nothing else but a Pre-existing Person, and
by the term God nothing but God Almighty the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
if taking those terms in those Senses did not make St. John write Nonsense; and
if by Flesh could be meant nothing but a Man, how excellent soever, and not a
Mortal Man, subject to Infirmities: But all these things are otherwise.

For, 1. The Ancient Orthodox Sense, at the Council of Nice, and afterward for
some Centuries, was this: In the beginning of the World, or before all Worlds,
the Son of God did exist, and that Son was with God his Father, and that Son
was very God of very God, not numerically, but specifically, as Peter and Paul
are of the same Substance. Now this Opinion was rejected by the Schoolmen, as
introducing two Gods. And the Modern Orthodox understand it thus: In the
beginning before all Worlds, or from Eternity, the Son a distinct Person did
exist, and that Son was with God his Father, and the Son was that God with whom
he was. But if they be tied to take the terms in the sense of their Opinion,
they must expound thus: The Son was with God, that is, with the Father, himself
and the Holy Ghost; and the Son was the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Or,
according to Dr. Wallis, the Breadth of the Cube, was with the Length, Breadth
and Depth of the same Cube, and the Breadth was the Cube. And for the
fourteenth Verse, they say not, the Word or Son was made Flesh, but, God the
Son by the Holy Ghost coming upon the blessed Virgin, and the Power of the most
High overshadowing her, was united to a Human Body and Soul. The Arian Sense
you may see in a late Tract, entitled, A Vindication of the Unitarians, That
God first made a Super-Angelical Being, called the Son, and through that Son,
and by the Holy Ghost, framed this World, and Man within it; This Being was
with God, and was an Angelical God; and this Son, called The Word, became
Incarnate. The Socinian Sense was thus: In the beginning of the Gospel ( Mark
1.1.) was Jesus called the Word, because he was the prime and chief Expounder
and Minister of the Gospel; and this Word was with God, ascended into Heaven, (
John 3.13.) and descended thence, and being anointed with the Holy Ghost and
Power, being thus sanctified, and sew into the World, was far more deservedly
called the Son of God, and God, then those among the Jews to whom the Word of
God came, who yet were called Gods, ( John 10.35, 36.) or than that Angel who
appeared to Manoch, ( Judge. 13.22.) And the Evangelist having said in Verse. 12.
that this true Light, as well as Word, or Light-Bringer, gave Power to those
that believed in him to be the Sons of God, he says in Verse. 14. that He, the
Word, was himself, as well as they, a Mortal and Frail Man.

The Sense of Paul Bishop of Antioch An. 262. (as I have read somewhere in
Melancthon) and the Sense of some in our Days was, That this term Beginning,
must be taken for the beginning of the World, and the term The Word, being the
Subject of the History in the very Front of it, must be taken properly, and by
way of eminence, for the Gospel Word. But a Word, according to Aristotle, being
twofold, Internal in the Mind, and External in the Speech, the Word here spoken
of, must mean the Internal Word of God by way of excellence, that is, the
Gospel Decree, as it is taken also in Titus 1.3. where the Apostle Paul, having
mentioned the Truth which is after Godliness, in hope of Eternal Life, goes on
and says, which God, that cannot lie, promised [decreed to promise, or in
purpose promised] before the World began: has in due time manifested his Word
[(...),] through preaching. This Word was with or in God, not yet manifested:
and the Word was God; here God being the Predicate, must have such a Sense as
can agree to the Subject Word, either most Divine, as Spirit for Spiritual,
John 6.63. and the very term God, Gal. 1.10. for the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and in the 18th Verse of this Chapter, John 1. in the same Sense; or as Grotius
would have it, for the Word of God: but die former Sense seems far better: All
things were made by it, to wit, as a Rule or chief Design. According to this
Exposition, the Word must not be taken for a Person in the first five Verses,
nor till the Evangelist had said in the sixth and seventh Verses, That the
Baptist being a Man sent of God, was not the Light which was in the Word
mentioned, that is, was not the Bringer or Preacher of the Light; for that must
be the Sense, when a Man is said to be, or not to be the Light. But that which
is denied of John, is affirmed of another, to whom he bare Witness, and that
was Jesus, as appears afterward. He was the true Light, that is,
Light-Bringer, which coming into the World, enlightneth every Man. And now
having laid a sufficient Ground for taking the Light, in an improper Sense, for
Light-Bringer, his meaning cannot easily be mistaken, when in the fourteenth
Verse, he calls the same Man The Word, that is, the personal Word, or Great
Gospel-Prophet, and says, That The Word was, was made, or was born Flesh; that
is, a Frail and Mortal Man, (not barely a Man) for so the Word Flesh does
always signify when it is applied to Man; and Christ is now a Man, but not
Flesh. The Word wets made Flesh, does not imply that this great Word, Prophet,
or Messenger of that Word, did exist before he was born, no more than that
Phrase in 1 Cor. 15.45. The first Man Adam was made a living Soul, proves or
implies that Adam did pre-exist before he was made a living Soul.

Here, Sir, I interposed, and told my Gentleman, That this Exposition seemed
very uncouth and strange; I had never heard of it before, and therefore it was
not easy for me to apprehend it, much more to receive it. He readily consented
to what I said; and added, That it is a thing which makes Unitarian
Interpretations seem forced and unnatural, namely, because we have imbibed from
our Youth, and even from our Catechisms, contrary Expositions: But if they were
both proposed to one that had never heard of either of 'em before, he was
persuaded the Trinitarian Expositions would seem far more harsh and forced,
nay, contradictious and absurd. For, to instance in this very Text of John,
what un-prejudiced Man could ever imagine that this Text should be the Ground
of the Doctrine of Two Persons in God, when nothing is more clear in Scripture
and Reason, than the Unity of God, which necessarily implies the Unity of his
Person. I have been the larger in setting out this Exposition (says he)
because I knew it would be difficult for you to apprehend it.

There is yet another Exposition of this Scripture, which is derived from the
Great Grotius, and may be found in the Brief History of the Unitarians, which I
spoke of. But I think I have said enough to convince any Man that is not
extremely prejudiced, that this is an obscure Scripture: For as every one of
these Senses finds some specious Grounds in the Text, so never a one of them
can clearly answer all the Objections that are levied against them, and that of
the Trinitarians least of all: Therefore your Doctor writes, either unlike a
Divine, or like a Censorious, I will not say Malicious Person; when he says, If
God say, The Word was God, and The Word was made Flesh; shall we say, not so,
only because we cannot tell How? As if these Sayings were so clear, that they
admitted no Sense but his, which understands by The Word an Eternally
pre-existing Person, whereas the term Ho Logos in Greek, which we translate The
Word, Speech, or Saying, is found (I suppose) forty times in the New Testament
taken impersonally for the Gospel, or some Speech: It Is Three and twenty times
so used in this One Evangelist of St. John, and for the most part opposed to
the Person of Christ; and on the other hand, there is not one Text, except this
in 1 John 1.14. where it can reasonably signify a Person, except we reckon that
in 1 John 5.7. for one, which I have showed to be uncertain, and not to have
the Authority of other Sacred Scripture. As for that in Rev. 19.13. -- his Name
is called, The Word of God, that is, not the same with The Word simply; and
though it denote a Person, yet it is one whose Vesture was dipped in Blood, which
shows him to be a Man, a glorious Captain. Let all rational Men judge, Whether
it is more reasonable to take a term in such Sense, as it is almost always to be
found in in the same Divine Author, than in the Sense of Philo a Jew, or Plato
a Heathen. So that the Unitarians have far the most reason to cry out of forced
Interpretations, whereby to deprive God of an incommunicable Attribute, even
his Unity: And they defend these Interpretations with such Distinctions, as are
either not intelligible, or which infer absurd Consequences: Such are the
Distinctions between the Essence and the Divine Persons; of the threefold
manner of Existence of God; of Circumincession, or the mutual Penetration or
mutual Inexistence of the Divine Persons among themselves; of God taken
personally and essentially in Scripture; of the Name Father sometimes
signifying the Father alone, sometimes the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; of the
Eternal Generation, or God's Eternal begetting a Son equal to himself, and yet
not another God; of the Divine Operations within and without the Essence,
whence it is that the Internal are attributed to the Persons distinctly, the
External to them all Three, though One only be named; of the Incarnation, or
God the Son not being made a Man, but joining himself to a Man in an
Hypostatical Union; hence of two Natures in One Person, of the Communication of
Properties, whereby that which is spoken of Christ's Divine Nature, is
understood to agree to him according to his Humane Nature, and vice versa: and
many more confounding Distinctions they use, without which the Holy Scriptures
cannot be understood in the Sense of Trinitarians: but I am weary with reciting
them. Here he broke off, and I rose to take my leave of him. I told him, as the
truth is, That I had long taken the Doctrine of the Trinity for granted, and
began but now to inquire into it, therefore could not readily reply to those
things he had urged, who, I perceived, was well versed in the Point; but I
would, further consider it. He thanked me much for my Friendly Visit and
Patience in hearing him, and hoped to see me again shortly upon this Occasion.

Now, Sir, give me leave to tell you, that though I was much satisfied with
your Letter, taking it for granted you had given a true Representation of the
Socinians, yet finding by this Discourse, it is far otherwise with them, that
they have as high a Veneration for the Holy Scripture as we, that they use
their Reason no more than reasonable Men ought to do, viz. for the finding out
the true Sense of Scripture; that they reject the Doctrine of the Trinity, not
only because it is contrary to Reason, but more especially because it is contrary
to most plain and clear Scriptures, as they conceive; that they have no need of
those nice Distinctions that we are forced to make use of; that the Texts you
allege against them as most clear, are notwithstanding very doubtful and
obscure. For these Reasons, and others of this Kind, I am more dissatisfied in
this Matter than I was at first, because I perceive by your Letter, that
nothing convincing can be urged against them, even by them that are most
Learned, such as you are. If you can and will please to take upon you the
trouble of another Letter, to answer these my Scruples and Doubts, you will add
thereby much more strength to the many Obligations wherein you have already
bound,

SIR, Your much obliged --

Postscript.
SIR,
I Had no sooner finished my Letter, but you were pleased to send me another,
which is an Answer to a Letter you received from an unknown Gentleman,
proposing some Objections against your former Letter. My Gentleman hearing of
it, came to give me a Visit, and when he had read this your second Letter, he
made his Exceptions to two or three Passages in it.

1. You say, By Personality, I mean that Distinction (whatever it be) whereby
the Three are distinguished; but what that is, I do not pretend to determine.
And if I should guess, for it will be but guessing, etc.

Now (says he) our Savior in the Holy Scripture tells us plainly, This is
Life Eternal, that they might know thee (Father) the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent, John 17.3. Do not these Names and Characters
distinguish the one from the other? Does any thing distinguish Two Persons more
fully, than that the one is Father to the other, and the other his Son? The one
prays, the other is prayed unto. The one is not only God, but the only true
God; the other is he whom the Father, the only true God has sent: and he that
is sent by him is Jesus, the Name of that Man who was the Son of the Virgin
Mary; and the Name Christ signifies, that he was anointed with the Holy Ghost
and Power, for the performance of that Office of saving Men from their Sins,
whereunto he was sent by the only true God his Father. I challenge the Learned
Doctor, and the Learnedest Doctor at Oxford, (if there be any more Learned than
he) to show me a clearer or plainer Distinction between God and Moses.

So that Dr. Wallis's not pretending to determine the Distinction between God
the Sender, and Jesus Christ the Sent, but calling that Determination Guessing,
is in effect to deny the Authority of Christ's Words, and to call his clear and
full determination of that which we are to know for obtaining the Eternal Life,
Guessing.

In his next Paragraph, speaking of the same Matter, he Complements some Body,
craving leave to be ignorant of what the Scripture does not tell him. Now if I
did not consider the vast power Prejudice and long Prepossession have over Men's
Minds, I should determine the Doctor to be wilfully blind: But it is plain, he
bears false. Witness against our Lord, and the Holy Scripture, whilst he says
the Scripture does not tell him, what it plainly tells him and every Woman that
can but read it.

The following Paragraph is Of the damnatory SENTENCES in the Athanasian Creed,
which seem, say you, to be annexed only to some Generals, which the Author
thought necessary, as the Trinity and Incarnation of Christ. To which he
excepted thus: This Creed being made (as it seems to the Learned) many hundreds
of Years after the Apostles Creed, which contains all General Articles of the
Christian Faith, and two or three hundred Years after the Nicene Creed, which
explains the Doctrine of the Trinity and the Incarnation more particularly, the
Author of it was very impertinent, if he did not design all his Explication to
be believed upon pain of Damnation. But if that Argument were wanting, who can
read the Athanasian Creed, and find Damnation in the beginning, middle, and
conclusion, and can then have the face to deny, that the not believing of every
Clause is damnable? I am sorry to find so much Daubing in Dr. Wallis.

Then we came to your further explaining the parallel of the Cube; where you
say, it may be said of it, that, This long Things is a Cube, and so, This which
is broad, or this which is high is a Cube. But the (says he) he that says,
This long Thing is a Cube, does in so saying, say, This long Thing is broad and
high: consequently in Parallel each Person is Three Persons.

This is all he took notice of at that time, for he was in haste. And I having
considered what he had said before, and finding so much Reason and Suitableness
to Scripture in it, could not tell how to defend these Passages, and therefore
remit them to you, hoping you will honor with a Return,

SIR, Your --

Whether Trinity or Unity more dangerous?
THE Trinitarians and Unitarians agree that there is but one God most High:
they both agree that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is that God
most High. They differ in this, that Jesus before he was a Man and from
Eternity, and also the Holy Ghost, as distinct Persons from God the Father,
were and are each of them as perfectly God most High as the Father; so that
each of them is Almighty, Eternal, All-knowing, only Wise, only Good, Infinite,
etc. equal to the Father. The Trinitarians assert these things, the Unitarians
deny them.

The Question hereupon is, Which of these Parties are in the most dangerous
Error, supposing them to be in Error, now the one, now the other?

If the Trinitarians err, they worship two Persons in God equal to one that is
undoubtedly God, that is, they worship three Almighty and only Wise Persons,
which are not distinguishable from three most High Gods.

If the Unitarians err, they avoid that Error of worshipping three Persons
which they cannot distinguish from three Gods; but their Error lies in holding
so strictly to the Oneness of God, as well in Person as Essence, that they do
not acknowledge, besides that One, two more Persons to be equally God, as well
as that One, whom both Parties agree to be so: that is, they err in not
acknowledging two unnecessary Persons in God, but holding that the God and
Father of Christ is God alone, only necessary and all-sufficient.

If the Trinitarians err, they err against the common Reason of Mankind, and
most plain and express Scriptures, which assert that God is One, or that there
is but one Supreme God, and always speak of him as one only Person. If the
Unitarians err, they err against the doubtful Sense of some obscure Texts,
which more fairly admit of another Interpretation consistent with the Unity of
the Person of God.

In short, the Question is, Whether the Term God includes only one Person, or
three Persons? one Almighty Person, or three distinct Almighty Persons? And
whether the former or the latter is the more dangerous Error, which soever is
found an Error?

FINIS.

