A Large and Particular RELATION OF THE Affairs of Ireland.
In a LETTER to a Person of Honor, from a Gentleman at Chester, who came from
Dublin, June 26, and arrived here July 1, 1689.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Chester, July 1. 1689. SIR,
THIS is to acquaint you that I am safely arrived here, having run through many
hazards and dangers, but being resolved to attempt the getting away from
Dublin, notwithstanding all Difficulties; in order to inform the Government
here of the present posture of Affairs in Ireland, on Tuesday last, at ten of
the Clock at Night, my self and four more persons came to the Point of Dawky,
an Island toward Bray, having ordered a small Wherry and two Boat-men to stay
our coming under a great Rock; there being a whole Regiment placed along the
shore between Dublin and Bray; to avoid being seen, we went down the great Rock
to the Boat; but not so privately but the next Watch made toward us, about
thirty in number, we made haste and got into the Boat, they following, called
to us, and swore they would fire, if we did not come back; notwithstanding
which, we put to Sea, knowing it was no less than hanging matter if we
returned; the Soldiers we believe wanted Match, so that there was no shots
made: We landed in Wales near Mossom; on Thursday last, having but two Boat-men
and three Oars, one being lost getting off from the Rock; My Brother M -- was
Pilate, but neither he nor any of us had ever been on the English shore before.

I here send you the following Relation (in short) how it is with our Friends
in poor Ireland. There has of late been a constant Correspondence between
several Persons of note in Lancashire, with the late King, in order to raise an
Army in England, who made several Voyages in the Custom-house Boat; which I
understand has been taken lately at Denby, but B --, etc. was not then in her:
They are now fitting out some other Boats for the same purpose, and a Yatch;
likewise a Privateer of 14 Guns and 60 Men; one Bennett is Captain of her; I
was on board her, and saw how she is provided, and went to drink with Bennett,
who swore he would take and burn all the Vessels on the Welsh Coast in 14 days;
he sets to Sea this Week. There was a design to have had two Camps, one on each
side of Dublin, in sight of the Harbor (about a Month since,) but at that time
Enniskilling sending forth 400 Horse, they went up as far as the Counties of
Leitrim and Longford, through Westmeath and part of Mead and Cavan, and brought
back from the Irish above 6000 head of Cattle; Difarming several Companies in
their way; which made the late King resolve to bend all his Force against that
place to reduce it; and accordingly Genesis Rose marched to Trim, where he
rendevouz'd 8000 Horse and Foot: But at that time an Express being brought to
the late King, and French Ambassador, (who lives in Sir John Davys House,)
That Collnel Kirk had Sailed to the Relief of Derry; and that Derry had made a
vigorous Sally, and killed many of their Men, General Rose and his Army were
forthwith ordered against Derry, with the whole Flower of the Army, and to
leave Enniskilling until Derry were taken, which they were daily in expectation
of; for the late K. said on Monday last, The Garrison did at that time live on
Horseflesh, and were in a starving Condition; but still continue to make brave
Sallies; and as the Irish own, have killed near 3000 in two late Sallies. There
is but two Regiments in Dublin, and very few Forces in Munster, and Leinster;
all are in the North, about Belfast, Carrick-Fergus, Lisburn, Antrim, and
Colrain, the latter whereof they are fortifying, and erecting in it great
Stores of Provisions, etc. to supply the Army. Enniskilling has taken several
parcels of their Provisions and Ammunition, going to Derry, and have defeated
many Parties of the Irish. Coll. Kirk had not gotten into Derry when I came
away; but they expected daily to hear he had attempted it. -- It is believed
that no less then 10000 have been killed before Derry. And Will. Dopping.
Brother to James Dopping the Attorney, has exceedingly contributed to the
preservation of that Place, in his careful and wary distribution of the
Provisions, etc. being Clerk of the Stores: He is extremely rated at by the
Irish, and admired by the Garrison: The late K. sent his Wife and Children to
him, with a Pardon, and great Promises; but he rejected all, and sent her back
again.

The King refuses to let Mr. Price come away, until Nugent be first sent over,
and 10000 l. which he says Mr. Price owes him. Money is very scarce there, for
the French Ambassador will not part with any Money, until the Irish Army be
landed in Scotland, or England, thinking to get many Friends by their punctual
Payment there. At present they have coined Copper Money, which passes for 6 d.
though not worth half a Farthing, and does oblige the People to take them, but
will take none of it in his Revenue; which is one way to get all the Money in
the Country into their own hands. They design likewise to make half Crowns and
Crown pieces of the same sort. The Parliament go on, and the Royal Assent is
given to the following Acts, viz.

1. Twenty Thousand Pound per Month, for 13 Months, to the King. 2. Repealing
the Act of Settlement, and Restoring old Proprietors. 3. Liberty of Conscience.
4. Taking off Penal Laws and Oaths. 5. Taking off all Writs of Error, and
Appeals to England. 6. Taking off Valuation Money, and other Rights from the
Clergy. 7. Repealing the Act of the 23 October. 8. No benefit of Clergy for Two
Years. 9. All Patents for Offices void. 10. Ireland to be independent of
England.
They have seized on all Protestants Goods, and Estates, that are come away;
and are daily doing the like to them that stay, under color of Plots, or some
Design or other. I hope in God they will hasten Forces to relieve those People
which have suffered so much.

Tyrconnel still keeps at Chappel-Lizard, being out of favor. The Protestant
Lords have entered their Protest against the Parliament Proceedings; and among
the rest the young Lord of Hoath is very brisk.

I have since my Arrival met with some of our Irish Gentlemen, that are said in
Ireland, to be managers against their K. and Country, having the Honor to be
much talked of there, and yet are wanting Employment here, which is ill luck on
both hands. They have seized on all, etc.

I am, SIR, Your humble Servant, J.M.

Advertisement.
THE History of the late Revolution in England With the Causes and Means by
which it was Accomplished. Together with the Settlement there of under their
most Serene Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, by the Lords and Commons
Assembled in this present Parliament. Printed for Tho. Salisbury at the Sign of
the Temple near Temple Bar in Fleetstreet. 1689.

London: Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1689.


