Mr. De Labadie's Letter To his Daughter Mrs. Delabadie, Nurse to the pretended
Prince of Wales.

Written in Characters, and Deciphered by Dr. Wallis, Professor of Geometry in
Oxford.

Which said LETTER is referred to by Mr. Fuller in his Two Narratives, and is a
plain demonstration of that horrid Imposture.

WITH Reflections upon it, and a full Answer to the Material Objections, in a
late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Truest Account of Mr. Fullers Discovery, etc.

By another Hand.

Printed in the Year, 1696.

Mr. De Labadie's Letter To his Daughter Mrs. De Labadie, etc.
THAT Madam De Labadie's Letters and Papers Domonstrating the Management of the
suppositious Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales; were found in her fathers
Trunks some years ago, and put into the hands of the Government, is very well
known, the memory whereof being Lately revived by Mr. Fuller, in his two Books
on that Subject, and the truth of it called in question by another, published
since, in favor of that pretended Prince: It is thought fit, for the
satisfaction of the Nation, to publish the following Copy of one of those
Letters from Mr. Labadie to his Daughter, with some Remarks upon it; to make it
appear, that what Mr. Fuller has advanced concerning that horrid Imposture, is
as well Demonstrated as a thing of that nature can be, except those who were
Actors in the Affair would confess it, which we have now no reason to expect.

The Reader is desired to take notice, that the following Letter directed to
Mrs. De Labadie, is one of those that the Late Q. of Blessed Memory ordered to
be Printed, but the performance of the same was prevented by the L. N.
Pretending they were mis-laid, as Mr. Fuller acquaints us, in his further
Confirmation, page 5. And being in Ciphers, was amongst other Papers of that
sort, Committed to the Care of Dr. Wallis, Professor of Geometry in Oxford, and
by him Deciphered.

The Letter is thus. TO Mrs. De Labadie, present.
I Am so troubled about what you told me last time I saw you, that I cannot
forbear any longer Writing to you; to know how her Majesty behaves her self in
that hazardous undertaking.

I must Confess, the only thoughts of it makes me tremble. I hope Nevertheless,
that the Ingenuity of her Country, and the Goodness of her Cause will bring her
off.

Lord what a happy thing it would be, if we could get a Successor for our King,
that would settle our Forefathers Profession in our Country, which can never
be but by this means.

I am afraid of those Heretics that are about her, if these could be put out
of the way it would be a very good thing. Adieu, my Dear, and don't fail to
write to me by the bearer, and in the same hand. I rest

Your ever Loving,


Having accounted already for the Authority of this Letter, it remains that we
proceed to our Remarks.

In the first place, the Intreigue concerning the Sham Prince is so plainly
expressed in the Letter, that it can admit of no other Gloss, yet to obviate
such Cavils or Evasions as the Faction abounds with; we shall make the
following Animadversions upon it.

Here Is, in the first place, an hazardous matter to be undertaken by her
Majesty, that Mrs. De Labadie is acquainted with, and which she imparts to her
father. Now her Majesty's being really with Child, could not in Common sense be
called an undertaking; but her Counterfeiting to be so, might very well be
expressed by that Name, and have the Epithet of hazardous as properly adjoin'd.
And Mrs. Labadie being designed for her Nurse, she was the fittest person in
the World to bear a part in the Management, and that the Queen was only to Act
the matter, is evident from Mr. De Labadie's Concern to know how she behaved
her self: Whereas had there been a real Pregnancy, and a Natural Birth, there
had been no need of any such Enquiry, nor no Cause for his Trouble, but rather
for his Joy.

But that the Only Thoughts of it should make him tremble, as he expresses it
in the second Paragraph, is yet a plainer demonstration of the hazard and
danger to which he was apprehensive their Party would be exposed, if her
Majesty did not behave her self as she ought; which yet nevertheless he is in
great hopes she will, because of the Ingenuity of her Country, and the Goodness
of her Cause. It Is true, that the Ingenuity of the Italians, in matters of
Love, has been noted for many ages, of which the Book written by her
Countryman, Ovid de Art Amandi, is a Famous Instance; but that there is any
other Ingenuity, in Childbearing among the Italians, than what is Natural to
all other Women, is a thing not so much as pretended to; and then, as to her
being brought off by the Goodness of her Cause, it plainly discovers that her
Cause was not the Common Cause of all Mothers, which is, by the appointment of
the Almighty, to Replenish the Earth; but hers was to Replenish the Church of
Rome: and this is a fresh Instance of the Principles of the Romish Party, that
there are no means, how unhallowed soever, which they don't think lawful to put
in practice for the advancement of their Cause.

His next Paragraph contains a plain Declaration what that Cause is, viz. To
get a Successor for their King, that would settle their Forefathers Profession
in their Country. This is truly very pleasant; other Kings use to get
Successors for themselves; but K. James, poor Prince! must have one got for
him. If there were not other Circumstances which prove this Imposture to be a
Cheat of another Nature, we should be tempted by this Expression, to think that
our Monarch had, like Henry King of Castile, got some body else to lie with his
Queen, seeing he was not able to get her with Child himself; but if that had
been the Matter, there had been no need of the Queen's being so very
Circumspect in her Behavior, nor of making use of the Ingenuity of her
Country, to Counterfeit a Big-Belly, but it was plain that a King of Clouts, in
the strictest sense, was to be Paum'd upon the Nation, and that was the true
Reason which made all this Precaution Necessary.

We are at a Loss, to understand, whether by the Last Sentence, viz. Which can
never be but by this means, the Author understood, that the Popish Religion
could never be Established in England without such a Successor; or that there
was no other way to procure a Successor but by this means: If it be the Latter,
then it is a plain demonstration, that they knew the Queen to be Impotent as
well as the King, or otherwise they might have made use of the King of Castiles
Means abovementioned, which the Goodness of the Cause, and her Majesty's
Italian Ingenuity, would soon have persuaded her to; but if it be the former,
then we hope it will open the Eyes of our Protestant Iacobites, and convince
them, that the Chief Thing aimed at by this Intrigue, was the overthrow of the
Protestant Religion.

But the Concluding Paragraph gives us the Finishing Stroke, viz. He was afraid
of those Heretics that were about the Queen. Why what is the Danger from those
Heretics? why truly they suspected, that the Queen, like the Grecian-Horse,
was Big, with Designs against our Troy; but they, poor Souls, were attended
with Cassandra's Fate, viz. They were not believed till the Plot discovered it
self: but if there had been no Imposture Designed, Why should they be in such a
Mortal dread of the Heretics; Could they kill, with a bare Look, like the
Basilisk? Might not the Queens naked Breast and Belly have been exposed to the
View of the Heretical Ladies without any danger? Might not such Persons have
been present at the Labor, and have been admitted to see the Child actually
delivered from the Queen's Body? Or was it below the Queen of England to have
been Delivered on a Pallat-Bed in the view of the next Heiress, any more than
it was below the late Queen of France to be Delivered of the Present King upon
a Pallat-bed, the Duke of Orleance, who was the next Heir, being an Eyewitness.

But the Case is plain, the Protestants who were concerned in Conscience and
Interest to be strict observers, were more likely to discover the Imposture
then others; and therefore it was necessary they should be put out of the way.

So that we have the True Reason from Mr. Delabadies Pen, why no Protestant
Lady was ever Admitted to View the Queen's Breasts, and try the Reality of her
having Milk, either before, or after the Pretended Birth; and that same is the
Reason why no Ladies of the Reformed Religion were ever admitted to see, or
feel her Belly: and, in short, this unfolds the Mystery of all those
Precautions made use of to Amuse the World, and to prevent a Discovery, as her
different Reckonings, the keeping of the Place of her Lying-In uncertain, and
the Methods taken to have all her Physicians and Servants absent at the Time of
her Pretended Delivery, except those concerned in the Intrigue: And for that
very same reason it was that she pretended to be delivered in Bed Covered, and
that the Protestant Ladies might have no opportunity to satisfy themselves, it
was Ordered, that the King and Council should be present in the Room when all
things were prepared for the Imposture, that so there should be a necessity of
the Queen's being covered and a Plausible Reason why the Ladies should not
desire the contrary: and by this means it was impossible that they could be
either Eyewitnesses of the Birth, or actually discover the Cheat.

We come now to Examine the Arguments advanced by the Author of the Pamphlet,
Entitled, The Truest Account of Mr. Fuller's Discovery of the True Mother of
the Pretended Prince of Wales, Born the 10th of June, 1688* by a Person of
Quality. But before we touch on the Particulars, it is necessary that the
Author should be a little Unmaskt.

He pretends, Page 1. That the Succession of the CROWN is otherwise Legally and
Sufficiently Secured against any Title or Plea from the said Prince, and that
it may reasonably be thought, that the Noise some Little Writers have lately
made about this Affair, has proceeded only from some sordid desire of Lucre, by
the Sale of their Copies, and of rendering themselves Popular and Gracious with
the Unthinking Mob, rather than out of any Zeal to Serve the Government.

And, Page 5. That the Persons supposed, or declared our Enemies, have True
Faults enough to employ our Censures, and therefore it is neither a part of
Generosity, nor Christian Charity, to charge 'em with uncertain Suspicions, or
any thing but what will bear the Test of a Visible Proof. All this is only an
Amusement, by which the Author would Impose upon the World, as if he were no
Enemy to the Present Government; and that he had only undertaken this Province
out of a respect to Truth; but they must be very silly Birds indeed, who are
caught with such Chaff: The whole design of this Pamphlet is to fix a Note of
Injustice upon the present Government, as having charged such things upon the
late King, as he was never guilty of, and particularly in relation to this
Counterfeit Prince.

We come now to consider his Arguments, which are, page 1. That Whether the
Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales were Legitimate or Supposititious, has
not yet been thought a Question worthy enough to be examined by public
Authority, Which is a downright untruth; for the Late King James, thought it
worthy to be proved by such depositions as he was able to procure, and to have
the said Depositions, how Lame and Defective soever, entered on a public Record
in Chancery; as our Author owns himself, page 5. and 22. and that they were
published by Authority, just before the Revolution, page 20. By which its
apparent, that the Question was thought worthy of a Decision on his side, by
all the authority that he was Master of, which does naturally imply that the
truth of the matter was questioned by some Authority or other, and that it was
really so, is plain to the View of the World by the Prince of Oranges
Declaration, wherein he desired that the Examination of this Question might be
referred to a free Parliament; and this he was empowered to demand by the
Authority of our Laws, according to which his Princess was the presumptive
Heiress to our Crown. But King James durst not adventure to bring the matter to
this Touchstone, and therefore its apparent that instead of alleging, that
this Question has not been thought worthy enough to be examined by public
Authority, our Author ought to have said, that the late King James durst never
submit the matter to such an Examination.

But we shall suppose the Gentleman's meaning to be this, that neither the
Convention nor any of the Parliments, since the Revolution, have thought the
matter worthy their Examination. And if it be so, it is the less for the Credit
of his Party, for then it must of necessity follow that they thought the matter
so palpable that it needed no further Enquiry.

But if he mean that the Parliament or Convention ought to have made a scrutiny
into this affair, before they had proceeded to the settlement of the Crown: He
may be pleased to consider, that they were not under the least obligation to do
so, for the late King had so much diffidence of the Justice of the English
Nation; that he durst not trust them with the Determination of the point, but
immediately sent to France his Queen with her pretended Son, Nurse, Midwife,
and other Servants, who must have been examined if the matter had been
submitted to their Enquiry, and having, in stead of calling a free Parliament,
according to the Princes desire, recalled the Writs for Summoning of one, which
he had endeavored to make for his Interest, and then withdrawn in person from
the Kingdom, the succeeding Convention, and following Parliaments, had all the
reason in the World to take it pro confesso, that he owned the Imposture, and
therefore there was no reason that they should give themselves any further
trouble about it.

The Gentleman is likewise desired to Consider, that the Late K. James, had by
the methods abovementioned rendered any such Examination wholly impracticable;
for if the Parliament had been entrusted with such a National Concern, the
Queen, the Child, and all the Deponents, then in being, ought to have been
personally present, that they might have answered such Interrogatories, as the
Wisdom of the Nation should have thought fit to propound to them, but whereas
instead of ordering it so, the Late King sent the principal persons out of the
way, who could best have attested the Reality of the Birth, or of the
Imposture; it is an Argument sufficient to convince an Indifferent person, that
there were some deeds of Darkness in the Case, which could not abide the Test
of an Examination.

If it be answered that the Parliament however ought to have summoned those
Witnesses to appear before them, or at least to have Examined such as Remained
behnid. We Reply that the Late K. James having thought it his Interest to carry
off the Witnesses, would certainly never have suffered them to come, for that
had been a direct owning the Convention, Parliaments Authority and Power, to
examine and decide that Question which he would never have submitted to, tho
they had been called by himself, and much less when they were called by
another; and therefore it had been very imprudent in them to have deferred the
Settlement of the Nation upon that account, especially seeing the Late King did
never desire that they should make an Enquiry into that affair; and as to the
Examining of the Witnesses that were left behind, it was to no purpose, seeing
the most material Witnesses were carried beyond Sea, so that it if it should
have happened upon the Cross Examination of those that were left here, that the
Imposture should have been discovered, the party would still have raised a
Clamor that Justice was not done them, because the most material Witnesses
were absent.

Our Author, page 5. Says, he will now lay before us, Some proofs of another
nature from a numerous Troop of Honorable Eyewitnesses, whose Testimony is on
public Record, and which, tho contradicted by Mr. Fuller and his Secretary;
yet never was retracted and much less Condemned, nor any other Equivalent
Contradictory Testimony entered as yet in the like Records against it, these all
unanimously declare the Late Queen to be his true Mother. A very plausible
story, and a handsome skreen indeed to cover the Imposture, but will no more
abide the Test of an Examination, than the pretended Birth; The Gentleman's
Confidence is truly superlative to impose upon us in this manner, as if the
Depositions imported that the Deponents, been made by such as were all of 'em
Eyewitnesses of the Prince's Birth, when by the same depositions it is plain
and evident, that the Queen was covered in her Bed, and pretended to be so
delivered, so that it was morally impossible for any of them to be
Eyewitnesses of the delivery; and this the Gentleman may soon be convinced of,
if he do but cast his Eye on the very first of his Depositions, which is, that
of the Countess of Sunderland; wherein we are told, that the Midwife pulled her
Ladyship by the Coat, which was the sign agreed on betwixt them, to let her
know that it was a Son, which had been altogether Needless if the Countess had
been an Eyewitness; and it is plainer still by the reason of the private Sign,
which was, that the Queen had charged the Midwife not to let Queen Dowager know
presently, whether it was a Son or a Daughter, so that neither the Countess of
Sunderland, nor yet the Queen Dowager, whose Religion and Character entitled
her to a pretense of seeing all that could be seen, were Eyewitnesses of the
Birth, tho present all the time of the pretended Labor. Hence then it appears,
that our Author does plainly equivocate in a Jesuitical manner, for the support
of his Popish Cause, for every body will easily perceive the difference betwixt
being Eyewitnesses, that a Child lately Born was taken out of the Bed from the
Queen, where she lay covered; and being Eyewitnesses that the Child was really
Born of the Queen's Body.

Then whereas he says that they do all Unanimously upon Oath declare the late
Queen to be his true Mother, it is notoriously false. There are many of 'em
indeed who talk of the Queens being Delivered, but that proceeded only from the
common Idea which all Mankind form to themselves in such cases, when they see
or hear of a Woman's being in Childbed, but that they could justly depose upon
Oath, That the Queen was his true Mother, was morally impossible, seeing they
were not Eye Witnesses of his being Born of the Queen's Body.

As to their Evidences never being retracted, we know no reason why it should
be expected, many of the Witnesses were so devoted to the Cause as Wilks Iurini
de Labadie, etc. That to make use of the common Expression, they would swear
through an Inchboard to serve it; and as for that part of the Evidence which
relates to the seeing of the Queen's Shift wet with Milk, and a Child taken out
of the Bed from her, there is no need of retracting it, for no body questions
the Truth of it; as to the Milk, it might either be Counterfeit or real,
without prejudice to our Cause, it being no extraordinary Phenomenon in Nature
for those to have Milk who have had no Children for several Years, tho there is
more reason to suspect a Counterfeit in this Case, and as to the Child there is
no doubt of it, being taken out of the Queen's Bed, but all the question is how
it came there. The Author tells us, page 8. in Mrs. Dauson's Depositions, That
the Queen was wholly left alone immediately before her (pretended) Labor, and
that while she was in her imaginary pains, she saw the Fire carried into the
Queen's Room in a Warming-Pan to warm the Bed, though all agree that the Pan
was covered; and the Author knows the Report which did then Universally obtain,
that the Child was brought in the same from a neighboring Apartment; and now
that Mr. Fuller has Discovered Mrs. Mary Greys being brought to bed in the
Narrow Gallery, between the Queen's Apartment and the Great Chapple at the very
same time, there is no room left to doubt but her Child was conveyed to the
Queen's Bed; and if there was not some such abominable Cheat in Hand, why
should the Queen have been left alone in such adangerous condition as she was
then pretended to be in? Why should the King have gone to the other side of the
House with all the Men? Why should all her own Servants be sent to the Chapel,
as if there had been no reason to attend upon the Queen, but that the Imposture
might be carried on with the more secrecy by the few that were to be Actors in
the Intrigue.

What other Reason can there be assigned for the Queens sudden Removal to St.
James's, and that also in the Night; and why there was no more public
Provision made for her Lying In, and that it was not so much as talked of, or
seemingly apprehended by her Servants that very Morning, in so much that they
were all sent from about her, but because they could not be certain whether
Mrs. Gray should bring forth a Dead or a Living Child, or a Son, or a Daughter,
till the very Critical Minute; that so if it had either been a Female or a Dead
Child, they might have found some other way either to carry on the Imposture,
or drop it at that time, but as soon as Mrs. Gray was delivered of a Boy, then
all of a sudden the Queen's pretended Labor comes on: We don't know what de
facto proof would satisfy our Author, but certainly all those things, together
with the Queens being covered in Bed, and that neither of the Princesses nor
their Deputies, nor none of the Privy Counselors, nor Ladies, Protestants, or
Papists, were suffered to be the Eye Witnesses of the Child's being actually
taken out of her Body, as they ought to have been, considering the strong and
Violent suspicion there was of a Cheat, I say, that all those things being
Considered, it is as strong a proof of the Imposture, at least, as his
Depositions are of the Real Birth, for which there is but one single Witness
who swears positive, and that is the Midwife; a begotted Papist, and a Tool
fitted for the design, so that he has no reason to object against the single
Testimony of Mr. Fuller, when the Title of their pretended Prince has no more
but one to support it, and that also the Evidence of such an one whose
Testimony cannot be revived in a civil Cause. We would moreover, desire our
Author to reconcile the Contradiction between the depositions of the said Mrs.
Wilks and the Lady Bellasis, the former swears that she cut The Child's Navel
string in Bed, and that as soon as it was cut, the Child cried; The latter
swears, that she saw the Child taken out of the Bed with the Navel-string
hanging to his Belly; and opening the Receiver, saw it was a Son, and not
hearing the Child cry, and seeing it a Little black, she was afraid it was in a
Convulsion fit. Now this Lady deposes she stood behind the Midwifes Chair, and
therefore it is strange she should not have heard the Child cry, as well as the
Midwife. But for these things, we refer to the Complete History of the
pretended Prince of Wales, where the depositions are considered more at Large.

Then as to the Testimonies being on public Record* He must give us leave to
tell him, that there can be no less laid on that Examination, where the King
was Defendant, the Papists Maintainers, so that His Majesty sat as Judge, and
the Popish Defendants were examined for themselves, and none to interrupt them.

By that same Rule which the party think his present Majesty, and the
Parliament were obliged to have summoned the Witnesses who made those
depositions, in order to have made an Enquiry into that affair, the Late King
was obliged to have made public Proclamation, that all who know any thing
concerning the matter should come and depose upon Oath, such their knowledge,
with his Royal promise to Indemnify and not molest them, and the Examination
ought to have been made in presence of the two Princesses, and the Princes
their Husbands, who should have had Liberty to put such Cross questions to the
Evidence as they thought fit. But nothing of this being done, and the Late King
having also declined to submit the Enquiry into the whole affair unto a free
Parliament, our Author must give us leave to retain our suspicion;
notwithstanding his strenuous endeavors to amuse the World with his Numerous
Train of Eyewitnesses. The Instance of a forged Bond from a Gentleman in
Gray's Inn, to his Laundress after he was Dead, and to which the Witness swore
positively at first, pleads strongly for the necessity of Cross
Interrogatories, seeing upon the Rebound the same Witnesses who swore that they
saw him sign the Bond, did afterward discover that it was by a Pen put in his
hand, and guided by another after he was Dead.

Then as to their Testimonies never being condemned, nor any other
contradictory equivalent Testimony entered, it is plain from what is already
said, that King James has rendered that impracticable in ordinary course of
Law, nor is it indeed necessary. Our Author being a Person of Quality, cannot
be ignorant that the Imposture designed by the former Queen Mary, was never,
for any thing we know, condemned by Public Authority. Nor did Queen Elizabeth
cause any contradictory equivalent Testimony to be entered against it, and yet
the Truth of the Imposture is generally believed, nor would it have failed of
coming as great a Length as this, if Philip II. had not been of a more generous
temper than James II. and Lewis XIV.

It was certainly much better Founded than this last Imposture, for not only
the Privy Council sent Orders abroad to make Prayers for the Child, but the
Parliament was so far imposed upon as to enter into the consideration of
Provisions for the Child, which was far greater Circumstance of the Reality of
the Pregnancy, than any thing that can be pretended to in this of the Last
Prince of Wales, and therefore iti snot to be wondered at that so many Lords and
Ladies should be deceived in this case, seeing they were not allowed to see the
Actual Delivery, and so they have rendered the Birth of their supposed Prince,
for ever incapable of being proven that way by any but the Tool of a Midwife,
who cannot be admitted as a Witness in Law, so that all the proof which they
can pretend to now is only that the Child was taken out of the Queen's Bed,
etc. whereas all this might have been prevented had the Princess of Denmark, or
any other Protestant Ladies been allowed to see the Child taken out of the
Queen's Body.

It is also observable, that the former Queen Marys Imposture was managed in
the same manner, for none during her pretended bigness was admitted, on behalf
of the Lady Elizabeth, to view her Breasts or Belly, and several persons were
put out of favor and discarded for speaking plainly in the Case, there being a
General suspicion amongst Protestants then, as there was now, as appears by
Bakers History, and Foxes Acts and Monuments; it must be owned that Queen Marys
Game was much harder to play then the Late Queens, because King Philip was an
utter Enemy to the Imposture, but it cannot be so said of the Late King James,
for it is evident that he was a Zealot in it.

It may be objected, that Queen Mary Tudors design having miscarried, there was
no need of making any enquiry into that affair, or of entering a Contradictory
Testimony against it. We answer that it is true, there was not the same need as
in the present Case, yet if the matter could have been detected; It must be
owned that it would have been of great use, and a convincing instance to future
Ages, that the Papists think no means unlawful, how wicked soever, if they can
any way subserve to promote their Church, for this supposed Pregnancy was by
the Privy Council ascribed to providence, and the Divine care of Christ's only
flock, for the throwing down of the Protestant Heresy, and the Physicians,
Ladies of Honor, etc. Justified the Queens conception as to all signs, so that
it would have certainly been of very great use at that time, and have tended
much to bring the Popish Idolatry into disrepute, if the methods of the
Imposture, how they raised her Belly, and how they imposed upon the Privy
Council and Parliament, had been fully displaid.

And therefore seeing the Particulars of that Imposture, tho allowed to be one,
on all hands, never came to Light, nor that none of the Cabal did ever confess
it on their Death beds, or otherwise; we are not to wonder if this Intrigue
should never be fully discovered, especially now that they have prevented the
Evidence of Mrs. Mary Gray, who there is all the Reason in the World to believe,
was the true Mother of our pretended Prince.

Our Author after having finished his account of the Depositions tells us, page
22. That none of the Witnesses were under any force, neither were they all of
one Religion, yet they unanimously gave in their Testimony upon Oath, and
suffer it without any Contradiction to be publicly Recorded in the Court of
Chancery, as their standing Testimony, that the Late Queen Mary, was the true
Mother of the pretended Prince of Wales.

To all which it is answered, that their not being all of one Religion, is
nothing at all to the Advantage of his Cause; for it must be owned to our
shame, that there are a sort of Protestants in England as bad, nay, worse than
the Papists themselves; Charnock, King, Keys, Rookwood, Louick, Parkins,
Friend, and Cranborn, were not all of one Religion, yet they were all in one
Design against the Laws and Religion of the Nation; and it is obvious to any Man
that peruses their Trials and last Speeches, that such of them as professed
themselves to be Protestans, were a great deal the worse fMen and Christians,
than those of 'em that Died Papists, and we have a very late Instance of one
who calls himself a Protestant, and a very devout one, who forswore himself at
his Trial, and denied such things with the most dreadful of Imprecations, which
he has since Confessed to be true.

Then as to the Witnesses being under no force, it is as little to the purpose,
They were all of one Faction, a very few of them excepted, and so willing to
promote the Design, that there was no need to force them to an Attestation, and
whereas he will have it, that they gave their Unanimous Testimony upon Oath,
That the Queen was the true Mother, he will find it otherwise upon a second
perusal of the Depositions, as has been already noted, They only Swear what
they heard and saw, but not one of them Deposed, That they were Eye Witnesses
of the Birth, though our Author has the Confidence to say so again and again.
-- And upon the whole it is demonstrable, that of all the thirty seven
Witnesses, there is only the Widwife who Swears to the thing it self, and all
the rest swear only to Circumstances, which being his own Exception against Mr.
Fullers Evidence, page 23. He must needs allow it to be as Valid against
theirs. He alleges, Ibid, that most of the Witnesses were of high quality, and
that others of them had intimate knowledge in the truth of the Fact. As to their
Quality we shall say nothing; but certainly Judith Wilks, when she gave in her
Evidence at the Chancery Bar, did not appear like one who deserves that
Character, and it was indeed observable that she went at other times richly
Apparelled, yet then she came habited in a Green Apron, and a Tattered Scarf,
that her seeming Simplicity and Meanness might create a belief in the
Spectators, that she was neither capable of managing such an Intrigue, nor fit
to be entrusted with it; and she being the only Witness who Swears home, and
having no pretensions to Quality, that big word is of no significancy to our
Author.

But because we would not be understood to reflect upon those of Quality, or
were undoubtedly of the Protestant Religion, and yet made use of as Evidence in
this Case; we desire it may be observed, that let their Probity and Quality be
never so Eminent, matters were so ordered that they were not allowed to be
Witnesses of the Birth; but having been then at Court, they could neither
handsomely nor safely refuse to give an Account of what they heard and saw when
the King desired it: But as we have already said, the Examination was neither
fairly nor impartially managed. Nor durst any of them, but with the hazard of
their Lives, have at that time said any thing which could Administer the least
Ground of Suspicion, and tho we will grant our Author that none of 'em were
under any force, yet he cannot pretend but they had cause enough of fear; and
whereas he alleges that others of the Witnesses had intimate knowledge in the
truth of the fact: It is a Notorious falsehood, for none of 'em pretend to it
but the Popish Midwife.

His ridiculing the Escape, Examination and Tragical fate of Mrs. Gray, is but
a very ordinary piece of Wit. Does he think that Lewis XIV. and Mary of Modena
are persons of such a Refined Honor and tender Conscience, that they would
scruple the Murder of such an Insignificant woman as Mrs. Gray, when it is plain
to the World that their boundless Ambition and Zeal for Idolatry, has involved
Europe in Blood and Flames? Was it of no Concernment to those two persons, to
prevent the discovery of the horrid Imposture by such a Material Evidence? Was
it below the French Kings Grandeur, to Enquire whether her escape had been
favored by the Prince of Oranges Friends, as we are told by Mr. Fuller they
did at first suspect it to have been? Is Lewis XIV's. Conscience, which is so
much hardened with Blood and Destruction, that it can digest the Assassination
of Sovereign Princes, become so very tender of Late, that it cannot away with
the Blood of a private Woman? Or is it reasonable to think that they would
trust this poor Creature to our Authors Oublies, when they had beforehand
Condemned her to perpetual Oblivion? Were not Coleman and Plunket hanged to
prevent telling of Tales, and what reason can our Author assign, why Mrs. Gray
should have more favor? Or supposing she should have escaped into England, and
there made a discovery, does our Author think that his Extraordinary Invention
of Charging it as a Forgery of the Prince of Orange, and his Friends, would
have satisfied the World, and was it not more wisely done in the French King
and his Messalina, seeing our Author has put us in mind of it, to prevent the
occasion of such a superlative piece of Wit, then to venture the need of making
use of it? Might it not have been possible for Mrs. Gray, if she had got into
England, to have directed us to other Concurrent Testimonies to have
strengthened her own? How does this person of Quality know that she could not
have brought the true Father, as well as the true Mother for a Witness, or why
may we not suppose that Mrs. Gray could have quoted such Circumstances, as
might have turned a great part of his thirty six Circumstantial Witnesses,
against his supposititious Prince? Tho our Author could not or would not
foresee such dismal Consequences, of Mrs. Greys Elopement from the fat Bellied
Monks, to whom she was married, yet Lewis XIV. and his Messalina could see
further, and therefore rather than the whole Catholic cause should suffer, it
was expedient that one Woman should Perish, and thus his Messalina.

Ne Scelerata fit, facit Scelus. The Gentleman is so hugely addicted to the
Apocrypha, that none but Apocryphal Authors will down with him; In the
beginning he attacks us with the Noble Zorobabel, and he brings up his Rere
with the Cheva Lier Lestrange, but we would have our Author to know that tho
Sir Roger was formerly quoted from the Pulpit, the Commissioners of Enquiry,
who were employed to examine whether his works were to be found in the Canon,
have made an unanimous return of non est Inventus; and thus we bid our Author
Farewell.

FINIS.

