Presbyterian Inquisition; As it was lately Practiced against the PROFESSORS OF
THE COLLEGE OF EDINBURGH. August and September. 1690.

In which, the Spirit of Presbytery and their present Method of Procedure, is
plainly discovered, Matter of Fact by undeniable Instances cleared, and Libels
against particular Persons Discussed.

For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against
me, they have spoken against me with a lying tongue: They compassed me about
also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a Cause. Ps. 109. v.
23. LICENSED,

Nov. 12. 1691.


LONDON, Printed for J. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball in Cornhill. 1691.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHen the Reader considers what is said in the following Sheets, he will find
the Title exactly agreeable to the Book; and if that seem odious, it is not to
be Imputed to the Author of this Narrative, but to one of the Visitors; who in
the face of the Court, Declared, That their Method of Procedure was an
Inquisition; and the plain Truth is, he was so Happy in the choice of the Word,
that it would have been unreasonable to have changed it.

The Reader is also desired to take Notice, that by the Witnesses mentioned in
the last Paragraph of the Preface; are to be understood, only such as were
Examined against those Masters of the College, whose Trials are not yet
Published; for all the Art and Industry of the Party, could not so much as
procure one Witness to Appear against the two Doctors, whose Libels, Answers,
and Sentences, are here Related.

THE PREFACE.
I Was present at Edinburgh when the University there was lately Visited by the
Presbyterian Party, and was Witness to all that past at the Trials of the
Principal and other Masters; and the Accounts of it having since fallen into my
hands, and I knowing them to contain nothing but Matter of Fact and down right
Truth, thought fit now to Publish them; not to Continue, or Excite Faction or
Revenge, but to Vindicate Innocent Men, from the Calumnies and Slanders that
have been of late Charged upon them. If the Presbyterians had not Industriously
propagated abroad, the Idle and Impertinent Stories they invented at home,
these Papers had never seen the Light: It is indeed with great Reluctance, that
I give the Transactions of that late Visitation any room in my Memory; but
since the Clamours of a Factious Party constrain Men to defend themselves: It
is but just to return such Answers as may undeceive well meaning People, and
expose the Injustice of that Inquisition: It being so easy a thing to make it
appear, That the Masters of that Universities greatest Crimes, were their
Places and Preferments.

Because in the following Papers, mention is often made of a New Test, that the
Parliament appointed for all University Men; it may not be improper once for
all here in the beginning, to tell what that Test was; for this then let it be
remembered: That the 17 Act Parl. 1. Sess. 2. July 4. 1690. Earl Melvil
Commissioner, appoints; That no Master or Professor in any College or School,
shall be allowed to continue in the Exercise of his Function, but such as do
Acknowledge and Profess, and shall Subscribe the Confession of Faith
Westminster Confession.
, Ratified and Approved by this present Parliament; and also, shall Swear the
Oath of Allegiance to their Majesty's; and withal, shall be found to be of
Pious, Loyal, and Peaceable Conversation, and of good and sufficient
Literature, and Abilities, for their Respective Employments; and submitting to
the Government of the Church now settled by Law -- and are well Affected to
their Majesty's, etc.

Again, by Act 38. Sess. 2. Parliament. 1. Gulielm. and Mari. July 22. 1690.
Melvil Commissioner, all persons who are bound to Swear the Oath of Allegiance,
are also obliged to Subscribe this Assurance, as they call it.

I A. B. Do in the Sincerity of my Heart, Acknowledge and Declare, that their
Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, are the only Lawful, Undoubted
Soveraings, King and Queen of Scotland, as well de jure, as de facto, and in
the Exercise of the Government: And therefore I do sincerely and faithfully,
promise and engage, that I will with Heart and Hand, Life and Goods, Maintain
and Defend Their Majesty's Title and Government, against the Late King James,
his Adherents, and all other Enemies; who, either by open or secret Attempts,
shall Disturb or Disquiet Their Majesty's in the Exercise thereof.

These were the Instructions which the Parliament by their Acts gave to the
Visitors; and a considerable number of them being Presbyterian Ministers, were
not wanting in their Diligence to screw up every thing to the greatest height,
against the Episcopal Masters, and to make them feel the severe effects of
Presbyterian Power and Malice; as appeared by a Printed Warrant, or rather
Proclamation, in their own Names, in which, they Require and Command,

Messengers to pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, upon a Mercet day,
betwixt Ten and Twelve a Clock in the Forenoon, and immediately thereafter, to
the most patent Gate of the University of Edinburgh, and sicklike to pass to
the Market Crosses of Edinburgh, Hadingtoun, Duns, Green-Law, and Lawder,
Jedburgh, Selkirk, Peebles, Linlithgow, and Stirling, and there at after open
Proclamation, etc. To Summon, Warn, and Charge, the Principal, Professors,
Regents, and all Others, Masters of the University of Edinburgh, and
Schoolmasters Teaching Latin in the said Town, etc. -- To Compear before the
Committee of the said Visitors, etc. -- The 20 day of August next to come, at
Ten a Clock in the Forenoon, to Answer and Satisfy the said Committee, etc.

And likewise the said Commissioners, do hereby Require the said Messengers, at
the same time and place, and in the same manner, to Summon, and Warn, all the
Leidges, who have any thing to object against the said Principal, Professors,
Regents, Masters of the said Universities, and Schoolmasters -- To Compear
before the said Committee, the said day and place, to give in Objections
against the Principal, Professors, Regents, and others aforesaid -- Requiring
in like manner, the Messengers, Executors of this present Warrant, not only to
Read Publicly the same, and the Citation to be given them, at the said Market
Crosses and College Gate; but also to leave Printed Copies thereof, affixt
upon the Market Crosses of the Head Burghs, and upon the most patent Gates of
the said College. Lastly, Requiring the said Messengers to Return the same,
with formal Executions and Indorsations thereof, duly Subscribed by them
before Subscribing Witnesses -- For doing of all which, these Presents shall be
their sufficient Warrant. Given at Edinburgh, July 25. 1690. And Ordains these
Presents to be Printed, Extracted forth of the Records, by me

Tho. Burnet.

1. Here you see a vast deal of Pomp and Parad, to Usher in this INQUISITION;
open Proclamation was made at Market places, a sufficient indication of what
might be expected afterward from them: Alt the Leidges are Warned, and
Summoned to come in, and make what Objections they can, against the Masters;
sure if the Visitors want Men to Accuse these Masters, it cannot be ascribed to
their want of Industry to procure them.

2dly. The great Zeal these Commissioners had to purge the Universities from
Malignants As they are pleased to call all Episcopal men.
, made them upon all occasions stretch the words of their Instructions, far
beyond their ordinary and usual signification. When some enquired whether by
that part of the Test, which requires to submit to Presbytery, were meant only,
a quiet and peaceable living under that Government, or if it imported any thing
farther: Some of the Commissioners plainly told, that by that Clause of the
Test, was also meant, That every Master should tbereby Declare the Presbyterian
Government, to be preferable to any other whatsoever, and the only Government
left by Christ and his Apostles in the Church, and warranted by Scripture.

By the same Spirit of Prebyterian Moderation, some of the Commission Declared;
that by the Acknowledging and Subscribing the Westminster Confession of Faith;
is not only meant an owning of it, in so far as it is a System of Theology
conform to the Holy Scriptures, and one of the best designed for distinguishing
the Reformed Church, from these Heretics and Schismatics that now disturb it;
but that it also imports, an absolute owning of every particular Article
thereof, as the only and most perfect Confession, that has been or can yet be
composed; and that therefore it was to be Acknowledged, Professed, and
Subscribed, without any Limitation, Restriction, or Reservation whatsoever.

The Visitors might have been well assured, That no Master or Professor of any
Conscience, who had been Episcopally Ordained, or acquainted with the Primitive
Constitution of the Church, could any ways comply with Conditions so Rigid and
Severe.

It had been soon enough then, for the Presbyterians to have fled to their old
Experimented way of Libelling, when the Masters had stood their ground against
that New Test, which Originally had no end, but to make vacant places. But the
Preachers of that Party (Members of the Visitation) judged it more convenient,
Boldly and Indefatigably to Calumniate the Professors, lest if they had been
turned out for mere and just Scruples of Conscience, the People should have
murmmured and complained; The Body of Mankind often believe the first and
loudest Reports, few of the People being capable, willing, or at leisure to
Examine the Truth of things, and since now the Faction had got the uppermost,
and had Power in their hand, they enquire into all things that might make the
Professors odious to the City or Nation, and thought fit to let them feel the
effects of their Rashness, if in all their Life time, they had been once spoke
against the Imposture or Enthusiasme of that Sect.

The Presbyterian Preachers (who earnestly wished to be Employed in the Toil
and Drudgery of this Affair) made it their Business to search into all the
Actions of the Professors Lives, especially such as were capable to be
Transformed into a Libel; and having the Assistance and Zeal of some of the New
Magistrates of Edinburgh, to second their Endeavors, it was easy to foresee
what Quarter they might expect, who differed from them: And this was no
difficult Province for Presbyterians to manage, considering the Nature of
their Discipline, and their present Constitution; The most innocent things have
two handles, and some Men industriously seize the worst: But because they
pretended to be most Accurate Reformers, they would therefore do their work
thoroughly, and strip their Opposers as bare of their Reputation and Good Name,
as of their Livelyhoods and Preferments; and having now got the Church's
Jurisdiction and Revenues into their hands, it was not safe for them to want
the Government and Psssession of the Seminaries of Learning: And therefore the
Presbyterians that Preached before the Parliament, never forgot to Exhort such
as were in Power speedily to Reform the Universities; which is no less in their
Language, than to plant them with Presbyterians; To accomplish this, it was
necessary to Represent the Masters of Universities under the Episcopal
Constitution, as very Ill Men, Enemies to the Godly, Socinians, Papists; now
the People could not discern when they spoke Contradictions, for though
Socinianism, and Popery, be two opposite Points of the Compass, yet some of
their Emissaries scrupled not, among the Gossoping Sisters, and at other more
Public Meetings, Viz. Dr. Monro.
to Accuse one and the same Person of both.

When the Government of the City of Edinburgh, was lodged in the hands of the
first and best order of Citizens and Gentlemen; the Masters of the College had
all the Encouragement that they themselves could wish; They lived in all
Tranquillity and Freedom during the Administration of Sir Magnus Prince and his
Predecessor, Sir Thomas Kennedy: They made it (both of them) their Business to
preserve the Order, Fabric and Revenues of that House; they omitted no
occasion of Supporting the Honor and Reputation of its Masters; as well as of
discouraging what ought to be reproved, and timously amended; whenever there
was the least ground for it. The Masters of the College in that Period, had
nothing to do but carefully to look after the Manners and Proficiency of their
Students; for the Countenance of the Magistrates and their generous
Inclinations to Propagate Learning, did so secure and guard the Professors,
against the little efforts of censorious and talkative Fanatics, that they
could not contrive how to be more happy in their Stations: For these Gentlemen
knew what an Ornament their University was to the City and whole Kingdom, how
necessary Freedom, Contentment, and Retirement are to the attainment of
Learning: and therefore they were so far from vexing and disturbing them, that
they heaped upon them all marks of Honor and Regard.

Others (shuffling themselves into the Magistracy under the Covert of such
Commotions as necessarily attend all great Revolutions) had not the same view
of things, They thought their Business was to Reform, though they knew not what;
and this Reformation was regulated by such Oracles as managed their Councils,
and the Responses were always given by Interest: Hence they seemed to mind
nothing so much as the disturbance of that Seminary: Sometimes they thought
that they might manage the Discipline of the House, without considering the
Masters; sometimes they thought they might by themselves, without the King
Although the ordering of Colleges be, as themselves acknowledge, an inherent
Prerogative of the Crown.
, or any formality of Trial, remove and displace them at their Pleasure;
sometimes they picked Quarrels with the Students, of purpose to accuse their
Masters: sometimes they would contrive odd and fantastic Schemes of
Discipline, and it is not easy to imagine into what freakish Humors, silly
Conceits, and little Tricks this Fancy metamorphosed it self in the space of
two Years. But those Attempts served only to make Citizens of the best Sense
and Quality, some of them to Laugh, and others to Lament, that the Professors
of the Liberal Sciences should be so treated by such illiterate Busybodies.
For generally the Citizens of Edinburgh are not only Affable, Kind and
Courteous to the Masters of that College, and to Learned Men in general; but
also very forward to promote the Interest of that House; The original Erection
whereof is owing to their Charity; and they have frequently since the first
Foundation, augmented its Revenues, Books and Curiosities: And there are but
few of them but retain a tender esteem of its great Worth and Advantage, and
the Escapes and Preposterous Dealing of some of them; in this Critical
Juncture, is not at all to be laid to the Charge of the Body of the People, who
have always valued the Masters of the College as they did the Education of
their Children, than which nothing is of greater consequence to themselves, or
the Societies in which they live: The Presbyterian Ministers, finding the
Endeavors of their Magistrates too slow to serve their ends; and that they
were frequently baffled in those little Skirmishes with the Masters, importuned
the Leading Men of the Party, to procure such an Act of Parliament as might
best serve their Designs against the Universities, Vid. Acts Parliament, Page
1. and 2.
and lest the Masters should Comply with the Civil Government, a New Test was
so ordered, that none but Presbyterians could comply with it, and even such, if
ever they had but submitted to Episcopacy, were not allowed to hold their
Places, but in a most precarious manner.

The Masters of Universities complain justly of two things. First, That they
were obliged to take Oaths that the rest of the Clergy of the Nation were not
bound to take. Whereas any Legal Test should reach all or none. Secondly, That
this Test should contain not only their Allegiance to the Civil Authority, but
also their hearty Submission to the Presbyterian Government and the new Model
of it in Scotland Which differs vastly, not only from all Presbyterians abroad,
but from all their own former Constitutions.
. Thus the Presbyterians were very sure, that if they did not thrust them out
by the First, they could not fail to send them Packing by the Second,
especially since the last Clause of the New Test obliged them to submit to
Presbytery, which is no lose than to give themselves up to all the Decisions of
the Consistory.

It was not to be expected but that the Presbyterians would quickly possess
themselves of the Universities, since the Ecclesiastical Government was lodged
in the hands of a few of them, by an Heteroclite kind of Prelacy never before
known in the Church Vid. Act of Parliament, Sess. 1. Gul. and Mar. Appointing
60 Presbyterians instead of 14 Bishops -- to Govern the Church of Scotland: by
an Arbitrary Power, whence there was no Appeal, no, not to the King himself;
. Yet it may be fairly presumed, that for their own Honor and Interest, they
should have vacated the Seminaries of Learning at least by degrees; and not
have pulled them down all at once: but the fiery Spirit of that Faction endures
no delays. Yet lest the People should find sault with their Precipitancy, they
were to manage their Game with some Plausible Pretenses: If any of the Masters
were observed to have had but any Kindness for the Order and Rites of the
Primitive Church, or ever to have but spoke slightingly of their New
Discipline; such were to be Expelled the College with Disgrace, clothed first
in Beast-Skins, and then exposed to the Rabble: Their Places and Preferments
were Sacrificed to Presbyterian Covetousness and Sacrilege, and their Honor
and Good Name, to their Vanity, Pride and Revenge; It was not enough to have
them removed, unless it was with Ostentation and Triumph. They would fain
persuade the present Generation, that they value the other World more than
their Neighbors do, but yet they never neglect any Methods, right or wrong, to
secure the Interests of this.

It was not unpleasant to some Spectators to behold at what pains the
Presbyterian Preachers were to patch up Libels against the Masters, going from
House to House, from one Company to another, enquiring into the most minute
Actions of their former Lives. Some of the Masters, Viz. D. M.
they were so keen against, as to run back the Inquisition, as far as their
Childhood, entertaining Persons of Quality with the Opinions and Erroneous
Conceits they alleged them then to have had. And besides that, they had the
true Art of Transforming the most laudable Practices, into suspicious Designs;
They pretend to pry into the Secrets of their Hearts, Accusing them as
Reprobate and Wicked Men, Popishly affected, Enemies to the Godly, Friends of
the Idolatrous Liturgy of the Church of England, and Despisers of all true
Piety and Devotion; for that to be sure is the Monopoly of their own gifted and
select Tribe.

This is the Mischievous and usual effect of Bigottry, it changes the Soul (the
luminous Part of Man) into a Dungeon of Passion, and Self-conceit, it debases
the Generous Spirit of Christianity, into Servility and Superstition, it blocks
up all the Avenues of the Mind; you may as well Preach to the River of Forth to
stop it is Current, as desire them to listen to calm Reasonings, to weigh the
Justice or Injustice of what they do against these of a different Opinion; Nor
is there any Sect upon Earth in whose actions the sad Effects of Prejudice and
Imagination are so legible as in this last Edition of Presbytery in Scotland.
They complain of all Degrees of Power when it is not in their own keeping: The
most innocent Commands of their Lawful Superiors are insupportable Grievances,
When K. C. II. immediately after their Murder of Archbishop Sharp, and
Rebellion at Bathwel Bridge Anno 1679. Granted them such an ample Indulgence,
as even to Enjoy Ecclesiastical Benefices, only upon the Condition of but
Living Peaceably; for which they were to find Surety under Penalty of about 330
Pound Ster. Those few who Embraced the King's Goodness in this, were Declaimed
against by the whole Faction, as Deserters of God and his Cause, and a Book was
Printed and Published that same year, (by the Approbation of the whole Party,
as the Author says) to prove that to engage in or observe such a Condition, is
Inconvenient, Scandalous, and Sinful. They pretended the State could neither
make Peace nor War, without the Interposal of the Kirk, for it fell under their
Consideration, as a Case of Conscience: Act and Declaration against the Act of
Parliament: July 28. Anno 1648.
and the Canons of the Universal Church, are but Superstitious Encroachments
upon Tender Consciences: They Declaim perpetually against Arbitrary Power, and
yet nothing escapes their Cognizance; and they only are Judges of the
Punishment that every little Offense deserves; nay frequently, the most
Commendable Actions are made Offenses, for there is nothing so remote from
Ecclesiastical Censure, but what is hooked in by them, in Ordine ad Spiritualia.

This needs no Explication to such as have lived where their Discipline
prevails; when Religion and its Doctrines are made subservient to the Tyranny
and Caprice of Self-designing Men, it loses its Natural Beauty and Use; The
greatest Blessings of Heaven, are by the Wickedness of Men changed into Curses,
and the Light of the Gospel made to Truckle under the Designs of Darkness: The
Passions of Pride and Revenge that it designed to Mortify, are Advanced and
Encouraged, but the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, and then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and of good works,
without partiality, without Hypocrisy; it is sad to consider how much the
People are diverted from considering, Believing, and Contemplating, the Pure
and undisguised Design, Faith, and Morality of the New Testament, by Fooleries
and Novelties, that have no Natural Tendency, but to divide Christendom, and
corrupt the simplicity of that Faith once delivered to the Saints, and instead
of that Beautiful Worship, by which our Ancestors in the Primitive and Purest
Ages did Adore the Creator of Heaven and Earth, there is now introduced a new
Scenical incoherent Rapsodie; and all this under the pretense of a more
Illuminated State, and Progress of the Reformation: Just so the Donatists of
old destroyed the Power of Godliness, as well as the Ancient Forms. and Canons
of the Catholic Church, under the popular pretense of Reformation.

By the following Sheets, the Reader will clearly see a most remarkable and
undeniable instance, of the Partiality and Injustice of the Presbyterian Party,
and that they were fully determined right or wrong, to find such of the Masters
Guilty as were not of their way; a plain Evidence of this, is the Report they
made to the General Commission of the Visitation, in which the Reader will see
their affected Mistakes, and Malicious Method of Arguing; particularly in their
Report concerning Dr. Strachan Professor of Divinity, in the College of
Edinburgh; They insinuate, that the Doctor did either believe
Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation, both which determine positively the
manner of our Savior's Presence in the Holy Eucharist, because the Doctor had
sometimes said with Durandus, praesentiam oredo, modum nescio, but of this more
in its proper place. It had been a much more Creditable, Compendious, and
Ingenuous Method, to have turned out the Masters of the Episcopal Persuasion,
by one General Act, it being once determined that they should be Ejected, than
by so much Noise and Ceremony, first to bring them upon the Stage, then to kick
them off with all the Affronts and Indignities they could heap upon them; for
Malice it self could have done no more, as you may easily see by some of the
Malicious, Triffling, and False Things, objected against the Masters.

I cannot guess, why the Masters of the College of Edinburgh, should be
Treated otherwise than the Professors of other Colleges were: It Is true, that
City is the Center of the Nation, and the Schools there are most frequented,
and if they had not at first applied their utmost force against that place,
they could not so easily have removed them afterward, at least such a delay
would have put them to the pains of gathering new Libels; therefore they were
to push their Business with all Diligence and Vigor, nothing else but the
force of Interest and Malice could have made Reasonable Men venture upon such
Scurrilous Methods as they used and here are Narrated; Long Libels formed
against the Professors, but no Informer or Accuser made known, a Practice
peculiar only to Courts of Inquisition: And which, the Pagan Emperor Trajan,
thought so Inhumane and Barbarous, that he forbid this Method of Trial against
the Christians, whom yet the Persecuted; and therefore he Ordered Plinius
Secundus the Proconsul, to admit no such Unsubscribed Libels against the
Christians, because that this was a Custom of the worst Example, unaggrecable
to the Reign of Trajan, and to the common forms of Justice received in all
Nations Sine Auctore vero propositi Libelli nullocrimine locum habere debent,
nam and pessimi exempli, nec nostri saeculi est. Trajan. Plinio Ep. 98. inter
Ep. Plin. Cicil. 2d.
; for the Accused ought certainly to know his Accuser, lest he, or his
Malicious Associates, should shift the Scene and turn Witnesses; The Accuser
ought also to be obliged to prove his Libel under a Penalty So both the Civil
and the Scots Law require.
; It is very hard, to leave Men of Credit and Reputation to the Mercy of every
little Informer, who can slip his Collar when he pleases. I know nothing that
can so Disjoint and Embroil Humane Societies, as this unworthy sneaking
Practice; for this kind of Inquisition, is much more Grievous than that of the
Romanists, this only great difference being Remarkable, That the Severity of
the Popish Inquisition is tempered with Canons, and this of Ours, only
Regulated by the boundless Humor of a few Imperious Rabbis, Whose Actions
know no Law but the Covenant, and that no other end, but their Ecclesiastical
Tyranny.

It was easy to guess what the Sentence would be, when some of those
Presbyterian Ministers who were Judges, drudged so much to procure Libels: It
is true, the Committee for the College of Edinburgh, was for the most part
more deeply engaged to the Interest of Presbytery, than they who were sent to
Visit other Universities, yet some of them did so abhor this harsh and
preposterous Violence; that Persons of Honor and Integrity amongst them, (soon
perceiving their Assessors upon this Committee, were not to be guided by common
Forms of Justice) left their Meetings, and seldom or never again appeared;
such were the Earl of Louthian, Lord Secretary Dulrimple, L. Raith, Sir John
Dempster, etc. When once they retired, the Masters were left to wrestle with
all the Chicane, and affected Mistakes and Prejudices of then Sworn Enemies;
and because some of them did insist upon the same Arguments afterward at
London, which they had made use of at Edinburgh, therefore those Objections are
Represented in their own words, and their most plausible and successful Topics
fairly Examined: And since the Masters were not allowed sufficient time to make
their Defenses, but forced to precipitate their Answers to many particulars
which were jumbled together against them, and which they never heard of until
they were sisted before these Tribunals: I will therefore take care to pick up
all the Exceptions that came to my hand; and now, since the Answers must be
made Public, where I judge them defective or obscure to Strangers, I will
Enlarge and Explain them, and that so much the rather, because they thought
these Libels of such weight as to keep them upon Record in their Public
Registers.

Indced, if the Reputation of Innocent Men had been Assaulted, only by
spreading Reports and scattering idle Stories among the People, no Man needed
to have been at the pains to answer such whispers as fly only the in dark:
Innocence, and the good Nature of the Citizens of Edinburgh, would have
sufficiently defended the Masters against secret Reproaches and Calumny, but
now that they are allowed a place in the Public Records, it is but a piece of
Innocent Self-Defence, to expose the Weakness of those Arguments they laid such
stress upon, when the Presbyterian Preachers, who alone were most Active in
such Libels, practiced such an Arbitrary Inquisition upon the Theater of the
Nation, what is to be expected from them in the remote Corners of the Country?
where their Meetings are not overawed with the Presence of Persons of Quality,
where there is no check upon them, nor any Witnesses of their Extravagance, but
the Lay Elders, those Grave Noddies of their own Erection, a new set of
Presbyters of their special invention, without Mission or Ordination.

If the Presbyterian Government in our Nation, had been Tempered by a Modest
Dependence upon the State, there had been less place for such unreasonable
Oppressions and irremediable Confusions as are now too visible: Nor is it
possible to preserve the Peace of the Nation; if there lie no Appeal from the
Ecclesiastical Consistory: This was the most insufferable piece of Popery that
Christian Princes Groaned under before the Reformation, and therefore they
shook off this Yoke too Grievous to Them, and to Their Ancestors: This
Independent Discipline as it is managed by our Innovatours, is founded upon
such Ambition, and Arrogance, as is inconsistent with Reason, and the Innocent
Freedom of Humane Life, and the Prerogative Royal of Kings, and instead of
promoting Piety and Peace among Christians, increases only mutual Censurings,
Factions, Hatred, and Division, and what else is most opposite to the Spiritual
Tendency, Charity, and Purity of our Holy Religion.

But when they themselves look back upon all the steps and Pageantry of that
Visitation, they cannot but acknowledge they have missed some considerable part
of their Design; for the Masters they were most violent against, are as much
Beloved and Esteemed by their former Friends in the City of Edinburgh and
elsewhere, as ever: They did not think to keep their places in defiance of the
present Law, nor do they complain so much of the Illegality of the Sentence
against them, being there is now such a Law, as they could not comply with, but
they have Reason to complain, that there was such a Law made on purpose to turn
out some particular Persons, as the Contrivers threatened Twelve Months before
that Trial, They hoped (If they were not Treated like Christians and Scholars)
they might be allowed the Civilities due to Humanity, and the common forms of
Justice; now being this Account carries with it the undeniable Evidence of
particular Matters of Fact; The Reader may by it discern somewhat of the Spirit
of Presbytery, and of that Partiality and Hypocrisy, that animates their most
Solemn Proceedings.

It is not intended by this Preface to Insinuate, that all the Nobility and
Gentry, who were Named to Visit the Universities, by Act of Parliament, were
equally inclined to Faction and Injustice: It is certain, that many of them
were averse from such Severities, and particularly my Lord Carmichael President
of the Committee for Glascow, Treated the Principal Dr. Fall, and Subordinate
Masters there, with all the Civilities due to their Merit and Character; for
though the Cameronians in that place had prepared Libels against the Regents, yet
my Lord Carmichael rejected them with Indignation. And though the Masters of the
University of St. Andrews have been Examined with all Rigor and Severity (all
the Vintners and their Servants, and other Rabble at St. Andrews, being
Summoned to appear before the Committee, and made to Declare upon Oath, all
things that ever they heard or knew of the Masters of that University) yet no
Masters were treated as Malefactors, but the Professors of the College of
Edinburgh. It Is true, nothing but Civility and Discretion could be expected
from a Gentleman of my Lord Carmichael's Honor, Integrity and good Breeding.
And that any Persons of Quality were so ridiculously Zealous as to Glory in
their Severities against Men of Learning and Piety, is, I hope, to be ascribed
rather to the Prejudices of their Education, than to any Perverseness in their
Nature.

The Spirit of Presbytery has in it so much meanness and insolence, when it is
attended with Force and the Secular Arm, that it cannot so much as counterfeit
Civility; wherefore it is hoped that the Nation will speedily shake off this
Yoke, which neither they nor their Forefathers could ever bear.

Our Gentry are Men of good Sense and Education; and though in the Western Shires
some of them are biased toward this New and Pedantick Tyranny, yet it is not
possible to keep even them so much in the dark, as not to see the Novelty and
Vanity of Presbyterian Pretencies: And therefore since Presbytery began to
appear in its true Colors, they have lost the greatest part even of such of
them, as they had formerly deluded.

The Presbyterians from abroad have always spoke and written of the Episcopal
Constitution with respect and veneration, because they found that the Bishops
and their Adherents (especially in England) have been always the Glory and
Defense as well as first Promoters of the Reformation. But the through-pac'd
western Presbyterians, have lost all Thoughts of any other concern but of their
own Model; and though it never prevailed in its full force and tendency in any
other Church upon Earth, yet they must measure all Mankind by that Standard.
There is scarce a little ruling Elder A Ruling Elder is a Scripture word, but
the thing signified by it in the Presbyterian Language is not to be met with in
the Scriptures, a late Invention obtruded upon the World.
in the West of Scotland, but expounds the darkest Prophecies in Ezekiel,
Daniel and the Revelation, with relation to the Covenant and the Reformation
wrought by it. This is the great Secret of their Religion, the original spring
that sets all their Endeavors in motion. They are a Covenanted People, i.e.
linked and confederated together to advance and propagate their Faction and
Discipline, which they upon all occasions, Blasphemously call the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ. It is true, the Roman Domination is intolerable, but then to make
the People bow under the weight of it, They pretend to Infallibility: The
Presbyterians should follow them in this Pretense, as they do in the Severity
of their Procedures, that at least they might be Consequential; for they are as
impatient of Contradiction as the Jesuits, Witness Mr. Black. Vide Spotswood.
from whom they have borrowed most of their beloved Tenets, and Arguments by
which they endeavor to support them; Especially their opinion concerning
Kings, and the Independance of Clergymen upon the Secular Powers.

And because without extraordinary Appearances of Sanctity and Devotion, the
People cannot be wheedled into a belief of their Godliness and Honesty; they
confine the Name of the Godly only to themselves, as Papists do the Name of
Catholic to them: J. F.
And I have heard some of them say, That it was not possible the Power of
Godliness should prevail, but under Presbytery: If it be so, the World is much
mistaken; I wish with all my heart we had better Evidences of Their Piety, than
of late we have discerned: I am sure, and no less sorry, That some who advance
and support their Fuction at present in Scotland, are remarkably profligate
sensual and Scandalous Debauchees.

Had we no other Evidences of their unchristian and immortified temper, but
their late Injustice toward the Episcopal Clergy, we might be sufficiently
convinced of their ill Nature. Their Hypocrisy was never acted with less
Disguise, they are so barefaced in their illegal Proceedings, they leave off
to Counterfeit: They abuse the Power which is put in their hands, to that
degree, that their Partiality is become the Talk of many of their own
Adherents. Though the perverse Inclinations of the People, be no good Argument
(nay, that which Christianity is designed to subdue) yet really they have as
little Foundation in the Affection of the People, as they have in Scripture and
Reason; And this will appear upon the least search even into those places of
the Nation where they boasted that there was none to contradict them (I don't
mean the West) but some of the most eminent and populous Counties and Parishes
even be South Forth, what do they think of the Shires of the Mers and
Teviotdale, of the Parishes of Peebles, Dalkeith, Musselburgh and Aberlady,
etc. and which is yet more troublesome to their Wisdom, They are all convenient
Livings, and not far from Edinburgh. As for the Northern Country, we know what
Esteem they are like to have there, by their late Reception at Aberdeen, when
they want to offer the Gospel Their own Phrase, for no less distinction must be
made between them and those that differ from them, than that which is between
good Christians and unbaptized Heathens.
there, for since they must be attended with Troops, it is no good Argument, of
their having any great Foundation in the Affection of the People; but indeed,
the weapons of their warfare are only known to be mighty, because they are felt
to be Carnal.

Two Arguments I find lately insisted upon by some Patrons of that Party, to
prove that the general Inclination of that Kingdom is for Presbytery. They are
to be seen in P. 32. of a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A further Vindication, etc.

The first is, That the Bishops durst never venture upon the Calling of a
National Synod, even in that Period that Episcopacy stood by Law, lest some of
the Clergy might assault the very Order of Bishops, though most of them had
received Orders from their own hands.

To this I answer, That, if the Author of this Pamphlet is is persuaded, That
the most part of the Episcopal Clergy are for Presbytery, why then does he not
influence the Presbyterians, to receive them into the Government, especially
since he acknowledges that the Ministers cannot lawfully part with their share
of Ecclesiastical Power to any other. The Factions in the State, rather than
the Inclinations of the Clergy, was the Reason why the Bishops did not call a
National Synod. And if the Author thinks that the Scottish Clergy are for
Presbytery, how inexcusable is it in the Presbyterians to Prosecute them so
violently when they have nothing to object against them, but that they complied
with Episcopacy, since the first Covenanters were as liable to this Accusations
as any of the present Clergy.

His next Argument is, That there was a Necessity to maintain an Army to
Suppress the Insurrections of the Western Shires when the Government was
Episcopal. This is rather a threatening, than an Argument, and we know very
well, that since ever that Sect thrust up its Head above the Ground, they were
troublesome to Authority, and will continue so as long as there is any matter
for FACTION and REVENGE to work upon, for they Preach to their People that they
may advance their own way, whether the Prince will or will not. But I leave it
to the Author to judge what the Consequences should be, if the Episcopal Clergy
(who are now so cruelly trampled upon by their Insolence and Injustice) should
Preach to the People of their Communion the same very Doctrines that are
Propagated by the Covenantors, if they Preached up Assassinations and
Rebellions as their Enemies do, I suppose a more considerable Army would be
necessary; for it is certain, that the People that adhere to the Episcopal
Clergy can fight much better than the Western Covenanters, and 2000 Men can
keep these Shires very quiet at any time. But in stead of those lame Topics
which he fancies Demonstrations, I think a better expedient were to put it to
the Poll of the whole Nation, which I know the Presbyterians will never be for.

The Author is much mistaken if he thinks that the Plurality of the Scots
Clergy are Presbyterians, though they are content, to join with Presbyterians
in Church Judicatories in all those Duties that are uncontroverted. His Book is
rather an Advice to the Presbyterians, than an Apology for them: For as long as
the Constitution is such, as that it may be wrested, it is certain they will use
it not for Edification but Destruction, and the question in our present
Circumstances is not what belongs to the Civil, and what to the Ecclesiastical
Power, but what the Presbyterians have formerly done, what they do now, what is
likely they will do hereafter upon their own Principles, and whether or not
they can ever be persuaded to profess their Repentance for what they have done.
The Author indeed deserves thanks that he offers them a more moderate Scheme,
and that he acknowledges their former Extravagancies, but in all the Book I see
no proper Remedy for our present Confusions, and the truth is, there are many
of his thoughts very just; yet the true Remedy is not to offer Advice, but to
pull out the Teeth of our Oppressors, and then (and not till then) every Man
may sit under his own Fig Tree. However I intend this Author no Unkindness, who
(I think) understands the World very well, and much better than he does some
places of St. Paul's Epistles, and the Acts of the Apostles: Which I have no
mind to examine fully in this Preface. Only let him be advised not to allege
for Presbytery that place of St. Paul to the Corinthians, The Spirits of the
Prophets are subject unto the Prophets. For though this Text should be changed
unto all shapes and figures, it can yield nothing to his purpose; for it
lignifies no more, than that the Prophets inspired by God were lest in the
Exercise and Possession of their Reason, when they uttered their Prophesies,
and this distinguished them from the Exstaticks and Enthusiasts who were
possesed by Devils, and delivered their Oracular Responses in Fury and
Transport.

For the other mistake of the Apostolic Character, Page 4. It is no more than
what is ordinarily said in all Presbyterian Systems, but when he Examines it a
little more accurately, he will find by this especial Character which he
appropriates to the Apostles (and by which he distinguishes the Apostles from
other Ministers) that the Seventy Disciples are as much Apostles as the Twelve.
I hope the Author of that Pamphlet will Pardon this Digression. His Book may be
examined more seasonably in another Treatise. When ever he persuades the
Brethren of his way to act like reasonable Men, they will meet with less
opposition, and he himself will deserve the just Commendations of Prudence and
Modesty.

They have hitherto gloried in their Extemporary Prayers; I love not at any
rate to play with things Sacred, I know that Men in Private and in their
Closets ought not be tied to Words or Forms that are prescribed; for if we can
fix our Attention on God himself, and the things agreeable to his Will, and
suitable to our Necessities, we need not words, if we have but strong and
fervent Desires for all things are naked and open to the Eyes of him with whom
we have to do; but when we go into the House of God, it is long since Solomon
advised to go with reverence, for he is in Heaven and we are upon Earth; our
words should not only be few, but very well weighed, and apt to beget in the
Hearers, an awful sense of his Presence, and of the inconceivable distance
between him and the Workmanship of his hands: Therefore the Wisdom of the
Christian Church, thought fit in all Ages to put words in the Mouths of her
Children when they approach the most High God in his House of Prayer: for it is
very odd that we dare come into his House with less Preparation, than we do
when we address to any of our considerable Neighbors: yet with the saddest
regret it must be acknowledged, that the Presbyterians of late have to the
Disgrace of Christian Religion, and of the Solemnity of its Worship, changed
the Devotion of the Christian Church, into incoherent Rapsodies and Fopperies.
I am confident (not to mention the Blasphemies for Twenty two Years, and the
New of Montross his Armies; with which they were wont to run their Glasses) if
their Prayers but since the late Revolution, within the City of Edinburgh, and
the Places next Adjacent to it, were but Printed and exposed to Public View,
all the Protestant Churches would abhor their way; as the ready means to
introduce and strengthen Atheism and Irreligion among the People.

The Pulpit Blasphemies that have lately been belched out against Heaven in
this Nation, cannot be related without Horror and Indignation: Nor was God
ever so much dishonored by the Vanities of the Pagan Idolatry, as by the
pretended Inspiration of our new Reformers, every little trifling occurrence
that is suggested to their Fancy, or casually tumbles in their Memory, is
immediately cramb'd into their Prayers.

But I have digressed too far, now then to return to my particular Theme. The
Visitors put themselves indeed to extraordinary toll in examining the Masters
of the College of Edinburgh: And yet the Particulars they insisted upon were
such, as they themselves knew, neither to be material, nor possible to be
proved. They could not but think that the most remarkable steps they made in
this Affair would readily come to light, and yet they were not so wise as to
temper their Proceedings with the least Discretion; so difficult a thing it is
to hide what has got the Ascendant over all their Passions. A Calmer Method and
Temperament would have served the Design of their Government to better
purposes, If their Discipline may be called a Government, that't every where
attended with so many Complaints, so much Confusion and Anarchy. But I am not
to teach them how to strengthen and propagate their Party; for none can deny
them the two principal Supporters of Faction and Schism, Impudence and
Industry. They may think this Language something course and severe, but it is
hard to change the Propriety of words. If we must speak of them and of their
actings, the keenest Satyrs come short of their Oppressions and Falsehoods.

They had the Confidence at London to deny that some of the People of Aberdene
had their Ears nailed to the Pillory lately at Edinburgh, because they
testified their respect to their own Episcopal Ministers, and would not suffer
the Inquisitors to deprive them of the Blessing of their Doctrine and Presence.

As also they deny boldly, That the Ministers in the West were drove out by the
Rabble which they hounded out; or that any Ministers were deprived in Scotland,
who were willing to Comply with the State.

They might have even as well said that the Sun has not shined in that Kingdom
since the Covenant was abandoned by it, for these other things they assert are
as universally known to be false as that is.

There is no fear that ever their Party shall prevail where Men retain the love
of Liberty and Humanity; for though that poor Nation be at present run down by
the most Arbitrary and licentious Practices of the Kirk; yet the Common concern
of Liberty, Morality and Society, may awaken Men at length to fix, and again to
Establish something that may become the civilized part of Mankind, and upon
which the Superstructure of Religion may be happily raised. When our Fever is
abated, and the Nation calmly considers its true Interest and Advantage. It Is
not to be thought, that they will suffer an inconsiderable Company of Pedants,
to continue Dictators either to the Church or the Universities. In their late
Books, they promise to disprove the just (but lame) account given to the World,
of the Cruelties and Oppressions the Episcopal Clergy has met with in the
Western Shires of Scotland, But this amounts to no more than that they are
resolved to employ some of their Emissaries to make contrary Stories, and to
varnish them over with all the little shifts and artificial Disguises they can
invent, Mr. Rules, now Prima^^ (...) of the College at Edinburgh being
supposed to have the best hand among them for disguising Truth, is appointed
for that work by the General Assembly as appears by one of their unprinted Acts
to that purpose. And now that he is engaged in the Work I would advise him to
write in Latin, for his Reculiarities in that Language may tempt some People
to read it, otherwise his Book may be Buried under the same deserved Contempt
and Obscurity, which was the fate of his trifling Pamphlets against some
Doctors of the Church of England, which no body designs either to Read or
Answer; no more than he himself or any of his Party believes what he asserts
concerning the Church of Scotland, in his last Squib against Episcopacy.
when their Barbarities are already known over the greatest part of
Christendom, and when the Reformed Churches are all ashamed of them, and
scandalized by them.

If the Gentry and Nobility who were Commissionated to Visit the Universities,
had come alone without their Chaplains, the Masters had not met with so much
rudeness: for there are but very few of them so deeply sowred with the leaven
of Presbytery. And if some may have forgot their Character, it is because they
have nothing to recommend them, but the implicit Faith they pay to the
Consistory.

And now I have nothing more in order to the following Memoirs, to advertise
the Reader of, but only that the Method of them is Natural, Easy and Distinct;
For first, the Author sets down the unsubscribed Libel, as it was prepared and
given in to the Court, and to which the Masters were made to Answer upon the
first hearing of it without the least delay. Secondly, The Answers made by
particular Masters to those Libels. Thirdly, In their own very words is set
down the Report of the Committee to the Commission concerning the Masters.
Fourthly, The Animadversions on that their Report.

And now to conclude this Preface, let not the Reader forget, That though
Hundreds of Witnesses have been Summoned and Examined against those Masters
whose Trials are hereafter related, yet nothing was proved of the least
Consequence against any of them, only such things as they avowedly owned
themselves, and for which they were rather to be commended than reproved. I
heartily pray God the Nation may enjoy more Peace, Religion, Order and Unity,
than can reasonably be expected from its present Model of Presbytery, and that
our Country be no more imposed upon by such open and barefaced Injustice, and
Oppression, under the Pretense of Reformation.

Presbyterian Inquisition, AS It was Practiced by the Visitors of the College
at Edinburgh, in Their Proceedings against some of the Masters there, in August
and September, 1690.
THE Act of Parliament for Visitation of Universities, Colleges, and Schools,
passes the Vote of the House, July 4. 1690. And by the said Act, the Visitours
were appointed to meet at Edinburgh, the 23d of July, for the first Dyer, that
they might divide themselves into several Committees, and lay down common Rules
for Regulating the manner of Trying the several Universities within the Nation,
according to the Instructions and Injunctions then agreed upon, as you may see
more at length in the Act it self.

Accordingly, a sufficient Quorum of them, met upon the 23d of July, 1690. and
divided themselves into several Committees, as follows.

For the University of St. Andrews.
Earl Crawford. Earl Morton. Earl Cassels. Earl Kint^^. Master of Burley. Sir
Thomas Burnet. Sir Francis Montgomery. Mr. James Melvil. Lord of Balconie.
Lord of Nungtown. Lord of Meggins. Mr. Henry Rymer. Mr. William Tullidaff.
Mr. David Blair. Mr. James M'gill. Mr. James Rymer.
For the University of Glascow.
Duke Hamilton. E. Argile. V. Stairs. L. Carmichael. Sir George Campbel. Sir
Robert St. Clare. Sir John Maxwell. Lord of Craiggenns. John Anderson of
Dowhill. Mr. James Smalle^. Lord of Lewchatt. Mr. Gabriel Cuninghame. Mr.
George Meldrum. Mr. William Violent. Mr. George Campbell. Mr. John Oliphant.
For the University of Aberdeen.
E. of Marshall. V. Arbuthnet. L. Cardros. L. Elphingsston. Master of Forbes.
Sir George Monro. Lord of Brodie. Lord of Grant. Lord of Grange. Moncrife of
Rydie. Mr. Alex. Pitcairn. Mr. Hugh Anderson. Mr. Alex. Forbes. Mr. William
Mitchel. Mr. Robert Willie.
For the University of Edinburgh.
E. of Louthian. L. Reath. L. Ruthven. Master of Stair. L. Mersington. L.
Crosrig. Sir Patrick Hume. L. Hall Craig. Lord of Pitlivier. Sir John Hall.
Sir William Hamilton. Mr. Edward Jamison. Mr. Hew Kennedy. Mr. John Law. Mr.
James Kirton. Mr. Gilbert Rule Now Possessed of the Principal's place.

When they had thus divided themselves into Committees, they agreed upon the
following Rules, by which they were to Regulate their Trial.

At Edinburgh the Twenty Fifth Day of July, 1690.

Instructions from the Commissioners appointed by Act of Parliament, to Visit
Universities, Colleges, and Schools, to the Committees Delegate for that
effect.
Imprimis, That the Committee enquire and take exact Trial, of the Masters,
Professors, Principals, Regents, etc. If any of them be Erroneous in Doctrine,
and as to Popish, Arminian, and Socinian Principles, which is to be searched
from their Dictates, or to receive Information from other Persons who have been
Conversant with them, or have Heard them.

2o. To Enquire and take Trial, if any of the Masters, etc. be Scandalous, or
Guilty of Imoralities, in their Life and Conversation.

3o. To Try if any of the Masters be Negligent, and to enquire how many
Conveniendums That is, Meetings for Teaching their Scholars.
they keep in the day, and what time they Meet, and how long they continue
these Meetings, and how the Masters attend and keep them, and what Discipline
they Exercise upon the Scholars for their Immoralities and none Attendance; and
particularly to enquire at the Masters, Anent the Office of Hebdomodaries, and
how faithfully that is Exercised, and how often they Examine the Scholars on
their Notes: And to take Trial, what pains they take to Instruct their Scholars
in the Principles of Christianity; and what Books they Teach thereanent for the
Subject of these Sacred Lessons, and what care they take of the Scholars
keeping the Kirk, and Examining them thereafter.

4o. To Enquire into their Sufficiency, and that their Dictates be searched,
and if they be suspect of Insufficiency to ask Questions and Examine them, as
the Committee shall think fit.

5o. To Enquire and take Trial what has been the Carriage of the Masters since
the late Happy Revolutions, as to Their Majesty's Government, and Their Coming
to the Crown; and to Enquire into their Dictates or Papers Emitted by them;
what are their Principles as to the Constitution of the Government, by King and
Parliament.

6o. Likewaies, to call for the Foundations and Laws of the Universities, and
to consider how they are observed, and to Try how they have managed their
Revenues, and especially Anent the Money given for buying Books to their
Libraries, and any Mortifications, Stents, and Collections, and vacant
Stipends, and other Moneys given on any Account to the said Colleges, and if
the Donations.
Mortifications for the several Professions be rightly applied.

7o. To Enquire and Try the Professors of Divinity, what Subjects of Divinity
they Teach, what Books they recommend to the Theologues, and if they be remiss
and careless in causing their Theologues have their Homilies and Exercises, and
frequently Disputes on points of Divinity, as it is required.

8o. To Enquire at the said Hail Masters, etc. If they will Subscribe the
Confession of Faith, and Swear, and take the Oath of Allegiance to Their
Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary; and to Subscribe the Certificate and
Assurance, Ordained to be taken by an Act of Parliament in July 1690. And if
they will Declare, that they do submit to the Church Government, as now
Established by Law.

9o. That the Committee appoint such of the Masters as they shall find Cause,
to attend the next General Meeting of the Commission, which Order shall be
equivalent, as if a Citation should be given to them for that effect.

Having agreed to those Rules of Trial, they appointed the several Committees
to meet at the Respective Universities, on the 20th of August, thereafter;
Accordingly the Committee appointed to Visit the University of Edinburgh, met
in the upper Hall, and Sir John Hall was Chosen Praeses; The Masters met in the
Library, and waited there about an hour and a half, till they were called to
Appear; and upon their Appearance, the Praeses told the Principal, that they
would delay the Trial of the Masters till that day Seven-night; because they
were in the first place, to dispatch the Schoolmasters, who were at some
distance from the Town, and could not therefore so conveniently give their
Attendance: But the true Reason was, That the Libels against the Masters and
Professors, were not then so fully ready, as they designed them.

Upon the 27th of August the Committee met, and spent some time in Reading the
Libels, before the Masters were called to appear: A little after, they were
pleased to call in the Principal Dr. Monro; upon his Appearance, Sir John Hall
desired him to Answer to the several Articles contained in his Indictment which
he commanded their Clerk then to read openly, in the face of the Court and
Spectators.

Accordingly, The Clerk read the First and Second Articles, to which the Dr.
answered ut infra, but finding that the Paper contained a great many Articles,
He pleaded, That he was not obliged to Answer an unsubcribed Libel; that, He
should know his Accuser, And that this Method of Trial was New, Unjust, and
Illegal: That Men should be obliged to Answer so many Questions ex tempore.

A certain Member of the Committee told the Dr. that it was no Libel, but an
Information. The Principal answered, That a Slanderous Information, containing
so many Calumnies, to the ruin of a Man's Reputation and good Name, was to him
the self-same thing with a Libel: at least that he was not Lawyer enough so
nicely to distinguish them; but that he was sure the one had the same Effects
with the other; and since the thing was the same, he was not concerned by what
Name it was called.

The Committee-Man told him, It was to have no Effect till it was proved; (a
Favor which they do not always grant) The Principal replied, That there was a
double Effect, That of Deprivation, and the loss of his Good Name; and though the
first was not Attained without Proof; yet the last was sure to follow upon such
a malicious Charge, since the People were but too apt to believe what was
publicly informed, though it were not proved; and so that which He called an
Information, would have the Effect of a Libel, even in the worst sense that it
could be taken.

The Principal, wearied with Jangling about a word, and Conscious of his own
Innocence, was willing to hear the worst they could say, and so the Clerk
proceeded to other Articles: And after having read one Paper, another far more
Impertinent and ridiculous was put into his hand to heighten the Libel; The
Articles whereof follow.

Articles of Inquisition against Dr. MONRO, to which he was made to Answer
before the Committee upon the 27th of August, 1690.
I. THAT he Renounced the Protestant Religion in a Church beyond Sea, and
Subscribed himself a Papist.

II. When Mr. Burnet the Regent being suspected to be a Popist, entered to the
second Class, most of the Parents of the Children that were to enter to the
said Class, inclined to put them back to the first Class, for fear of there
being tainted with Popery; But Dr. Monro made on Act in the College, That none
should go back, particularly Bailzie Gram's Son, who had entered to the first
Class, was made to enter to the Second: Likewise, Dr. Monro went and told the
Earl of Perth his Diligence and Care of Mr. Burnet, whom the said Earl thanked
kindly, for his love to any that went under that Character.

III. That he set up the English Liturgy within the Gates of the College, a
Form of Worship never allowed of in this Nation since the Reformation; And though
it were tolerated, yet no Toleration allows any of different Form of Worship
from the State, to enjoy legal Benefices in the Church or Charge in
Universities.

IV. The Act for Visitation of Colleges requires, that none carry charge in
them, but such as be well affected to the Government both of Church and State:
But so it is, that it is known by all, that know Dr. Monro, that he is highly
disaffected to both, as appears by a missive Letter written by him to the late
Archbishop of St. Andrews, Dated the 5th Day of January 1689. And which may
also appear by his leaving the Charge of the Ministry to shun Praying for King
William and Queen Mary: and his rejoicing the Day that the News of Claverhouse
Lord Duudie.
his Victory came to Town. And how much he Dislikes the present Government of
the Church, may appear by the bitter Persecuting of all that Persuasion to the
utmost of his Power. And particularly the breaking up of Mr. James Inglish his
Chamber Door in the College, and turning him out of the same, notwithstanding
he had been in peaceable Possession thereof for many Years, and paid Rent for
it: and all this betwixt terms, and the said Mr. James Inglish was willing to
part with the Chamber at the Term. And this be did only because the said Mr.
James Inglish Preached in a Meeting House in his own Parish, being called to it
by them; And when the said Doctor was challenged for this; He said, he would
suffer none of such Principles to be within the College. And when Mr. Gourlay
was Licensed to Preach by the Presbyterians, the Students of Mr. Kennedys and
Mr. Cunninghame's Classes beat up his Chamber Door, and Windows with Stones;
and pulling off his* Hat, Cloak and Periwig; and reproaching him with
Phanatick, etc. They forced him to remove from his Chamber which he had
possessed peaceably before, and when this Abuse was Complained of, and the Boys
Names given up to the Principal, there was no redress given.

V. At the late Public Graduation.
Laureation, He sat and publicly heard the Confession of Faith, after it had
been approven in Parliament, rediculed by Dr. Pitcairn; yea, the existence of
God impugned, without any Answer or Vindication.

VI. He caused take down out of the Library, all the Pictures of the Protestant
Reformers, and when quarrelled by some of the Magistrates, gave this Answer,
That the sight of them might not be Offensive to the Chancellor, when he came
to Visit the College.

VII. When Mr. Cunninghame had Composed his Eucharistick Verses on the Prince
of Wales, he not only approved them, but Presented them to the Chancellor with
his own hand.

VIII. That the said Dr. is given sometimes to Cursing and Swearing, an
instance whereof is, be said to one of the Scholars, God Damn me, if it were
not for the Gown, I would crush you through this Floor, or to the like purpose.

IX. That the Doctor is an ordinary Neglecter of the Worship of God in his
Family.

X. That on Saturday last he Baptized the Child of Mr. James Scott in the
Parish of the West Kirk, without acquainting the Minister thereof.

Answer to the Articles given against Doctor Monro, upon the 27th of August,
1690.
My Lords and Gentlemen.
I Return you my humble thanks, for giving me a Copy of the unsubscribed
Articles, given in against me upon Wednesday last: And by their being such, I
find my self under no Obligation to take notice of them: Yet I make bold to
entreat your Lordships Favor and Patience for some Minutes, to hear a more
particular answer to that Paper, than that which I then gave, resolving to
trouble your Lordships with none of the little shifts and Niceties of form that
are usual on such occasions.

I. That I Renoimced the Protestant Religion, and Subscribed my self a Papist,
beyond Sea.
This is a Spiteful and Malicious Calumny; for as it is Libelled, it is not
supposable that it can be true; for any thing I know, The Papists require no
Subscriptions of such as go over from the Protestants to their Party. If I had
Inclinations to Popery when I was in France, it is more than the Libeller
knows, and more than he will be able to prove; and being now for Twenty Years
past, by all the Evidences by which one Man knows another, This Mr. Reid was
Examined with all severily and diligence (but still in private) threatened and
cajoll'd but the Man being of more Honesty then Fear, told them what he knew,
and that rather incensed their Envy, than satisfied their Design.
of the Protestant Religion; any Man will see the Impertinence of this
Suspicion: It is not worth the while to give a particular Account of my Life,
but I allow them to make the Inquisition as narrow as they can.

And therefore if your Lordships think it worth the while, Mr. Reid, the
present Sergeant of the Town Company (who knew me all the time I was in France)
may be examined particularly upon this Head, or upon any other thing relating
to my Life, and Behavior.

But your Lordships will consider I hope the impertinency of this Accusation,
since it is not possible to be ordained a Presbyter of our Church, without
renouncing of Popery; And our Ecclesiastical Superiors, who ordained Priests
and Deacons, according to the Forms of the Church of England, always since the
Restitution took care (I hope) to distinguish Papists and Protestants, by the
most Solemn Oaths and National Tests.

Next let it be considered, whether I endeavored to advance the Doctrines and
Designs of the Roman-Church, since I entered into the Ministry, what good
evidences for my being inclined to Popery? Had I not a fair opportunity to take
off the Mask some Years before the Revolution? Was it any of the Sermons I
Preached against Popery, in the High Church of Edinburgh and in the Abbey of
Holyrood-house, when our zealous Reformers were very quiet: To all which some
Hundreds of the best Quality of the Nation, were Witnesses. And the Libeller
knows this Article is set in the front, to make up the Muster, and for no other
end, since he dares no more appear to make good this, than the other triffling
particulars. Was it my Swearing the Oath of the Test once and again, or my
recommending to the Scholars (the first Year I came here) such Books as I
judged most proper to Discover and confute the Superstitions of the Roman
Church. Had it not been far easier for the Libeller (who has no regard to
Truth or Probability) to have cast into this Paper more odious Crimes? But I
was in France, and therefore behoved to be a Papist, This Article was let fall,
for after all their Industry, they could saynothing upon the Head, no Report
made of it to the Commission of the General Visitation.
and this is enough for this triffling Lybeller; I am very sure none of the
Papists ever thought me one.

The second Article, is a Confirmation of the first, Mr. Burnet, was suspect of
Popery when he came here, and I did all I could to get Scholars to his Class,
Auditum admissi risum te^nea^is amici.
particularly I spoke to Bailey Grahame for his Son, and the Chancellor
thanked me for the Care I took of Mr. Burnets Concern, and such as he was.
The then Magistrates of Edinburgh, several of the Learned College of
Physicians, and all the Professors of this University will bear me Witness,
that I left no stone unturned to keep Mr. Burnet out of this College: And yet
the Libeller has the Honesty to accuse me, that Mr. Burnet was suspect of
Popery; Was this my fault, or was it truly a fault in Mr. Burnet, that he was
Suspect of Popery? The Lord Archbishop of Glascow and Sir Thomas Kennedy, then
Protest, will vindicate me in this particular: For it is very well known how
much I opposed Mr. Burnet's entry here; a Gentleman of known Parts and
Integrety, one of the Professors of Philosophy in the old College of St.
Andrews, was the Man I wished to fill up the vacance that happened by the Death
of Mr. Lidderdale; Ja. Martin.
but Mr. Burnet being once thrust in upon us, (more by the Duke of Gordon than
the Earl of Perth) what could I do with him? My care of this House obliged me
to make him as useful as I could: He lay under the Suspicion of being Popish,
but I knew this to be a Calumny; and if I had not endeavored to get him some
Scholars, we should have wanted one entire Class in the College: This is the
true Reason why I spoke to Bailzie Grahame to send his Son to Mr. Burnet, and
procured an Act of the Faculty (for I could make none as the Libeller
impertinently suggests) that such as were Mr. Lidderdale's Scholars the
preceding Year should be taught for that Year, in no other Class but Mr.
Burnet's who succeeded to his charge. This was no Arbitrary stretch of mine,
but a just defense of the Current and usual Customs of the House; for Mr.
Burnet having the second Class, could expect none else but the Students that
were taught in Mr. Lidderdale's Class the preceding year; We shall hear more
of this in the Report of the Committee, where its Impertinencies will be more
particularly Examined.
but it is added, I did all this, because I favored Popery, and the
Chancellor thanked me for it. But this is a down right Lie, for I never
Entertained the Chancellor with Discourses of Mr. Burnet, besides, for any
thing I know, the Chancellor had no value for him.

III. The next, is that formidable one, of Reading the English Service in my
Family, in that Interval, when there was no National Church Government here.
But the Libeller forgets, that this quite frustrates his first attempt; They
must be odd kind of Papists that Read the Service of the Church of England,
upon the 5th of November; But the Libeller adds, that the Book of Common Prayer
was never allowed here since the Reformation; does he mean that the Service of
the Protestant Church of England was used here before the Reformation; but to
let this go, the Book of Common Prayer was Read in many Families in Scotland,
ever since the Restitution of King Charles II. and Publicly Read in the Abbey
of Hollyrood-house, in the Reign of King Charles the First, and I hope the
Tolleration by King James did not Exclude the English Prayers: But upon Enquiry
it will be found, that they were the first Prayers that were Read in Scotland
after the Reformation; for XIX Book, An. 1567. Regnante Jacobs Sexto. Scotiante
aliquot Annos Anglorum auxiliise servitute Gallica liberati Religionis cultui
and ritibus cum Anglis communibus subscripserunt. See Spotswood also, beginning
of the 3d Book.
Buchannan tells us expressly, as you see in the Margin, And Buchanans Testimony
is the more Remarkable, that the Confession of Faith was Ratified in Parliament
that very year, so that we have not only the private Practice of a few great
Reformers, Wisheart, and several others, to justify the English Liturgy; but
also the Solemn Concession of the whole Nation, who thought their Confession
then Ratified, had in it nothing contradictory to or inconsistent with the Book
of Common Prayer, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church of England: And such as
plead for their Separation from the Church of England, from the Practices of
the first Reformers here, go upon an unpardonable Mistake in our History. But
the plain Matter of Fact, is this, when I left off Preaching in the High
Church: I advised with some of my Brethren, and the Result was, that we should
Read the Book of Common Prayer, and Preach within our Familes, per vices, since
most of them were acquainted, somewhat, with the Liturgy of the Church of
England. Neither did we think, when Quakers and all Sects were Tolerated, that
we should be blamed for Reading those Prayers within our private Families,
which we prefer to all other Forms now used in the Christian Church: Neither
had we any design to Proselite the People to any thing they had no mind to,
else I might have Read the Liturgy in one of the Public Schools within the
College. And it must not be said we were afraid to venture upon the Public
Exercise of it because of the Rabble, for during the Session of the College,
it is very well known in the City, that the Mobile durst not presume to give us
the least Disturbance: However, the Matter succeeded beyond what we proposed or
looked for; we Preached to the People upon the Sundays, they came by hundreds
more than we had room for, and very many became acquainted with the Liturgy of
the Church of England, and perceived by their own Experience, This Answer to
the 3d Article of the Doctor's Libel, did exasperate the Presbyterians to the
highest degree, and they to whom it was recommended to view and examine his
Answers, thought they discovered strange consequences in this. But some of the
Nobility who were present when this was tossed, would not suffer such Fooleries
as were then objected to be inserted in their Report, partly that the
Presbyterians might not be exposed; partly, that they might not be Witnesses to
such palpable Impertinencies; and partly, that none might say the Ministers, to
whom the Government was committed, were such Fools as to fly in the face of
the Church of England, in this juncture.
there was neither Popery nor Superstition in it; and when the Libeller knows
it better, he will forbear his Violence and Foolish Cavilling.

But your Lordships will not think I make all this Apology, as if I were
diffident of the intrinsic Excellency of Common Prayer, or that I had done
something that needs an Excuse; for I look upon the Church of England, as the
true Pillar and Center of the Reformation; and if Her Enemies should lay Her in
the Dust, (which God forbid) there is no other Bulwark in Britain, to stop or
retard the Progress of either Popery or Enthusiasme: And I wonder Men should
retain so much bitterness against the Church of England, This Article was let
fall, and no Report made of it to the General Commission.
valued and Admired by all Foreign Churches, and whose Liturgy (as it is the
most Serious and Comprehensive) so it is the most agreeable to the Primitive
Forms; What Esteem the most Learned and best Natured Divines in Foreign
Churches had of the Church of England, its Learning, Piety, Constitution, and
Primitive Order; may be gathered from hundreds of Authentic Testimonies; I
will only here insert one, from the Venerable Du Moline, it is in his 3d
Epistle to Bishop Andrews, inter opuscula quaedam posthuma Episcopi Wint.
But if there was no Law for it, there was none against it; there was no
National Church Government here then, and why might not we Read the Prayers of
that Church from which we derive our Ordination to the Priesthood, since the
Restoration of the King Charles the 2d.

IV. But I am (as it is said) highly Disaffected to the Government in the
Church and State, as appears by a Letter to the Archbishop of St. Andrews,
Dated January 5. 1689. Intercepted by Hamilton of Kinkell.
Egone male vellem ordini vestro, de quo nunquam ^^cutus sum sine honor, ut
pote qui scio Instaurationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Evers^^nem Papism^, post
Deum and Reges deberi praecipue Episcoporum Doctrinae and indust^iae. Quorum
etiam nonnulli Martyri^ Coronati Sangnine suo subscripserunt Evangelio? Q^rum
habemu scripta and meminimus gesta ac zelum nulla ex part inserio em zel^
praestantiss^^norum Dei servo um quos vel Gallia vel Germania tulit. Hoc qui
negat, oppo^tet vel sit improbe vecors, vel Dei Gloriae invidus vel cerebrosa
soliditate stupens caliget in clara luce; Hanc igitur suspicionem a me amotam
volo: maxim cum videam Calvinum ipsum and Beza^ quos solent quidam suae
pervicaceae obtendere, mustas scripsisse Epistolas ad Praesules Angliae, eosque
affari ut fideles Dei servos, and been meritos de Ecclesia: Nec sum usque adeo
oris duri ut velim adversus illa veteris Ecclesiae lumina, Ignatium,
Polycarpum, Cyprianum, Augustinum, Chrysostomum, Basilium, Gregorios,
Nissenuni, and Nazianzenum, Episcopos far sententiam, ut adversus Ho^ines
vitio creatos vel usurpatores muneris illiciti, plus semper apud me poterit
veneranda illa primorum saeculorum antiquitas, quam Novella cujusquam
Iustitutio.
But the Libeller should remember, that the Letter is of a much older Date than
the present Government either in Church or State, and that at that time, things
looked rather like a total Interregnum, than any settled Government; and if that
Letter (Written in the time of the Tumuks) retain any vestiges of Fervor and
Impatience, your Lordships will impute that, partly to the troubled State of
things, and partly to the hard and unchristian Oppression of the Clergy of the
Western Shires: And let not the word Phanatick be extended to signify a
Presbyterian, further than the Presbyterians verify the Name by their
Practices: For I think there may be a Presbyterian, who may not deserve that
Name, such as have been in France, and are in Holland. As to that Sentence,
informing my Lord St. Andrews of a certain Clergy Man who had groaned under
Episcopacy, I had it by Misinformation, I wrote it hastily, and now I Retract
it, and am glad I have the opportunity to do so: I remember when the Letter was
delivered to your Lordships, I was chafed into some degrees of Passion, that
Hamilton of Kinkell should have used me so unworthily, Desigillatio Epistolarum
crimen falsi.
as to break open my Letters; for no Honest Man will break open other Men's
Letters, without Order from the Public; We shall hear more of this Letter in
the Report of the Committee.
and then I said, all the ill Offices that ever I did him, was to hinder once
and again, Letters of An Order from the Public to Imprison.
Caption against him; and lest I should be said to upbraid Hamilton of Kinkell
with the Kindness I never did him, let Mr. Alexander Monro (who was then
Attorney Agent for the New College of St. Andrews) produce the Letters I wrote
him in favors of Kinkell, six or seven years ago, notwithstanding that he, the
said Mr. Alexander Monro, had Orders to use Diligence against the said Kinkell,
and to recover what was owing by him to the New College: But this Gentleman's
Ingratitude to Persons of greater Quality, who saved him from the Gibbet, is
very well known over all the Nation.

A Second Instance of my being Disaffected to the Government of the State, is,
That I dimitted my Charge in the High Church, lest I might be obliged to Pray
for King William and Queen Mary, etc.
Let the Libeller consider the Paper by which I dimitted my Office in that
Church, and see if there be any such Reason for my Dimission inserted in that
Paper. I could Name other Reasons for my Dimission, besides those Mentioned in
that Paper; but the Libeller is very confident of his Guesses, without the
least Evidence to found them upon; and I do not believe that the Presbyterians
were angry with me on that head; that I left off Preaching in a Church, which
they were so very fond to have in their own Possession; and though the Labeller
was very well pleased with my Dimission then, yet he can take it now by another
handle, when he thinks to do me harm by it; but such ill-natured Impertinencies
should not be answered.

The next is, That I Rojoyced upon the News of my Lord Dundee His Victory.
This is pleasant enough: for he could Name no outward sign or expression of
it; he thinks I Rejoiced, and therefore sets it down as a ground of Accusation;
so, my Lords, it was impossible for me to shun this, unless I had been Dead
some time before the Victory; for this Libeller names his Conjectures, dark
Consequences, and remote Probabilities, for sufficient Evidence; for any thing
he knew, this Joy appeared no where but on the inward Theater of my Mind; but
to make the Story pass, why did he not name the usual and Extravagant Frolicks
that attend such Mirth? Where was it? And with what Company? Was he Invited to
this Merry Meeting himself? But this is no part of his Business, to
circumstantiate things as common Sense and Justice would require in
Accusations: This brings to my Mind, the Legend of Mother Juliana, that was
said to smell Souls, and at a good distance to discern whether they were in the
State of Grace, or under the Power of Sin. I have Answered once already, that
it was an Impudent and Impious thing to pretend to Omniscience, and that I had
some Relations in Mackays Army, for whom I was extraordinary solicitous: The
Libeller does not think I Rejoiced at the fall of my Lord Dundee, I assure him
of the contrary, for no Gentleman, Soldier, Scholar, or Civilized Citizen,
will find fault with me for this; I had an extraordinary value for him; and
such of his Enemies, Elian. Spart. in vita Severi. Sed triumphum respuit ne
videretur de civili triumphare victoria.
as retain any Generosity, will acknowledge he deserved it. And he should
consider, that the Victories obtained in a Civil War are no true cause of Joy:
Our Brethren, Friends, Acquaintances, and Fellow Christians must fall to the
Ground. The Pagan Romans knew better things, than to allow of Public shows of
Triumph upon such occasion.

Bella geri placuit nullos habitura Triumphos. We bear no more of this Article.


But the Libeller may prove more successful in his next Attempt. That I
Prosecute all the Presbyterian Party to the utmost of my Power, But this is
like all the rest of his bold Calumnies: I thank God I have no such
Presbyterian temper, for I never hated any Man for his Opinion, unless by it he
thinks himself obliged to destroy me and mine; and such truly I consider as the
Tyrannical Enemies of Humane Society. But he would have acted his part more
skillfully, if he could have named some Dissenters in the Parishes of
Dumfermling, Kinglassie, or Weems (where I was once Minister) that I had
Prosecuted before the Secular Judge for Nonconformity, which I might have
easily done, had I been so very sierce as the Libeller represents me, having
easy access to the Greatest Men of the State at that time. But I give him and
all his Associates open defiance upon this head; not that I blame them that did
otherways in Obedience to the Laws of the Nation, for their extravagant tricks
did frequently require and extort it from some Ministers.

The next Instance is, that I broke open Mr. James Inglish his Chamber Door,
and ejected him out of the College, for Preaching in a Meeting House in
Perth-shire.
But if Mr. James Inglish be a Presbyterian, it is more than I know. I heard
that he was a Behemenist, I heard his Testificate from Oxford did bear that he
was much devoted to the Church of England: And I know, that for his habitual
Lying, and Slandering of his Brethren in the Presbytery of Perth, Since of
Orkne^, a Person who, for his great Learning, Piety, and Prudence, all good Men
justly esteem.
he was Deposed (after an orderly and exact Process) by The Right Reverend
Doctor Bruce, then Bishop of Dunkeld, and that the Oath of the Test was never
offered to Mr. James Inglish; although to ingratiate himself with the
Presbyterians at this Revolution, he pretends to be Deposed on merely for not
complying with that. But to my Purpose, I think, about three years ago (the
College then being very throng) several Gentlemen importuned me to procure
Chambers for their Children within the College; at which time Mr. Inglish had
no use for a Chamber within the College, being for the most part absent: I
sent the Janitor to him, and ordered him to tell Mr. Inglish that we were very
throng, and I would take it for a great Complement, if he would part with that
Chamber; yet I ordered the Janitor to treat the said Mr. Inglish with all
Civility and Discretion, and not to straiten him. The Janitor went as he was
ordered: Mr. Inglish returned answer, That now indeed he had no use for a
Chamber in the College, but since he understood there was a design another
should have it, he would not part with it, and he would keep it in spite of my
Teeth: Some days after, as I was going through the upper Court, I met with some
marks of Incivility from him. The next News I hear of Mr. Inglish is, that he
had raised Letters of Which among the Scots signify such writs as oblige any
Man to secure the Peace under the pain of Imprisonment.
Law-barrows against me, and offered himself to Swear before the Lords of
Session, he dreaded me Bodily Harm. But the then Lord President Lockart
rejected the Letters, with Indignation, without my Interposal or Knowledge. For
I knew nothing of this Malicious diligence against me, until some of my Friends
sent me the Letters of Law-barrows rejected in praesentia; I gave this account
of the whole Affair to Sir Thomas Kennedy, then Lord Provost of Edinburgh; he
immediately sent his Officers to discharge Mr. Inglish from the College, who
when they came, they did not break open his Door, nor was his Furniture cast
out; but after all this Provocation, I gave him all the days he sought, for
ordering his things conveniently, and peaceably to retire. So much of Mr.
Inglish his Persecution for being a Presbyterian: And I beg Your Lordships
Pardon, that I have kept you so long upon this particular. But the Libeller
adds, I was challenged for this, and returned answer, I would suffer none of
Mr. Inglish his Principles to continue within the House. That I was challenged
for this, is an untruth, and consequently I made no such answer. If by
Principles he mean Faction, Contention, and Sawciness, I confess I did not love
these Qualities; but if by Principles, he means the New Opinions and Fancies,
which denominate a Man a Presbyterian, I behoved to extrude several of the
Students, who are likely to adhere more tenaciously to their Tenets, than Mr.
Inglish can be supposed to do; but some even of them so Principled will bear me
witness, that I treated them with the same Civility I did others, according to
their good behavior.

The next Man I Persecuted for being Presbyterian is Mr. Gourlay, and his
Persecution did so exactly meet with the time of his being Licensed to Preach
by the Presbytery; Mr. Cuninghame and Mr. Kennedy's Scholars drove him from his
Chamber, and no redress of all this.
The Libeller is certainly very Critical and Exact in this part of his
Inquisition; for there was no mark of Contempt put upon Mr. Gourlay here (says
he) until he Preached, and until he was Licensed to Preach by the
Presbyterians; this is wisely observed, for if I could have gotten Mr. Gourlay
out of the College I had accomplished a great design for Episcopacy! It is not
enough for the Libeller to Represent me as an Ill Man, but he must have me
thought an Idiot. But the Matter of Fact, as to this Trifle, is, that Mr.
Gourlay, some years before I came to the College, attempted to teach the
Second.
Semy Class, in Mr. Kennedy's Absence: But the Boys then found him quite out of
his Element, and drove him out of the Schools with Snow-balls to the Foot of
the College Lane. My Lords and Gentlemen, I appeal to you, if, after this
Affront, it was ever possible for Little Gourlay, in so numerous a Society, I
believe Mr. Rule, now that he has had the Government of that House in his hand
for some time, will not think the extravagance of some Boys a sufficient reason
to deprive the Principal, e^se he must expect the next Visitation may conclude
he has lost the Spirit of Government.
to recover his Reputation, unless it be supposed, that so many Boys in Health
and Vigor, should want all degrees of Petulance and Levity: I am sure he that
tries them next, when I am gone, will find he has no Utopian Commonwealth to
Govern: And yet I think they are as Obedient and Regular as so many Youths in
any part of the World. When Mr. Gourlay came to me, I went with him, and I was
so forward to punish the Youths, that before I heard them plead in their own
defense, I fined some of them in a Pecuniary Mulct. But the Students finding
that they were thus treated by Gourlay, they presently Caball'd themselves into
a more numerous Combination, of which I knew nothing; and then it was that
Gourlay found it Convenient to retire. But as to this Second Assault made upon
him, no complaint was ever entered, no Names were ever given up to me. And I
again beg Your Lordships Pardon, that I have spent so many Lines on this
impertinence. And Mr. Gourlay will pardon me, if I do not set down the
particular Acts of Imprudence, open Folly and Ignorance, by which he made it
impossible for him to live here without a Guard. Why the Students in Mr.
Cuninghame and Mr. Kennedy's Classes should only be named, It is not difficult
to guess his Informer, nor his inveterate prejudice against those Professors.
the Libeller and I both know a very good reason for it; but because it would
seem Malicious, I now wave it.

V. The next Accusation is, that I heard Dr. Pitcairn at the late Public
Commencement, Treat the Confession of Faith at Westminster, in Ridicule, and
Impugn the Existence of a Deity, without answering him.
My Lords, my Patience is quite tired with this Impertinence: I was not in the
Desk, nor bound to preside at those Exercises, and so not concerned to answer:
But my good Friend, Dr. Pitcairn, is more able to answer for himself and me
both than I am. Only, the sneaking Libeller is grossly Ignorant and Malicious,
for the Doctor did not Impugn the Existence of a Deity, he endeavored fairly,
like a True Philosopher, to load some Propositions in the Thesis with this
Absurdity (Hoc posito sequeretur illud) The most Sacred Fundamentals in
Religion are thus, disputed in the Schools, not with a design to overthrow them
(as he ignorantly fancies) but to establish and set them in their true light,
that they may appear in their evidence: Is it necessary to answer the silly
Conceits of such a Libeller, who should not be suffered to enter the Public
Hall, if he must Censure and Mis-represent the most exact and usual Methods of
all Schools in Christendom? Yet I foresaw that some Ignorant or Malicious
People would mis-represent this Argument, Difficile Satyrum scribere,
and therefore I desired the Doctor to let it fall, and without any more he did
so.

VI. The next Crime is, I removed some Pictures of the first Reformers, for a
day or two, out of their place in the Library, and that I was challenged for
this by the Magistrates.
To this I answer, That the Magistrates never challenged me for it; for they
knew well enough there was no hazard of my running away with them: But I gave
the true and satisfactory Answer to this Article, to Sir John Hall, Provost of
Edinburgh, upon Wednesday last, This is the Objection they insisted most upon;
and the whole Story of it is related in the Animadversions upon the Report of
the Committee in the following Pages.
and it needs not be made Public unless he please. And I am not very
sollicitous whether ever the Libeller be satisfied about it, I hope the
Nobility and Gentry, who sit here, will.

VII. The next is, that I presented on Eucharistick Poem, Composed by Mr.
Cuninghame, upon the Birth of the Prince of Wales, to my Lord Chancellor with
my own hand.
Where the Libeller had the word [Eucharistic] I know not; it is his misfortune
that some of his darling expressions discover him more frequently than he is
aware: It seems he had read upon the Frontispiece of the Poem, Tetrastic, and
he stumbled as near as he could, by setting down Eucharistic, but by what
Propriety of Speech he knew not; I am sure the Bonefires, Illuminations,
Glasses, and Wine flung over the Cross, were all of them as Eucharistic as the
Poem, and the Town of Edinburgh should answer this, not I: Nay, the Council of
Scotland Complemented the King on this occasion: Yet it may be the Libeller had
some other design, by choosing some word near the Eucharist, that Mr. Cuninghame
and I might be thought to advance the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But that
I gave the Poem to the Chancellor, No report made of this Article to the
General Commission of the Visitation.
beginning Trino nate di^, is acknowledged by me.

VIII. The next is a Horrid and Impious Curse against my self, when I threatened
one of the Scholars.
My Lords, I did look for some such Accusation; for it is not usual for the
Presbyterians to load Men of a different Opinion from them with ordinary
escapes: They must represent them as abominable, and as Sinners of the first
rate; for all that are not of their way can have no fairer quarter, yet I could
not easily guess who should first invent this prodigious Calumny, a Lie so
notorious, that it could not come out of the Mouth of an ordinary Sinner. The
Story of this Scholar, and the true Original of the Slander is this. In the
beginning of Nov. 1688. I found that Robert Brown the Plunderer (who was then
Mr. Kennedy's Servant) had been for a good while practicing upon some of the
Students, to enter into Tumults, break all Order and Discipline, and to burn
publicly some mock Effigies of the Pope: This certainly would have ruined the
Peace and Order of our Society, many bad Consequences did frequently attend it:
Not only were the Students debauched from their Books, but their Lives exposed
every moment to hazard by the Tumults: Besides, that our College had felt the
bad effects of it some years before. Upon the account of this, and some other
notorious Villainies, I procured Robert Brown to be imprisoned, however, at the
same time I gave him a piece of Money to serve him that night, upon the marrow
I pleaded he might be set at Liberty, upon his promise of amendment, which was
done accordingly; but the Villain grew worse and worse, till at last he became
Captain of the Rabble; and in requital of my forbearance toward him, he writes
and fixes a Placade upon the College Gate threatening to kill the Regents,
ordering me to R^cant my Sermon against the Tumults, and charging me with all
the Bloodshed at the Abbey Upon Monday 10 Dec. 1688, where there were 36
either killed or wounded.
(This Placade is still in my keeping) Notwithstanding of all this, I forbore
to extrude him upon plausible Considerations, at the entreaty of some, and
still he went on in his wicked Course, and all the Robberies committed upon
poor People were laid at our doors, as if our Scholars were to be blamed for
his Extravagancies: At last he committed an Outrage, which might have hanged a
hundred. There was a Woman in my Lord President's House, whom this Brown
caressed and frequented, and she had a quarrel with another Maidservant who
was Popish; immediately Brown is employed by his Godly Mistress to banish the
Popish Maid from the House. He willingly undertook the Service, gathered his
Troop, and entered the House (my Lady being in Childbed, and my Lord President
himself at London) Brown thus invading the Lord President's House, my Lady was
almost frighted to Death; and we that were Masters of the College thought our
selves so disgraced, that the House of our Great and Learned Patron should be
thus rifled in his absence, by one of our Scholars, when his Lady was lying in:
And when we thought that my Lord President could not but be highly offended, to
hear that we had thus requited him for many favors he had done to this
University, I confess, I could no longer forbear, I went to the Class where
Brown was, and called him to the upper Gallery, and gave him all his most
proper names, and threatened him, if he did not immediately beg my Lady
Lockart's pardon, I would break his Bones, all those big words I said to him,
and the day thereafter extruded him with the usual swore: Upon which he
frequently swore he would be revenged; and told the under Janitor, Robert
Henderson, that he had bought a pair of Pistols to shoot me (one might have
served) I beg Your Lordships Pardon for this tedious and unpleasant story; for
none else but Robert Bown, or some of his Associates would ever have accused me
of such an Impious Curse. And when the Libeller will be ingenuous (which I do
not expect) he must confess the Original of this impudent Slander to be just as
I have related it, and let him consult, as much as he pleases, Brown for more
materials to make up a Libel; No Report of this Article, no Witnesses examined;
no not Brown himself after all their industry with him in private*
for I assure him I think my self disgraced if he, or any of his Accomplices,
speak good of me.

XI. The next is, That I ordinarily neglect the Worship of God in my Family.
Sometimes I am accused for having too many Prayers in my Family, and now that
I ordinarily neglect Prayers (for (...) guess, by the Worship of God, he only
means that part of it) But this is a common place, and all of the Episcopal
Persuasion must be represented as Atheists and Scandalous, void of all Devotion
and Piety: But very few of any Sense or Quality will believe this impertinent
Slander, either in the Country, or the City of Edinburgh where we are known;
therefore I thought it not worth any answer.

X. The next is, I Baptized upon Sunday last Mr. James Scot his Child, without
acquainting the Minister of the West-Kirk.
When Mr. Patrick Hepburn, who is the Lawful Minister there (though he be of the
Episcopal Persuasion, as yet is neither Censured nor Deposed) will find fault
with what I have done, I shall endeavor to make amends; but I need not fear
any trouble this way, since I had his leave before: But the Libeller means Mr.
David Williamson, the Presbyterian Mininister, who has no Legal claim, either
to the Benefice or Ministry there: This is a piece of the ordinary modesty of
the Libeller, who is not concerned to enquire into this matter, nor do I
decline to give a reasonable account of what I have done, to any body that asks
it, no, not to Mr. Williamson, if he will but prove himself the Legal Minister
of that place, and withal make good the New Paradox, wherewith he has lately
blessed the World, in his Sermon before the Parliament, viz. That our Savior
died a Martyr for the Presbyterian Government, then I acknowledge my self
obliged, ^ure divino to beg Mr. Williamson's pardon: However, the Child is
Baptized according to the form of the Catholic Church, and I hope they do not
undervalue Ceremonies of Divine Institution so much, as to Re-baptize him.

My Lord Provost, I was interrogate Wednesday last upon some other things, This
part of his Answer was directed to Sir John Hail, a Man so little obliged to
the Universities, that the Masters could not reasonably look for any kindness
from him.
that I do not find in the Copy of Articles given me, as first, that I
frequently Preached unfound Doctrine, but this is an impertinent and indefinite
Accusation (there is no doubt but the Libeller would have Preached otherways
than I did, had he been in the Pulpit) By this the Visitors may see, that the
Libeller had no other design in his Head, than to gather together such Articles
as he thought would make me most odious. What is Sound, or un-Sound Doctrine,
he as little knows, as he does the Secret of the Philosophers Stone. Then
again, That I thought my self independent on the Town of Edinburgh; but I gave
a full anser to this the last day. Then, That I went on to Laureat, the last
Class, without acquainting the Magistrates of the Town, or the Treasurer of the
College. The Provost knows the first part to be a Lie; besides, that it is not
practicable, for this Civility and Deference to the Magistrates runs in course,
and cannot be omited. Too inconsiderable a Man to be any further chastised, H.
F.
That I did not wait upon the Treasurer, is become a fault only since we had a
Treasurer that mistook his Figure, for when he knows himself and the College
better, he will forbear such Impertinencies.

The next was, That I did not punish the Scholars for Whoring and Drinking.
There was not one Scholar, since I had the Government of the College, Convict
of either, nor so much as complained of; but it is naturally impossible for him
to forbear Calumny; the Viper must either burst or spit his Poison. I was then
again interrogate about the Bursars of Theology and Philosophy* to which I
gave a full Answer on Wednesday last.

Upon Thursday the 18th of Sept. 1690, the Inquisitors sat and some of the
Presbyterian Ministers having looked over the public Records, thought they had
discovered a dangerous Plot (...) the occasion whereof was this By King James's
Proclamation for Indulgence we could not impose the former Oaths upon our
Students, when they commenced Masters of Art, and therefore, lest they should
go often without any engagement, the former Oath was comprised into this short
Promise Pollicemur in Deum fidem inviolabilem, in religions Christiana
Reformata perseverantiam erga serenissimum Dominum Regem Obedientiam, etc. But
it fell out so that the word [Reformata] was left out in some place, by which
they would conclude either that the Promise was indefinite, or that there was a
Blank left to be filled up upon occasion with a word, in favors of some other
Religion different from the Reformed. If the first be intended, it is no new
thing to find the Students here Sworn to Oaths as indefinite, as this is; for
the Puritas and Veritas Evangelii, in the Oath imposed by Dr. Golvil, is
coincident with the Christian Religion, mentioned in the Form now challenged;
for I never understood by the Protestant Religion any thing but Christianity
unmixt. But if this be said to be too general, look the Records, Ann. 1662, and
ye shall find that there is not the least mention of Religion in the Oath
Imposed. If the second be said that there was a Blank left on design, it is
humbly desired to know what the design could be; the Bibliothecarius is ready
to depone that he never intended a Blank, nor was he ever ordered a Blank; and
the rest of the Masters may be interrogate, whether ever they knew of any such
design. So that this Phrase, Religio Christiana, without the word [Reformata]
once varied, is purely the Result of Chance, and no Design.

At the Doctors first appearing, it was talked of with that warmth and concern,
that he thought the Gun-powder-Treason was in the Belly of it; so that the
Bibliothecarius his Deposition, who Swore that he wrote nothing in the Book,
but by Order* is not to the purpose, unless he acknowledge a Bla^^^^^gned by
him in that manner of Writing, and Ordered by the Doctor or some of the
Masters; all this bustle comes to nothing, We shall hear more of this in the
Report of the Committee.
unless the Christian Religion in the formula of Promise now challenged,
signify the Antichristian Religion; and if that be, I have no more to say in
his defense.

The Report of the Committee, concerning Doctor MONRO. At Edinburgh, September,
23, 1690.
THE Committee considering that Doctor Monro Princicipal of the College of
Edinburgh, did Judicially refuse to comply with the Qualifications required by
the Act appointing the Visitation of Colleges, except as to his Subscribing
the Confession of Faith; as also it appears by his written Answers, Read and
given Judicially by him, that such as were Mr. Lidderdale's Scholars the
preceding year, should be Taught that year in no other Class, save Mr.
Burnets, (who he confesses lay under the suspicion of being Popish) under
pretense of making a gap in the College, and for other Reasons known to the
Primar himself, as the Act bears; and he does not allege, that he used Means
to cause Master Burnet purge himself of the said suspicion: And further, that
he did take down the Pictures of the Protestant Reformers out of the
Bibliotheque, at a time, when the Earl of Perth, the late Chancellor, came to
Visit the College, without any Pretense or Excuse, but that the late Provost
of Edinburgh did advise him thereto; And that on the 23d of August last, he
Baptized a Child in the Parish of the West-Kirk, without acquainting of the
Minister of the Parish, or License from him; which is contrare to the Rules of
the Established Church Government; As also that he acknowledged, that he had no
Public Dictates one whole year, but only Catechizing; And that it appears by
the Public Registers of the Magistrand Laureation; That whereas, from the year
1663, and till the year 1687. the Magistrands were always Sworn to continue in
the Verity and Purity of the Gospel, or in the Christian Religion Reformed
according to the Purity of the Gospel; yet in the year 1687 and 1688. when
Doctor Monro was Principal, he takes the Magistrands obliged only to persevere
in the Christian Religion; and this Blank is found three several times in the
Book, viz. at two Public Laureations, and a private one; and the Doctor having
laid the blame on the Bibliothecarius his negligence, and craving the
Bibliothecarius might be Examined thereupon* He being accordingly Sworn and
Examined, Depones, that what he wrote in the Magistrand Books, was either by
direction of the Primar or of one of the Regents, and in Presence of a Faculty,
or of a Quorum of them; and that what he did write, was always Read over in
the Presence of the Masters and the Scholars; and particularly the alteration
of the Promise made at the Graduation, in the year 1687, as also the Committee
considering, that at the two last Laureations, in the year 1689 and 1690,
neither Oath nor Promise was required at the Graduation.

It is therefore the Opinion of the Committee, That Doctor Alexander MONRO,
Principal of the College of Edinburgh, be Deprived of his Office, as Primar
there; and that the said Office be Declared vacant.

There is a Letter Written by the said Doctor, and Directed to the late
Archbishop of St. Andrews, Dated Jan. 5. 1689. owned and acknowledged by the
Doctor to be his hand write, the Consideration whereof is Remitted to the
Commission.

The Sentence of Deprivation against Dr. Monro. At Edinburgh, September 25*
1690.
THE Lords and others of the Commission appointed by Act of Parliament, for
Visitation of Universities, Colleges, and Schools, having this day heard and
considered the above written Report of the Committee of the College of
Edinburgh, anent Doctor Monro Primar of the College of Edinburgh; Deposition
and other Instructions produced, and also Doctor Monro being asked, if he was
presently willing to Swear the Oath of Allegiance to Their Majesty's King
William and Queen Mary, and to Sign the same, with the Assurance, and the
Confession of Faith, (which formerly he had offered to Sign before the said
Committee) and if he would Declare his willingness, to submit himself to the
present Church Government, as now Established; The said Doctor Monro, did
Judicially in Presence of the said Commission, refuse to Sign the said
Confession of Faith, and to take the said other Engagements, required to be
done by the said Act of Parliament: And also did Judicially acknowledge his
written Answers produced before the Committee; and did Confess, he caused
remove the Pictures of the Reformers out of the Library: Therefore the said
Commission, approves of the foresaid Committees Report, and finds the same
sufficiently Verified and Proven; And hereby, Deprives the said Doctor
Alexander Monro of his Place, as Primar of the said College of Edinburgh, and
Declares the said place Vacant. Sic Subscribitur

Crafurd, P.

A Review of the abovementioned Report of the Committee, appointed to Visit
the College of Edinburgh, concerning Doctor Monro.
The Report.
THE Committee Considering, that Doctor Monro Principal of the College of
Edinburgh, did Judicially Refuse to comply with the Qualifications Required by
the Act appointing the Visitation of Colleges; except, as to the Subscribing
the Confession of Faith.

Review.
First; It cannot be denied, but that the Doctor did once and again,
deliberately, plainly, and openly, refuse to comply with the New Test,
appointed by the late Act of Parliament for Masters of Universities; but then
it is necessary for Strangers to know what this Test is, and then they will
see, upon what Design it was invented, and why it was Imposed upon Masters of
Universities, and not upon the whole Clergy of the Nation. First, All Masters
of Universities, were required to Sign the Westminster Confession of Faith in
every Article, and to hold every Article de fide, without any Limitation,
Explication, Restriction, or Latitude: When the Doctor gave in his Answers to
the Committee, he was that Afternoon asked, if he would comply with the Act of
Parliament; he told them, he had considered the Act of Parliament, and he could
not comply with it: For, said he, it is needless to insist on particulars,
though I should agree to it in some Instances, I cannot comply with it in its
full Extent; and, in our Language, this is molum ex quolibet defectu* bonum ex
integra causa; thus he answered once, so he had Reason to expect, they would
never give him any trouble about this Question.

But the Committee upon the (...) day of August, would needs ask him again,
whether he would Sign the Westminister Confession of Faith; The Doctor thought
this question was asked to satisfy their private Curiosity, not at all with
regard to the Report they were to make to the General Commission; since he
positively told them before, that he would not comply with the New Test;
therefore he yielded so far to their importunity, as to tell them he had no
great scruples against the Confession of Faith, and that if the Westminster
Confession of Faith, was imposed, as Vinculum Unitatis Ecclesiasticae, and
nothing else required, he might be induced to comply with it very cheerfully;
he was then removed, and in the Interval of his absence before he was called
again, one of the Ministers desired, that no more Questions should be asked,
for in Case, said he, (He should comply with the other particulars of the Test,
where are we then) I had this from a Person of Honor who was present, a Member
of the Visitation: But as long as the Test stood as now it stands, Mr. Kennedy,
if he be the Man, needed not be so much afraid of the Doctor's Compliance: This
Confession, as to the Confession of Faith, is by their Sentence, made to
contradict his public refusal to Sign it before the Commission; as if every
Article of that Book should be received as Infallible Truth; was it not enough,
that he was content to Sign the Confession of Faith, with that Freedom and
latitude, the Protestant Churches used to impose Confessions upon their
Members: But the Earl of Crawford, Praeses of the General Commission, asked the
Doctor when he was sisted before them, whether he would Sign the Westminister
Confession of Faith, without Restriction, Limitation, Explication, or any
Reserve whatsoever; To this, the Doctor Answered plainly and resolutely, he
would not; nor are Confessions thus imposed in any Protestant Church upon
Earth; they look upon them as Secondary Rules, and consequently to be Examined
by the Word of God: And the most Accurate Humane Composures, may afterward be
found in some one Instance or other, to have swerved from the Infallible and
Original Rule of Faith; but the Presbyterian Severity may appear in this, that
they Read the Scriptures with design to defend their own Dictates; whereas,
others Read all Dictates with an Eye to the Holy Scriptures: The Doctor was
content to Defend and Assert upon all occasions, all these Articles in that
Book that were Uniformly Received in all Protestant Churches; Nay more, he was
content never openly and contentiously to Dispute against any of the Doctrines
contained in that Book, so as to advance Faction or Parties; But to Sign the
Confession of Faith in all Articles, and to hold every one of them to be de
fide, he thought not consistent with the Freedom of Universities and Schools:
Heads of Agreement, by the United Ministers, Head 8, of a Confession of Faith.
They might have Learned to be a little more Modest, from the Practice of the
United Dissenters in and about London, who allow any Man to be an Orthodox
Christian, and fit to be Received into their own Refined Communion, if he hold
the Doctrinal part of the 39 Articles of the Church of England; But the
Presbyterians, though they have no Standard of Unity, yet they are mightily
Rigorous in their Impositions; and it is a little odd, that they should have
mentioned this, concerning the Confession of Faith, in their Report, since the
Doctor once and again, told them before the Committee, that the Condition that
Qualified Men by Law for their places in Universities, was a complex thing,
which he could not comply with; such a Rigorous Imposition was never intended
by the Parliament: They thought it necessary for Masters of Universities to
Sign it, as vinculum pacis Ecclesiasticae; but the Ministers were to Comment
upon the Act, and extend it as was most subservient to their Design: The
Presbyterians are against Infallibility in the Theory, Vide Acts of the General
Assemb. 1646.
but will not allow their own Dictates to be Disputed; yet when this Confession
first appeared, they themselves did not Receive it without Restrictions and
Explications; But if there be so much Mischief in Impositions; (as sometimes
they would make us believe) It is in those of this kind, where our
Understandings are Captivate to believe the lesser Niceties and Decisions of
Dogmatick Men, to be de fide; which (with leave of the Presbyterians) I reckon
a far greater and more Spiritual Bondage, than Bowing of my Knees when I
Receive the Holy Eucharist: If Men were so Wise, after our endless and Foolish
Disputes, as not needlessly to multiply the Articles of our Faith; how quickly
might the Christian Church be United on its Apostolical Center, of Unity and
Simplicity; The Papists will not part with one Barbarous word, nor the
Presbyterians with the least Iota of their Orthodox Stuff; though they plead
the Tenderness of their Consciences very loudly, when they are only bid do
things in their Nature indifferent, to preseve External Peace and Uniformity.

The next Branch of this Test, was, The Oath of Allegiance to King William and
Queen Mary.

One great piece of Policy, which the Presbyterians manage against the
Episcopal Party, is, never to require Obedience to the Civil Authority, without
the mixture of some Presbyterian Test; when this Severity is complained of,
they Clamourously Allege, that the Episcopal Party are Enemies to King William
and Queen Mary, and openly in the Coffee-Houses at London vent, that there was
none of the Clergy of Scotland, met with any ill usage, but merely upon the
account of their Disloyalty to King William and Queen Mary: upon the whole
Matter, I have no more at present to say; but that the Presbyterians are never
so much out of Humor, as when they know their Opposites heartily complie with
the Civil Government: Then they find it a little more difficult to turn them
out, though this trouble amounts to no more than the forming of a Libel of
Scandals, and judging them that are Libelled, by the same Men that Accuse them.

But the Presbyterian Hypothesis (when its Consequences are duly considered)
allows no true Allegiance to any King upon Earth; if after all, there lies no
Appeal from the Ecclesiastical Court to him, to whom I Swear Allegiance; for
two Coordinate Supreme Powers in one State, is a Contradiction; and therefore,
whenever I am required to Swear Allegiance to the King; The first thing I
humbly crave, is, to be delivered from that Presbytery, which will supersede
that Allegiance upon occasion; for it is not enough to tell me, that the Power
of the Presbyterians is Spiritual, and the other is Secular; for I feel their
Spiritual Power meddles with all my Temporals; that though I hear the Voice of
Jacob, I am oppressed by the hands of Esau: And though it is an easy thing for
them to tell me, they only meddle in Ordine ad Spiritualia; yet, that is but a
word, and but a Foolish one too; for by the same Logic, they may cut my
Throat, as well as turn me out of my House and Living, and both may be said to
be in Ordine ad Spiritualia: But every Man knows, how inconsistent the
Presbyterian Principles are with the Royal Prerogative of Kings: And it is very
hard to leave the Episcopal Clergy to their Mercy, who, by their Hopes of
Heaven, are Sworn to destroy them in the Solemn League and Covenant, which is
still the Standard; and though they think it not time all of them again to Renew
it; yet they magnify it on all occasions, and Act exactly conform to it.

The next Branch of the New Test, is, the Certificate or Assurance, which you
may Read in the Act of Parliament: If Allegiance, Naturally imply an
Affectionate and Sincere Resolution to serve the King, against all others upon
all occasions; then some will say, this additional tie of Fidelity, is
superfluous; I am sure that many in England who will endeavor to serve the
Government with all Cheerfulness, and Zeal, could not be made to Subscribe any
such Declaration as this is: But let it be Remembered, that when this Act passed
in Parliament, very few either of the Nobility or Gentry were present.

The Fourth Article of the Test Requires, that they should submit to the
Presbyterian Kirk Government; for if they had complied with the former three,
this was a sufficient reserve for the Presbyterian Interest; every thing the
Masters did or said, good or bad, might be turned into a Libel, and they were
Judges of what every Libel deserved: Their Discipline is a bottomless Abyss;
the Masters behoved to be Tenants at will, if once they submitted to their
Government: It was an easy thing for the Presbyterians to From Libels: Nay,
rather it is impossible for them not to form them; for so many of them desiring
to be thrust into these places, it was folly to expect any peaceable
Possession. And if there were no other reason to refuse the Test now appointed;
but that it required Submission to Presbytery, I think any knowing and
ingenuous Man might be excused for his noncompliance.

Now you have seen the Test in all its Branches, and Strangers will be
surprised, to hear that there are no Oaths at present required in Scotland of
any Clergy Man, but only of the Masters of Universities. The reason is this,
the Presbyterians intended speedily to plant themselves in these places, and
for the rest of the Clergy they doubt not quickly to dispossess them of their
Livings, by the Power of their Government, upon such pretenses as they can
easily devise and suggest against them. Such of the Presbyterians as entered
into the Universities took the Oaths; but it was thought sit to impose no Oaths
upon the whole Body of the Presbyterians, that the Kirk might preserve its
independency upon the State; so this Law was not made for the Saints, but for
Wicked Men and Malignants. They know they may dispatch the rest of the Clergy
by methods, such as are frequently complained of: For who can stand before the
force of Presbytery?

Sternit Agros, sternit sata laeta, Boumque labores
Praecipitesque trahit Silvas.
Like an impetuous Torrent that runs all down before it.

Report.
As also it appears by his written Answers read, and given judicially by
himself, that he made an Act of the Faculty, that such as were Mr. Lidderdale's
Scholars the preceding year, should be taught that year in no other Class,
than that of Mr. Burnet's (who he confesses lay under the Suspicion of being
Popish) under pretense of making a Gap in the College, and for other Reasons
known to the Principal himself, as the Act bears. And he does not allege that
he used means to cause Mr. Burnet purge himself of the said Suspicion.

Review.
There are here a great many things jumbled together, and therefore they must
be explained more particularly. But it was not possible for the Ministers that
drew up this Report, to have contained more Nonsense and Malice in so few
words. And some Persons of Quality, who were Members of this Visitation, do
confess that the Doctor did nothing in Mr. Burnet's affair, but what they would
have done, if they had been in his Circumstances: But the matter of Fact is
this: There fell a Regents place vacant in the College of Edinburgh, by the
Death of Mr. Lidderdale: Mr. Burnet had his eye upon this place a good while
before Mr. Lidderdale died, and so prevented the diligence of all Competitors:
He was recommended very strongly to the Provost, and other Magistrates of
Edinburgh who are Patrons. The Doctor, upon the death of Mr. Lidderdale, fixed
his eye on Mr. James Martin, Professor of Philosophy in the Old College of
St. Andrews, his particular Friend and Acquaintance, who had taught Philosophy
several years in that Famous University, with great Success and Applause; and
did recommend him with all the Zeal imaginable to the Magistrates, that he
might be chosen in the room of Mr. Lidderdale, now deceased! Several Divines
and Physicians, Men of unquestionable Learning and Reputation, in the City,
know that the Doctor used all means to keep Mr. Burnet out of the College: But
Mr. Burnet (being recommended by the Duke of Gordon, and his Friends at
Edinburgh being pre-ingaged to lay hold upon this advantage as soon as there
was occasion,) prevailed in this Competition, notwithstanding the Doctor, and
several other Friends, did with all Vigor interpose in Favors of Mr. James
Martyn.

Mr. Thomas Burnet had emitted some Theses, in which were some positions
favorable to the Absolute Power of Kings, and particularly the King of Scots:
It seems this was magnified by the Person of Quality that recommended him to
the Town of Edinburgh; several People did upon this suspect him either to be a
Papist, or not far from Popery, if any strong temptation did assault him; and
this was industriously propagated by some against him; so that many were
determined to keep back their Children, either from his Class, or from the
College for good and all. The Doctor found that the College was at a
disadvantage by such Reports, as were founded on slight Surmises, and therefore
he was at the pains to undeceive some Citizens and others, that Mr. Burnet was
no Papist; and this he had good reason to do, because Mr. Burnet, as soon as he
entered Regent in the College of Edinburgh, offered cheerfully to sign the
Test, and Renounce all Popery and Phanaticism. And therefore the Doctor (having
nothing in his view, but the public advantage of the House, and that there
might be an even balance betwixt the four Professors of Philosophy; and that
none of them might make a Monopoly, either of the Scholars that came to be
taught, or of the Profits got by them) took all possible care to make Mr.
Burnet as useful as he could, though he was thrust into that College against all
the endeavors the Doctor could use to keep him out of it. If he had done
otherways, and suffered such reports to fly abroad, the Country would have
concluded all the Masters in the House were Popishly affected, and so withdrawn
their Children from the Seminary. The fear that many would absent themselves
from the College on this occasion, touched the Doctor to the quick, and made
him struggle with all possible Industry to keep up the Reputation of that
House, especially since the Government of it was committed to him, and that it
had flourished for many years before he entered under the Inspection of his
Learned Predecessors. And lest some other Professors might take advantage of
the misfortune Mr. Burnet lay under, he procured that an Act of the Faculty
should pass, that the Scholars who had been in the preceding year taught their
Greek in Mr. Lidderdale's Class should be admitted to no other Class, for that
year, but Mr. Burnet's, who was orderly brought into his place. This was the
current uninterrupted Practice of the House, and of all other Philosophy
Colleges in the Nation: Here was no Arbitrary stretch, nor no Statute of the
House violated, and no Member of the Faculty was forced to Vote otherwise than
they pleased. This account of the Act that passed in the Faculty, in favors of
Mr. Burnet, is in it self Reasonable, Just, and True; how then can the
Inquisitors pretend there was another Design, than what is alleged by the
Doctor? They Will tell you there was another Design; the Doctor favored Papists,
Mr. Burnet was a Papist, and that was the Reason why the Doctor wished many
Scholars to be taught by Mr. Burnet. It is natural for such as never designed
well in their life, and never with regard to the public advantage, to suspect
the most Laudable and Innocent Actions to proceed from the worst Principles and
Designs; Did Mr. Burnet truly teach any Popery? Or did the Doctor recommend to
him to teach Popery? Did any of his Scholars ever hear him teach any thing that
looked like Popery? No, that cannot be alleged; but it was fit for the
Presbyterians to say so, and though they could bring no proof for what they say,
yet they impudently insist on it. If they had not lost all sense of common
Modesty, they might have learned more Discretion.

But let us examine more narrowly the Reasonings of this part of their Report.
They tell us, in the first place, that the Doctor made an Act of the Faculty:
This is an Impertinence; for though he presided in the Faculty when it met, he
could by himself make no Act. The Reasons, perhaps, he alleged for the Act,
might determine his Brethren to Vote, as he did in that juncture.

They tell us next, that the Doctor confesses that Mr. Burnet lay under the
suspicion of being Popish. It is true, that in the second Article of the Libel
formed against the Doctor, the Presbyterians say, that Mr. Burnet lay under the
suspicion of being Popish. Those words of their own Libel, the Doctor repeats
in his Answer to the second Article; and this Repetion of their own words, they
make to be the Doctors Confession. This must needs proceed from, either
unpardonable Malice, or Stupidity. For in what sense can it be said, that the
Doctor confessed that Mr. Burnet was suspected of Popery? Was it any fault of
his, that Mr. Burnet was suspected, or can Mr. Burnet himself be blamed that he
was suspected? The least mistake may occasion one to be suspected, and yet he
may be very innocent; notwithstanding of all the Suspicions that may be to the
contrary: This is a malicious and foolish way of Reasoning; for the most
public Spirited, and most innocent Men may be Suspected and Libelled too by
Malice and Envy, and yet continue in their Integrity. Let me expose this way of
Reasoning a little more familiarly. A very Eminen, Member of the pretended
General Assembly, is suspected to have Enriched himself with a part of the
Money given by the Sectarian Army to the Presbyterians, when the King was
delivered up at New Castle: Is the General Assembly to be blamed, because they
did not oblige this Man to vindicate himself from this Suspicion, before he sat
in the Assembly; or was that Member himself to be blamed, because he was
suspected of it, unless there can be some evident proof brought, that he did
actually receive a considerable Sum of Money from the Sectarian Army, upon the
former consideration: I believe neither that Member, nor the General Assembly,
will allow of this way of Reasoning, when it is applied to their own Case. I Will
make it more clear yet, by one or two Instances. Another great Reformer in
Fife, is suspected of being accessory to the Murder of Dr. Sharp, Rin^eit.
Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews, and it may be this Suspicion is founded upon
better Reasons than the other, of Mr. Burnet's being a Papist; do they
therefore think it reasonable to treat him as if he were a Murderer: There is
no doubt they will be more merciful, if they remember his Service to their
Cause. There is one Urqhart who is suspected to have spoken Contemptuously of
the Lords Prayer, A Presbyterian Minister.
and our Blessed Savior, for having Composed it, and of doing this in the most
blaspemous Expressions; do they therefore think he should be stoned to Death,
upon the account of this Suspicion? For my part I do not think Suspicion a just
Reason against any Man. Our Savior himself was said to be a Wine-bibber, a
Friend to Publicanes and Sinners; and all the Innocence of Heaven, and Luster
of his Divinity, could not keep him from being Censured by the Pharisees; so I
hope we need no more insist upon this: When the Doctor is turned out, and when
they consider seriously, they may perhaps acknowledge they ought to have
Reasoned better.

But we are told, the Favor done to Mr. Burnet, was under pretense of making a
Gap in the College; so it is insinuated, that, whatever the Doctor pretended,
the true design was to advance Popery; at this rate it was not possible to do,
or say any thing, no, nor to look to any quarter of the College, but what
might be suspected of having some Popish Plot in it. But was the Doctor
observed to keep Company with Mr. Burnet more familiarly than he did with other
Masters; no, this is not, nor cannot be alleged, for to tell the plain Truth,
he never Treated any Man in his Life so roughly, as he did Mr. Burnet
sometimes, for which he blamed himself afterward; then in the Name of Common
Sense and Modesty, tell me, where lay the Popish Plot: If the Doctor had not
obviated the Lying Reports that went abroad, of Mr. Burnet's being a Papist,
one of the four Classes had been wanting in the College; and if this had truly
fallen out by his Laziness; had it not been a great disadvantage both to the
Town and College, and to the Doctor's own Reputation? Would it not been said,
that the College Flourished formerly, but now, since it had a Governor that
understood not the Interest of it, it decayed in its Number, Order, and
Splendour? This would have been the just Consequence, if Mr. Burnet had not been
Vindicated from the Suspicion of being a Papist; And they that now manage the
Argument against the Doctor, would have been the first and loudest Accusers of
his Conduct; but it seems, that they thought it no prejudice to the College to
want one entire Class: It Is true, the Doctor might have suffered Mr. Burnet to
sink or swim, without his Assistance; and perhaps he would have done so, if
there had been nothing in it, but Master Burnet's private Interest; but when
the Reputation of the College was in hazard, any Man of Common Sense would
excuse the Doctor, to interpose in that Affair with all Vigor and Application;
It may be, they have no Notion of the Principal's Office; but, that he must be
some Grave un-active Thing, that must be thought Wise, because he cannot speak,
and a Prudent Governor, because he dares not meddle with their Disorders: But
we are told,

That the Act runs thus; That the Doctor procured the Act, in favor of Mr.
Burnet, for several Reasons known to himself; The Doctor does not deny, but
that when the Act of the Faculty was made, some such Expression might have
dropped from him, that such an Act was necessary for several Reasons, not fit to
be insisted on particularly in that Conference; And when the Reader considers
the Reasons that are already given, he will find there was just Cause for that
you to make such an Act; though no Reason (at all can be given for compelling the
Masters to give such a particular account of their Administrations in so
trifling an Occurrence.

But they insist on another Argument, to prove that the Doctors Concern in
this, had in it some one Popish Design or other; because the Doctor does not
allege, that he used means to cause Master Burnet This word in the Phanatick
Language signifies the Vindication of one from Calumny and Slander.
purge himself of the said suspicion of being Popish.

Here is Modesty with a Witness; how could the Doctor Allege in his own
Defense, what he enjoined Mr. Burnet to do in Order to his Vindication: unless
the Inquisitors had given the Doctor a particular occasion to tell, whether he
did oblige Mr. Burnet to Vindicate himself or not; did ever any of them that
were Members of that Committee ask that particular question, whether he ordered
Mr. Burnet to take all just and Reasonable Methods, to Vindicate himself from
the Suspicion of being Popish? Or did ever the Doctor refuse to give a plain
Answer to all the Questions, that were asked? But the Inquisitors would have
the Doctor (such is their Ingenuity and Candor) Answer all possible Questions,
as well as those that were proposed; why did not they ask the Question in
particular? If they had, the Doctor would have Answered, that Sir Thomas
Kennedy then Lord Provost of Edinburgh; and he himself too, did enjoin Mr.
Burnet to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, with the very first
occasion, in the Gray-Frier Church, from Dr. Robertson, that the People might
see, that the rumors of his being Popish, were groundless and fictitious; and
accordingly Mr. Burnet did so, and engaged all his Friends through the City, to
vindicate him every where, from the Calumnious Suspicions vented against him.
Now if the Inquisitors had asked particular Questions, they would have met with
particular Answers; but they must blame the Doctor for not Answering the
Questions they might have started, as well as those that were asked; and if
they are not as yet satisfied by this account of things, they may satisfy
themselves by some hundreds of Witnesses in Edinburgh: But there needs no such
Appeals be made to the Citizens of Edinburgh, since the Testimony of Sir Thomas
Kennedy alone (a Person of so much Honor and Integrity) is instead of a
Thousand Evidences. And I think we have enough of this Impertinence.

Report.
And further, That he did take down the Pictures of the Protestant Reformers
out of the Bibliotheque, at a time when the Earl of Perth, the late Lord
Chancellor, came to visit the College, without any other Pretense or Excuse,
but that the then Provost of Edinburgh did advise him thereto.

Review.
This is the Argument by which they seem to triumph over the Doctor, and which
they managed with all Art and Industry. Nothing pleased the Gossiping Sisters
so much as this Story, for they hugged and embraced each other at the hearing
of it: Some said the Doctor did take away the Pictures out of the College: No,
Sister, said another, he sent them away down to the Abbey of Hollyrood-House,
and there they were burned by the Papists. And this being the last and most
odious Story, prevailed; and if any body offer to contradict it, they were
ready to fly in his Face, as an Enemy to the Good old Cause: But before I come
to tell of the matter of Fact in particular, let us view the Report in Truth
and Ingenuity. Therefore let me ask one Question, Did ever the Earl of Perth,
Lord High Chancellor, come to the College of Edinburgh in Person, to visit
the said College, all the time that the Doctor had the Government of that
House? This must be answered negatively, because the Chancellor never came to
the College; for the Visitation sat in the upper Rooms of the Parliament
House, not in the College. And it is not easy to guess how they could be so
impertinent, as to name the Lord Chancellor on this occasion.

You have seen the Doctor's answer to this Article of the Label before; but
then he thought that he needed not make it more public nor more particular;
but since they must have all come to light, the matter of Fact is this: When
the Committee came to that Article of the Libel against the Doctor, that he had
removed the Pictures of the Reformers out of the Bibliotheck, and asked him
what he had to say to it: He told them that there was a Gentleman concerned,
whose Name and Person he honored, and he behoved to name him, if he was
obliged to give a particular answer to that part of the Libel; and tho there
was nothing done, but what deserved Applause and Commendation; yet it was not
very good Manners to toss the name of any worthy Person before Courts and
Judicatures needlessly; Therefore he desired that one of their Number might be
Commissioned to hear his Answer in private; and if that Person was satisfied
with the Answer, they might trust him so far, as to make no further inquiry
into this matter; but if he was not satisfied, then the Doctor was ready to
make the Answer as public and as plain as they required. The Committee yielded
to this overture, and asked the Doctor whom he would communicate his Answer to,
he said he would give it gladly to Sir John Dalrumple, then Lord Advocate; and
he named him, because he knew him to be a Person of Sense and good Manners. Sir
John asked the Doctor whether he would not communicate the Answer to Sir John
Hall, then Preses of the Committee. The Doctor answered that he was content to
do so; he thought in discretion he could not refuse him, since he was once
named: Then Sir John Hall withdrew from the Table, and went to a Window in the
upper Hall of the College, to hear what account the Doctor would make of it in
private. Then the Doctor told Sir John thus, That he could not give a
particular Answer to the Libel, without making mention of Sir Thomas Kennedy's
name; this he thought would have been great rudeness, where there were so many
Spectators; but the true and plain account of the matter was this. That Sir
Thomas Kennedy, then Lord Provost of Edinburgh, did expect that the Visitation,
which was appointed by King James, in the Year should sit in the College
Library, and he feared that some of them who were in the Retinue of Persons of
Quality might take occasion, from the sight of the Pictures of the first
Reformers, to begin some one Discourse, neither so pleasing to the Protestants,
nor yet so fit to be heard in that House. And therefore that no such occasion
might be given to them, and that all such Debates might be waved at that time,
Sir Thomas ordered and advised the Pictures of the Reformers, which hung in the
Library, might be removed, for some few days, out of their usual place, and so
soon as this occasion was over, they might be hung up again where they were.
Sir John receives this Answer from the Doctor, and returns again to the Table,
and gave some general Answer, with which all of them seemed to be satisfied at
that time, for ought I know, Now let me examine their Discretion and Sincerity
in this particular, either Sir John was satisfied with the Answer that he got
in private, or not; if he was satisfied himself (the thing being revealed to
him under Secrecy and Confidence) how came he to make it public, for the
Committee having allowed the Doctor one of their Number to hear his Answer in
private, did plainly yield, that if the Answer satisfied that particular
Trustee, they were no more to insist upon it; if he was not satisfied why did
he not plainly declare his dissatisfaction when he returned to the Table; then
the Doctor would have given the full and plain Answer himself, without any
Disguise or Reserve: Sir John Hall being Provost of Edinburgh, should have
defended the Authority of his Predecessor; and he knows very well that he
himself did frequently and impertinently interpose his Authority about the
College, in things that had no such tendency, either as to its Preservation,
or Honor, as what Sir Thomas Kennedy, in that Interval, did intend. But it
seems the Committee thought fit to examine Sir John Hall upon Oath, what it was
that the Doctor told him in private: This was not fair, for they might oblige
the Doctor himself to tell all that he had to say upon this Head: For if they
obliged him to make a public Answer, it was as good he should do it by
himself, as by another. But the most pleasant part of the Story is this, That
Sir John deposes upon Oath, that the Doctor told him in private, that it was by
Sir Thomas his Advice. But did the Doctor intend to exclude his Order, when he
alleged his Advice in his own Defense; or does the Learned Committee think,
that the serious and prudent Advice of a Person invested with Authority, has
not the usual force of an Act of Jurisdiction. But they condemn the Doctor,
because he did it by Advice; but did not the Doctor, before the Commission it
self, allege Sir Thomas his Order, as well as his Advice? And might not his
just Defense be heard at the Higher Court, as well as the Lower? And if he was
not so full and accurate in his Defenses to Sir John in private, why might he
not be allowed to give one more full in public? When the E. of Crawford
examined him about this particular, whether he confessed that he removed the
Pictures of the Reformers by Sir Thomas Kennedy's Advice? The Doctor answered,
That what he did in that Affair, was by his Advice and Order too. The Earl
gravely shook his Head, and told, that Sir John Hall was upon Oath, and that
Sir John did not make mention of any Order. Truly one would have thought this
was nothing to the purpose; for if what the Doctor said was true in it self, it
was as fit to be alleged in his Defenses before the Commission, as before the
Committee, or Sir John. Therefore the Doctor pleaded that Sir Thomas Kennedy
might be examined upon this particular; but that was denied, for it was no part
of their business to find the Doctor in the right. Sir John Hall declared, Though
the Doctor did this by order, yet he needed no order for it, it being in his
power to remove and set up Pictures, or any other Furniture as he pleased.
that the Doctor said, he had removed the Pictures by Sir Thomas Kennedy's
Advice, so it was fit for them to conclude, he had no Order for what he did.
Now if such Nonsense pass in the Eye of the Nation, what must the Ministers
expect in some corners of the Country, where Ruling Elders, Shoomakers and
Weavers, are their ordinary Judges.

But why all this mighty noise about this trifle? Is it a Sin to remove
Pictures for two days, from one corner of a Room to another: They Will tell you,
I believe, it was no Sin in it self; but it was done with a bad Design. But Sir
Thomas Kennedy, and the Doctor, will say it was done with a good design, where
then are the Evidences that there was a bad design in it? It Is true, there is
no Evidence; but since it is capable of a misconstruction, it is as impossible
for them to take it by the right handle; as to bring any solid proof, there was
any bad design in it, from the first to last. But since I have said, that Sir
Thomas ordered what was done in this Affair, let me subjoyn his own Declaration
upon the whole matter.

BEing informed that the Reverend Dr. Alexander Monro, Principal of the
College of Edinburgh, is charged with causing take down some Pictures of
Luther, Calvin, Buchanan, and others of our first Reformers from Popery, which
hung in the Bibliotheck there: And his so doing is represented as an Argument
of his disaffection to the Reformers, I find my self obliged in Duty and Honor
to declare, that what he did in that particular, was done at my desire and
appointment, I bebeing Prevost of Edinburgh at that time; which was intended
and done by me upon no other motive, and for no other end, but that there being
a Visitation of the College immediately to ensue, where I had reason to
suspect several Romish Priests and Jesuits might be present, I thought a
prudent Caution was to be used, for saving these Pictures of our worthy
Reformers from being abused, or ridiculed: This made me think it convenient,
that for some few days these should be removed, as accordingly they were; and
how soon this occasion was over, they were immediately hung up in their former
places again. At the same time I took care to have kept out of the view of such
Priests, whatsoever might prove tempting or inviting about the College, to
kindle their endeavors for getting it a Seat or Seminary for them or their
Religion, and I gave the necessary orders accordingly, which is well known to
several of the Masters of the College. I am sorry to be obliged to give this
Declaration, but that I find it necessary, both for mine own, and the Reverend
Principal (whose firmness in, and public Sermons for, as well as his Abilities
to assert and defend our Holy Religion, are so notour in this City) his
Vindication, when what was so well and honestly meant for the Honor of our
Religion, and to save the Worthy and Eminent Reformers thereof from being
Exposed or Ridiculed, should be so grossly mistaken, and groundlesly, not to say
maliciously, inverted and misrepresented as a Crime. Given at Edinburgh the 7th
day of October. 1690, Before these Witnesses, William Reid, my Servitour, and
Hector Monro, Writer in Edinburgh. Sic Subscribitur.

W. Reid, and H. Monro, Witnesses. Tho. Kennedy.

Report.
And that on the twenty third of August last, he Baptized a Child in the Parish
of the West-Kirk, without acquainting the Minister of the Parish therewith, or
License from him, which is contrary to the Rules of the Established Church
Government.

Review.
It is true that the Doctor did Baptize Mr. James Scot's Child, without
acquainting of Mr. David Williamson therewith, with, who at that time had no
Title to be Minister of the West-Kirk. For Mr. Patrick Hepburn was then
Minister, and of the Episcopal Persuasion, and no Sentence against him; and if
his Infirmities did confine him to his House, it was so much the greater
Charity to officiate in his Parish, especially when the Parent of the Child
(unless I mistake him) is determined never to have any of his Children Baptized
by Mr. Williamson. But I believe the Doctor is so far from being a Penitent in
this instance, that if it were to be done again, he could venture upon it
without any fear or remorse, and then there was no restraint upon him; and I
believe many of the Nobility and Gentry that sat upon the Commission, will
think this as impertinent an Accusation, as that which follows next to be
examined.

Report.
As also, that the Doctor acknowledges he had no public Dictates one whole
year, but Catechizing.

Review.
I must give the History of this particular in the plainest manner: For I think
the Records of all Nations, and Histories will not parallel this Accusation
(all things being duly considered) The several Committees had Order from the
General Commission, to look carefully into the Dictates that were taught the
Scholars in all Schools and Universities: Pursuant to this Order, The
Committee, appointed to visit the College of Edinburgh, ordered Dr. Monro,
upon the 25th. of August, within two or three days after, to give up to the
Clerk of the Committee a Copy of his Dictates. The Doctor told them what the
Themes were, upon which he had his public Praelections, viz. De Deitate
Christi, De ejusdem Sacrificio, De adventu Messiae, De natura, ortu and
progressu Religionis Christianae, etc. And so they needed not be Inquisitive
after them, for they were not likely to find in them those Opinions, that they
were most zealous against. But withal he added, that he himself wrote a very
ill hand, that the Papers that lay by him were in many places blotted and
interlined. But he promised where ever he could find a Copy among the Students,
he would deliver it up to their view. For the Copy they wrote was more just
than any he had in his keeping; for in the very time of the Public
Praelection, he did Add, Change, and Alter as he saw convenient. This did not
satisfy, but one of their number pleaded, that he should give up his Dictates
immediately, and that the Apology he made, was a Shift and downright contempt
of the Committee: I think it was Hume of Polwart that reasoned thus, with some
degrees of warmth against the Doctor: The Doctor was content to undeceive them
as far as was possible, and therefore he desired they might name some of their
own number to examine his Dictates, and that he would wait upon them, and read
the Dictates to them himself, since he presumed none else could read them so
well. It seems they found this overture reasonable; for after that offer made
by the Doctor, he heard not one word more of the Dictates, they never inquired
after them. However, the Doctor procured a legible Copy of his Dictates, De
Sacrificio Christi, from one of the Students, and gave it to the Clerks, that
they might give it to whom they pleased. It fell out, that when they were
speaking very hotly about the Doctor's Dictates, that he told them himself,
that for one year he had changed his public Dictates into Chatechetio
Conferences. The reason was this, That he perceived that it was not possible to
order any public Lesson, equal to the Capacity and Advantage of all the
Students; for some of them being but so very young, that they were but Learning
their Latin and Greek; Others of them being advanced so near the Degree of
Masters of Art, most part of the Youth, within the College, could not be
thought capable to understand Theological Controversies, which were the
ordinary Theams of such Public Praelections. Therefore the Doctor advised with
some of the Masters, what way the public Lecture, upon the Wednesdays, might
be made Universally useful to all the Students within the College. And the
result was, that he told the Students he would not put them that Year to the
toil of writing any, but ordered them to convene frequently on the Wednesdays,
and he would explain to them the Apostolic Creed, one Article after another,
viva voce, this he did for that year: The Students were better satisfied, much
more edified, and less wearied, than when they were obliged to Write; for now
they came to the School freely of their own accord, without constraint; whereas
formerly they neither writ what was Dictated, nor were all the Masters able to
drive them to the public Hall, when they had strained their Authority to the
greatest height. And perhaps some of them who were most concerned then to
magnify every shadow of an Objection against the Doctor, have found by their
proper experience, that the public Dictates are no more regarded than their
Character: This then was the Doctor's fault that he changed a public Lesson,
that served no end, but that of Form and useless Solemnity, into a profitable,
useful, and serious Exercise. By his employment, he was obliged to teach the
Youth the first Principles of Christian Religion; what more proper method could
he devise, than go through the Articles of the Apostolic Creed, and explain
them, partly from Scripture, partly from the assistance of Natural Reason,
partly from the Universal Tradition of the Church, and partly from such
Concessions of Pagan Authors, as might either illustrate or confirm what was
believed among the Christians: This was the method he took: But was the Doctor
obliged, by any Statute in the House, never to vary the former Custom of
Praelections? No, that is neither pretended nor alleged; wherein then was he
to be blamed, that he taught his own Scholars in the manner he judged most
proper for their Edification? perhaps, when Elias comes he will tell us where the
fault lay, and not till then shall we ever know. Let me ask one question, and
so I Will leave this Argument: Did all the Doctor's Predecessors so
Superstitiously observe this way of Dictating, without change or alteration of
the Method? No, for the truly Learned and Pious Dr. Lighton, Bishop of
Dumblain, when he was Principal of the College of Edinburgh, did never oblige
them to write one word from his Mouth: But instead of those Dictates,
recommended to them, viva voce, the most excellent truths of the Christian
Religion, in the most unimitable strains of Piety and Eloquence. And Mr.
Adamson his Predecessor did Catechize, as you may see by the Printed Copy of
his Catechism; nor is there any restraint upon the Principal of the College,
either from Statute or Custom, why he may not change his Method, as often as he
sees convenient: Yet to make a mighty muster of Arguments against the Doctor,
his Catechetick Conference, must be made a part of his Crime: I think one Mr.
Law had the honor of making this discovery, but I am not very sure of it.

Report.
And that it appears by the public Registers of the Magistrand Laureation,
that whereas, in the Year 1663, till the Year 1687, the Magistrands were always
sworn to continue in the Verity and Purity of the Gospel, or in the Christian
Religion reformed, according to the Purity of the Gospel; yet in the Year 1687
and 1688, when Dr. Monro was Principal, he takes the Magistrands obliged only
to persevere in the Blank Christian Religion, and this Blank is found three
several times in the Book, viz. At two public Laureations, and a private one,
and the Doctor having laid the blame on the Bibliothecarius his negligence, and
craving the Bibliothecarius might be examined thereupon. He being accordingly
Sworn and examined Depones, that what he wrote in the Magistrand Book, was
either by direction of the Primar, or of one of the Regents, and in presence of
the Faculty, or of a Quorum of them, and that what he did write in the said
Book, was always read over in presence of the Masters and Scholars. And
particularly the Alteration of the Promise made at the Graduation, in the Year
1687. As also the Committee considering that at the two last Laureations, in
the Year, 1689, and 1690, neither Oath nor Promise was required at the
Graduation:

It is therefore the Opinion of the Committee, that Dr. Alexander Monro,
Principal of the College of Edinburgh, be deprived of his Office, as Primar
there; and that the said Office be declared vacant.

There is a Letter written by the said Doctor, and directed to the late
Archbishop of St. Andrews, dated the 5th. of January, 1689, owned and
acknowledged by the Doctor to be his hand Writ, the consideration whereof is
Referred to the Commission.

Review.
Here it at last some dangerous Plot discovered: To make the Account of it as
short and easy as is possible, let me first explain some words that are
peculiar to our Country. By the Magistrands is understood that particular
Number and Society of Students, that are ready to Commence Masters of Art; by
the Laureation is understood the Public Solemnity of conferring this Degree;
The particular Answer to this objection, is given before; but I will unfold the
whole Matter, by proposing some Queries relating to it: The first, is, did the
Doctor Administer the Current Oath, that was ordinarily Sworn by Masters of
Art, all the time he was in the College, until there was a Proclamation, Feb.
1687. by King James, forbidding all Discriminative Oaths?

Yes he did. But how can that be made evident? yes it may be made evident by
the following Transcripts of the public Registers, that all who Commenced
Masters of Arts since the Doctor entered, were made to Swear the Current Oath of
the House, until the Proclamation of Indulgence did forbid all such
Discriminative Oaths; and therefore the Public Registers.
Reader will be at the pains to read as follows, Anno 1686. De disciplina
Magistri Herberti Kennedy sollinne formulae sponsionis and Juramenti Accademici
Edinburgeni praescripti nos quorum subsequuntur nomina cordicitus subsignamus.

So you see, that all that Received the Degree that year, did Sign the Oath, 3
Junii 1686. eidem S. S. Juramento praescripto subscripserunt Gulielmus Baird,
and Joannes Monro.

Another was Graduate, 9th of July 1686. Another, July 20, 1686. Another, July
26, 1686. Another, upon the 24 August, 1686. Another, upon the 31 August 86.
Another, upon the 22d of Sept. 86. Another, upon the 22d of October, 86.
Another, upon the 23d of December, 86. And all of them did Swear, and Sign the
same Oath that was formerly Sworn.

Then it is Alleged in the Doctor's Defense, that the current Oath of the
House was Administered, until all such Oaths were Prohibited by the
Proclamation, Feb. 1687? Yes that is Alleged, and no change observed, until
the 4th of April 87.

But did other Masters of other Universities, particularly in the Universities
of St. Andrews and Glascow, forbear the Imposing of all such Discriminative
Oaths after the Proclamation, Feb. 87. as well as the Doctor? Yes, that they
did: Were they ever Challenged for this, by any Committee sent to Examine their
Behavior? No, not at all, not one of them was Challenged for it: What is it
then that the Doctor is Blamed for? He is Blamed for this, that in stead of the
former Oath which he would (but durst not) Impose, he required a General
Promise of persevering in the Christian Religion: But is not the word, Reformed
Religion, never to be met with in that Public Promise, required of the
Students, instead of the former Oath? Yes, I told you before, that the first
Alteration that is observable, is, upon the 4th of April 87. and then the
Promise was, to persevere in the Christian Religion: But this being thought too
General and Indefinite; in the Month of June thereafter in the same Year, as
may be seen in the Public Registers; the words run, pollicemur in puriore
Religione Christiana perseverantium: Did the Doctor at any time thereafter, in
Private or in Public, with or without the knowledge of the Masters, Order the
Bibliothecarius to leave out the word Puriore? No, that he never did; Have we
no other Evidence for that, than the Doctors bare Assertion? Yes, as you may
see by the Bibliothecarius his Declaration, subjoined to this Dialogue, upon
the word of a Christian, that he was never Enjoined, either by the Doctor or
any of the Regents, to leave out the word (puriore) or (Reformata) But did not
the Bibliothecarius leave a Blank, as the Inquisitors allege? The
Bibliothecarius will answer that Question in the Declaration himself: But are
there no other Instances preceding the Doctor's time, even when there was no
Public Proclamations, forbidding Discriminative Oaths; in which, the Masters
of Edinburgh took the Liberty to change the Public Formula of the Oath? Yes,
several Instances may be given of such Changes, if any Man will be at the pains
to peruse the Registers; I Will name but one, it is in the Year 1662, and the
Students, when they Commenced Masters of Art, had an Oath Administered to them;
in which, there is not the least mention of any thing Relating to Religion; and
therefore the Inquisitors date the Custom of Swearing this Oath, from the year
1663; for they evidently saw, if they had gone further back, they would have
met with a Formula, in the year 1662, much more Loose, General and Indefinite,
than that for which the Doctor is challenged; and lest he might have any such
Precedent from the Public Registers in his own Defense; they that drew up the
Report, fraudulently passed it over in silence; so they concluded, it seems,
that no Religion was better, than the Christian; For some of them that sat
Judges in that Committee, did Commence Master of Art that very Year, 1662, in
the College of Edinburgh; when the General Oath Imposed, only obliged them to
continue, Fautores Academiae Edinburgenae; and some Members of the Committee,
scrupled not to say, that the Formula in the Year 1662, was better than the
Promise required by the Doctor after the Proclamation: But what was it that the
Doctor blamed the Bibliothecarius for? He might perhaps blame him, that he did
leave out the word Puriore, at sometimes, after it was Insert into the Formula,
since he himself Declares, he was never enjoined to do so; but the plain Truth
in cold Blood is, that this was no Trick nor Design in the Bibliothecarius, but
a most Innocent inadvertence: When this Affair was tossed before the Committee,
they Discoursed of it, with that Warmth and Confusion, that it was not possible
to know, what they would have been at; Therefore the Doctor desired, that the
Bibliothecarius might be Interrogate upon Oath, whether he knew of any Popish
or Heretical Design, intended or contrived by the Masters, when they required
this Public Promise of the Students; instead of this, they enquire whether he
wrote this Formula by any order from the Masters, as if the Crime lay in the
Formula it self, and not in any bad Design about it: This was another
Impertinence, for the Bibliothecarius was never Accused to have invented the
Formula of himself, for that had been a piece of Forgery with a Witness; of
which Mr. Henderson the Bibliothecarius is not capable, being a Youth of such
Modesty and Ingenuity; it may be, he might be blamed for leaving out a word, or
for Writing carelessly.

From the Answers I have given to these several Queries; The Reader may see,
what was the occasion of this Change in the Public Formula, after the
Proclamation; and it is so much the more wonderful, that they blame the Doctor
for obeying that Proclamation, that first warmed the Phanaticks into their
present Strength and Confidence: But before I set down the Bibliothecarius his
Declaration; let me Inform the Reader, that when the Doctor was sisted before
the Commission, several Questions were asked at him, and five or six times he
was Removed, and the Report of the Committee was but once Read in his Hearing;
It was not possible, for an Hour together to give an Answer, to all the
particulars they had heaped together in their Report; The Doctor endeavored to
give a true Account of the Formula which was challenged; He desired, that Mr.
Gregory, Professor of the Mathematics, and Mr. Cunninghame Professor of
Philosophy, who knew the Registers much better than he did, might be Examined,
but this was denied: If Mr. Gregory, and Mr. Cuuninghame, had been Examined,
they would quickly have explained any thing that was dark or intricate about
it; But the Earl of Crawford would not hear any Defense or Explication of that
Formula; he alleged that it obliged them only to be Christians, and that the
Papists were Christians; The Doctor answered that by the Protestant Religion,
he never understood any thing, but unmixed Christianity, and that the Papists,
as such, were no Christians, i. e. Popery is no Christianity, for though they
were Baptized, and so Members of the Catholic Church, yet their Popery is no
part of their Christianity, else the Protestants are obliged immediately to
turn Papists, unless they renounce their Christianity. And therefore though we
allow the Papists to be Christians, and some of them excellent Men too; yet the
Errors which are mixed with their Christian Belief, and which obliged the
Protestants to Separate from them, is no part of the Christian Religion; and if
the Students did continue firm in the Christian Religion, I hope it had no
tendency to make them Papists: But there is a Sect of Men amongst us, who value
the nicest Punctilio's of the Covenant, more than they do the fundamentals of
Christianity. It is time now to leave this, and to insert Mr. Robert Henderson
the Bibliothecarius his Declaration.

A Declaration of Mr. Robert Henderson, Bibliothecarius and Secretary to the
College of Edinburgh, relating to the report of the Committee against Dr.
MONRO. At Edinburgh, the 18th, of October, 1690.
I Mr. Robert Henderson, Bibliothecarius and Secretary to the College of
Edinburgh, hereby declare upon the word of a Christian; that whereas I have
deponed before the Committee appointed for the visiting of the said University,
that what I wrote in the Magistrand Book was by Order of the Primar, or some of
the Regents, yet notwithstanding of my said Deposition; I declare that the
manner of Writing was entirely left to me, and that I never intended a Blank,
and that I was never enjoined by the Primar or Regents, to leave a Blank, but
that the promise being drawn up into Three Articles, the Second Article being
so much longer than the line, the remaining words were placed below toward the
middle for Ornament, there being scarce half an Inch of distance on both hands:
And hereby I further declare that I was never enjoined to leave out the word
Puriore or Reformata, and that I never perceived any Design thereabout. And
that the Classes of the two last Laureations, in the Years 1689 and 90. were
engaged by the same promises, This Declaration, contradicts the Report in three
Material Instances.
to which the former Classes were obliged, In Testimony whereof I have Signed
these Presents, before Mr. Gregory Professor of the Mathematics, in the
University of Edinburgh, and John Smith, Student therein, and Servitor to the
said Mr. Gregory; Day and Date foresaid, Sic Subscribitur.

Dr. Gregory, and J. Smith, Witnesses. Rob. Henderson.

ARTICLES Against Doctor STRACHAN, Professor of DIVINITY.
I. THat in the New Kirk of Edinburgh, in a Public Sermon before the Diocesian
Synod, be Preached Reconciliation with the Church of Rome, adducing the
Instance of the two Brethren, called Reynolds; who in Dispute, the one being a
Protestant was turned Papist, and the other being Papist turned Protestant; and
yet, said he, they were both good Men; and for any thing I know, they both went
to Heaven. What need then is there of all this din betwixt Protestant and
Papist? He also holds Consubstantiation, saying, the Church of Rome holds
Transubstantiation, but I hold Consubstantiation.

II. That he is commonly i.e. Reputed.
Repute to be an Arminian, and he Preached and Maintained Arminian and Pelagian
Principles and Tenets in the Trone-Church, and was opposed herein by Mr.
Trotter his Colleague; And particularly had one Expression, That without special
Grace Renewing the Mind and Heart, a Man might Believe and Repent; and that
having Believed, he might still continue, or not, as to the Exercise of Grace
and Believing; or words to this purpose.

III. That he has innovate the Worship of God, in setting up the English
Service, which was never allowed nor in use in this Church; and suppose it were
tolerated, yet no Toleration allows any to enjoy Legal Benefices and Charge in
the Church or Universities, who in Doctrine and Worship does not agree with the
Church in her present Establishment.

IV. His negligence of his Duty, in teaching Lessons to the Students, is
evident in that, for the first two years his Prelections went no further then
his Harangue.

V. That since the Establishment of the Government, be has Baptized Children
without any Testimony from the Minister, to whose Congregation they belonged:
And also has without Proclamation, in a Clandestine way, Married several
Persons; as for Instance, Mr. Alexander Chaplain's Daughter, to Mr. John King,
Apothecary, taking a Guiny for his pains, which should have been given to the
Poor of Edinburgh.

VI. His dissatisfaction with the Government, both in Church and State, is
evident hereto, both by the Verbal Expressions, in Censuring and Condemning
both these grounds whereupon be then left the Ministry, are sufficient for
turning him out of his present Station.

VII. That the said Doctor does ordinarily neglect the Worship of God in his
Family.

AN ANSWER TO THE ARTICLES Given in Against Doctor STRACHAN, Professor of
Divinity, in the College of Edinburgh.
TO these Articles or Libel I am not in Law obliged to give any particular
Answer, unless it were owned and subscribed by my Accuser, and Witness adduced
for the probation of the Particulars Lybelled; for since the Accuser is so
Conscious to himself of his gross Prevarications and notorious Falsehoods
alleged in his Libel, that he dare not subscribe the same; yet since I know my
entire Innocence, as to many of the particulars Libelled against me; (for some
of them I do not acknowledge to be Faults) I shall not decline to give a
particular Answer to each of them, being glad that the Lybeller has not had the
Confidence to charge me with any Immorality in my Life and Conversation,
reserving therefore all other Defenses competent in Law.

I. To the first I Answer, That in a Sermon before the most Reverend Father in
God, my Lord Archbishop of Glasgow, then Bishop of Edinburgh, in his Diocesian
Synod, I did from Phil. 4. and 5. recommend to my Auditors, and to all
Christians of whatsoever Persuasion, that Christian Duty of Moderation, (of
which I wish we had more at present) the want whereof is the occasion of the
lamentable Schisms and Divisions that are in the Christian Church: But as for
Reconciliation with the Church of Rome, as it is now Constitute, I was so far
from pressing it (though to wish a true Union among all Christians were no
Crime) that I did highly blame the Romanists for going so far to the extreme,
in Points controverted betwixt us and them, so as to obstruct a desirable
Reconciliation, as it is to be regretted some Protestants, on the other hand,
run too far to the other extreme, to put a bar thereto: So that we owe it to
the want of Moderation amongst the fiery Zealots of the different Persuasions,
that the same is rendered so impracticable. But as to that expression, What
needs this din (or rather noise) betwixt Protestant and Papist, I never had
such an expression. As for that of the two Brethren named Reynolds, I did
adduce that as an Instance of the Imbecility and Weakness, Mutability and
Changeableness of our Judgments and humane Understandings (while we dwell in
these Houses of Clay, and the dust of Mortality not blown out of our Eyes) upon
the account whereof, we ought to have Charity one toward another, and
Compassion one of another; and that they might have been both Good and Learned
Men, and might have been both saved, I know nothing to the contrary; yea, and
in the Judgment of Charity I am bound to think so, if they lived and died in
the Christian Faith, owning the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion,
whatever Preterfundamental Errors any of them might have been entangled in. As
for my alleged Saying, that the Papists hold Transubstantiation, but I hold
Consubstantiation, it is so impudent a Calumny, and such a notorious Lie, that
as I am confident the Accuser, whoever he be, dare not say he heard it, so
neither can be adduce any famous Witness, that can depone the same; the
contrary is so well known, that my Judicious Auditors can bear me Witness that
I Preached both against the Transubstantiation of Romanists, and
Consubstantiation of the Lutherans, and said it had been good, and had tended
much to the Peace of Christendom, that the different Parties had never taken
upon them, peremptorily to determine the manner of our Blessed Lord's Presence
in the Holy Eucharist, but that they had contented themselves with that modest
expression of the old Schoolman, Durandus, Vterbum audimus motum sentimus modum
nescimus praesentiam credimus; with which also accords that known Distich,
Corpore de Christi lis est de sanguine lis est. Deque modo lis est non habitura
modum. I might adduce several Testimonies of Learned Divines of the Reformed
Church, to this purpose, but I shall content my self, at present, with that one
of Judicious Calvin, In Tractatu de coena Domini. Blasphemia est negare in
coena Domini offerri veram Christi communicationem, pani and vino Corporis and
sanguinis nomen attribuitur, quod sint veluti instrumenta quibus Dominus Jesus
Christus nobis ea distribuit. Panis in est figura ^^da and simplex sed veritati
suae and substantiae conjuncta panis merito dicitur corpus cum id non mod^
representet verum etiam nobis offerat intelligimus Christum nobis in caena
veram propriamque Corporis and sanguinis sui substantiam donare panis in hoc
consecratus est ut representet nobis Corpus Domini, etc.

2. As to the Second, that I am generally reputed an Arminian, etc. I know not
how I may be reputed, but I desire the Lybeller may condescend when, or to whom
I said I was so; did I ever subscribe their Confession? it is known they were
Presbyterians, and I am none. And I suppose that may now be reputed to be my
greatest Crime; for if I were, it is probable these things would not be laid to
my charge. It has been always my Principle and practice not to espouse the
particular tenets of any party, but as the ancient Philosopher said, Amicus
Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas. So say I, Amicus Calvinus,
amicus Arminius, amicus Lutherus, sed magis amica veritas, being always ready
to embrace Truth by whomsoever it be maintained. That I Preached and maintained
Arminian and Pelagian Tenets in the Trone-Church, in which I was opposed by my
umqhaill Colleague Mr. Trotter. The Lybeller ought to prove it by famous
Witnesses, and not simply to allege, Si accusare satis sit quis erit innoceus.

For I peremptorily deny, that ever I used such expressions as my Accuser
alleges. My then Colleague being now at his rest, I desire not in the least to
reflect on his memory; what his designs were, in being the first Aggressor in
reflecting in his Pulpit were best know to himself. Though he were in vivis,
his allegation could be no probation; wherein he wronged me, I forgive him, and
I hope God has forgiven him.

3. My third Accusation is, That I have innovated the Worship of God, etc. To
which it is answered, That I have indeed made use of the English Service in my
Family, as judging it to be the way of Worship most consonant and agreeable to
the Word of God, and the practice of the whole Catholic Church, even in its
purest times, it being a most devout and serious way of offering up our Prayers
and Praises to Almighty God, and tending most to Edification. And against this,
I know no standing Law, more than against the French Service, which is so
publicly made use of in this place, and not in the least quarrelled: And that
the English Service was not more in use in this Church, it is too well known to
whom we owe that unhappiness, and what Unchristian and Barbarous courses were
taken to prevent its orderly Establishment here, when that Royal Martyr of
Blessed and Glorious Memory was endeavoring it for the good of this Church and
Kingdom, which by the unjustifiable practices of the Opposers was then made an
Aceldama, or Field of Blood.

4. In the Fourth Article the Accuser challenges me for negligence of my duty
in teaching of Lessons to the young Students, and alleges it is evident, in
that for the first two years, my Prelections went no further than my harrangue.
I answer, that were it so as he alleges (which whether so or not I cannot call
to mind now) I could not be challenged of any negligence upon that account. The
subject of my harrangue being so copious that it might have furnished matter of
dictats for several years. For it was de Theologia in genere de ejus dignitate,
Authore, objecto, fine, etc. Which Subject I enlarged upon, in dictating
further than I had in that harrangue: Whereas some eminent Professors have
spent several years dictating upon one point of controversy; but whenever it
was finished, I simply deny that either it or any thing else I dictated
contained any unsound Doctrine as the Lybeller was pleased to allege. As for
Passive-Obedience, and NonResistance, I yet own them to be sound points of
Divinity, duly stated and qualified; besides, that could be no evidence of
negligence in regard the frequent returns of other exercises, viz. Homilies,
Exe^esies, and Disputes among such a number of Students were such as at some
times I could scarce have allowed me above six or seven Diets in dictating the
whole half year. So that considering the few Dyets of dictating and how ill
they were attended by the Students who were desirous rather to read what was
already Published, than to be put to the toil of writing, I kept those Papers
in loose Sheets, not having designed them for public view, but it was always
my judgment that if there were less writing, and more reading and meditating on
what is already published, it might tend more to the advancement of Learning,
and the better Education and Improvement of Youth in the Study of Divinity; and
therefore I chose to recommend to them such Books as I judged most proper for
them; by which method, and the Lords Blessing upon their pains and endeavors,
many have given great Proofs of their proficiency in the said Studies, and
others great grounds of hope of their being serviceable to God in the holy
Ministry, when he thinks fit in his Wisdom to employ them therein.

5. As to some Baptisms and Marriages in the Fifth Article, I knew no restraint
upon me, nor any in my Station, hindering me to grant the desires of the
Respective Parents, when duly invited by them to the performance of such
Duties. But since the promulgation of the late Act, I have forborne any thing of
that nature. As for the instance of Mr. Alexander Chaplain, his Liberality to
the Poor of Edinburgh, and others, is very well known. If he had given me a
Guiney for the use of the Poor of Edinburgh, I should not have defrauded them
thereof. The Gentleman himself can declare as to that matter, for I was never
so mercenary as to ask any thing for my pains.

6. As for the Expressions mentioned in the Sixth Article, they ought to have
been condescended on, and proved; which not being done, I can give no answer
thereto. I never left the Ministry, nor do I design to desert my present
Station here; but if I be thrust from the one, as I have been from the other,
upon the account of my Conscience, that cannot comply with the Conditions
required, I must patiently submit, and cast my self, and my numerous Family, on
God's good Providence; being resolved never to put my worldly Interest in
Balance with the Peace of my Conscience, which I have endeavored hitherto to
keep void of offense toward God and Man. And to follow that Apostolical Rule,
which I always recommended to others under my Charge, to obey God rather than
Man.

6. Lastly, I am charged, that I ordinarily neglect the Worship of God in my
Family, which is so notorious a Falsehood, that I challenge the Libeller, or any
he can adduce to make it good, and appeal to all that have been in my Family,
as Witnesses of the contrary. But it seems the Libeller has forgot the Third
Article of his Accusation, or thinks, to use the English Service, is not to
Worship God: To whom, for all these Calumnies, I refer him.

THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE, Concerning Doctor STRACHAN. At Edinburgh the 23d.
of Sept. 1690.
AS to Doctor John Strachan, Professor of Divinity in the College of
Edinburgh; the Committee considering his Answers to the Articles given in
against him, for his Preaching Reconciliation with Rome, and anent
Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation: That he acknowledges he has often
Preached Presentiam Credo modum ignoro: And that it had been good that that had
not been in dispute, but kept in the Ancients words: And albeit he denied his
being Arminian; yet he not only refused to Subscribe our Confession of Faith in
the Complex, but also declared, he was not clear to give a present answer,
whether or not the Articles about Free Will, and the First Article about
Justification, were agreeable to the word of God, and if he owned the same; yet
he promised to give an Answer in Writing, which he has not done: And being at
the giving in of his written Answers, desired to give a particular Answer, if
he would assent to these Articles, as they stand in the Printed Confession of
Faith, and if he would subscribe the same? He answered, that each of these
Articles were Complex, and that he was not clear to Subscribe or Sign the same;
as also considering his negligence in dictating to his Scholars: That he
acknowledges he would scarce have Dictate above six or seven times in a whole
half Year, and excuses the same with the returns of other Exercises, such as
Homilies, Exegeses, and Disputes: As also considering that he refuses to
qualify himself conform to the Act of Parliament:

It is therefore the Opinion of the Committee, that the said Dr. John Strachan,
Professor of Divinity in the College of Edinburgh, be deprived of his Office
in the said College, and that the same be declared Vacant.

THE SENTENCE Against Doctor STRACHAN. At Edinburgh the 25th. of Sept. 1690.
THE Lords and others of the Commission appointed for Visitation of Colleges
and Schools; having heard, read, and considered the above written Report of the
Committee for visiting the College of Edinburgh, anent Dr. John Strachan,
Professor of Divinity within the said College: And the Doctor being called in,
and having heard the within Report read over in his presence, and he being
asked if he did acknowledge that the matters of Fact, contained in the said
Report were true, he did Judicially acknowledge the verity of the matters of
Fact therein contained: And also he refused to Swear the Oath of Allegiance,
and to Sign the same with the Assurance: And also refused to Sign the
Confession of Faith, or to declare his Submission to the present Church
Government, as now Established: Therefore the said Commission approves of the
Report above written; and do hereby deprive the said Dr. John Strachan,
Professor of Divinity in the said College, of his said Place, as Professor
foresaid, and declares the said Place to be vacant.

Crawford P.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE APPOINTED To Visit the College
of Edinburgh, concerning Doctor John Strachan, Professor of Divinity there,
Sept. 23. 1690.
And on the Commission's Approbation and Ratification thereof. Edinburgh, Sept.
25. 1690.
DOctor Strachan being Cited to Appear before the General Commission, that was
to Sit, Sept. 25. 1690. at Nine a Clock in the Morning; after a tedious
Attendance of about four hours, was called before them, and being wearied
himself, he resolved to give them very little trouble; for he had determined to
make his Process as short as was possible; for he could not Reasonably think,
he should meet with any Favor from that Bench; especially, since he knew how
his Colleague, Doctor Monro, was Treated by them that Forenoon; being no less
than five or six times called and removed, with no other Design, than to wrest
and misinterpret what he Answered for himself: And having no time allowed him
to clear the trifling Objections made against him; great Endeavors were used
to entangle him in his Answers; therefore the Doctor took care to give them as
little ground against him, as was possible.

WHen he was called in before the Commission, the above written Report of the
Committee, was once Read over to him by the Clerk; My Lord Crawford enquired at
him, if he acknowledged the things contained in that Report, to be true? He
Answered, that he thought the Report, as to the main Substance of it, was true;
but having heard it but once Read over, he could not peremptorily say so of all
Circumstances relating to it: My Lord Crawford asked again, if he did own and
adhere to that written Copy of Answers given in to the Committee in his Name?
So much the greater shame, a Method was taken not allowed by any Act of
Parliament, and contrary to the common Forms of Justice over all Nations, to
receive Libels, and to conceal the Informer; and when those Scurrilous Papers
had in them the Nature, Design, and Materials of a defamatory Libel, then to
pretend there were no Libels given against them, because my Lord Crawford, was
pleased to call the Libels Informations, and is it Consistent with Reason to
receive Informations, or Libels, before Solemn Courts of Judicatory, and still
to conceal the Informer, a Practice so infamous, that as it never had a
precedent in that Nation: So I hope Posterity shall never imitate it.
To which the Doctor Replied very pertinently; that if any Person would own and
Subscribe the Libel given in against him to the Committee, he should then
Answer it particularly. My Lord Crawford Praeses, said there was no Libel, the
Act of Parliament made mention of none, it was but an Information, and any body
might Inform; The Doctor Replied, it was materially a Libel what ever word they
pleased to Express it by; And that in Equity and Common Justice, he ought to
know his Accuser. The Praeses replied, there was no Accuser, neither did the
Act of Parliament appoint any, and therefore, he (the Proeses) required the
Doctor to give a Positive Answer, whether he owned these written Answers, or
not, (a Copy of them being offered to him to view them) the Doctor Answered,
that he did own them and adhere to them.

After which, the Lord Crawford asked the Doctor, if he would qualify himself
according to the Act of Parliament for his place in the College, by swearing
the Oath of Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, and subscribing the
Declaration of assurance, the Confession of Faith at Westminster, and heartily
submitting to the Presbyterian Government. The Doctor answered he could not
with a good Conscience comply with the Legal Test so proposed, and that
therefore he adhered to his former answers before the Committee, whereupon he
was ordered to remove, and within a little while he was called again before
them: The former Report of the Committee was again read over to him, and the
Commissions Sentence of deprivation following thereupon; after the reading of
both, the Doctor said no more, but that he thanked God he received their
Sentence with great peace of Conscience, and Tranquillity of Mind, which he
could not have promised to himself, if he had done any thing against his
convictions to avoid that blow.

Many of the Gentlemen and others who were permitted to be present at the
reading of the Report and Sentence, not having heard the Doctor's Answers read,
nor known what past in the Committee, might conclude upon the bare hearing of
that Report drawn up by the Presbyterian Ministers, that they had found him
Guilty of propagating several Heterodox Opinions in the College, and that for
such Doctrines he was deprived. Yea, some of the Members of the Commission it
self, before whom the Doctor's written Answers were never read (as he is
credibly informed) did entertain the same thoughts upon the hearing of such
words as Reconciliation with the Church of Rome, Consubstantiation,
Transubstantiation, etc. Therefore it was thought convenient to undeceive well
meaning men, and expose the malice of his Accusers in this particular.

1st. The Committee did consider his Answers to the Articles of his Libel, but
they do not plainly declare what it was in those Answers that they did
consider; we know very well they did consider his Answers, and it was not
possible for them to find in them either Untruth or Impertinence; it is true,
they accuse him that he Preached Reconciliation with the Church of Rome, but
they thought it no part of their business to prove it, no nor so much as to
examine one Witness that ever heard the Doctor utter the least expression that
might favorably insinuate a Syncretisme with the Roman Church; so it is very
odd that the Committee's consideration of his answers should be named as one
ground of the Sentence which past against him, before the General Commission of
the Visitation.

2dly. They considered his answers concerning Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation, etc. But is it possible for a man at one and the same time,
to hold both those Opinions? Or can a man Preach Reconciliation with the Church
of Rome, if he himself hold only Consubstantiation, and yet recommend to the
People that the Doctrine of the Romanists may be complied with, who say that
there is no such thing as Bread in the holy Eucharist after Consecration. It
seems the Libeller thinks there is no great difference between the Lutherans
and the Romanists; had he listened to an Impartial Monitor, Lysimachus Nicanor,
in time of the late troubles, he would have found that it is much more easy to
reconcile Popery and Presbytery than the Lutherans and Romanists.

3dly. But the Doctor acknowledges, that he had Preached Praesentiam credo,
modum nescio; and that it had been good for the peace of Christendom, the
manner of our Savior's Presence had never been so hotly disputed, but kept in
the words of the Ancients. This is a piece of Logic that the Doctor cannot
understand: must he that says, Praesentiam credo, modum nescio, necessarily
believe Transubstantiation, or Consubstantiation, one or both. I think the
Church of England will not say so, for it holds the Real, effectual Spiritual
Presence, and yet denis both Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation. And did
not the Doctor say plainly modum nescio, how then can they affirm that he had
any kindness for either of those opinions, since the fault of both is so
plainly disowned by the Doctor: He believed the Presence, but the manner of the
Presence he did not know.

But since those words in his answers, praesentiam credo, was so greedily laid
hold on by the Presbyterian Ministers, Members of that Committee, that when
they heard them they desired the Clerk to note that especially, it will not be
amiss over and above what is represented in his written answers, to put those
Gentlemen in mind that they should read Mr. Calvin more frequently, whom they
have deserted shamefully in many things, and in his Tract De Caena Dom. after
the words formerly cited by the Doctor, they will meet with the following
words, Fatemur omnes, nos, cum juxta Domini institutum fide Sacramentum
recipimus, Substantiae corporis and sanguinis Domini vere fieri participes.
Quomodo id fiat alii aliis melius definire and clarius explicare possunt. Ne
vis sacro sancti hujus mysterii imminuatur, cogitare debemus id fieri occulta
and mirabili Dei virtute. Do they allow of this saying of Calvin? If they do, I
am sure the Doctor said less than what may be deduced from them by necessary
consequence, if they were contentiously insisted on. And how can they be so
captiously querulous, as to dream of Chimera's and Monsters in the Doctrine so
currently taught in the most Famous Schools amongst the Protestants?

It may be Mr. Calvin' s Treatise de Coena Dom. is not so easily had as his
Book of Instit. which I think very few of the Presbyterian Ministers want, then
let me entreat them to look to the following Testimony from Mr. Calvin, Lib. 4.
Cap. 17. Sect. 7.
in which he writes so Religiously and Reverently of that Sacred Mystery of the
Eucharist, Quanquam autem cogitando animus plus valet, quam lingua exprimendo:
rei tamen magnitudine ille quoque vincitur and obruitur, itaque nihil demum
restat nisi ut in ejus mysterii admirationem prorumpam, cui nec men's plane
cogitando nec lingua explicando par esse potest: And par. 10. of the same
Chapter, Summa sit non aliter animas nostras Carne and Sanguine Christi pasci,
quam panis and vinum corporalem vitam tuentur and sustinent: neque enim
quadrare tanalogia signi nisi alimentum suum animae in Christo reperirent, quod
fieri non potest nisi nobiscum Christus, vere in unum coalescat nosque reficiat
carnis suae esu, and sanguinis potu. Etsi autem incredibile videtur in tanta
locorum distantia penetrare ad nos Christi carnem, ut nobis sit in cibum,
Meminerimus quantum supra sensus omnes nostros emineat arcana Spiritus sancti
virtus and quam stultum sit ejus immensitatem modo nostro velle metiri. Quod
ergo men's nostra non comprehendit, concipiat fides, Spiritum vere unire quae
locis disjuncta sunt, etc. And Paragr. 32. ab initio. Porro de modo si quis me
interroget fateri non pudebit, sublimius esse arcanum, quam ut vel meo ingenio
comprehendi, vel enarrari verbis queat, atque ut apertius dicam experiar magis
quam intelligam, etc.

Several other Testimonies might be gathered together from many other Reformed
Divines; but that is not the design of this Paper, it is enough by one or two
Authentic Testimonies to expose the silliness of such men as find fault with
every body that does not follow their words as well as their Sentiments. I
think the learned Bishop Andrews understood the Doctrine of the Church of
England sufficiently well, who in his answer to Cardinal Bellarmine, has these
words, Dixit Christus Hoc est Corpus meum: non hoc modo, hoc est corpus meum.
Nobis autem vobiscum, de objecto convenit, de modo lis omnis est. De, hoc est,
fide firma tenemus quod sit: de hoc modo est (nempe Transubstantiato in Corpus
pane) de modo quofiat at sit, per, sive in, sive cum, sive sub, sive trans,
nullum inibi verbum, and quia verbum nullum merito a fide procul ablegamus,
inter Scita Scholae ponimus, inter fidei Articulos non ponimus. And after he
had instanced the saying of Durandus, cited by the Doctor, he adds, Praesentiam
credimus, nec minus quam vos, veram. De modo praesentiae nil temere definimus,
addo, nec anxie inquirimus, non magis quam in Baptismo nostro, quomodo abluat
nos Sanguis Christi, non magis quam in Christi incarnatione, quomodo naturae
divinae humana in eandem hypostasin uniatur.

Notwithstanding of all this, the Doctor did not Believe, Assert, or Recommend,
the Corporal and Carnal Presence of our Savior in the Eucharist; but he loved
to Express his Reverence of that Mystery, Of this many instances may be given
in the time of the late troubles, though it be a part of the constant
nourishment of Christ's Family upon Earth, till he return to Judge the quick
and the dead.
otherways than the Presbyterians do; who, for the most part show so little
regard unto it, that in the West of Scotland, their greatest Zealots, did not
Administer the Sacrament, of the Lord's Supper for twenty years together.

The next thing those sharp-sighted Inquisitors, did consider in the Doctor's
Answers, is, that though he denied his being Arminian, yet he not only refused to
subscribe their Confessions of Faith, in the Complex, but also declared, he
would not then give a present Answer whether or no he thought the Article about
Freewill, and the first Article about Justification were agreeable to the Word
of God, and whether he owned the same. In what Sense the Doctor denied himself
to be Arminian, may be seen in his Answers to the Libel; of the rest take this
following account. When they asked him, if he would Subscribe the Westminster
Confession of Faith, he answered that he would Subscribe no Confession composed
by fallible Men, but so far as it might be agreeable to the Word of God. For
since those Gentlemen at Westminster were not Divinely inspired, their Dictates
might be fairly examined, and that his Subscription to any Confession did
necessarily imply this reserve and limitation.

Then the Doctor was desired to instance those Articles in the Westminster
Confession, Nor could it be reasonably thought he came there to be examined by
such Pedagogues.
he thought not agreeable to the Word of God. To this he replied, he was not
obliged; it was enough that he gave them this plain and positive Answer, he
would not Subscribe the Westminster Confession, without the former Restriction:
For he never made it much his Business, since this Visitation began;
especially, to look so narrowly into the Presbyterian Books; and for the
Particular Articles about which they desired to know his Judgment, it was
needless for them to be so Inquisitive, for if he refused any one part of what
was required by the present Law, he was sure to be deprived, so it was not
worth the while to satisfy the Curiosity of the Committee Men in their little
Punctilios.

Yet he promised (says the Report) to give a particular Answer in writ
concerning those Articles of Freewill, and Justification, and here they plainly
Insinuate him guilty of Breach of promise; it is true, the Doctor did promise
if the Libel had been Subscribed and owned by any Informer, to return a
particular Answer to all the Articles that were contained therein; but to give
them an account of his private Judgment in the Articles of Freewill, and
Justification was needless, for every Man's Conscience did plainly convince
him, he had Freewill, else he could not see how the remorse of Conscience could
be understood, which makes the Remembrance of our willful Sins so uneasy to us.

Next they will have the Doctor Guilty of Negligence, because he did not oblige
the Students to write his Dictates so often as the Visitors would have had him,
though the frequent returns of other Exercises, (much more useful) made this
impossible to him. But this is an impertinence not worth considering, and the
same exception has been sufficiently answered in the former Trials.

Besides, since most of the Students of Divinity are obliged once a Year to
sustain public Disputes, and that the Professor is allowed but two Dyets a
Week, it was not convenient he should Dictate above seven or eight times a
Year, else he could not but hinder the Freedom and Solemnity of their public
Disputes and other Exercises.

Now in the last place, they mention the Doctor would not qualify himself
according to Law, it is certainly true, that he will never prostitute his
Conscience so far as to do any thing wilfully against his Convictions in a
matter of so great Consequence: And it might be expected by such as did not
well know the Ministers that sat in that Committee, that they, who pretended
so much to a tender Conscience, would have taken more pains to inform the
Doctor, than presently to insert in their Report to the Commission, (without
acquainting him) what they had snatched from his Mouth upon surprise. The
Presbyterians in the Year 1638 were truly more Civil, and took some pains in
the beginning to inform such as differed from them, though their Methods
afterward became very severe. But the plain Truth in this matter is, that the
Suspicion of being Arminian, (especially his Reading the Liturgy of the Church
of England) was it that made his Enemies implacable, because that in the third
Article of their Libel against him* they seem to pass Sentence against him,
upon this very head before he was heard, for (say they) none can Legally enjoy
Benefices in the Church or Universities, who differ from the Church of Scotland
in her Present Establishment in Doctrine or Worship.

Next, he was Examined more particularly about the English Liturgy; They
asked, whether he used that Service in his Family, before the Revolution? To
which he Answered, he did, though not so frequently; yet he did not so constantly
tie himself to that Form, but that he used Conceived Prayer; upon the hearing
of this, one of the Ministers said, that it was not usual for such as were
accustomed with that Service, at any time to use extemporary Prayers; neither
did he think that such could pray after that manner; and therefore the Doctor,
making use thereof, was a Schismatic from the Church of which he was a Member;
so Saucily do they talk, when they themselves are Schismatics from the
Universal Church; yet they venture to Brand all others that differ from them
with that Infamous Character; they think none can Pray as they do; and the
plain truth is, that, in some Sense, it is very true; for it is very difficult to
reconcile so much Boldness and Indiscretion, as is observable in their Prayers,
either to the Fear of God, or Christian Humility.

They then asked the Doctor, who concurred with him in that Worship? He
answered, That of late, since the Church was pulled down, a great many of good
Quality did frequent it. At which they were greatly nettled, and asked him
again, who had pulled down the Church? To which the Doctor replied, he was not
obliged to give any particular answer, it was evident enough, that a National
Church established by Law was pulled down. To which one of their number said,
that that was pretty indeed, if the pulling down of fourteen Old Fellows.
Carles, was the pulling down of the Church. This Gentleman should have
remembered that there was many more than fourteen pulled down by the Rabble, and
more since by Presbytery; but out of kindness to him, I shall make no
particular answers to what he said in his passion.

He was next desired to answer positively whether he was an Arminian? The
Doctor answered, that the Arminians were Presbyterians, and he was none. The
same Person asked again what the Doctors judgment might be of the five
controverted Articles? To which he answered, that he was not obliged to declare
his private judgment in those controversies. If they thought Arminianism a
crime that deserved deprivation, they might accuse him, and prove it against
him, for he was not obliged to accuse himself.

At last, one of the Ministers expressly required him to declare his opinion
about the Doctrine of Freewill and Justification, to which the Doctor replied
as before. Sometime before the Doctor once asked the Committee whether they
were a Civil or Ecclesiastic Judicatory? If a Civil, how came the Presbyterian
Ministers to sit there, who clamoured perpetually against the Bishops for being
Members of Parliament, since now themselves acted by a Commission from the
Parliament; and if Ecclesiastical, he wished to know from whom they had their
Power? Thus the Doctor was tossed and wearied with their endless trifling and
insidious Questions.

When I look back upon all the steps of Dr. Strachan' s Trial, it brings to my
mind one of the Fables we were taught when we were Boys. The Wolf and the Lamb
met at a Fountain, as soon as the Wolf saw the Lamb he Lybelled, and accused
him, first that he troubled the Waters; for the Wolf alleged he could not
drink them; the Lamb answered that he could not trouble the Waters, he stood
much lower than the Fountain. This Accusation being removed, the Wolf told him
that six Months ago he heard the Lamb curse him. The Lamb answered that he was
not six Months old: so the second Accusation was as calumnious as the first.
Then the Wolf told him, if you did not, your Father did curse me: There was no
answering the third Article of the Libel, so the Lamb was worried.

Reader,
THou have now heard how the Presbyterian Inquisition proceeded against these
two Doctors, with the same Rigor and Severity they Persecuted all such as they
judged to be of the Episcopal Persuasion in that College, and in all the
Colleges of the Mother University at St. Andrews: One Instance more of the
Presbyterian Partiality in Judging, I must not here omit, and it is this.

They admitted and sustained Libels against all the Masters that they thought
Episcopal, without the least shadow of any Accuser or Informer, when
themselves also knew the Article to be most false; yet if any of the Masters
who were Presbyterians, or who had insinuated themselves into their Favor; I
say any such were informed against, though the Indictment was subscribed by Men
of undoubted Reputation; and contained many things that justly deserved
deprivation; yet the matter was huddled up, without examining any one Article.
As in the Case of Mr. Andr. Massy, against whom an Information was given in,
subscribed by two Gentlemen of Great Learning and Reputation, the one a Doctor
of Medicin, the other a Master of Arts in Edinburgh; but the Inquisitors knew
that these Informers were not of their Gang, nor had any liking to their Cause,
and therefore they took no notice of the Charge, which is as follows.

Information against Mr. Massy.
THere being a Commission granted by Their Majesty's and Estates of Parliament,
to some Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Ministers, for Visiting the Universities of
this Kingdom; the said Visitors are earnestly desired to Consider and Examine
the Behavior and Management of Mr. Andrew Massy, Regent in the College of
Edinburgh, who these several years has been an useless and unfit Master of the
said University.

1. The Visitors are desired to consider Mr. Massie's base and indirect ways to
procure Scholars to himself, which is thus, While he was a Regent in old
Aberdeen, during the whole Vacance, he used to Travel up and down the Country,
and where ever he heard there were any young Boys, without any Introduction, he
would impudently address himself to their Parents and Friends, and assure them
that the Boys were fit for the College, albeit, very often they did not
understand a word of Latin; and if any of their Parents or Friends did object
to him, their Children not being qualified, he did promise to make up the same,
by extraordinary pains and care by himself, which he never did yet, being the
most superficial and unconcerned Master that ever was in an University, as will
appear afterward. When he came to the College of Edinburgh, and found that
way not so practicable here, his method was, and is, to spread confidently
abroad, that none of the Courses were necessary, which preceeded that which he
taught for the time; so that he never failed to have Semies, Bauchelours, and
Magistrands, who were never at any College before, and he admitted them to be
Scholars, without offering them to be examined by the Principal or Masters. And
this he did so frequently, that there was a public Process intended against
him, in Anno. 1684. And as this is not our and known to the whole University,
so the same can be proven by particular Witnesses.

2. The Visitors are desired to consider his way and manner of Teaching his
Scholars, which is so trifling and superficial, that there can be no excuse
given for it. For, 1. He never explains his Notes, but unconcernedly reads them
shortly over, without ever making any Digression or Commenting upon them, so as
to make his Scholars to understand them. 2. There are many in his Class, at
whom he will not ask one question in the whole year, nor once examine them. 3.
He takes no notice of the Absents; since many of them will be absent for some
weeks, and yet he never misses nor calls for them, neither does he fine or
punish them for their absence; and the effect of this, the time he taught his
last course was, that the trafficking Priests and Jesuits did debauch more of
his Scholars then of all the other Students in Scotland beside. 4. He takes as
little notice and care of his Scholars when present; for albeit his Class be
numerous, yet there will not be eight or ten taking notice of what is said or
dictated, while the rest in his presence are talking, tossing, and fighting
together in the School: And an effect of this is, that there is more expense
for mending the Glass Windows of his School, than of all the other Schools
besides. 5. He gives very ill attendance; for all along. and particularly the
last Session of the College, he never entered the College till half an hour
after eight in the Morning, and near eleven in the Forenoon; and this was so
well known to his Scholars, who did not expect him sooner, that it made them
either stay from the College altogether, or so disturb it, that it was hardly
possible for other Masters to keep their Meetings at these times. 6. He has
very few Meetings with his Scholars on the Lords day, and takes no care that
the Scholars attend, since of seventy or eighty, of which his Class may
consist, there will not be above eight or ten present. 7. He altogether
neglects the Office of Hebdomader (which was the most useful attendance in the
College, for preventing of Tumults) in so much that the Scholars did
ordinarily brag, that Massie's Week was near; and that then they should be
revenged of one another.

3. The Visitors are desired to examine his care anent the Library, which
should be very dear to all the Masters; and yet Mr. Massy took no care to make
his Scholars pay their dues at their Matriculation, and Laureation; and
particularly this last three years there were to the number of 58 of his
Scholars, whom he would not bring to Matriculation, notwithstanding he was
desired thereto by the Principal; and the Catalogue of these Scholars Names the
Biblothecar can exhibit to the Visitors if required. 2. It is evident by the
Journal Books of the Library, that in the Year 1680, or 1681, there was taken
out of the Money belonging to the Library Twenty Pounds Sterling, or thereby,
for uses unknown to any of the present Masters, for which Mr. Massey gave his
Ticket, and which Ticket, without paying the Money, he did again take up from
Mr. Robert Henderson the Biblothecar, or his Father; who can give the best
account of these Affairs, and his other Dealings anent the Library.

4. The Visitors are desired to consider what he Teaches, or rather what is
contained in his Notes, (which for the gross of them he Copies from those of
Mr. John Strachan, who was a Regent when he entered to the College of
Aberdeen, and afterward turned Jesuit) and they will find in the questions,
wherein there is occasion of differing from others; that his Doctrine is either
such as tends to Skepticism, and uncertainty of all things, or such as inclines
to Atheism: As when he asserts that a Creature may Create its own self, and
that even as the principal and efficient Cause; Or such as favors Popish
Transubstantiation, as his Doctrine concerning the Bilocation of Bodies; or
such as favors Arminianism, as his Doctrine de Scientia media; or such as
inclines to Superstition, and the Diabolick Art, as the Doctrine of Judiciary
Astrology, and particularly de Genituris, which, contrare to the Example of all
Christian Schools, he inlarges upon and Exemplifies; or such as is pure
incomprehensible Nonsense, as when he says the Diagonal of a Square is not
really longer than the side; and for his public Appearances, his maintaining
of Theses in the common School on the Saturdays, amounts to no more than giving
of the Jesuits answers to evident truths, viz. That the contrair is the opinion
of some Doctors, and consequently probable, and may be safely followed; and on
the last Saturday of March last in the hearing of all the Masters, and some of
the English Gentlemen who were accidentally present, he stuck not to say in
express words, That Deus non just punit peccatores. And always at these
public Disputes he falls out in such passions, when any thing is reasonably
urged against him, that the Students cannot forbear to hiss at him.

5. Albeit, for the time the Visitors be not troubled with an Account of his
gross Hypocrisy, Covetousness and the Immoralities of his Life: Yet it is not
amiss that they know his merits in relation to the present Established
Government of Church and State; it is true, he was bred Presbyterian, and did
take all the Oaths, and lies under all the Obligations that were at those times
imposed when he was bred, and first entered in public Employment, from the
year 1647 to the year 1660. But it is as true, that without any scruple, he
broke all these Bonds, took the Declaration and all Oaths of course in King
Charles's Reign, and conformed and complied as much as any man. And when he
came to be Regent in the College of Edinburgh, he owned his dislike of the
Students burning of the Pope in the year 1680; and in the year 1681 he took and
swore the Oath of the Test; and again in the year 1685 in the late-King James's
Reign, he swore the same Oath again on his bended knees before the then Bishop
of Edinburgh. His courting of the Popish Priests was so often and barefaced,
that (beside his conniving at their seducing and perverting his Scholars to the
Romish Religion) in the year 1687 at the public Laureation in the common
School, He, as a Praeses, Invited, and had with him in the Pulpit, Father Reid,
as he called him, a Dominican Friar, and a trafficking Papist.

After the Battle of Gillicrankie, he went to complement a Popish Lady on the
Victory: And frequently this Summer he has averred that the Church of England
is the best constitute Church, and that the Scots Episcopal Clergy are the
honestest Men in the World. It Is true, he will take all the Oaths that can be
put to him, but the Visitors would consider that he has already broken all the
Engagements by which he was tied to the Presbyterian interest: Neither can the
Government ever be secure of him, since beside his practice, he teaches in his
Notes, That Potest dari Dominium duorum in solidum in unam and eandem rem per
notabile aliquod tempus. So that though he swear that King William is King de
Jure, yet, according to his Principles, King James may be so too.

Warrant by the Commissioners for Visiting of Universities, for Citing of
Parties before their Committee at Edinburgh.
THe Lords and others Commissioners, appointed by Act of Parliament for
visiting of Universities and Schools within this Kingdom, do hereby require and
Command

Messengers to pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, upon a Market Day,
betwixt ten and twelve a Clock in the forenoon, and immediately thereafter, to
the most patent Gate of the University of Edinburgh, and sicklike to pass to
the Market Crosses of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Duns, Greenlaw and Lauder,
Jedburgh, Sclkirk, Peebles, Linlithgow and Stirling, and thereat, after open
Proclamation, and public Reading of the said Act of Parliament, herewith sent,
appointing the said Visitors, and this present Warrant, to Summon, Warn, and
Charge the Principal, Professors, Regents, and all others Masters of the
University of Edinburgh, and Schoolmasters teaching Latin in the said Town, at
the Market Cross of Edinburgh. and College Gate thereof, and all other
Schoomlasters, teaching Latin within the Shires of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun,
Berwick, Roxburgh, Sclkirk, Peebles, Linlithgow and Stirling, at the
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-burgs of the respective Shires, within which they
live, upon fifteen days warning, to compear before the Committee of the said
Visitors, delegat by them conform to the said Act of Parliament, to the effect
therein specified, at Edinburgh, in the High-Common-Hall of the College
thereof, the twenty Day of August next to come, at ten a Clock in the forenoon,
to answer and satisfy the said Committee, upon the points contained in the
said Act of Parliament, conform to the Instructions given by the said
Commissioners to them: And likewise, the said Commissioners do hereby require
the said Messengers at the same time and place, and in the same manner, to
summon and warn all the Loidges, who have any thing to object against the said
Principal, Professors, Regents, Masters of the said Universities, and School
Masters teaching Latin within the bounds of the said Shires, to compear before
the said Committee, the said day and place, to give in objections against the
said Principal, Professors, Regents and others foresaid; And also requiring the
said Messengers, at the said time and place, to make Intimations to the
Magistrates of the Burghs-Royal, within the said bounds, that they send in
subscribed Lists of the School Masters, teaching Latin within their respective
Burrows Royal, and to the Sheriffs of the Shires abovenamed, that they send in
Lists of such School Masters, within their respective Shires, out with the
Burrows-Royal; which subscribed Lists are to be sent to the Clerks of this
Commission, or their Deputs appointed for that Committee, which is to meet at
Edinburgh, and that betwixt and the said twenty day of August next, to which
the said Principal, Professors, Regents, and others Masters are Cited, as the
said Sheriffs and Magistrates will be answerable; Requireing in like manner the
Messengers executors of this present Warrant, not only to read publicly the
same, and the Citation to be given therein at the said Mercat-Crosses and
Colledge-Gate, but also to leave Printed Copies of the said Act of Parliament,
and Copies of this present Warrant, and of the Citation thereof, affixt upon
the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-burghs of the said Shires, and upon the most
patent Gates of the said College: Requiring lastly, the said Messengers,
executors of these Presents, to return the same with formal Executions, and
Indorsations thereof, duly subscribed by them, before subscribing Witnesses, to
the said Clerks or their Deputs, betwixt and the said day of the said
Committees meeting at Edinburgh: For doing of all which, these Presents shall
be their sufficient Warrant. Given at Edinburgh, the twenty fifth day of July,
One Thousand six Hundred and ninety Years. And Ordains these presents to be
Printed. Extracted forth of the Records, by me

THO. BURNET, Cls. Reg.

FINIS.
ERRATA
Page 5. line 1. for been, r. but. Page 7. l. 23. for not only, r. over and
above. L. 24. del. but also. Page 12. l. 14. r. in the.


