The RUSSIAN IMPOSTOR: OR, THE HISTORY OF Muskovie, UNDER The Usurpation of
BORIS AND THE Imposture of DEMETRIUS, Late Emperors of Muskovy.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet, near
Cliffords Inn. MDCLXXIV.

IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NVLLA. printer's or publisher's device

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of Ossory, OF The Most Noble Order of the
GARTER, etc.
I Had no sooner engaged my thoughts in the following Narrative, but I judged
it worthy of your Lordships view; and my Concern in it, your Protection.
Besides, at what Altar could I more reasonably make tender of this humble
Sacrifice, but where I had already made Oblation of my self? Or to whom should
I more properly expose the great Achievements of others, than to Him whose
Courage and Civility are such, that both Peace and War seem equal Rivals for
his Fame?

I had large room in the last Summers Expedition to contemplate the greatness
of your Mind, and the Honor of your Nature; for I observed such generous
impatience in you before the Fights, so much Valor, and Conduct, and Temper in
them, and such care and pity for the hurt and unfortunate after them, that I
reverenced and admired so many Virtues in one Person.

These are the steps, my Lord, by which your Ancestors entered into the Temple
of Honor. Thus has the Splendour of your House for so many Ages been upheld.
And in what Firmament does there now shine a more Illustrious Star? Continue
then to be propitious to the Nation, and kind unto

My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted Servant R. M.

THE PREFACE.
THese Collections being the Issues of some of my Foreign Rambles in the Late
Times, whilst our Intestine Calamities rendered it infectious to abide within
the Air of them, and laid aside amongst my neglected Papers, have run the
risque of being stifled in their birth; when looking about me, and finding
nothing considerable of this Story made public by any other hand, I fancied (I
think not unreasonably) that it might, under the Character of being divertive,
appear abroad in the crowd, without too much exposing its Author. Besides, I
found so much parallel betwixt these Troubles and those of my Native Country,
which by a Providence not many degrees short of Miracle, is but lately rescued
(I may say, uninchanted) from an Imposture of more Artifice and Delicacie, by
how much it is more difficult for one person to vary his shapes to the same
eyes, than for those eyes to be deceived by variety of persons, that I have
here thought good to present the world with some Observations of the later
sort. The Scene of what I write was laid in the great Empire of Muskovy, which,
in the Memory of man has labored under an Imposture no less strange in its
birth, than admirable in its productions; and if we consider the various
vicissitudes of the Actors in it, not only surpassing what former Ages have
delivered of this kind, but hardly to be paralleled by Posterity, unless it had
already happened. For the better understanding of this History, I have thought
fit to premise somewhat, but briefly, concerning it; upon no other design than
that of gratifying such as are less versed in the Manners and Government of
that Country.

The vast Continent of Russia extends from the Frozen Ocean to the Caspian Sea;
being also bordered upon by the Swedes, the Poles, and the Tartars. The length
of it from the Cape of Ob to the Town of Czerkassy, is accounted 1520 English
Miles: and its breadth from Corelenburg in the Confines of Finland to Lepin,
300 German, or 1200 English Miles. This great Territory is divided into many
large Provinces, which give also names to, or receive them from their principal
Cities; the Chief whereof is that of Moskwa, so called by the Inhabitants, and
by us Musko, from whence also the whole Region is called Muskovy. The Country
is sandy and plain, but welnigh impassable, by reason of the multitude of Lakes
and Rivers, save in the Winter, which is long, and insufferably cold; but most
of their Commerce is driven then, upon their Sleds and Ice. The Summer is in
its turn as violently hot, and seems the more intense by reason of its short
stay; sufficing howsoever to ripen their Herbage, and Corn, and Fruits;
especially such as survived the rigor of the cold. It abounds in Flax and Hemp,
and an immense quantity of Honey; the Woods, which are many and great, being
filled with swarms of Bees, as also of Birds and of wild Beasts; the precious
Furs of the later bring in such high esteem in the world. The Inhabitants (we
will except those of the first Rank) are barbarous, yet cunning, unfaithful,
immeasurably debauched, luxurious, cruel; and yet so servile, that they glory
in it. The Nobility think it an honor to be esteemed the most abject of Slaves
to their Princes; but they again insult and tyrannize over their Vassals,
though all acknowledge the Despotick power of their Duke; who is so absolute,
that he is Sovereign of the lives and fortunes of every individual; being
fettered by no Law but that of his will, which is as extensive as his pleasure.
In a word, there is no Government in the world where the Prerogative of the
Prince and the Servitude of the People are greater. For all this, He admits of
a precarious Council, many of them of the Clergy, the better to impose upon the
ignorant and superstitious Commonalty, who think nothing Sacred that they have
not consented to, nor nothing hard that has their approbation. Their chief
Strength consists in their Cavalry, all Gentlemen's Sons: for none are esteemed
Noble, who do not serve in the War. When all these meet, they are accounted
80000; and that is as often as the Great Duke pleases: these have Land and
Stipends allotted for their subsistence. The Foot all Fire-men, are 12000 in
ordinary pay; nor are there any Strangers employed, but upon extraordinary
occasions. Whereas our chief care is to provide Victuals for our Armies, their
Prince takes none at all for his; every Soldier being his own Purveyor, and
content with a little, scarce using any thing but Biscuit and Meal. If they were
as brave as they are strong, and understood War as well as hardship, what could
resist their numbers and power? But they are heavy, and so addicted to
servility, that they scarce desire, seldom acquire any great matters. Yet they
have one other excellent quality, especially in Garrison, tenacious even to
obstinacy, as appears, together with most of their other Virtues and Vices, in
the sequel of this Narrative. This, as most other Countries, was at first
governed by many and several petty Princes and Lords, until most truckling to
the felicity of a few, these again did by Alliances and Conquests devolve upon
one. John the Son of Basilius was the first that assumed the Title of Prince of
all Russia, having not only reduced all others to his obedience, but shaken off
the Tartars yoke, from whom his Predecessors received their Scepters and Power.
His Son Basilius equally happy, ^dded the fair Provinces of Smolensko and
Plescow to his Dominions, with the Honor of Knez, King and Emperor, to his
Titles. John succeeded him, who adding Industry and Discipline to the Arts of
his Forefathers, conquered the Kingdoms of Cazan and Astracan, and extended his
Empire to the Confines of Persia. But he was no less cruel than brave; which
did much asperse the glory of so many Victories. But this Prince being his
Father, whose Story we write, we will refer the rest of him, and the Reader, to
the subsequent Relation.

SECTION I.
The Introduction. Theodorus dies, and Boris is chosen in his place. He causes
Demetrius the Heir of the Empire to be slain, to facilate his Election. A new
Demetrius appears; his Education and Discovery. He is acknowledged in Poland,
and enters Moscovy with an Army. He is beaten. He afterward overthrows the
Enemy in a memorable Battle. Boris enraged with this loss and the Competition
of a Rival, transported with passion and fury, dies suddenly. His Elogie.

ALong and uninterrupted series of Succession had devolved the Dominion of the
vast Empire of Muscovy upon the person of John Basilius, who however
preferrable for his Cruelty to the most monstrous of Tyrants, did yet excel the
Glory of all his Predecessors in the Luster of his Actions, and Greatness of
his Achievements. For having added the severe Rules of Military Discipline to
his Industry and Valor, he extended the Bounds of his Dominions as far as
Persia, and Conquered the Kingdoms of Casan and Astracan, in vain attempted by
his Father before him.

This Great Prince having lived six and fifty Years, and Reigned nine and
thirty of them, was forced to quit this World, to search for that Repose in
another which the violence of his mind had denied him in the midst of his
Victories and Triumphs. Anastasia his first Lady had born him two Sons; John
his Eldest, whom he slew with his own hands, upon no other provocation than
that of his violent Temper; and Theodorus, Heir of his Empire, not his
Greatness; though the Father laboring under the pangs of Death, was not
wanting to recommend with much passion to his surviving Nobles the Conduct of
that Son, in whom he proposed to himself the perpetuating of his Glories and
Conquests. He yet left behind him another Son of a second Bed, the unhappy
Demetrius, born in the extremity of his Fathers Age, and brought up by his
Mother till his supposed Decease, in the Castle of Vglecz.

The Great Duchess, a Lady of a Masculine Presence and Carriage, was Sister to
Boris Gedanow, Master of the Horse; who (by the joint Advantages of his
Relation and Quality, added to the dexterity of his Address and Contrivances;
to all which Conspired the Infirmness of Theodorus his Constitution, and the
easiness of his Nature) had gained an entire possession of the Government. This
Glorious Favorite having, by his Sisters Influence and his own Skill, gathered
into his Manage the greatest Concerns of the State, had thereby the opportunity
of obliging or removing the chief Officers of the Empire at pleasure. And
whether having tasted the sweetness of Dominion, ordinarily quitted with much
reluctance; or that he had from the Death of his old Master laid his designs of
placing the Crown upon his own head, is scarce questionable. However it was,
the way seemed already smoothed by the indisposition of the Duke, and the
acquired favor of the Nobility, who, preferments passing through his hands,
gave them a necessary dependence upon him; none being advanced to any place of
Honor or Trust, but as they were presented by this Prince-minister. Add to
this, that Theodorus was Childless, though Married in his Fathers lifetime, who
by reason of his Wives Barrenness had often commanded him to put her away; (a
Practice consistent with the Power of those Princes:) but he consulting more
his Affection than his Interest, had all that time delayed it: and now what the
Duchess by her Influence had before exercised for the raising of her Brother
to the Great Dukes Favor, is by his insinuations upon the Affections and
Passions of the Prince returned to her with advantage, who for his sake
continued her, as he had formerly for hers received him. He had indeed attained
to a very great perfection in the Art of Government, which with the powerful
Charms of Flattery and a well-dissembled passion for his Masters Interest, as
it rendered Boris absolute in his greatness, so it rendered the Empire secure
in the Fidelity and Watchfulness of so excellent a Minister, that laying aside
the present Care of his Dominions, he was consequently as little thoughtful of
a Successor; but indulging himself in his private Pleasures and Retirements, he
became insensibly divested of the Majesty of one of the Greatest Princes of the
Christian World. The main obstacle to the growing Ambition of Boris, was the
Life of Demetrius Brother to the great Duke, and Heir apparent to the Crown.
His destruction was therefore judged necessary to precede, in whom the
Blood Royal determined; there would want only the death of the Great Duke, to
make way for the Election of a new Emperor. And the Constitution of that
Government then considered, Boris might reasonably propose to himself the
suffrages of the Nobles and People, who were actuated by his Counsels, and
employed or discontinued in order to his Interests and Designs. Bloody Tyrants
never want Bloody Instruments (witness that most horrid of Murders perpetrated
in our own Land upon the best of Princes) neither is any Relation proof against
the Charms of Ambition and Avarice in a degenerate mind. Boris by the aid of
vast Presents, and promises of greater, had gained four of Demetrius his
Servants to murder their Lord. The horridness of so sad an Assassination made
them for some time suspend its execution, till hurried on by a consideration
that they were too far advanced to retreat with safety, by threats of the
Tyrant, and by the hopes of becoming suddenly Great, they resolved upon the
cruel performance of what they had so wretchedly undertaken. All the difficulty
now is, how it should be compassed; and several ways being proposed, they at
length conclude, as follows. An obscure gloomy Night is made choice of, as
most proper and suitable to so black a deed; and the Town being set on fire in
many places at once, these miscreants fill all with Tumult, and the terror of
the Burning. This done, they fling themselves like men amazed into the Princes
Bedchamber, and awaking him with a sudden Fright, alarm his already-disturbed
Spirits with the approaching danger. Demetrius starts up at the noise, and
running to the window to see the Flames, is set upon by those he trusted most,
and pierced in several places of his Body with long poisoned knives prepared
for this inhumane Butchery. While the unhappy Child lay wallowing in his Blood,
and struggling with his Fate, these Villians, by the advantage of the Night, and
the confusion they had raised, and upon Horses laid for them, posted to Boris
with the news of the execution of his Command, and to receive their promised
Salary. The Tyrant upon the first advertisement laboring under the Impressions
of his Joy, received these Bloody Ministers of his will with no ordinary
transport; till the heat of that Passion being spent, and reflecting upon what
he had done; as it is the Nature of Guilt and Treason never to think it self
secure, he thought likewise his Practices might come to light: but being
resolved these miscreants should not discover them, he by the temptation of
excessive rewards hired other Executioners to destroy and make away these four
first Murderers. And that he might not be engaged upon new contrivances, he
designs the same Method for their Ruin, which they had squared out for the
death of the Prince: in order whereto, as Vglecz was Sacrificed to his
destruction, so Musko was put into flames for theirs. The Town is fired in many
places at once, some hundreds of Houses buried in their own Ashes, while these
hated Traitors were (though by unjust means) punished with a just retaliation
for their execrable Villainy.

But to return to Vglecz. As soon as the Fire was quenched, and that the
Citizens began to be Composed from their disorder, a Rumor being spread that
their Prince was Murdered, they violently break into the Castle; and finding
what they feared to be true indeed, their distraction being now heightened to
Fury and Outrage, they slaughtered all his Servants without distinction or
enquiry: supposing the carelessness and neglect of the Innocent, no less
culpable than the pernicious industry of the Guilty, they thought happily to
purge themselves from the stain of the Fact, by their zeal in revenging it. But
in vain: for Boris, to clear himself if any durst suspect him, and to signalize
his pretended Passion to his Prince, made use of this Irregular vengeance of
the Citizens as an Argument of their Guilt; and laying the Murder at their
door, because they had slain all those from whom inquisition might have been
made concerning it without examining them at all, he caused them to be
proceeded against as Criminals. Many of the chief amongst them were tortured,
hanged, drowned, Banished, and exposed as examples of public Justice; while
he (the better to disguise his cruelty) under the sense of so irreparable a
loss, vests himself and the whole Court in mourning; And having dispatched Duke
Basilius Zuisky with many prime Senators and Persons of Eminency, with Orders
to Celebrate his Obsequies with all the Funebrial Pomp and Honor imaginable,
he commanded that the very place of his Death (as guilty in failing to protect
him) might not survive to be a witness to so great a loss, but (as Infamous) be
immediately razed, and levelled with the ground.

Demetrius being thus removed, Theodorus did not long survive him; and it is
more than conjectural, that his end was hastened by the impatience of Boris,
and the violence of a secret poison. However it was, the Duke sensible of his
weakness, and the approach of his departure, bequeathed the Government of the
Empire to the conduct of the Lady Irena his Wife, sister to Boris: the
Patriarch was appointed her Assistant, and both of them by the dying Prince
recommended to the Valor and Fidelity of the Great ones of his Kingdom.

Theodorus being dead, and the Solemnities of his Funerals performed with all
becoming Ceremonies and Circumstances, his Duchess did readily ascend the
Throne: but afterward having some time toyled under the weight of so Great an
Empire, whether out of unwillingness to fustain so Great a Burden, or, as is
more probable, to secure the succession in her own House by transferring it
upon her Brother, she declares her resolutions to quit so unequal a Charge: And
accordingly yields up the Ensigns of her Authority into the hands of the
Nobles, giving out, that for the Repose of her Soul she would Sequester her
self from the Turmoyls of this World into the Retirement of a private Life.
This news being spread amongst the people, did infinitely perplex them: for
though they might have some reluctance against the Government of a Woman, or
that the servility of their Nature might at other times render them patient of
any Yoke; yet they wisely considered it more safe to submit to one, than many
Tyrants. Boris in the mean time laid his trayns at distance, choosing rather to
have the Government devolve upon him by necessary Consequence, than rudely to
break in upon it; cherishes (by his secret Agents and Emissaries) the mutinous
Temper of the People, who without an head were become uneasy to themselves as
well as others. This subtle Statesman had in the interim withdrawn himself
from all public business, to the retirements of a Countrey-house. All things
in this State had a tendency toward confusion; some not daring, others not
willing to lay hold upon the Government: and indeed, all the prime Ministers
being raised by his Favor, not secure in the Counsels of each other, were
emulous who should first conduct him to the Throne. In order whereto, they
attend him with their Submissions and Addresses that he will take upon him the
protection of a distracted State. The people transported by the apprehensions
of their Ruin, seconded the Nobility with their Importunities. The Clergy,
whose safety consisted in the Peace of the Empire, brought in their
Supplications. The Nuns quitted their Cloisters, and instead of praying for
their exquisite Artist, offer up their Prayers to him as their Tutelary Saint
or Angel. The very Children, as if swayed by a Supernatural Impulsion, besieged
him with Tears and Cries. And what he denied to all these Solicitations either
apart or united, supposing them to have a respect to him only, not to
themselves; he grants, as he declared, to the necessity of his Country; which
being without a Head, and no man willing to undertake the care, he must offer
violence to his own nature, rather than expose so glorious an Empire as a prey
to every Invader. Who could all this while, under so dark a Veil, suspect him
guilty of Poisoning his Sovereign, and the Murder of his Prince, to make way
for his Crown, presented to him several times in vain by all the Orders of the
Empire? But permitting himself at length to be overcome, he protested that he
had given that to their importunity and the love of his Country, which he
should for ever have denied to his own Honor and Greatness, and the Advancement
of his House to so Illustrious a Rank. He confessed himself too weak for so
great a Burden; but Courting the Aid of his Petitioners to his Assistance, he
promised his utmost Endeavors to answer the obligingness of so Unanimous and
Honorable an Election, wherewith they were pleased to signalize him above his
Fellows: And since they had marked him out for their Emperor, he would no
longer Question their Judgment, but cheerfully receive the Honor of that
Trust; which he would die rather than betray or relinquish, but into their
hands who committed it to him. He assured them, that where he could not equal
his Predecessors in Glory and Merit, he would surpass them in Temperance,
Evenness of Government, and the Impartial distribution of Justice to his
People; as deriving his Greatness from their choice, and dedicating it wholly
to their Service and Interest.

Boris being thus come to the Crown, showed no less wisdom and conduct in
conserving his Dignity, than he had exercised in the acquiring of it: he
secured the Army and men of War to him by Gifts; the Nobles, by Preferments,
Favors and suitable Graces; and the Commonalty, by a diminution of their Taxes,
increase of their Privileges, protection and encouragement of Trade, and in
all things by a gentle hand upon the Reins of Government; whereby he was become
the Darling of his people, and the Honor of that Crown they had given him. He
had an eye to the state of his Affairs abroad; in order whereto, he was careful
to renew the Treaties with the Swede, Pole, the Persian, and neighboring
Tartar; and being secure beyond humane apprehensions to the contrary at home
and abroad, he is from the Contrivances and Designs of a private Monk in a
Cloister hurried into those discords and perplexities which no foreign Enemy
with all his Powers could have reduced him to.

This Monks right name (if we believe the contrary party) was Hrisko Otropeia,
born a Gentleman, but of a decayed Family, in the Dukedom of Jareslaw. The
debaucheries of his younger years were extraordinary, which necessitated his
Parents to dispose of him into the Cloister of Trinouka, where he might have
room to breath out the extravagancies of his youth by this more rigid
conversation. This retiredness did not at all quadrate with the licentiousness
of Hrisko's nature, who being of a Spirit over-active for the Contemplative
life he was condemned to, had therewith a very advantageous mien and presence;
which an old subtle Friar of that Covent taking notice of, one who had a
secret Antipathy to the person of the Great Duke, though never disobliged by
him (if at all known to him) he contracts a particular friendship with this
young Probationer; and fully instructing him in the History of the Russian
Chronicle, and with the present form of Government, he also acquaints him with
all the circumstances of the late Changes in the State, and by what Arts and
Assassinations Boris had possessed himself of the Empire. The Friar having thus
qualified his Pupil, tempts him away from his Cloister and Country, and
secretly conveys him into the Dukedom of Kiow; where, with some difficulty, he
places him in the service of Duke Adam Wisnioweski; furnishing him with apt
Rules for the discovery of himself when a seasonable opportunity should be
offered. Hrisko being thus disposed of, the Friar leaves him, and returns into
Russia; giving it out every where, that Demetrius the right Heir of Moscovy was
yet alive: that his Murder had been designed by that bloody Tyrant Boris, but
that his Mother, the Great Duchess Dowager, having gained private Intelligence
of the Plot, and in that Juncture of Affairs judging no place secure against
the power and malice of the Favorite, thought it more safe to avoid the storm,
than vainly to resist it: in order whereto, she caused Demetrius to be conveyed
away under the conduct of only one Servant privy to his Estate; and the better
to disguise his flight, had provided another Child of the same Age (a Priests
Son at Vglecz) of shapes and features not unlike the Prince, whom the
Murderers killed in his stead. He affirmed further, That the Corpse was
suddenly Coffined by the wary and honest Lord Chamberlain, a German, privy to
this pious fraud, in order to his Interment; whereby the escape of the Prince
was managed with less difficulty; who was at present in Duke Wisnioweski's
Court in great Honor, and acknowledged and treated as Emperor of Muscovy:
That his preparations were in a good forwardness for the recovery of his
Rights; and assures the Cossacks, that if they would espouse his Quarrel, they
should share in his Conquests, and their Pay (for it is a Military Nation) be
much bettered. Whilst the Friar by whispers of this kind was accommodating the
peoples inclination to his own Designs, Demetrius, (for so we shall hereafter
call him) remains in the Dukes Court, in the Quality of his Chamberlain; but
not forgetting the Rules his Tutor had left with him, he employs all his spare
time in the exercise of those Qualities and Graces which render Great Persons
more considerable; as, riding the great Horse, Tilting, Fencing, and whatever
else might bear proportion with that Greatness he resolved to pretend to. His
Conversation amongst his Fellows was reserved, and yet obliging; toward his
Mr. full of Respect and Submission, not without the mixture of an Air which
spoke his Services more the effect of Gratitude than Duty.

Thus did this apt Scholar demean himself in the Court of Wisnioweski, watching
all opportunities to put in practice the Documents of his Tutor; which by an
accident of some severity, were seasonably offered, and laid hold of by him.
For the Duke being one day in a Bath, his Chamberlain had omitted some
necessary circumstance about his Person, wherewith his Choler being raised, he
strikes him upon the Face, calling him the Son of a Whore. Demetrius not at all
surprised with this usage, (as if forgetting the Quality of a Servant) seemed
infinitely perplexed at so unkind a Treatment from a person his equal at least,
if not his inferior; and the scorn and unkindness of a Blow from one whom he
had vouchsafed to serve, transporting him to a discovery of himself beyond a
retreat: His Eyes filled with Tears, he breaks forth into these words: My Lord,
were my Quality as well known unto you as my Person and Service, your Grace
would have spared your ill Language, and your Blows, both which I equally scorn
and grieve at; being that where I promised my self a Sanctuary, and Ayds for my
Restoration, I am discouraged by this rugged Treatment from expecting either.
And as recollecting himself for having said so much, he stopped suddenly. The
Duke being strangely surprised by his Servants discourse, and behavior in this
discourse, hastily asked him, What mean these ambiguous Speeches? Who art thou?
Of what Country, and Name? and upon what designs art thou here? His haste by
these multiplied Questions to know all, without permitting Demetrius to speak,
and answer them severally, gave him room to clear up; and composing his
Countenance into a more Grave posture, not without a becoming sadness and
modesty, answered, That his Country was Muskcovy; his Father John Basilius the
deceased Emperor; his Name Demetrius; and his Business there, for Protection
and Aid against Boris, the most bloody of Tyrants, who had laid designs to
murder him, but that by the care of his Mother, and the fidelity of a Servant,
he was conveyed away; another Child of his Age, and not unlike him, being laid
in his place, whom the Assassinates killed, supposing it to be him. That since
that escape, he had been concealed in a Covent of Monks; till a just ambition
of getting his own, had tempted him into the world to try what was to be done.
And to confirm all this, putting his hand into his Bosom, draws out a rich
Cross of Gold beset with Diamonds, which he said was the only Testimony of
Royalty his Mother had left with him upon his escape. Then casting himself at
the Dukes feet, he breaks forth into these Expressions: Now Sir, that I have
discovered to you a Secret of that nature which no Rack could have extorted
from me, you are become Master of my life and fortunes: neither have I thus
exposed my self to your knowledge without design, it being equal to me to die,
as to wither and languish in this servile condition. But if you will make good
that confidence which first swayed me to put my self under your Protection;
refuse me not those favors which I have promised my self from your Justice and
Virtue. Let not the wickedness and evil consequence of the example receive
countenance from so just a Prince, but give your self the Honor of assisting
me to cleanse my Throne from the usurpation of a Tyrant, by so much the more
Ignominious, by how much he stands obliged to me, as my Subject and Vassal. And
for your recompense, besides the having performed so good an Act, which brings
with it its own rewards, I shall think no acknowledgment too dear for you. The
Duke astonished at this discourse, and at the same time reflecting upon former
passages in the behavior of his Servant, which comparing with the seeming
probability of his narrative, and his mien in delivering of it, besides the
Rumor spread abroad that Demetrius was yet alive, was at a loss how to behave
himself; but being divided in his resolution, he made a kind of excuse to his
Servant, that not knowing his Quality, he ought to pardon any miscarriage
toward him; and requesting him to stay where he was, till he should send to
him. He left him very anxious what would be determined concerning him. The Duke
full of amazement and irresolution, hastes to his Ladies Chamber, to whom he
repeated the whole story of his encounter with his Servant Hrisko. The
Duchess, according to the nature of Women, much pleased with the novelty,
judged the matter very probable, because not altogether impossible: and then
comparing all circumstances together, she raises her likelihood to a certainty,
that it could not otherwise be; that she had ever observed in his very Face,
the marks of Greatness; that he had ever aspired to noble Qualities; that no
Impostor could have dared under so young years to own so hazardous a discovery;
and that therefore it must be Demetrius, and no other, who had cast himself
into their arms for Protection, which by all Laws, Divine and Humane, they were
obliged to afford him. Thus having determined the matter, care was had for his
reception, in a way proportionable to the Greatness of his Quality; and the
whole Court immediately disposed into a State fit to have received the Great
Duke and Emperor of Muskovy, that evening. A train of Servants of all sorts,
with horses for the Saddle and Coach suitably accoutred, were forthwith
ordered, and an Appartment in the most honorable part of the house was made
ready with all imaginable State becoming so Great a Prince. This being done,
the Duke having laden twelve Servants with presents of the Richest things in
his possession, and most suitable for the occasion, himself in Person ushers
them with much Submission and Ceremony to his late Servant Hrisko, conducts him
to his Appartment, humbly beseeching his Highness to receive those trifles as a
testimony of his service, and devotion to his interest; declaring his
resolution to contribute all his Powers for the settling him upon the Throne of
his Fathers.

Demetrius being by this time reassured, receives the Dukes Complement with a
becoming Reservedness and Civility, repeating to him his Engagements; and that
when it should please God to restore him to his Dominions, he would give more
effectual Testimonies of his resolutions never to forget so seasonable and
obliging Favors.

This extraordinary change in Wisnioweski's Court, managed with so great
Ceremonies in the view of the whole world, failed not to justify those
Whispers scattered abroad by the Old Friars industry, and gave a confirmation
of those Rumors dispersed in the adjacent Kingdoms and Countries: and what
before could make no impression upon the faith of the Cossacks, is now become
an Article of it; That Demetrius, Son to John Basilius, and right Heir to the
Empire of Musko, was alive, and in safety. But no man apprehended the report
with more Terror than Boris; guilt and fear rendering even impossibilities
conceivable, though he knew not how to reconcile the present reports with those
had been made unto him by his Assassinates, and were confirmed by the
Solemnities of the Princes Funeral: but being of a present Courage and
Judgment, laid by his wonders, to make room for his Industry and Conduct; and
wisely foreseeing what great disorders the Novelty might produce, if not
seasonably prevented, He immediately posts away his dispatches with Presents to
Wisnioweski; besides an Offer of a perpetual League, and several Castles and
Towns upon the Borders, convenient for him, with a vast sum of ready Money,
upon condition he would dead or alive send him that Traitor and Impostor who
presumed to abuse the world by assuming the name and person of Demetrius;
warily mixing his Courtship with some threats, That Wisnioweski he hoped was
too wise to be made a property to gratify the Malice of any that should dare
to interrupt his repose. Wisnioweski was so far from being swayed by the
Messages and Temptations of Boris, that he became wholly confirmed in what he
made some doubt of before; and concluding that this seeming Hrisko was the true
Demetrius, he resolves to espouse his Cause and Interest. In order whereto,
Boris having strong Forces upon the Borders, the Duke with Demetrius took Coach
immediately, and with some Horse that he had in a readiness, retires to
Wisnioweski, a strong Town of his farther in the Country: being come thither,
he puts the Great Dukes Letters into Demetrius his hands; who having perused
them, after some little pause, cast himself at the Dukes feet, and with
interrupted words said to him, Sir, I am in Gods hands and in yours; the
Fortunes and Person of Demetrius are at your dispose: but my Trust is in the
Honor of your promises, and that the temptations of this Usurper shall have no
influence upon your Integrity. Wisnioweski raised him up with much Humanity and
Respect, bids him be sure he would not depart from that faith he had already
passed to him, for all the Dominions in the world; that he had therefore
brought him to that place, further out of his Enemies reach, where he wished
him to remain with his Attendants, while himself went back to a nearer distance
from Boris, in order to a better discovery of his designs.

Boris being impatient of Wisnioweski's delays, sends yet again to him, before
the return of his former Agent, with larger offers; but suspecting the Duke was
not to be wrought upon, he gave secret instructions, that by some Art or other
Demetrius should be privately Murdered or Poisoned. The Duke by means of a
secret correspondent in the Court of Boris, having notice of this design, and
judging Demetrius scarce safe at so near a distance, recommends him to the
Palatine of Sondomiria, by whom he was received with all imaginable
Demonstrations of an entire Respect and Honor, as due to a Person of so
Illustrious Quality. Being thus by the mediation of his supporter disposed into
a place of better security, he had more room to reflect upon the Documents of
his Tutour: And being quick of apprehension, close in his nature, and apt to
promise himself a glorious Issue to these fair beginnings; he nourishes his
fancy with high Reflections, whereby his thoughts being sublimated, his very
nature was changed into that of Princes. Greatness had seemed to take
possession of his Soul; and what by a conversation with persons of the first
Rank, and discourses of Kingdoms and Empires, the part he Acted was become
natural to him. His faculties were pregnant, and his courage not unbecoming the
Person assumed by him. He had an understanding above his Age, and a presence so
agreeable, that he seldom or never lost ground where he had room to Act his
own part. He was not insensible of the present State of his affairs; that he
was fallen into the hands of strangers, who having taken fire at the novelty of
his Fortune, would be apt to cool again at the least hard weather that should
fall upon it. It Is true, he had received very honorable promises of protection
from Wisnioweski, but he wisely considered those would depend upon Interest of
State; and when the Duke should judge it more conducible to his affairs to
deliver him up, he foresaw it would be his fate to be the sacrifice of the
Dukes peace. He therefore casts about how to lay a more solid Foundation for
his greatness, and at all turns calling to mind the Rules of his Tutor the
Monk, he contrives how to involve the Interest of such who had or should own
him, with his own. He was now in a Country that professed the Roman faith; he
considered that his Aids must be procured from those of the same Belief; and
observing the zeal of the Jesuits in the propagating of that Doctrine, and
that they had an influence upon the Counsels of most Christian Princes, he
fixed upon them, as the first Cornerstone to his new Fabric. They, who were
not without their designs neither, had easy access into his presence; and
taking all opportunities to feel his Pulse, they were not wanting to let fall
their observations upon the fortune of him and his Family, as laboring under
the Judgments of God, and the Wrath of Christ, in refusing Obedience to his
Vicar the Pope; not failing to urge the suitableness of the punishment, which
rendered the hand of God the more visible: that that Prince who in opposition
to the Catholic Church had owned a Heterodox Patriarch, renouncing the
Supremacy of the Infallible Chair, should have the Throne of his Fathers
possessed by an Usurper. Our Demetrius seeming to be staggered by these and the
like arguments, did with equal art suffer himself to be convinced, but
Gradually, and upon the Impulses of Conscience, lest he might be thought to
have a more faint Zeal to the truth of Religion, than to the recovery of his
Empire. He therefore makes his doubts and scruples upon the account of that,
and receives their solutions with so seeming an Innocence and Simplicity, that
they promised to themselves a Conquest of his heart as well as of his head. He
failed not to hint the reasons of State which would oblige him to profess the
Religion of his Fathers; and that to own any other, were to make a general War
upon the Consciences of his whole people, who upon declaration of himself to be
given over to the Church of Rome, would make it matter of Conscience to resist
him as the public Enemy to their faith: That what the Usurper wanted in the
justness of his Title, would be supplied by the asserting the faith of Muskovy,
and by the Influence of the Patriarch, whose Dominion over the Conscience of
the Muskovites was the more absolute, by how much they were the more ignorant
in the knowledge of the best things; the common people being always swayed by a
blind devotion, which derived to them from their Ancestors, they could better
defend by Arms than Arguments. However, he let fall some professions, which
coming from him by snatches, seemed therefore the more real, that no Reasons of
State or Interests should engage him against the convictions of his Conscience,
and that he would not purchase the Universe with the wounding of that. These
ejaculations did yet more inflame these Apostles, and they were themselves
taken in their own Artifice; concluding him real, while they were laboring to
possess him that they were so; and resolving, that he being once brought off
from his former Tenets, they had gained a Champion to their Cause, whose soul
was engaged in the Quarrel. Thus did our young Statesman lay his Foundation a
Jove; but his affairs being of an active nature, he contrives how to fix to
himself an Interest, which if things fell out well, might bear some proportion
with the greatness of his pretensions; if otherwise, might prepare him a
retreat, where he might subsist in honor.

The Palatine had a daughter young and sprightly, of an Air Noble and Masculine
And though her Carriage was more charming than her Complexion, and her distinct
parts less winning than the Composition; yet in her Entire, she was very lovely
and taking. To all this, she was endued with a Courage above the ordinaries
other Sex; and that so tempered and allayed by a great measure of
Understanding, that she was considered at the rate of a second Pallas: and all
this attended with a presence so Majestique, that her very aspect rendered all
her beholders her Adorers.

Demetrius considering this Lady as (...) proper object for his Passions,
judged i^ very conducible to his Interests to plan^ himself into so Illustrious
a Family. For the Palatine was a person very considerable in his Quality,
potent in Allies, able it Council, and rich in Men and Money Demetrius swayed
by these motives, reasonably supposing that the Palatines ambition would
dispose him to cast in hi^ daughter into the Fortunes of a person where she
should stand fair to be one of the greatest Princesses of the Universe,
resolves to make his Addresses to him.

Whilst he was entertaining himself with these thoughts, he was again visited
by the Jesuits; whereof one, a very grave person, to whom the rest seemed to
pay most respect, finding himself singly with the Prince, and both removed from
the company, (for they withdrew to a convenient distance) said to him to this
purpose: My Lord, had I not a very great assurance of your wisdom and virtue,
I should not with so much passion offer my self to the service of your
interests. Your temper has so far prevailed upon me, that I must profess in my
self a natural propensity to your services, for the sake of your person, which
will be always dear to me. It is upon that account that I press thus (I must
acknowledge with much indecencie) upon your retirements. Father, said
Demetrius, as I have ever had a high esteem of your wisdom and piety; so have I
in my heart retained due acknowledgements of your zeal for my concerns. My
Lord, replied the Jesuit, being fully convinced of your Candor in rightly
understanding my devotions for you, I shall use the more freedom toward you. I
have, according to the best of my understanding and observation, weighed every
circumstance of your Condition, with the present posture of your Affair; and I
must needs say, that upon the whole matter I find it full of intricacies and
hazards. Your Adversary is a person of great wisdom, experience and courage, in
possession of a vast Empire, to which he is ascended by many gradual
Contrivances, that render him a Statesman of no ordinary Indowments. His
Interests are laid deep in the Affections of the Nobility, most of whom he
took care while the old Emperor lived to link to him by Preferments and
Favors, and though some amongst them may malign his Precedencie and Election
to the Throne yet we are reasonably to suppose, that all Places of Trust and
Power are in the hands of his Dependants and Favorites. You cannot be ignorant
how he endeavors to stain your Pretensions and Titles with the Ignominy of
Imposture; which he has spread abroad with much Artifice; making the Story so
particular, that it carries with it the greater face of truth, as that which
because all men have power to examine, they therefore admit, without
examination. To all this, add how you are but lately discovered to the World;
and that in your discovery, you have not been so happy as to produce any other
Testimony of your Quality besides your own. And though there needs no more to
conclude you descended from Emperors, than to look upon your face, where
Majesty sits enthroned as in its proper seat; yet you must confess with me,
that this Evidence is too delicate for the grosser multitude, who believe all
things and nothing much alike. Let me therefore, who have studied your
Concerns, and am not a stranger to the Constitution of your Empire, presume to
offer you my humble and faithful Advice, grounded upon my true love to your
Cause, and upon my great experience of the Affairs of this World, and the
present posture of this Kingdom in which you now receive shelter. You must in
the first place know, that there is not now living a more ambitious person than
the Palatine; and could you so far descend below your self, as to make an
Alliance with him, it would put so great countenance upon your Cause, that I
know no one thing in the world would more contribute to the success of it. He
is considered as a person of great wisdom, and that he would not cast away his
daughter upon an Impostor; and whatever may be spread abroad to your
disreputation, would lose much of its credit, when the World should see that
he, in a flourishing condition, should give away his only Daughter, a person of
high Accomplishments, and of an Illustrious extraction, into your arms. As for
the change of your Religion, wherein I most magnify your piety, and shall
always offer up to the Father of Mercy my poor Prayers and thanks for touching
and inflaming your Princely heart with the love of the truth: Let me be free
with you, and tell you, that that Point is to be handled with much caution:
though it will be necessary to persuade our Holy Father the Pope of your
reality, yet it will be as requisite to suppress all breathings of it in your
own Territories; and it is therefore that I the more earnestly advise this
Alliance, which as it will draw the King of Poland to your Aid, so it will
satisfy the scruples of the Nobility and People of Muskovy, that what the
Palatine does for you by himself and his Confederates, is for his own Child
also. And now that I have given you the best counsel I am capable of offering
to so High and Wise a Prince, I humbly supplicate your pardon, if in the
freedom of it I have let fall any expression unworthy of your Sacred ears.
Having spoke this, he was silent. Whereupon Demetrius approaching him nearer,
takes him in his arms, and embracing him with all imaginable affection, Father,
says he, I receive your counsel as proceeding from an Oracle, and I shall
pursue it, as that upon which will depend my future happiness; I only beg, that
as you have advised the main, you will contribute your particular Aids, and
instruct me as well in the method as the thing. My Lord, replied the Jesuit,
since you are pleased to receive my true meaning with so great affection, I
shall not decline your service in any circumstance: Make your addresses to the
young Lady; and when you have tasted her inclination, my advice is, that you
move her Father for his Consent. I shall be consulted by him in the Affair, and
you need not doubt of my Fidelity to your Interests, only it may be convenient
for you to communicate to me the Progress of your applications, whereby I may
the better contrive my self for your service. Demetrius promised to pursue his
instructions; and it now being grown late, he dismissed the Father with a very
great Sensibility of his zeal and services. He being gone, Demetrius indulged
the happiness of his fortunes, and was over-joyed to think how powerful an
Advocate he had gotten. He was not without reflections upon the reality of his
own Birth, and considered that by the same Rules he had deceived this
quick-ey'd Jusuite, he might much more captivate the sight and sense of the
thick-sighted Multitude. For Religion, he knew that his heart had little of
that to sway it, only he saw the pretense was necessary. He considered it as a
good step to ascend to a Throne by, and that if he could by pretending to that,
raise himself to the possession of an Empire, he concluded his Title would then
be clear enough: in the mean time he resolved to pursue his designs, though he
dyed in the attempt; and one day taking an opportunity to speak to the
Palatine, unbosomed himself to him with such protestations of love for his
Daughter, that he seemed to prefer his acquisition of her, to that of his
Empire. The Palatine very sensible of the honor of this Alliance, and too wise
not to venture upon such sair hopes, being also prepared by the Jesuit, is
said to have answered him after this manner.

My Lord, though what you are pleased to propose to me, be a matter of
consequence, not to be determined upon single Counsels, yet your person has
something of magnetic in it, that hurries me by secret impulsions to your
service and interests, which leave me no room to consider, but how far I may
contribute to those ends. That noble Testimony you gave me of an affection for
my Daughter, has gained so much credit with me, that I make not the least
doubt of it; and in that moment you mentioned it to me, I must say, you spoke
the desires and ambition of my soul: and having cleared that to you, which you
are pleased to place in the first rank, let me oblige you to take my advice in
the conduct of your other affairs, which in my judgment are more considerable.
You have before you an undertaking which will require all your powers and
faculties for the effectual prosecutions of it; you have upon you the eyes of
the whole Christian World; you have a potent Enemy seated upon your Throne, who
has all his Engines at work for your confusion. The reputation of your
Courage, your discretion, and indeed the reality of your being the true
Demetrius, are all at stake, and must be vindicated by an industry worthy of
you; else, let me take the freedom to tell you, you are not worthy of Marina,
were she meaner than she is. Then as to the seasonableness of what you please
to urge concerning her; I must with the same freedom tell you, that considering
the Aids you depend upon, you ought not to think of marrying in this Juncture.
King Sigismond has declared himself for your supply, with both men and money;
and who knows but that the part he may pretend in your disposal, may render him
more zealous for you? Others, while you are single, will run in to your
assistance, every man forming to himself his hopes and expectations according
to the condition of his Affairs; which you must nourish by those ways and arts
which may increase, not diminish your Confederates. I know I run a great risque
in this advice: It may possibly fall out, that when you are ascended up to your
Throne upon the necks of your Enemies, and shall be seated there Triumphant in
their confusions, that your Appetite may change; Marina may be ugly in your
eye, or mean in your esteem; and then all those obliging promises will be
forgot: But le^ that, or worse (if it may be) be the consequence of this delay,
I cannot allow my self otherwise to advise you than I do. And to confirm to you
that my Counsel respects you, not my self, and that it is built upon
Foundations of Honor and Integrity; I do here promise you that I will Raise
all the power I am able, and march in person with it, for the recovery of your
Kingdom. I will espouse your Interests with the same fervor as if they were my
own; and will dye in the attempt, or will cut out a passage for you to your
Dominions through the heart of the Usurper. After this profession of mine, let
me have no more doubtings to remain in you, but cheer up, and intend the
prosecution of your Interests. Conceal and smother your passions for Marina,
and let the Courage which is in your Soul shine in your eyes: It will like fire
kindle a flame in others, which being cherished as it ought, will strengthen
your hands, and multiply your numbers. I will not permit you to object any
thing to this; I know it is the best way for you. I will so far pretend to the
power of a Father (since you give me the honor to expect it) as to impose upon
you in this affair.

Thus did the wise Palatine play with the temper of this young Gallant, bearing
him in hand with hopes, grounded upon arguments and probabilities, which he
could neither contradict, nor in his judgment disapprove of. Demetrius however
pleased with the obligingness of these promises, yet seemed afflicted at the
delay imposed upon him; but seeing no other remedy, and that the enjoyment of
his Mistress depended upon his Establishment in his Throne, he seemed to desire
this but as relative to the other: and now, as awaked out of an amourous
lethargy, he bestirred himself with more fervor than before. And reviving his
considerations as to that part of his business which he would have to be acted
by the Jesuits, he admitted them more frequently into his presence, not only
declaring his conversion to their Religion, but promising to reduce Muskovy
under the obedience of the Pope; and to make that provision for the Clergy, in
Colleges, Monasteries, and other Indowments, that the whole World should be
convinced of his entire Submission to the Apostolic Sea. He was grown so
exact a Statesman, as to discern that the designs of Empire are no way more
properly carried on, than under the Veil of Religion, where the parties to be
managed may find their satisfaction as well in point of Interest as Conscience.
The Fathers over-joyed with the hopes of so fair an accession to St. Peter's
Patrimony, promise Mountains, and assure him they will embark all the Princes
of the Christian World in the Quarrel. Neither were these industrious
undertakers any way remiss in their endeavors. Demetrius his Interests were
now become theirs, and a Croysado was resolved on, to put more countenance on
the holiness of them: To this end, they acquaint the Pope with the design,
Soliciting his Holiness to espouse it as the concern of the Church, and
accordingly to order powerful supplies of his own, besides vigorous
Recommendations to the King and Nobility of Poland, as nearest hand. Demetrius
also writ his Letters in reasonable good Latin, which he had learned in his
Cloister, and with his own hand, to the then Pope Clement the eighth, in the
Style of Emperor of Russia; wherein bewayling his own unhappiness, he besought
the Aid, Prayers and Counsels of his Holiness, against the usurpations of
Boris; promising that if it pleased God to restore him to his Crowns, he would
not only bring in his erring Inheritance into the Communion of the
Mother Church, but by a perfect Obedience to his Holiness, as the Head of the
same, signalize his gratitude to all Posterity.

He continued all this while at Sandomiria, and had not yet been presented to
the King; which he seemed passionately to desire, hoping by the advantage of a
personal enterview, and the telling of his own story, to gain upon the
inclination of that mild Prince: and indeed he was not mistaken in his
computation; for being after some time introduced into the Kings presence by
the mediation of the two Palatines of Sandomiria and Wisnioweski, and received
with Complements suitable to the Quality he bore, he made an hansome Narrative
of his Fortunes, in a Style not inferior to the Majesty of an Emperor; and
yet obliging, and full of deference to the King; in the close whereof he took
the freedom to mind him, that he himself came into the World a Son of sorrows,
being born in the noysomeness of a Prison, and was at last by various Fortunes
conducted to a Crown: That therefore he would please to reflect upon the
mutability of humane affairs, and upon the sufferings of an injured Prince,
whose Restoration depended upon his Aids; wherein he would perform a double
Act of Justice; to chastise the Usurper, and to establish the rightful Heir
upon the Throne of his Fathers. The King received his Address with much respect
and compassion; and being instructed by his own former hardships to sympathize
with those of others, he gave him permission, or rather connivance to make his
leavies of Volunteers within his Dominions.

Demetrius having thus improved the Credit of his extraction by the powerful
countenance of the King of Poland, which gained him a reputation too in the
esteem of other Princes, failed not by the fame of his preparations to fill his
own countries with irresolutions; which being seconded by secret Emissaries
employed into those parts, the people, whose nature is to affect novelty, did
with greediness swallow those seditious Pamphlets scattered abroad by him
against that bloody Usurper. To all this he added the Courtship of invitations
to the people to depart from that hated Murderer, lest they should be
overwhelmed in the vengeance prepared by God for him; fortifying the whole by
promises not only of indemnity for what was past, but of rewards and honors to
such as by their example should instruct others to the duty of their obedience.
Having thus plained his way by infecting the minds of his Countrymen, and
corrupting some person of Eminency of Muskovy, he judged it seasonable to
gratify their expectation by rendering himself upon the Stage of Action,
whereby not only to give life, but security to his party; whose
correspondencie might be discovered to their Ruin: He therefore treated more
particularly with the Palatine, descending to Articles, the substance whereof
were: That in consideration of his Supplies and Aids, Demetrius should upon the
regaining of his Crown, repay him his full charges, Marry the Lady Marina, and
introduce the Roman faith into his Dominions.

These Articles being Signed and Ratified, (though kept secret) the Palatine
applied himself vigourously to the work, raised an Army, being underhand
supplied by the King: But Duke Constantine Wisnioweski did publicly own the
Quarrel, by whose example many prime men of Russia presented themselves unto
him upon the Borders, in the head of considerable Troops raised at their own
charges. Being thus strengthened by fresh supplies, which signified more in
their reputation than in their numbers, the Palatine, with Demetrius in his
company, marched with his Army into Muskovy, the Winter being far advanced,
sending before him the terror of his Arms, and filled with hopes of Conquest.
This Engagement was the Fountain from whence did spring those many changes
which we have since seen in that Empire, and may possibly be the effect of that
Blazing-Star which appeared on the 3 of October, 1614. in the 7th degree of
Sagittarius, portending peradventure those more than Civil discords which tore
and distracted the States of Muskovy and Poland.

Demetrius had no sooner entered into Muskovy, but that 8000 Cossacks, disposed
to it by the persuasions of the crafty Monk, Ranked themselves under his
Colors: and being strengthened with this considerable supply, they passed the
River Boristhenes at Kiow, without opposition, and sat down with their whole
Army before the walls of Eeringow. The place surrendered upon summons, the
Governor Tackmenno having taken this opportunity to revenge some disgraces
formerly placed upon him by Boris the Emperor. Puttiwol, a great and populous
City, followed the example of Eeringow, induced to it by the Volgodensian
Cossacks there in Garrison, whose Governor Michaelowitz Soltekowski was swayed
by the temptations of Corelos General of the Demetrian Cossacks, and who had
the reputation amongst his own Troops of being skilled in the art Magic. Some
other places, but of less importance, followed these Examples, the rising Sun
of Demetrius his hope shining strong in their eyes.

Boris received the tidings of these Successes with Astonishment: he vowed
vengeance against these Revolters, after such a manner, that the whole World
should dread the like Infidelity and Treason. In the mean time he prepares to
oppose the Invasion with a force proportionable, and having drawn together an
Army of 100000 brave and choice Soldiers he placed Fedw in the head of them a
their General, commanding him to march with all speed to the relief of
Novogrod^ straightly beleaguered by Demetrius, but as courageously defended by
the Valor of Bosmanno the Governor. Boris in the mean time was not wanting to
himself, in contriving what was most suitable to the present occasions: and
considering that those of his Subjects who had run into Demetrius upon no
provocation but that of Novelty, would, when their Appetite was served, be as
apt to repent and come back; He prepared Declarations of Impunity to publish
amongst them; besides which, he dispatched several Agents into Poland and
Lituania, to undeceive such as seemed inclined to the Aids of an Heretic and
Impostor; and having found out one Smyrna Otropeia Uncle to Hrisko, he directed
him to repair to his Nephew, and to convince his adherents of the fallacy he
had put upon them. But the Palatine, who was too far advanced to look back,
would not permit Otropeia to come into his presence, seeming to despise those
Artifices, as weak shifts to a declining Cause, and that he doubted not but he
was prepared by the Usurper, to lay a blemish upon the Title of Demetrius, by
owning him for his Nephew. But those Arts were too feeble to divert them from
exacting a severe account from him for his murder of Theodorus, and placing
himself upon the Throne of Demetrius the present Emperor. Boris finding no
Success from these kind of little attempts, as it were from behind the Curtain,
resolved upon the dispatch of a solemn Embassy to the King and Commonwealth of
Poland, in order to expostulate with them the reason of this Invasion. The
Ambassador being arrived at the Court of King Sigismond, and pressing for a
speedy audience, it was granted him: he complained highly against the violation
of the Truce lately confirmed between both Nations for twenty years, by this
unexpected Invasion of his Dominions, sacking his Towns, and killing his
Subjects; and all upon no provocation, or so much as the pretense of any. He
added, that his Master hoped the King and Commonwealth of Poland would not only
be more just, but better advised too, than lay themselves under the reproach of
perjury, by imbroyling them and their Allies in a new War, by violating a
League sworn to by them with all the Solemnities in the World: He therefore
proposed they would not only recall their Troops out of his Masters Country, but
that Commissioners might be appointed to consider of the damages sustained from
them; and that that Impostor might be forthwith delivered into the Great Duke
his Masters hands, whom he would unmask, and render him to the World in his
native Complexion, a mean Creature, set up by the Malice of a discontented
Priest. And then concluded, that in case the King and Kingdom of Poland shall
decline those equitable demands, they would create to them an Enemy, one of the
greatest Princes of the World. And thus having sprinkled his desires with a
mixture of some Threats, he added Rich Presents, which were distributed amongst
the Ministers of State, and indeed most of those in Credit about the King, with
an open hand; so that there were very few but tasted of Muskovitish Bounty. But
all this state and charge amounted to nothing; the Interest of the Jesuits
added to the Authority of the Pope, had rendered the King and his Council deaf
to the applications of the Ambassador. It was therefore resolved that Demetrius
should be assisted with fresh supplies, in order to his Restoration; which was
considered as the only Basis upon which to lay the Foundation of a perpetual
League between both Crowns, and the only means to root out that Schism in
Religion, which hitherto had fomented their Quarrels; their affection being
swayed by their faith.

These Resolutions were kept secret, as the Arcana Imperii: for they did not
judge it fit to come to an open Rupture, till they saw what was like to be the
Success of Demetrius his Arms. Their Answer therefore was, that the King and
State of Poland knew nothing, at least took no notice of what was done in
Muskovy; and that those Tumults raised by Demetrius, a Muskovian born, and
Aided by Muskovians, or any other Volunteers engaged in his designs, did not
at all infringe, or so much as trench upon the League, which they should be
always ready to observe toward that Crown and Empire. The Ambassador being
dismissed with this general Answer, without effecting what he came for; In the
mean time the Armies in Muskovy were drawn within sight of each other, equal in
hopes and desires, though not in numbers. Demetrius upon the Enemies advance,
raised his Siege; and having chosen his ground, with respect to the number of
his men, wherein he was inferior to Boris, he was not without some hopes that
some part of the Enemies Army would, upon the closing, come over to him, having
held an intelligence with some of their Officers to that purpose. But there
appearing so formidable a power of the Muskovites, and but a handful of men
with Demetrius, those who had made him a promise of coming over to his side,
judged it more advisable to adhere to their own. The Armies were now drawn so
near each other, that it was impossible to part without Engaging.

Demetrius therefore and the Palatine judging their safety depended upon their
Courage, received the Enemies Charge, as men resolved to conquer, or lie by it,
not only sustaining, but resisting the fury of their Enemies. The Success was
a while disputed with doubtful hopes, till at last, the Victory began to
declare it self for the more numerous Force, which pouring in fresh supplies,
the Polonian was forced to shrink under the impressions of the multitude, after
they had given testimonies of great resolutions, having fought it out with so
great a pertinacie, that the Victory cost Boris the loss of many of his men.
His General received several wounds; and it was with much difficulty, that the
Enemy quitted the ground: at last they were disordered and broke, saving
themselves by flight. Demetrius having rallied some few of his Troops,
retreated to Ribscum, and the Palatine returned into Poland to raise new
Forces, having left 8000 of his men upon the place, with all his Cannon and
Baggage. The tidings of this Victory was carried to Boris the Great Duke, by
Bosmanno the Governor of Novogrod, whom Boris received as his better Angel;
and (the General having rendered him with an advantageous character) caused him
to be presented with a great Basin of pure Gold, filled with Ducats of the same
Metal, and all the Officers of the Army with Medals, and increase of Pay.

The Borisians showed more Courage in gaining this Victory, than Conduct in
improving it to their advantage, wasting their time at the Siege of Krom,
whilst the Enemy had room without interruption to gather together their
scattered Troops; who had they been chased while their fears had been upon
them, must necessarily have fallen into the hands of the Conquerours, and then
the Garrisons had followed their Fate. But the Great Dukes Army being fate down
b^^^re Krom, the place was defended againse them with so great a Courage, that
they despaired of taking it: whereupon the greater part of the Army being
reinforced with fresh men, marched toward Ribscum, in order to the scattering
of Demetrius his Forces, and the interrupting of his Levies.

He upon this defeat found the experience of those friends which had been made
with his Successes, not himself. Many who had run in upon the fame of his
prosperous March, ran now from him, as from a falling house, that would in its
own ruin involve those within it: Yet was not he wanting to himself, having
his Courage cherished by two Cistercian Monks and two Jesuits, who attended
him, especially the latter, in all his adventures: These inflame him to a
perseverance, with promises that the Issue would be Crowned with Success to
him, and confusion to his Enemies. In the mean time the Borisians advanced
toward him, upon intelligence whereof he sent out his Horse to face them,
while he was drawing up his Foot. Who had seen the great disproportion between
both Armies, the one of a vast Body of Horse and Foot fleshed with Victory, a
great Train of Artillery and Carriages; the other not exceeding 5000 effective
men; those abounding with wants, most of them Raw and Undisciplined; and the
rest, the remnant of a defeated Army, might reasonably have guessed at the
Success. But the power of Fortune, or rather of Providence, in this juncture,
appeared beyond humane expectation.

Demetrius was in a strange Country, no Counsel about him, unknowing in
Discipline, preposterous in his Orders, and not so much as a temptation left
him to hope: his Horse being advanced, were opposed by those of the Enemy, of
whom upon the Charge they killed about 1000; which discouraging the rest, they
shrink, and being pressed on by the Demetrians, had not time to rally, but were
in disorder forced upon their own Foot, breaking their Ranks, and doing for
Demetrius what his Army could never have effected. He pursuing his Success, had
the slaughter of that great Body, which not being able to make Head, were cut
down without any resistance. And thus what began but in a light Skirmish, ended
in an entire Victory.

The Demetrians laden with spoils, (the whole Camp and Train falling into their
hands) returned in Triumph to Puttiwol, where the Fame of this signal Victory
spreading it self to their advantage, Five good Towns with their Forts rendered
him their Submissions; whereby he was furnished with Ammunition, and all other
provisions for War. A while after, two other places, Jalka and Leptina,
rendered themselves; and the great Province of Seneria made one entire present
of all it is strengths at once. Others also hasting in to be first, or with the
first acknowledge the Conqueror, who received their Addresses with great
moderation upon so unexpected a Success. His great care was the relieving of
Krom, besieged by the rest of the Enemies Army: but having by a Spy which came
from out the Town, understood the place was in no danger, and that it might
defend it self for some longer time against the Assailants; He diverted his
thoughts from relieving it, till he had improved his late Victory by enlarging
his Quarters. He continued at Puttiwol, to reinforce his strengths, and to
receive the Submissions of several places and persons, which daily rendered
themselves with recruits to his small Army. While he was thus busied, Boris was
not less active in his Levies, repairing the Breaches in his scattered
Regiments, and doing what ever else might be needful to oppose the impressions
of a great Enemy. He had likewise his Emissaries and Agitatours in the Army of
Demetrius, who endeavored to debauch the Cossacks and such other of the
Russians as had listed themselves in his service, tempting them by excessive
rewards and honors to seize upon the Impostor, (as they Styled him) and to
present him to the Emperor, as a Peace Offering for their Rebellion. And to
enforce this the better, they had with them a thundering Mandate from the
Patriarch, as the Vicar of Christ, and Head of the true Church. These Arguments
swayed little, specially those grounded upon point of Conscience: The people
had shook hands with that before, only they kept so much of the pretense of it,
as might serve to justify their present swerving from the present Government.
Some of these Agents were seized upon, and being exposed to the Rack, confessed
the whole design upon the person of Demetrius, who being to gain upon the
affections of the people by his clemency, dismissed them; despising, out of a
generous carelessness of his own particular, to revenge his own injury upon so
ignoble Instruments. He writ also his Letters to the Patriarch, to mind him of
the duty of his Office; that he should not fix the Seal of Religion, to
justify an usurpation founded upon murder and perfidy, but rather dispose the
people to yield to the Son of John Basilius their undoubted Sovereign that
Obedience and Submission which was due to him from them by the Laws of God and
the Empire. It Is said, he also sent a Message to Boris, advising him from those
ungenerous practices of Assassinations and Libels; and that if he would give
testimony of his repentance, by renouncing the unjust possession of the Throne,
to which he had ascended by a continued Series of unworthy and wicked
practices, He should be permitted to retire into what part of the Empire he
pleased, with an entire indemnity for what was past, and all reasonable caution
and security for his future safety. But the Great Duke refused these overtures
with scorn and indignation; and casting about how he might root out this
growing evil, he judged it advisable to frame a diversion upon his foreign
supplies: wisely considering, that if he could prevent those, the Rebellion in
his own Kingdom would in time, extinguish for want of fuel to sustain it; and
that those of his Subjects who were deaf to his invitations, during the
prosperity of Demetrius, whilst he was owned and asserted by forain Princes,
would when he were left to his own fortunes, fall from him with no less fervor
than they had run in to him. In order to this, he treats with the Danish and
Swedish Ambassadors then in his Court, by what means King Sigismond might be
best incommodated in his own Dominions. Designs were accordingly laid to
imbroy him at his own doors, and to kindle a fire in Poland, which might oblige
him to call home his own Subjects for the quenchin^ of it. But amidst all his
contrivance of State, formed with prudence agreeable to the occasion, he was
seized with a violent tearing in his Bowels, a deluge of Blood flowing out of
his Mouth, Ears and Nostrils; with which, after some moments his enraged Soul
issued out, leaving the Body a horrid Spectacle to all about him and a Monument
of the instability of humane greatness. Some say he died of an Apoplexy,
others, (the fancied Fate of most Princes) that he was poisoned; Demetrius
having by a more delicate contrivance subdued him at his own Weapon. However it
was, he expired in the Month of April, 1605. having lived Emperor the space of
seven years; during which time, his Government was adorned with all imaginable
moderation and justice, as if to compensate the people for the murder of his
Prince, and to make good the sufficiency of their choice in his ability for
administration: And if we believe him who writ his Panegyric, he is to be
justly reckoned amongst the best of the Russian Dukes.

SECT. II.
Fedro succeeds his Father in the Empire. His Army revolts. His Partisans and
Palace are destroyed by the madness of the people. He and his Mother and Sister
being reserved for Demetrius his Triumph, poison themselves. Demetrius is
received and crowned Emperor of Muskovy. He marries the Lady Marina, and in
the height of joy and grandeur is miserably massacred. Zuiski the chief of the
Conspirators, and prime Actor in this Tragedy, is elected Emperor of Russia.

THe Great Duke being thus violently snatched away in the midst of all his
designs, and in the strength of his Age, the Nobility and chief Officers of
the Army were astonished with the surprise of it; and many of them (for it is a
superstitious Nation) reflecting upon this extraordinary adventure as a clear
decision of Providence, with relation to the right of Demetrius, began to
entertain inclinations in his favor: and certainly had not the people
interposed, they would have manifested the same by declaring him the Son of
John Basilius. But the people being alarmed with the Death of Boris, came to
Court in swarms, and in a Tumultuary way (as if prompted by some irresistible
impulse) they placed his Son Fedro upon the Throne of his Father, declaring his
Mother Regent in his minority; and bearing all before them like a torrent, they
sorced all the Nobility to swear Fealty to them, and to ratify the election by
an Act of State, grounded upon a mixture of descent, and the suffrage of the
people. The Army, as if swayed by the same instinct, did by their example
salute him Emperor, and by their Deputies thereto appointed, sent him a
Declaration, wherein they promised to adhere to him with the exposing of their
lives and fortunes, and to stand by him, not only in repelling the common
Enemy, but also in suppressing the Rebellion raised by his own Subjects The
State of Affairs being thus established at Court, care was had for the
interment of the deceased Duke, whose Corpse was without much solemnity laid in
the Sepulcher of their Princes. After this, a Council was held, for the more
effectual prosecuting of the War. Peter Bosmanno, upon the account of his great
service and known abilities, was appointed General of the Army, and dispatched
to the Camp before Krom; Mislikowski and Zwiski being recalled to assist the
Regent and the young Emperor in the administration of the Government. Krom had
been assaulted by the Russians ten severa^ times, who were as often repulsed by
the obstinate Valor of the Cossacks within it. But Demetrius, to cherish the
Courage and Fidelity of the Garrison, and setting much of his rest upon the
conservation of the place, dispatched Zaporius one of his chief Commanders with
the greatest part of his Army, to the relief of it. He having marched within a
convenient distance of it, and by his Scouts and other Spie^ understood the
posture of the Enemy Leaguer, judged it very hard to attempt any thing upon it
by force; and therefore has recourse to policy; and framing a Letter to the
Governor, told him he was advanced so far, as a Forlorn to the main Army, and
to keep the Leaguer from forraging the Country, while the Polish and Cossack
Auxiliaries were coming up to their relief, under the conduct of Demetrius in
person: And then magnifying their fidelity, and abounding in promises of
rewards and honors to them, he concluded with an assurance of speedy relief.
This Letter was put into the hands of a bold fellow, who undertook the delivery
of it, but was by the crafty Commander directed such ways toward the Town, as
led him directly upon an Out-guard of the Enemies, who having seized upon him,
brought him to the Headquarters, where being presented to the Rack, he
discovered his Letters; and being examined, confirmed the effects of them as a
truth which he had heard discoursed of by the chief Officers of Zaporius his
Army. The Leaguer was as yet commanded by Hoduinus a near Kinsman of the late
Great Duke's; the principal Officers of the Army disdaining to submit to
Bosmanno, as a Son of Fortune. Upon this intelligence, there were 2000 Horse
commanded to keep the avenues of the Town, while the rest of the Army drew off
to encounter the Enemy. Zaporius that he might better countenance his
contrivement, drew out his whole Army in Battalia, and having at a further
distance behind him placed all his Boys and Bedles of the Army, with all the
Carriages and some few Soldiers to make up a Front, which he extended to a
great distance; He with his real Forces marched up to encounter the Enemy,
having given order to this mock-Army that was behind, and which he had
furnished with Trumpets, Drums and Colors, that upon the Engagement they
should advance in view and fill the Air with shouts and noises that the Poles
and Cossacks were at hand The Fight was fierce, and doubtful in the beginning;
and Zaporius was so hard put to it by the greater numbers of the Enemy, that
notwithstanding all his skill, he must have sunk under their weight, had not
Bosmanno (disobliged by his own Party) who had the command of some Reserves,
instead of charging the Enemy, joined his Troops to theirs; and then in the
head of his men declared that Demetrius was the true Emperor, inviting all who
had a zeal to the honor of their Country, to follow his example in adhering to
the rightful Prince. This extraordinary adventure did equally surprise both
Armies, possessing the one with a consternation, and the other with amazement;
in so much, that the Fight held up as by joint consent, and both sides seemed
to expect the determination of the Cause, by some other Umpirage than that of
their Swords. Bosmanno taking advantage of this profound Silence, shows himself
again betwixt both Armies; and crying out with a loud Voice, invited all those
who had any reverence for the Ashes of John Basilius, or honor for his Son,
and affection to the public peace, that they should follow his example by
rendering themselves to the obedience of their rightful Prince, where they
should be sure of Indemnity and Protection. Bosmanno being of great reputation
with the common Soldiers, as one that had engaged with them in many Services,
had the fortune in this juncture to make so strange an impression upon their
minds by his discourse, that after some murmur amongst themselves, they all
cried out with a loud voice, that they would live and dye with Bosmanno. The
Nobility observing the course of the stream, and lest that they might be
overwhelmed in resisting of it, resolved to follow the Current; and immediately
declaring for Demetrius, dispatched a Party of 500 to him to Puttiwol, with
tender of their Submissions, and supplicating his pardon for their former
defections, whereto they had been ensnared by the Artifices of Boris. They
further offered him an entire Obedience of themselves, and of the strength of
the Empire; beseeching him he would come over to them, that they might march
under his Conduct to the Possession of his Hereditary rights. Hodwenus having
thus lost his Army, which deserted him as one man, purposed to save himself by
flight; but being pursued by a Party thereto employed, was seized upon, and
presented to Demetrius, in whose presence he disdaining to bow, or pay those
respects due to an Emperor, was commanded to Prison, and to be laden with
Irons.

Demetrius transported with this happy news, broke up with those Troops which
he had about him, marching directly to Krom, where he caressed the Governor and
Garrison with all kindness imaginable, magnifying their Courage and Fidelity,
and heaping upon them promises of Mountains, when he should be established in
his Throne. From thence he went to Arol, where the revolted Lords and Army
attended his coming, and received him with all the Submissions and
demonstrations of joy that could be expressed: And being by this accession of
Force rendered absolute Master of the Field, he advanced by easy marches toward
Musko the Seat of the Empire; and being come as far as Tula, he made some stay
there, as well to refresh his Army, as to consider how to carry on the rest of
his Affairs: And having advised with his Council, he writ his Letters to the
Magistrates of Musko, to acquaint them that God had in a wonderful manner owned
him and his Cause, by bringing over the Army that opposed him to their due
obedience without bloodshed, much to his satisfaction, rather to have them
reduced by the convictions of their Conscience, than by the force of his Arms:
he therefore invited them, according to that pious example of the Army, to
return to their obedience; and as a manifestation of it, to root out from the
face of the earth that hated Progeny of Boris, who had murdered his elder
Brother, and had laid Trains for his life, but that he was rescued from them by
deliverances not much short of miracle. That for his part he had a heart to
forgive all their former failings and rebellions, and as a true Father of his
Country, to extend his Clemency to such as should manifest their penitence:
But if after this advice, and the example of their Fellow Subjects, they should
yet persist in their rebellious actings they must expect he consequence in the
ruin of them and their City.

These Letters falling into the hands of some of Fedro's Forces which he had
drawn together for the defense of Musko, were suppressed, so that the people
knew nothing of them. Demetrius in the mean time wondered he could receive no
Answer to his Letters, till at last guessing the truth of the matter as indeed
it was, he employed some private Agents to Crasna Cella, a great Village within
a quarter of a mile of the City, peopled with Merchants and Handicrafts-men,
whose trading however was in the Town: He by these Agents insinuated into them,
that upon the single desire of their safety, he had employed diverse Messengers
to the City with overtures of peace; but that not having answer, he was
disposed rather to believe that his Letters were suppressed by the
Gedanow-Faction, than that the people were wanting to him in suitable returns.
He had a considerable Army about him, ready upon their March, and impatient for
want of action; but he had made that long halt at a convenient distance from so
populous a City, rather than incommode it by a nearer approach: He therefore
desired to understand their inclinations, according to which he resolved to
move; putting into their hands, whether they would embrace Peace under the
auspice of his Government, or the unhappy consequence of a bloody War, for
which themselves should stand accountable, and not he. The Inhabitants of
Crasna Cella receive this Message with great reverence; and the Agents having
with them Copies of those Letters formerly writ to the Magistrates of the City,
they delivered them likewise: whereupon the Inhabitants trooping together, took
with them Demetrius his Messengers into the Town; and being come into the
Marketplace, they caused his Letters to be openly read to that world of people
that flockt about them: whereupon, without the least show of tumult (which was
a wonder) they went as one man to the Palace of Duke Basilius Zuiski, and by
two of their number in a very civil manner beseech him to tell them if young
Demetrius the Son of John Basilius had been slain at Vgletz or not? Zuiski
without the least hesitation answered, that in very truth Demetrius, upon
notice of Boris his design had been secretly conveyed away, and another Youth
of his years and complexion, the Son of a Priest, put in his place in the
Princes Bed, who according to the plot laid by Boris, was murdered and
interred, as the right Demetrius, with the Funeral of Princes. To this he added
that he was the real Demetrius who lay with his Army at Tula. The people
hearing this from so great and eminent a person, and considering how the bulk
of the Nobility had declared for Demetrius, who was ready with a potent Army to
advance toward them, most of the Provinces having already tendered him their
Submissions, judged it high time for them also to make their Addresses; and
whilst they were in consultation of the affair, some Courtiers having had
notice of the Tumult, were come with some of the Guards to disperse them, and
seize upon Demetrius his Agents; which the people not only opposed, but
proceeding from one degree of heat to another, breathed nothing but Demetrius
his pretensions, asserting him to be the rightful Prince; and that they would
not any longer be so far wanting to themselves and the Empire, as to refuse
their obedience where by the Laws of God and the Land it was due: and then
crying, Long live Demetrius, Great Duke and Emperor of Russia; come, say they,
let us go and destroy that Viperous brood of the Gedanowes from the face of the
earth. This said, they ran toward the Court like madmen, and as a Snow-ball so
increased by rolling, that by the time they were come thither, their numbers
were multiplied to many thousands, sending their Clamours before them, which
filled the Court with terror and confusion: All within and about it were
sacrificed to their rage and fury, and no life escaped them but that of the
Great Duke, the Empress-Regent and her Daughter, who were rather reserved for
the judgment of Demetrius, and wherewith to purchase their own peace and
pardon, than upon the account of tenderness toward that Family. She was a Lady
of high spirit and courage, and considering that she and her Children were
reprived only to add to the Triumphs of Demetrius, resolved to put them and her
self out of the malice of his power: in order whereto, she prepared a strong
Poison, and disposed them to pledge her in that Fatal mixture. Her Tears did
easily deceive their Innocence; and yet theirs had almost overcome her
Constancy: Come, says she, the dear pledges of your Fathers love; and then
taking them in her arms, Come, continued she, my joy and grief, it may be the
Tyrant having rendered us incapable of disturbing his repose, will be content
with our spoils, and spare our lives. Here she paused; but suddenly
recollecting her self, No, no, said she, Treason is never secure so long as
there are any left to reproach its Author: Let us therefore not linger out a
miserable life by a more miserable delay, till the Tyrant have studied to
destroy us more Exquisitely, and more Ignominiously: and with this snatching
the Cup, she hastily swallowed the greatest part of it, forcing her Children to
take off the rest; and then clasping them in her arms, the Poison did in a
short time spread its vigor over their tender Bodies, all of them expiring as
by joint consent all together in their mutual embraces. Such as favor
Demetrius, affirm that the Princess was preserved by his command, by the speedy
applying of Antidotes to subdue the malignity of the Poison. His Enemies also
say the same; adding, he preserved her but in order to satisfy his lust. The
people being inflamed with the heart of their own fury, after they had pillaged
the whole Court, ran like mad men into the City, seized upon all the Borisian
Party and Family, putting many of them to death at that instant, and the rest
they hurried into a Fort adjoining to the City, where having stripped them stark
naked, they turned them in promiscuously, men, women and children together,
without either Clothes, Food, or Covert; and some of them, by the coldness of
the Air, and for want of Nourishment, perished; they strangle the rest, or put
them to some other violent death, so that there was not one of the Family left
alive; their rage herein executing upon the House of Boris an exemplary
judgment of God, proportionable to the Cruelty wherewith he had treated that
of his Master; God in his justice punishing his Cruelty to them with a due
retaliation of the like upon his Posterity. We have in this a lively
Description of the peoples temper; unconstant in their resolution, violent in
their love, and equally so in their hate: They in this juncture cast off all
their gratitude to the memory of Boris, their prosperity under his calm and
wise Government, his impartial distribution of Justice, the many public
Buildings by him erected for the splendour and use of their City. They had no
remembrance left of his great industry and charges in providing Food for them
in that more than Samaritan Famine, which happened in his Reign, in the years
1601, 1602, 1603. or finally, no reflection upon the advantageous peace and
repose which he had procured for them with their Neighbour-Princes. But though
they might be suspected to bury the memory of those things in the Grave of
Boris, yet the wonder was that they should so suddenly destroy their own Act,
in destroying him whom they had placed upon the Throne but two months before,
as a Sovereign of their own choice, contrary to the design of the Nobility,
whom they forced to swear fealty to him, vowing to live and dye in the defense
of him, his Mother and Sister, now rendered the unhappy Objects of their
boundless fury.

The Borisians being thus rooted out, wherein the Citizens were equally cruel
and diligent; they dispatched their Deputies to Demetrius, to render him their
Submissions, and to assure him, that in obedience to his Letters, they had
destroyed the Family of the Gedanowes to a man: That Fedro, his Mother and
Sister, were in safe custody, in order to his Majesty's dispose; and that not
only their gates, but their hearts were open too for his reception. Demetrius
upon this agreeable news advanced toward Musko with his whole Army: such of the
Lords as had not yet presented themselves to him, met him upon the way; and
being come within a mile of the Town, their Magistrates were there in their
Formalities, as a representative of the City, with a tender of its Homage;
which he received according to the mode of that Nation, in Bread and Salt. They
had also prepared a vast Present for him in Gold and Jewels; which he received
with a show of kindness. And being now owned by all the Nobility and Orders of
the Kingdom, and well assured of the devotion of the people to his Interest; he
made his entrance into the Royal City in great State, upon the 20th of June, in
the year 1605. Emperor and Great Duke of Muskovy, and many other Provinces,
and King of Casan and Astracan. The manner of this celebrious Cavalcade was
thus: The Polish Horse with their Lances presented, had the Van: Some
thousands of Muskovites followed them in good order, having in the midst of
their Body, the Coach of Demetrius drawn by six beautiful Horses, with all his
lead Horses nobly Sadled and Trapped, with embroidery of Gold and Jewels. After
these came the Clergy, with squared Ensigns born before them, on which were
Painted some Saint or other, as our Lady, St. Nicholas their Patron, and the
like. The Patriarch brought up the Rear of these Spiritual Warriors; and at
some distance behind him was Demetrius himself mounted upon a goodly Milk-white
Courser, environed on all sides with the Lords and Gentlemen that made up his
Train. All the Bells rung for joy, and all the Streets, Windows, tops of
Houses, and all other eminent places swarmed with multitudes of people, who as
he passed along, fell upon their faces, and then raising themselves up, cried
as one man, Long live the Great Duke of Russia; Thou art the right Sun and
bright Morning Star that now shines in Muskovy. To which he replied, God give
you my Subjects Health and prosperity, stand up and pray for me. As he passed
along, he was showed the Palace of Boris; but he turned another way, as
loathing to behold that place where had been hatched all the Villainies against
him and the Blood Royal of Russia; and declaring it his pleasure to have it
defaced, the willing people were not long in the execution of his Commands,
laying those goodly Fabrics in a moment level with the ground. Demetrius being
entered the Palace-Royal, dismissed the Princes and Lords, who trooped together
into the Marketplace, where Bogdan Bielski made them an Exhortation to
acknowledge the goodness of God for their Great Duke, obliging them to be true
and faithful to him: That he was the undoubted Son of John Basilius: and
thereupon taking his Cross out of his Bosom with St. Nicholas his Picture upon
it, he kissed it, and swore that their present Emperor was the right
Demetrius, and that to the day of his discovery he had been concealed and kept
in the Bosom of St. Nicholas, who had now restored him to them for the
preservation of them and their Land. Hereupon the whole people answered with
joyful acclamations three times, God save our Great Duke, God give him health;
God punish all his Enemies, and all those that fail in their Fidelities to him.

Demetrius being by this extraordinary Concurrence of his Affairs got upon the
Throne, assumed the manage of the Government into his own hands: and having
made it his study to understand the Interests of his Crown, as it stood related
to forain Princes upon the account of Traffic or any other considerations of
State; he informed himself what Ambassadors were then in the Kingdom, either at
Court, or upon their return; he judged it advisable to signify to them his
happy Restoration. And understanding that amongst others of other Princes,
that Mr. John Merrick Agent, and Sir. Thomas Smith Ambassadors for the King
Great Britain, having received their Dispatches from Boris, were upon their
return homeward; in order whereunto, having finished their other Negotiations,
they were gone toward the Seaside; Demetrius sent this following Letter from
the Camp at Thula to Mr. Merrick, and a while after another, with an Express by
one of the Gentlemen of his chamber, to the aforesaid Ambassadors.

Demetrius his Letter to Mr. Merrick, Dated the 8th of June, 1605.
WE Demetrius Evanowich Lord, Emperor, and Great Duke of Russia, To John
Merrick, English Merchant. We give hereby to understand, that we are by the
just Judgment of God, and his strong Power, as Duke and Sole Lord, raised to
our inheritance, Throne and Empire of Uladomir, Muskovy and all Russia. Calling
therefore to mind the Confederations and Amity which our Father Evan
Vasilowich, Lord, Emperor and Great Duke of Russia, held and kept with the
Great Princes of Christendom: We likewise are resolved to maintain and keep the
same, and in a more special manner to hold a more particular correspondence and
friendship with your King James. To this end we purpose to favor you, his
English Merchants, with a greater measure of our Grace than heretofore you have
enjoyed from our Predecessors. So soon therefore as you shall have received
these our Letters, and finished your markets at the Port of St. Michael the
Archangel, our pleasure is, that you hasten back to Musko to behold the Majesty
of our presence: to which end we have commanded Posthorses to be prepared for
you by the way; and when you are come to Musko, you shall Address your self to
our Secretary Offenasis Ulassou. Written in our Majesty's Camp at Thula, in the
year of the World 7113.


Sir Thomas Smith having received his dispatches from Boris, and being in his
way homeward, was overtaken at Archangel by an Express from Demetrius, with the
following Instructions and Letters.

Demetrius Evanowich, great Lord, Emperor and Great Duke of all Russia, has
commanded Savarela to repair to Volgoda, and then to the new Castle of
Archangel, or any other place, where he may overtake the English Ambassador Sir
Thomas Smith. When he has overtaken him, Savarela shall send his Interpreter
Richard Finch to the Lord Ambassador, with notice that the Great Lord, Emperor
and Great Duke, Demetrius Evanowich, Sole Commander of Russia, has sent one of
his Courtiers unto him touching his Majesty's Affairs; and after about two
hours respite, Gavarela shall himself go to the said Ambassador, and deliver
unto him his Majesty's Message as follows.
Demetrius Evanowich, Great Lord, Emperor, and Great Duke, of all Russia, and
many other Kingdoms, Lord and Commander, has commanded thee Thomas Smith
English Ambassador, to certisie unto James King of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland, that We are by the just Judgment of God, and his strong Power,
come and succeeded into the place of our Father and Predecessors, as also the
Throne of the Great and Famous Kingdom of Uladomir, Musko, and the Empire of
Casan, Astracan, and Sibiria, and of all the Kingdoms of Russia. Moreover, we
calling to mind the Correspondence, Love, and Amity which was between our
Father the Great Lord, Emperor and Great Duke Evan Vasilowich of Famous
Memory, as also our Brother the Great Lord Emperor, and Great Duke Fedro
Evanowich, Sole Commander of Russia, and their Sister Queen Elizabeth, Queen of
England: In the like manner we do purpose to have Intercourse, and to be in
love with your Lord King James, and more than has been in former times; and in
token of our said Love and Amity, we do intend to favor all his Subjects
within our Dominions, and to give unto them more liberty than they have had
heretofore. And you, his Ambassador, we have commanded to be dispatched without
any delay or hinderance. Therefore we would have you to notify to your Lord
King James, our Majesty's love: and as soon as God shall grant the time of our
Coronation to be finished, and that we are Crowned with the Imperial Crown of
our Predecessors, according to our manner and worthiness; then we the Great
Lord, Emperor and Great Duke, Demetrius Evanowich, of all Russia Sole
Commander, will send our Messengers to salute each other according to the
former manner. As for those Letters which Boris Gedanow sent by you, we would
have you deliver them back again to our Courtier Gaverela; and after the
delivering of our Speeches, to return him to the Emperor. Underwritten by the
Chancellor Offanafie Evanowich Ulascan.


These and some other public affairs being dispatched, Demetrius judged it
very conducible to his establishment, to have the Solemnities of his Coronation
speedily performed; the Celebration of which were therefore appointed to
succeed upon the Kalends of September: for it is then that the Russians do, as
the Jews of old did, begin their year. But Demetrius impatient of delay in that
material Circumstance, would have it done upon the 29th of July, after his
entrance into Musko, upon which day he was by the Patriarch crowned with the
Imperial Diadem of those Kingdoms; after which he caused the Corpse of Boris to
be taken up out of that Sepulcher wherein he had been interred (being that
belonging to the Royal Family) and buried without Solemnity, in a private
Churchyard without the Town. Before the Coronation, 'twas judged advisable
that the supposed Mother of Demetrius, who had for many years been shut up in a
Monastery by Boris, should be sent for to Court, as a reputation to the
Solemnity; which by Demetrius his art was improved to the utmost: for upon
advertisement of her being within a League of the Town, he went forth in Person
to meet her; and being come within view of her Coach, he alighted from his
horse, and making his Addresses to her with all imaginable Humility, she
received him with great demonstrations of Affection: She would have come out of
her Coach, but he would not permit it; neither could she prevail with him to
come up to her, protesting that as she had given him life, so would he pay it
her back in his Obedience; that the Crown of Russia was hers, and should be
only born by him, the better to execute her Orders. And with these and some
other obliging entertainments of this kind, she was conducted to the Palace;
Demetrius following the Coach on foot, bare-headed, till the Empress stopping,
declared that unless he would get up on horseback, she would accompany him on
foot. Being come to the Palace, she was conducted into the usual habitation of
such who were Widows of the Royal Family; where being alighted, she embraced
Demetrius with great passion, acknowledging him before all the Lords and
Courtiers present, to be her Son, begot by Duke John Basilius; evidencing the
same by many particular marks and tokens, which gave great credit to the
Impostor (if it were one.) His stature and proportion had a resemblance to that
of the true Demetrius; his hair was black and hard like his, with a mark upon
his nose and the right hand as the Prince also had: And though the Lady might
well remember the features of her own Demetrius, whom she had lost but seven
years before, and that this in reality was not he; yet she wisely dissembled
the matter, it being grown too far for her to contradict: and besides that, she
lay under a double obligation to him, having not only enjoyed her liberty, but
the satisfaction of an entire Revenge by his means upon Boris and his Family.
However it was, she treated him with all the demonstrations of a warm and
sincere Affection, while he honored and reverenced her with a more shan filial
Duty; so great a tenderness appearing in their caresses, that their Tears of
Joy were attended with a deluge from the eyes of the Lords and all others upon
the ^lace. And to be thus owned by the Empress in the face of the whole World,
gave a greater confirmation to the reality of his Birth, than all his other
Testimoies together; there being now no room ^eft to question his Extraction,
confirmed by the open declaration of her that bare him. It Is to this day a
controverted point in Russia, whether he was an Impostor or not. Common fame
since his misfortune, seems to render him such; and Petreius in his Chronicle
of Muskovy, has a Jury of Arguments to confirm it. But his Testimony is not to
be believed, but with caution; he being employed in that Country (at such times
as he made his Collections) by Charles the VIII, King of Sweden, upon the
account of the contrary Party. The Poles, by their learned Historian
Praeserius, as also by the Testimony of their own example, asserted the
contrary with much fervor; he by his Writings, they by their vigorous Aids by
the countenance of which, as by steps he ascended up to the Throne of the
Empire: and to justify his Title yet the more, there were many eminent Person
engaged personally in his Quarrel, mon out of greatness of mind, than any
particular Interest; which they would no have done, if they had believed him a
Impostor. And he himself, when he w(...) at any time ready to engage, was use
with erected hands and eyes to Pray (...) the hearing of his Soldiers, in the
terms: Destroy me, O just Judge, and blot out my name from amongst men, if what
Iundertake be done unjustly, or wickedly: Thou see my Innocence, help my most
righteous Cause: I commend my self and these my Fellow Soldiers into thy
protection, O Queen of Heaven. That he used these kind of Ejaculations before a
Battle, is very true; and if at that time he did not believe himself, it is
very strange; for then must he not believe in the Majesty of that God upon whom
he called, or that the great Creator was more swayed by his mental Reservations
than his public Expressions, and was of a confederacy with him to betray his
Army into a good opinion by the Success he gave it; which were Blasphemy to
imagine. And yet we have in our own Land had appeals to God upon the most
palpable Rebellion that ever was committed against a Sovereign; proceeding to
that hight, as to destroy the Anovnted of the Lord in the Name of the Lord.
Possibly this Demetrius had it instilled into him by the Priest his Tutor, that
he was in reality the Son of John Basilius; but however it was, or whether he
believed himself so or not, he was rendered to the world as the most remarkable
Object of Fortune that many Ages can parallel; she in him passing to both
extremes, by which may be observed the mutability of humane affairs, and that
their change is natural.

Demetrius was scarce warm in his Seat, when the Lords either taking it for
granted that he was an Impostor, or weary of that Instrument wherewith they had
served themselves to revenge upon Boris and his Family the Cause of the
Blood Royal of Russia, began to form a Conspiracy against his life; which
being secured by his Guard of Poles and other Forreners, their first design
was to remove them, the better thereby to break in upon him. In order to this,
they took all opportunities to breathe their Moans and Complaints to such as
they knew to be in favor about him: That it was the anguish of their Souls,
after the Testimony given by them of their Loyalty, to find their Prince retain
doubtful thoughts concerning them; which they collected from his employing
Poles and other mercenary Strangers to guard his person, as if he could be more
safe in their hands, than in those of his native Subjects, who could do no less
than consider themselves neglected, at least to see the Royal Person of their
Emperor in the hands of strangers, as if to defend him against his own
Subjects: That it was a new thing in Muskovy to have a Lifeguard of Forreners,
and did more argue the fears of an Usurper, than the assurances of a legitimate
Prince; and that they should understand these kind of Guards, (were they not
well assured of the Clemency of their Great Duke) as Executioners of his
displeasure, when he should please to look back into those times when they had
obeyed the commands of the Tyrant Boris. Thus did the Lords whisper their
griefs, as they called them, but with so great modesty, that Demetrius being
acquainted with them, and with what tenderness and respect they were uttered,
resolved to comply entirely with them, and to give up himself absolutely into
the arms of his own people; being so strangely deluded with this seeming
kindness, that he not only dismissed his Guards, but his Auxiliaries besides.
The Conspirators having got over these great steps, drew more into their Party,
whereby the Plot was rendered more public, till at last it reached the ears of
Demetrius, who too late repenting his unadvised credulity, would yet make
appear his resentment of this Treason; and causing some to be apprehended, they
were tortured till they confessed the whole design, and that they had been
induced to it by the insinuations of Basilius Zuiski, who assured them, that
his Highness was not the Son of John Basilius, but an Impostor; the Interment
of Demetrius having by Boris been committed to his particular care. He
confessed indeed, that in compliance with the malignity of the Times, and to
preserve himself from ruin, he had upon the Uproar in the City, when Demetrius
was at the Gates, affirmed, that the Son of a Priest at Vgleckz had been put in
the place of Demetrius, and was killed upon the supposition of his being the
Prince; but that all this was a false suggestion of his own, to gratify the
fury of the people, who would have involved him in the ruins of Boris, had he
denied it. Duke Basilius Zuiski being apprehended, and the Rack presented to
him (the readiest expedient for discoveries, and commonly used in that Country)
he confessed the whole Charge; whereupon he was condemned to loose his head: in
order whereunto, being conducted to the Scaffold, and placed upon his Knees to
receive the fatal stroke, the Execution was stopped, and he not only pardoned,
but received into particular favor and nearness about Demetrius; who by an ill
computation of his Affairs, took this way, first of exposing and terrifying
them as Criminals, and then taking them into his bosom as Friends; not
considering, that disobligations stick closer than kindnesses; and that they
who had laid a design for his ruin, were not to be diverted from it by the
Courtship of words.

If we look into the Affairs of the world, we shall find that the industrious
man is not always rich; there are that rise early, and yet eat the bread of
carefulness: Wealth comes many times by a lucky hit, and a fortunate man is
served by a concurrence, or rather confederacy of Accidents, which in the
judgment of right Reason would more probably tend to his ruin. Demetrius was a
notable proof of this, in his prodigious rise to the Empire of Russia, toward
which he had done little more than personate a fit Subject to be opposed
against the Interests of Boris. He owed his acquisitions to Fortune, and the
giddy humor of the wavering People; and his ruin to his own inconsiderateness
and want of Conduct. He prosecuted the Family of Boris beyond what was
consistent with the State of Great Duke of Russia; above seventy Families of
that Kindred and Party being banished by him, dividing the Spoils amongst his
foreign Auxiliaries; giving out that he would plant the Kingdom with Colonies of
strange Nations. This filled the people with dreadful Apprehensions of his
Tyranny, and embarked the Lords in the same prejudice, to find themselves
neglected in the administration of Justice, and the same managed according to
the appetite and fancy of the Poles.

To all this, he gave the Jesuits public Churches and dwellings, and to all
of that Persuasion the free Exercise of it. He had indeed himself been brought
up in the Romish Religion, which might in some measure have warranted the
Profession of it in his own Chapel (though Henry the Fourth of France
dispensed with his former Faith upon his accession to the Crown) endeavoring
thereby to cure the Jealousies of the people, who are no way so fervently
engaged, as upon the the account of Conscience. But Demetrius his public
despising of the Rites of the Greek Church, and his so open endeavors to
introduce that of the Latins, abhorred by the people, gave the first shock to
their affections; and then his Habit, Garb, and Gesture being wholly Foreign;
the Commonalty, who see but the outside, and make their judgment by that,
conclude his Inclinations were so too. But what wrought most effectually upon
those that understood best, was, to discern a lightness in his Behavior,
bearing no proportion with so exalted a Quality as he bore in the world; little
Gravity, and less Judgment in the manage of public Affairs, measuring concerns
of a different nature by the same Standard. From this short-sightedness, being
but newly invested in the Royalty, he denounced War against the Swedes; and
with the same vanity writ to King Sigismund, that he would arm against the Turk
and Tartar, before he knew the Constitution of his own Empire, or by what
establishment an Army was to be maintained.

Demetrius being Crowned Emperor, his next care was the matter of his Amors;
those Passions were still alive in him; and he had so much of the Constancy of
a Lover, as to invite Marina to the participation of his Greatness: Upon this
consideration, he dispatched a splendid Embassy into Poland, with a Present of
the Jewels of the Crown of an inestimable value. The Palatine of Sandomiria had
indeed deserved well from him; but the Nobility of Muscovy abhorred the thought
that the Treasure of their Empire should be havocked away upon that
Negotiation, which no way quadrated with their Appetite: however, this concern
fell out so far luckily for Demetrius, that it respited his fate; for the
Conspirators having laid their design to be put in execution some days after
the dispatch of this Embassy, held it advisable to delay it till that was
over; lest by quitting their hands of their Great Duke, the Jewels of the Crown
should fall short, and stay in Sandomiria. They therefore directed the
Ambassadors (who were also privy to the Confederacy) to make secret Articles
with George Mniseck the Palatine, Marina's Father, before they made their
Present of the Jewels to her, that she should bring them with her for her
Ornament to Musko. There was at the same time dispatched an Ambassador to the
King and Commonwealth of Poland. Athanasius Rosclovius the Treasurer was made
choice of for this Employment; who being admitted into the Kings presence, did
in the Name of his Master the Great Duke, present his very hearty
acknowledgments to the King and Nobility for the seasonable Aids he had
received from them; declaring, that next under God, he derived all his
Enjoyments from their Succors; and confessed, that had he not been vigorously
owned by them, he must have wandered about the world, the pity of his Friends,
and the scorn of his Enemies; whilst an Usurper possessed the Throne due to his
Birth, and in which by their kindness he was seated in perfect peace. And as a
Testimony of his further Gratitude, he had sent his Ambassadors to establish a
perfect Friendship and League Offensive and Defensive betwixt the Crowns, which
was to extend to all the Enemies of either Nation, especially the common Enemy
the Turk, who by the advantage of misunderstandings amongst Christian Princes,
got ground upon Europe. And that he might be the more naturally linked to the
Kingdom of Poland than the Ceremony of a League could extend to, he desired the
Kings permission to Marry a Lady his Vassal, the Palatine of Sandomiria's
Daughter: His Obligations to her Father being of that nature, that he knew not
by what other means to contrive him a proportionable Recompense. He had not
only owned and received him in his Exile, but engaged his Person and his
Fortunes in his Quarrel; and he could not stand acquitted to himself, if he did
not communicate to the Daughter of those Enjoyments which were derived to him
by the kindness and Courage of her Father. The King having fully heard the
Ambassador, did with much Civility acknowledge the respect of the Great Duke in
that Address; that he wished him all happiness, and did heartily congratulate
the success of his Arms in the acquirement of his just rights: Adding further,
that he did highly commend the pious resentments he was pleased to have for the
sufferings of the oppressed Christians. That he would willingly enter into a
League with him against the Infidels, but that without the consent of the
Senate and Nobility of the Kingdom, he could determine nothing of that Nature.
As to the Proposal of his Marrying the Lady Marina, he should not only have his
consent, but his prayers also, that God would render that Marriage auspicious
to both Kingdoms, by propagating between them a League of everlasting
Friendship. The King having expressed himself to this effect, the Nuptials were
within eight days after celebrated at Cracow, in the presence of the King, and
a great number of the Nobility of Poland, who were invited to this Royal
Solemnity. His Majesty delivered the Bride with his own hand to the Ambassador,
exhorting, that now she was to be transplanted into another Nation, she should
retain the Memory of her own Country, and her Fathers house: That she should do
all good Offices betwixt both Nations; and above all things, that she should
adhere to the Catholic Religion, wherein she had been educated.

The Church-Ceremonies being finished, his Majesty entertained the Bride at a
Royal Feast: Prince Vladislaus his Son, the Princess of Sweden his Sister, the
Palatine of Sandomiria, the Ambassadors of Persia, with all the Public
Ministers then at Court, were invited to it; where at the last Course, those
Jewels sent by Demetrius to his Marina, and the Palatine her Father, to the
value of two hundred thousand Ducats, were served up to the Table instead of
Fruit; which in so Illustrious an Assembly spoke the Magnificence of the Russ,
and satisfaction of the Bride, to be courted at so valuable a Rate.

About the end of Jan. 1607, the Bride, accompanied with the Ambassadors of
either Nation, the Palatine her Father, and Duke Constantine Wisnioweski, and
many other Persons of Quality, and a splendid Train, having taken her leave of
the King and Court of Poland, set forwards toward Musko; and on the 26th of
April entered the Imperial City; being met by the way by Peter Bosmanno,
attended by a great number of the Nobility, who conducted her into, and through
the City, which was fitted and accommodated according to the Mode of the place
upon such occasions; the Citizens being disposed in their Formalities, to make
a passage for her; and the streets ecchoing her Welcome with the confused
noises of the People, Trumpets, Cymbals, and other sorts of Music. Being
arrived at the Palace, she was received by Demetrius with all the imaginable
demonstrations of Joy and Affection. She also was not wanting in a very
obliging reception of the Great Ladies that were presented to her: and after a
short stay at Court, she, after the manner of that Country, was conducted back
to the Monastery where the Empress Dowager was, and where she was accommodated
with an Appartment till the celebration of the Nuptials. Four days after, she
was removed from thence to another Appartment, prepared for her in Court, and
Royally furnished, in order to her Marriage, which was the day following after
Evening-prayer performed by the Patriarch. The Scepter, the Apple, and the
Sword, were born before the Emperor (the Great Duke of Muskovy assuming that
Title) and the Crown wherewith the Empress was to be adorned, was carried
before her upon a Cushion of Crimson-Velvet, the Walls of the Church being hung
with the same Livery, bordered with a deep Fringe of Gold. The Church-ceremony
ended, they were both of them, with their Crowns upon their Heads, conducted
back to the Palace (all the Cannon, Bells, and Music in the Town thundering,
ringing, and playing without intermission) where the succeeding night was
wasted in Feasting, Dancing, Balls, Masks, and other Revels proper for the
Divertisements of Kings and Great Personages. The Solemnity was continued the
next and other following days, with all those Delights and Pleasures which the
Wit of Russia could invent, no excess being spared which might improve the
State and Magnificence of the Nuptials, till the 16th, the fatal Eve of the
ensuing Tragedy.

We have already given you some account of this Emperors disadvantages in the
peoples esteem, and by what ways he lost ground amongst them; his manner of
living bearing no proportion with the station wherein he was placed. He was
much to seek in the Art of Government; neither had he discretion to make right
application of the Advice of his Council, or indeed to be much amongst them;
his whole time being spent in the Society of Players, and such other Mimicks,
whereby his Nature being vitiated, he grew profuse of the Treasures of the
Crown; which were so strangely wasted amongst his Rabble, that to enumerate
their sum, must needs raise the Readers admiration. They speak of many Myriads
of Gold and Silver, and twelve Bushels of Pearl, and other Jewels; and to have
this prodigious stock of Riches havocked away in a few months, rendered him the
hate and scorn of the Nobles; which was heightened by his introducing of foreign
Habits and Customs amongst them; a people tenacious, even to Superstition, of
the old Manners and Ceremonies derived to them from their Fathers. All this
being put together, did so inflame them, that what they first designed out of a
levity in their nature, was now pursued upon the score of Justice, as being
called to it by Divine Impulsion, to chastise this Mushrome of a Prince, whose
growth being preposterous, his end was likewise so.

Basilius Zuiski, to the rest of his Arguments to conspire the ruin of this
Prince, had now an addition of Revenge to add to the heap, for that public
reproach laid upon him, not to be cancelled by new favors. He confidered, that
the next transgression would be severely punished upon him, and that he only
held his life at the will of a Tyrant, in whose power it was every moment to
renew the old Judgment against him. He was not wanting to inflame the Lords and
people with a zeal, as he termed it, to the Interest of their Country; who had
taken fire to that height, that they used to discourse publicly concerning
him: As for his Birth, it was base, being nothing of the Person or Manners of
Jo. Basilius appeared in him; and as for his Religion, it was Heretical, being
he scorned coming to the Churches; and if at any time he appeared there, he
manifested neither respect nor Devotion; and by his Outlandish Modes, rendered
his Presence a reproach to the Place. He omitted bowing to St. Nicholas and
other Saints which were had in Veneration by that people; and in his Diet would
ordinarily eat Calves-flesh, which was held an abomination amongst them. A bold
fellow taking the liberty to discourse at this rate in the hearing of some of
the Guards, was seized upon, and brought before the Great Duke, who commanded
him to the Rack; but some of the Council interposing, affirmed that the fellow
was drunk, and that it was below his Majesty to reflect upon such a worm;
adding, that there was no cause for those fears in a potent Empire, where he
was able to raise Millions for the defense of his Sacred Person; so that he was
fatally swayed to neglect the business: and being drowned in security, and led
away by the flatteries of a sort of Buffoons, who fed his pleasures with fresh
Inventions, he left the Affairs of State to their own fortune, accounting
himself secure in the protection of his new Guards of Foreiners, which were 300
men, English, French, and Scotch, and divided into three Squadrons, commanded
by Officers of their respective Nations. They were armed with Swords and
Halberds, and clothed for their everydays Habit in Scarlet, and for Festivals
in Crimson-Sattin. These Guards were brought in the place of those Foreiners
whom he had dismissed before; but the Gangrene was run too far to be cured by
so feeble an Application.

The Conspirators, as we have already observed, had purposely suspended the
Execution of their Design, till the arrival of the Bride, especially the
return of the Jewels; with another Consideration of no less Consequence, as to
time, which was judged most seasonable at the Solemnity of the Nuptials, when
Demetrius and his Court would be drowned in pleasures.

Basilius Zuiski, allied by the Mother to the Blood Royal of Muskow, had two
Brothers, John and Eogdan, who were very serviceable to his Design in the
raising of some thousands of men in their several Territories, and especially
in their conveying of them into the City unobserved. The Marriage of Demetrius
conspired with them in that part of it, as agreeable to the manner of the
Eastern Nations; for the Nobility upon such public Solemnities do travel with
a great Train of Friends and Attendants. There was upon the 16th of May a more
Royal Feast appointed than any had been held before, as if upon a particular
respect and Honor to the Polish Nation; to which the Ambassadors of that
Country being invited, they instead of promising to come, returned their Answer
by way of expostulation, that unless the same place were given them at the
Great Dukes Table, as his Ambassadors enjoyed at Cracovia, they begged his
Pardon for not obeying him; choosing rather to deny themselves the Honor of his
Invitation, than to receive it to the prejudice of their King and Commonwealth.
This Punctilio being argued in Council, was opposed by the Russian Lords by all
the Arguments they could devise; but the Great Duke overruled the Point, and
would have the Foreiners gratified, as those by whom he had ascended up to his
Throne. There happened during the Feast some passages of heat betwixt them; the
Poles giving themselves the liberty to reproach the want of Courage in the
Russians, as having imposed an Emperor upon them; which Language being
received with scorn, had certainly been returned with severity upon the place,
but that having whispered together, they chose rather to hasten their Design,
and to Revenge all their Resentments together. The close of the Feast was the
beginning of the Affray: for when all the world was steeped in Jollity, giving
themselves up to Dancing and Revels, the very Guards being dismissed upon this
occasion; the Conspirators, who had been kept waking upon other Designs, had
by break of day next morning possessed themselves of the most considerable
Parts and Avenues of the City; and Basilius Zuiski placing himself in the Head
of them, with a Cross in one hand, and his Sable drawn in the other, led them
on toward the Heart of the City. He had caused the great Bell (the common
signal of Alarms) to be tolled, and a confused Cry to be spread about the
Streets, that the Poles were in Arms, upon a Design of putting the whole City
to the Sword. The People being raised with this apprehension, fell upon the
Poles in their Quarters, and destroyed them before they could wake to see their
danger. The tolling of the Bell, with the greater noise of the people in the
Streets, had rouzed Demetrius, who calling to them of his Bedchamber to enquire
the Cause of that Tumult, they answer, it must necessarily be some Fire.
Bosmanno being commanded to understand the true reason of it, hastens to the
window that looked toward the Streets, and observed them full of armed men;
and asking the Cause of it at that unseasonable hour, they cried, they would
speak with that Impostor the Great Duke, who had betrayed them into the hands
of the Poles. Bosmanno hearing this, and struck with the apprehension of the
danger, ordered such of the Guards as lay next at hand, to be called to their
Arms, and to make good the Palace; and going in to Demetrius: My Lord (said he)
it is now too late that you have the Experience of my Counsel; the Conspirators
are in Arms, and the Treason at your Door. Whilst Bosmanno was speaking, a
Gentleman of the other Party had pressed through some of the Guards half
asleep, and called to the Duke aloud, Thou false Great Duke, why come thou
not out to satisfy that demand of the people, who are in the Streets expecting
thee? Bosmanno abhorring so great an Insolence, snatched a Sable which hung by
upon the Wall, and at one blow laid this bold man dead at his feet. Demetrius
flung himself out of Bed, and covering his Body with what was next hand,
snatched a Halbard from one of the Guards, with which going into the
Antichamber where the Conspirators were, entering with fury in his looks, he
flies upon them, and put the forwardest to retreat: but they pressing in the
second time, and some of them shooting at him, he judged it advisable to
withdraw; whilst Bosmanno advancing up toward them, desired they would please
in a peaceable manner to signify their desires, and he would undertake to have
them gratified. Michael Tatisson, one of the Ringleaders, answered him, Thou
Son of a Whore, do thou take upon thee to prescribe Rules to the Nibility and
people of Russia? And drawing out a long Knife which hung by his side, stabbed
him to the heart, wherewith he fell down dead before him upon the place. The
Guards being now no longer able to resist, were killed as they appeared, whiles
the poor Duke retiring from Chamber to Chamber with some few of his Servants,
was at last come to such a place, where there was no further passage: he
hurried on by his despair, flung himself out of a Window, forty foot from the
ground. His fall was so great, that he vomited Blood with the crush of it; but
his fears making him strong, he scrambled to his Guard of Muskovites in the
Fortress. The Conspirators in the mean time missing their prey, made Booty of
what else they found in the Palace; and causing themselves to be guided to the
Appartment of the Empress, who had hid her self, they asked for her: but the
frighted Ladies wanting courage to reply, the old Lady Palatine of Samoc,
confident in the Prerogative of her gray-hairs, told, she was upon the noise
fled to her Father's Lodgings. They searched the Room, and not finding her,
revenged their disappointments in such a vile sort of unclean Expressions, as
is not fit for any Language but the Russian to repeat; and the Lords by this
strange irruption transported in their very minds to all excess of Debauchery,
seized each of them upon one of the Ladies; none escaping them but the old Lady
Palatine, who was spared upon the Privilege of her wrinkles, and another Lady
that sat sick in a Chair; till one of them observing some extraordinary motion
about her lower parts, pulled her up; where the poor affrighted Marina was
discovered, but with so great a Majesty in her Aspect, that they her Enemies
seemed more astonished than she, and withdrew, offering her no kind of
violence; which is not the least Argument for the Dominion of Beauty, able to
subdue the Spirits of men, when they are become savage. The Conspirators having
received some advertisement that Demetrius was retreated to the Fort for
shelter, they all made thither; where after some confused attempts, but greater
threatenings to force the place, that unfortunate Person was put into their
hands. They led him away in Triumph, as the Spoils of War; and the Rabble were
not wanting to aggravate his afflictions by their reproachful Behavior and
Language; to which he made no reply at all: but seeing his stately Palace
pillaged, and stained with the Blood of his Servants and Friends, and others of
them hurried away to Prison, and abused in his presence, he could not resist to
manifest his resentments by his Tears. And to add yet to his misery, they
covered him with an old ragged Coat, and so exposed him to public view, not
without the scorn of mocks and taunts, which none can have so great a sense of,
as he that had been possessed of so eminent a Grandeur. And to leave nothing
unattempted that might imbitter his Soul (besides their justling him, pointing
their fingers at his eyes, plucking him by the Nose, and such rude freedoms)
they ask him if he were Demetrius or Grisko; and what Devil had tempted him to
profane the Blood Royal of Russia by so base a mixture. He expressing a greater
sense of this than all his other sufferings answered, You all of you know that
I am Great Duke of Muskovy, Crowned in the face of the whole world, and
received, as I am, So^ to John Basilius; which if you make any Question of, go
to the Cloister, and (...) the Empress my Mother, to whose Testimony I refer
you, and shall abide by it. They al^ seemed startled at this positive
affirmation and that being the main Point of the Quarrel, they would after all
their brutish violences seem to do him right in that: in order whereto, they
all desired Basilius Zuiski to attend the Empress for her Declaration; which he
did accordingly: And if we will credit common report in this matter, it is
rendered, that the Empress did renounce him now, as positively as she had owned
him before; affirming, that her Demetrius was murdered by the cruelty of
Boris; but that seeing how this Impostor had possessed himself of the Empire,
she judged it safer to own him for hers (being she could not by denying him
divert the people) as a means to procure her not only her enlargement, but the
enjoyment of her State and Greatness; and that indeed she was not without some
good will for him, as having revenged her injuries upon the bloody Usurper
Boris; but that in touth he was no Son of hers, neither had she ever seen him
before that time that he met her upon her return to Musko. Zuiski returned with
this answer from the Empress; which having reported to the people, a Merchant
stepped out of the crowd, with a Pistol in his hand, and coming up to him, spoke
with a loud voice, Thou infamous Traitor, it is enough thou have lived hitherto
to deceive the people of Russia; take the reward of thy Ambition for staining
the Sacred Blood Royal by thy Imposture; and with that shot him to the heart,
whereupon he fell dead upon the place; and the people, whose love and hate are
always in extremes, seeing him laid along, wounded his carcass with their
Swords and Pikes, as if they could never kill him enough; and to show their
malice did not end with his life, they dragged him out of the Hall by the heels
to the place where the Body of Bosmanno lay; the Rabble following after with
Outcries and Exclamations, as if he had yet sense left him. And thus was the
splendour of these Nuptials darkened by the Tragic end of the unfortunate
Demetrius, who was only suffered to taste the joys of a Crown and a fair Bride,
and then snatched from them; as if the whole had been a Dream, which upon the
wakening vanished away.

The Barbarity of the enraged Multitude rested not here; it extended to his
inanimate Corpse: for having laid his Body naked, they post a cord through it,
which being fastened to his private parts, they tied it to Bosmanno's foot; and
dragging both the Bodies through the Streets into the Marketplace, they lay
exposed there for that whole day; which was done to satisfy the world, that
the Great Duke being killed, it concerned the people in order to their own
safety to consider of another choice. I shall not trouble the Readers ears with
the further indignities offered to the dead Carcass, beyond what Heathens would
have permitted, much less acted.

The contagion of this Tragedy extended it self to the Poles quartered up and
down the City, who with the like inhumanity were pillaged and murdered by the
multitude. There was a mixture of malice and cunning in their cruelty; for in
those parts of the City where the death of their great Duke was not yet known;
the Russians came with a formal Command to the Poles, that it was the Dukes
pleasure they should attend him unarmed, being he would have nothing of force
or terror in the celebration of his Nuptials; and the poor Poles giving credit
to this deceit, exposed themselves tamely to the slaughter which was committed
upon them. Many warned by the cruelty exercised upon their Friends, disputed
their lives, and fell not unrevenged. Some defended their Quarters; amongst the
rest, one Vitenski, a young Polish Gentleman of great Quality, made good his
with a great slaughter of the Rabble, till not being able to force him, they
caused Cannon to be drawn before the house. Upon that he hung out a white Flag
in token of surrender; and then causing his Servants to cast out handfuls of
Gold and Silver amongst the Rabble, he engaged them all in the scramble; and
then being well seconded by his Friends and Servants, he sallied upon them,
forcing his passage through the lives of many a Russian, and making way with
his Sword, bore all before him; till being spent with toil, and the carnage he
had made, he was ready to be overwhelmed by their numbers, when some Russian
Lords coming seasonably to the place, interposed their power, and rescued him
out of the hands of the people. Duke Constantine Wisnioweski and the Palatine
being in their several Palaces, which were large and strong, received many of
their Countrymen which fled from the peoples rage in to them, and defended
themselves maugre the force that was prepared against them; killing a great
number of that giddy multitude who attempted them. The houses of Ambassadors
were in the height of this fury considered as Sacred, they only of all
Foreiners escaped untouched. Many Merchants upon account of their Traffic with
Poland were pillaged and murdered; and at this time they, especially the
Stranger-Merchants and Jewellers, were more numerous, and had more Riches about
them than ordinary, in order to the great confluence of people at Musko, to
celebrate the great Dukes Nuptials.

This Massacre (as no violent thing is perpetual) ended with the day, in which
there fell twelve hundred of the Poles, and four hundred of the Russians. The
darkness of the night was accompanied with horror and silence, as if guilty of
the more dismal preceding day. The next Morning the Boyarians being
recollected, went to Council, where the first thing proposed, was, the Election
of a New Prince, as the only Expedient to prevent future Commotions. Zuiski
observing the temper of the Nobility, and that many had an eye upon him; the
better to dispose them in his favor, and to remove such Objections as might be
urged against him, is said to have spoke in the Assembly to them after this
manner:

My Lords and Friends,
THat Station wherein God has placed me a Member of this Empire, as it rendered
my Actions of an extraordinary Nature in these late Revolutions, so it has
plunged me upon some inevitable, though irregular Expedients; without which it
had been impossible to rescue the Honor of the Empire from the Confusion ready
to overwhelm it. But as you, my Lords, are Witnesses for me of our Disorders,
so am I to my self, of that reverence I bear to our Laws, and to the Majesty of
him that is seated upon the Throne. These considerations did so long restrain
me, that I had almost suffered my self to be born down with the Torrent, rather
than tread a way to redeem millions of People from the Inundation. But a just
zeal to my native Country, and the Honor of the Royal Family, having at length
subdued the temper of my Nature, I shall instead of excusing what is done,
bemoan to you the unhappiness of our Fate, that has left us no other way to
avoid Death and Confusion, but through it. To what extremes were we reduced,
when the Sword of Justice must be committed to the hands of the Multitude (who
commonly strike blindfold) and that nothing but Blood, Horror, and Confusion
could preserve us either a Being, or a Name! But the work is done, the Tyrant
is chastised, and the ashes of our dead Emperor in some sort appeased: We are
now to look forward; and in order thereto to consider, how God the Disposer of
Empires, had by a long and uninterrupted Series of Princes, devolved this
greatest of Christian Kingdoms upon the Person of John Basilius; whose great
Mind not enduring to be restrained within the Bounds of his ancient Dominions,
extended his Conquests by the accession of two great Kingdoms to the Empire;
and ^f any particular Persons suffered under the violence of his temper, yet
the universal benefits of his Victories did abundantly balance those private
mischiefs. My several Employments and Trusts under that Great Prince in Peace
and War, in Negotiations and Embassies, and Battles, as it gave me a particular
knowledge of, and Honor for so Illustrious an Emperor, so it gave me an
Inspection into the Mysteries of State, which ^y degrees had so naturalized me
into the ^oncerns of the Empire, that I think I may, without vanity, assert my
actings, as principally respecting the Honor of my Prince, and the safety of
my Country. But Basilius being dead, our Glory (as if he had been the Soul of
our Nation) withered away under the Conduct of Theodorus; whose infirm,
melancholic Complexion, bearing no proportion with the Courage of his People,
they seemed to degenerate from what they had formerly been; and the barrenness
of the Great Duchess conspiring with the indisposedness of the Prince, our
Government was no longer supported by his Virtue, but rendered a Prey to the
Designs of her Favorites. And though her unfruitfulness had by our known Laws
actually repudiated that Lady from the Emperors bed, yet by the artifice of
that worst of men (whose Name ought to be in horror with us) she was continued
near him, whilst that cursed Brother of hers, Boris, having thus, and by the
Murder of Demetrius, deprive^ us of all hopes of a Successor, had by the
influence of a secret Poison, laid a Train for the life of Theodorus, and was
to take effect in point of time, with his other hellish Contrivances for the
attaining of the Empire. Then was it, that our Banks being born down in the
Extinction of the Royal Family, our Calamities broke in upon (...) like a
Deluge; and such miseries as were not within humane Comprehensions, were acted
upon us by the vilest of Monsters; whose Villainies were such, that had we not
our own Testimony for our Sufferings, we should never credit that of any other.
It was from the Sense of this bleeding Condition, that I judged it necessary to
close with any Pretensions, for the Extirpation of so abhorred a Tyranny;
judging it a less evil to own the supposed Demetrius, than to sit under the
Cruelties of Boris; and no other way being then visible, I was constrained by
the Aid of an Impostor, to revenge the Royal Family upon a bloody Usurper: In
order whereto, I recommended him to you, my Lords, and to the whole people, as
the rightful Heir. But this Mushroom thus set at the Helm, immediately attempts
to hurry us from one confusion to another; nothing of ours was Sacred in his
eye, the Religion of our Forefathers was become our reproach, our ancient Laws
trampled on and violated, new Fashions and uneasy Customs introduced upon us,
our Liberties taken away, and the Government put into the hands of Strangers.
These considerations made me break through all difficulties to resist the
Impostor, and with the hazard of my life to refuse him those Honors which were
due to a lawful Prince. It Is true, I fell into his hands in the Attempt; and
that he spared my life, when the Executioner was ready to take it from me: But
I owe it him but as to a Thief, who had no right over it; and who when he
might, did not take it away. Though this might oblige any other of less zeal
for his Country, yet I, who lay under greater obligations to that, and that
never cared to live for my self alone, was after some reluctancies upon the
sense of ingratitude resolved to embark my Fame in the same Vessel that had the
charge of the Common-Interest; choosing rather to Shipwreck with that, than to
lie secure with my own Concerns in the Harbor. That which gave life to my
Endeavors, was the faithful concurrence of you, my Lords, whose Zeal and
Courage in so glorious an Attempt, as it contributes to the eternal Honor of
your Memory, so it receives Testimony from the Great Disposer of Empires, who
has signalized his Approbation of our Actings in the Event. And now, my Lords,
being we are delivered from our Bondage, and have once more day before us, that
the Royal Line is extinguished, and that we are in the quality of a free
people, it behooves us, as good Patriots, to provide for the Government of these
vast Territories, in a way consistent with their ancient Constitutions: in
order whereto, let us look into the Commonwealth, for what is denied us in the
Royal-Family; and pitch upon a Person fitly qualified for the Greatness and
Honor of the Charge he is to undertake. Let his Extraction be Eminent, and of
the first Rank, that the Glory of the Empire may not receive diminution from
the meanness of his Blood, or the Nobles scorn Obedience to their Inferior; and
let his Virtue be so Illustrious, that they have no room to envy his
Precedencie. But above all things, make choice of a zealous Worshipper and
Observer of our Religion, in the Rites and Ceremonies of our Ancestors; which
besides that it draws down the Blessing of Heaven upon us, it checks all
Conspiracies hatched under the Mask of Godliness and Conscience. Let your Prince
be a Person of years and Experience in the Affairs of State, considering that
besides our disorders within, we are surrounded with Enemies from without, who
lie in wait to invade us, and are ready to close with any distempered Spirits
for our confusion. Let him be one who will account Justice and Temperance a
more firm Support, than Pride and Arrogance to the Royal Majesty; who measures
his safety from the Affection of his People, and his Treasure from the
Preservation of their Propriety, and the Splendour of their condition. When I
discourse at this rate, you will possibly say, Where can you point us to such a
Person of these Accomplishments? I know it is difficult to do so; but it being
the duty of a worthy Commonwealths-man, and becoming the Honor of this great
Assembly, to propose the best things: Let us in the Name of God proceed to our
Election with all necessary prudence and sincerity.


This insinuating Speech being received by the whole body of the Lords with
universal applause, they passed an unanimous Vote in favor of the Orator; who
being a Person of great Birth, and great Parts and Experience, was elected
Prince, Emperor, and great Duke of Muskovy, by the concurring Suffrages of all
the Nobility upon the place; who immediately passed an Act of State for the
confirming of the Election upon the Person of the Illustrious Prince Basilius
Zuiski, who ascended the Royal Throne of Russia upon the 17th of June 1606.

SECT. III.
Basilius Zuiski being scarce warm in his Throne, is disturbed by another
pretended Demetrius. Putiwol by the artifice of Schakopski, declares for the
Impostor. His Lieutenants beat the Zuiskians, and block up Mosko. Masalski is
defeated, and the Muskovites being reduced to great streights, give the Lady
Marina her liberty; who after some difficulty acknowledges this
Pseudo-Demetrius to be her Husband. King Sigismund invades Muskovy, and
Besieges Smolensko. Demetrius flies to Caluga, his Army mutinies by the
practices of Marina, and dissolves. Zolkievius beats the Muskovites at
Clusinum. Zuiski is deposed, and Prince Uladislaus chosen Great Duke of Muskovy.

BAsilius Zuiski being thus chosen Emperor, his Coronation was hastened, to
prevent any change in the Affections of the People; which being performed with
the usual Ceremonies of State, he took upon him the Administration of the
Government, placing Guards upon the Lodgings of the Palatine and Duke
Wisnioweski, as well to observe their motion, as to preserve them from injury.
He also caused the Lady Marina to be delivered to her Father with what was
hers, except the Jewels of the Crown presented to her by Demetrius, which were
restored again into the Treasury. And to put some Countenance upon the late
Tumults, he published a Declaration against the slain Demetrius, rendering him
guilty of Imposture, Witchcraft, Heresy, and Tyranny. The People, as it is
their nature, fond of what is new, and of their own Creation, received all that
came from him as Oracles; and perceiving he took delight to vilify and traduce
Demetrius in his Writings, they to Complement his humor, dug up his poor
Carcass out of an obscure Grave which had been given it, after three days lying
above ground; and after a repetition of barbarities upon him, they burn the
body, and scatter the ashes in the Air.

And now the Great Duke casts about how to establish his Interest abroad; in
order whereto, he renewed those Correspondencies which had been held betwixt
that Crown and foreign Nations, by writing his Letters to several Princes of
Christendom, wherein he gave a Narrative of the troubles of Muskovy, and his
own advancement to the Throne. A Copy of his Letter to our King James, is
extant in our Countryman Purchase his Pilgrimage, to which I refer the Reader;
it being too long to insert in this place. Which though it be in a rude Copy of
Language, yet speaks that Nation to be men that understand the compass of their
business, though not much of Rhetoric.

And thus ended the most unhappy Demetrius, an unparalled Example of both the
extremes of Fortune, and the Inconstancy of Popular Favor; for being by them
brought from a Convent to a Crown, he was by them also precipitated from so
splendid a height, into a calamitous abyss of misery. But whether he was truly
Basilius his Son or not, is uncertain, and will ever be so; nay, it is
questionable whether he was slain in this Muskovitish Tumult, or afterward:
for Fame, as she had divulged him long since slain, so now when he seemed dead
to all men, she again raised him, and exposed him in a second Resurrection. For
the Tumult was scarce appeased, when a report ran through the City, that he was
still alive; another having in the hurry been killed for him, and not possibly
to be known, being so unhumanely mangled, for all his being publicly exposed.
'Twas further muttered, that he had disguised and withdrawn himself betimes,
escaping the danger upon swift Horses, which he had taken out of his own
Stables. Neither was this Rumor without appearance, there having been several
Stalls in the said Stables found empty of their Horses, which he afterward
affirmed he had made use of in his flight. Such who wished him well, believed
this noise, because they desired it; and others who did abhor the flagitious
Cruelty of what was acted, or preferred turmoils before quiet, did not
contradict it. But the business was put out of Controversy, when after a few
days Demetrius did indeed appear; but whether the true, or an Impostor (which I
am apt to believe) is not yet decided. Whoever he was, the Poles flock to him,
to revenge their Massacred Countrymen, and the Violation of the Laws of
Hospitality; they acknowledge him for the true Demetrius Emperor of Muskovy,
and make War upon Zuiski with such revengeful obstinacy, that it cost him his
Crown, his Liberty, and lastly, his Life, and consumed them an immense
multitude of Men and Money. But to relate things in order: During the
Confusions and Tumults at Musko, George Schacopski, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, and faithful to Demetrius, seeing the irresistible Torrent that was broke
in upon them, contrived for his own escape out of Musko, and taking two Poles
with him in Russian Habit, got away unobserved. The designed place for his
Retreat was Putiwol a City that had stood vigorous for Demetrius in the
Infancy of his Acquisitions. Being got about 30 Mile on his way, upon his
leaving the Inn where he had refreshed himself, instead of asking the Hostess
what was to pay, gave her a handful of Gold; with which she being equally
transported with amazement and joy, desired to know the Author of that
Profusion. Schacopski answered, As for my self, I am a Prince and Lord in
Musko; but my place is to attend upon the Great Duke, whom the Rebels think
they have murdered, but you have had the Honor to harbor him this day under
your Roof. Having said this on purpose to raise a Rumor of his being yet alive,
they immediately take Horse, and post away to the River Occa; where being
wafted over in the Ferry, they gave the Waterman six Gold Crowns; and told him,
he had had the Honor to serve the Great Duke Demetrius (pointing at him that
passed under that Character) and promising the Waterman high Preferments for
that days Service, if he ever should be restored to his Empire; charging him,
as the Hostess before, in the mean time, to keep their counsel, lest they
should be pursued. Being landed, they mount again, and post on toward Putiwol,
taking all opportunities by the way, to possess the world of Demetrius his
being alive, and escaped out of the reach of the Conspirators. Schacopski being
arrived at Putiwol, sent his two Poles forwards to Sandomiria, with Letters to
the Palatine's Lady of what had befaln in Musko, and to assure her, that the
Great Duke, her Son-in-law, was escaped seasonably, and hoped suddenly to be in
the head of an Army, to revenge upon his rebellious Subjects their Treason and
Disloyalty. Schacopski having made his dispatches to Sandomiria, applied
himself to the Citizens of Putiwol, desiring Audience from them in the Name of
the Great Duke Demetrius his Master; which being granted, and an Assembly
called, he took the liberty to enlarge upon the unheard of Barbarities of the
Citizens of Musko, how they had slaughtered the Inhabitants without regard of
quality; laying their malice so deep, as to attempt the Murder of the
Emperor; but that he had been preserved by the Providence of God, who had
always an especial regard on his Sacred Person: By whose Impulse, having taken
some of his best Horses out of his own Stable, He, with a small, but faithful
Company under his conduct, had withdrawn himself betimes out of the Tumult:
That he was retired to his Allies in Poland, for Aid against his Rebellious
Subjects; having left him to attend the Affairs of the Empire in his absence,
with an express direction to apply himself in his Masters Name to that Loyal
Town, to assure them that he was alive, and well, and preparing to vindicate
the Honor of his Empire out of the hands of the Conspirators. Schacopski was
not wanting in Arguments to provoke the Zeal of the Citizens to the Service of
their Prince; how great an Honor it would be to that City, to be the only
place in that vast Empire to which their Prince durst commit his Person and
Interest: That he would not fail to stamp upon them particular marks of his
Favors and Resentments for their seasonable Loyalty; and that it would be
their Eternal Glory to bring in their Great Duke, and to place him upon his
just Throne; cleansing the same from the pollutions of Conspiracies and
Usurpations. His Oratory had that effect, as to inflame them upon the place
with Resolutions to declare for Demetrius as their Leige-Lord and Sovereign;
that their Lives and whatever else was dear to them should be at his devotion,
and that in the mean time, till he honored them with his presence, they would
submit to his Commissioner the Lord Keeper; who having gained this great City,
failed not to solicit the Neighbour-Country. He dispatched Posts into
Tartary, inviting all that had the courage in behalf of an injured Prince, to
repair to Putiwol. The Cossacks flock in; and in four weeks he had persuaded
fourteen Castles in those parts, to follow the Example of Putiwol; taking a new
Oath of Allegiance from them in the name of Demetrius against all his opposers,
and particularly against the bloody Usurper Zuiski.

Zuiski alarmed with the Rumor of a new Demetrius, and that a considerable
party had declared for him, under the Command of Isthoma, a great Lord, made
all the speed possible in his Levies, to check that growing evil; and
encountering that Demetrian General, was totally defeated: Who pressing upon
him, as Master of the field, blocked him up in the Imperial City, and sat down
with his Army at the distance of about a Mile from it. Whilst Isthoma lay
encamped there, there came up to him an Army of twelve thousand Cossacks under
the Command of John Polutnich, a Soldier of Name, who was come out of Poland,
and produced a Commission from Demetrius to Command in Chief as General; which
Isthoma, after some disputing, was constrained to yield to, but apprehended the
affront with so great disdain, that he resolved not to brook it, or after
having chased Zuiski out of the the field, to truckle under the Command of
Polutnich, who was about to ravish from him the Palms due to his Victory.
Hurried on by these Sentiments of scorn, he risked the blasting of his Honor,
by an extraordinary tenderness of it; and having debauched 9000 of the Army, he
went over to Zuiski with them; who gave him a reception suitable to the
seasonableness of the kindness; and much more, when Isthoma had assured him
that no Demetrius had appeared in Putiwol; and that the whole trouble of his
Affairs was formed by the contrivance of the subtle Schacopski, who to render
himself considerable, had possessed the people with a suggestion of Demetrius
his being alive. This Relation from Isthoma was immediately communicated to the
people; who, however, were not without their fears; and therefore sent out to
Polutnich, demanding of him to see their Lord Demetrius, and they would cast
themselves at his feet for pardon: and immediately Polutnich returned answer,
that in truth Demetrius was in Poland, that he had there seen and spoke with
him, and received from his own hand the Commission mission by which he then
acted as General. Some of the Lords sent again, to assure him that the Great
Duke Demetrius had been killed in Musko, in the face of the whole people; that
if any one assumed that Name, he was an Impostor: Persuading him further to
quit that counterfeit Prince, and join himself to the Party of the rightful
Emperor, who would gratify his Loyalty with Preferments and Honors suitable
to the Merits of his Service, in preventing the effusion of Christian Blood,
and the harrassing of the Country, the guilt whereof would lie heavy at his
door, if he should not hearken to their wholesome invitation. But he rejecting
those offers with indignation, replied, he had taken an Oath of Loyalty to
Demetrius, which he would preserve inviolable, and not like the perfidious
^sthoma, betray the trust reposed in him: He added, that he neither desired nor
ca^ed for Zuiski's favor, only required of ^he Citizens, that if they would
not have that Christian blood which they so much pitied, spilt, they should
forthwith return to their Duty and Obedience they ^wed their lawful Prince,
deliver the U^urper Zuiski into his hands, and lay down their Arms: in doing
so, he would grant them an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion in the Great Dukes
Name, and promised they should be restored to that rank and place which the
Loyal City did formerly obtain in the Great Dukes favor. On the other side,
they were to expect nothing but the indignation of an incensed Lord, and of an
enraged Soldiery. This Polutnich was a Muskoviter born, but had been brought
up amongst the Tartars and Cossacks, and being taken prisoner by the Turks, had
served as a Gally-slave against the Christians, till amongst others, he
happened to be released by the Venetians; and passing through Poland toward
his own Country, he met at Sandomiria with this new Demetrius; to whom being
presented, he received conditions from him, and engaged himself in his Service,
as General of his Army; upon which account he lay now encamped before Musko.
But the Citizens perceiving that no Demetrius did yet appear, took heart; and
making an unanimous conjunction with Zuiskis Troops, made a furious Sally upon
Polutnich; who not able to sustain the assault of an hundred thousand men, was
forced to quit his ground, and save himself by a disorderly retreat, in Caluga.
Zuiski transported with the Success, returned Triumphant into Musko; and having
modelled his Army for a march, advanced toward Caluga, and sat down before it;
but was forced by the Valor and Conduct of the Lord Keeper to raise his Siege.
However, having recruited his Troops, he marched again to find out the Enemy;
and both Armies being met, were upon the point to encounter, when Schacopski
being terrified with the unexspected defection of 4000 of his men, not daring
to hazard the rest in so great a consternation, was constrained to quit the
Field, retreating to Thula, whither he was hotly pursued by Zuiski, and the
place closely besieged, in such sort, that not having had time to put in
Provisions, they were soon reduced to the eating of Horses, Dogs, Cats, Rats,
and such other things as were abhorring to nature. This quickly raised the
Citizens into a mutinous posture against Schacopski and Polutnich, as being
betrayed by them, upon an imaginary supposition, to adhere to a fictitious
person that had not a being; else that Demetrius, if he had been alive, would
not have failed in such a juncture of his Affairs, to have asserted his
Interest in Person. Polutnich protested to them, that he had seen and
discoursed with a young man in Poland of about 28 years of Age, who called
himself Demetrius, and was there acknowledged for such; but whether he were
really so or no, he could not positively affirm, having never seen him before.
But if the people would have a little patience, and stand by him, he would send
out such a trusty Messenger as they should make choice of, one that knew the
Prince, to inform them of the truth, and to see what hopes of relief was to be
expected from him. This being resolved upon, an Emissary was sent out, by the
favor of the night, and the carelessness of the Besiegers; the Citizens
resolving with patience to expect his return. In the mean time no Demetrius did
appear; that person whom Schacopski had designed to assume his Name and
Fortunes, being a Polish Gentleman, who thought it more safe to depend upon a
plentiful estate of his own, than to change his private condition for the hopes
and hazard of the Empire of Muskovy.

An Empire can never Escheat for want of an Heir: a new Demetrius shows himself
upon the Stage, coming out of Poland, the forge of all the contrivances and
troubles of Muskovy. He was conducted to Putiwol by Micharetski a great Polish
Lord; and acknowledged there, and received with all imaginary honor, as their
Prince and Sovereign. After a short stay there, he marched with what force he
could make to Staradub, where he met the Messenger from Thula; who being
brought into his presence, was startled at the sight of a person only very like
Demetrius, but in reality not he. Demetrius observing his dissatisfaction,
judged it more advisable to carry the news of his relief in the head of his
Army, than put himself into the hands of one who might raise in the City a
prejudice against his Person and Interests. This precaution was not
unreasonable, though it proved fruitless; the Garrison of Thula being reduced
to those straights, especially for want of water, (and supposing by the
Messengers long stay that he was fallen into the Enemies hands) they came to
Terms for a Surrender; which being honorable as to the condition of Soldiers,
Zuiski swore to observe, but failed in the performance; for he caused Peter
Fedrowits, an eminent person, to be hanged, and Polutnich to be cast into a
loathsome prison, where he was miserably famished to death.

Thula being reduced in this manner, the Demetrian Cossacks quitted their own
Party as desperate, to follow that of the Conqueror; and were with some other
Troops sent by Zuiski to prosecute the Siege of Caluga, the Enemies principal
Receptable. The Quarters were scarce marked out before the Town, when there
happened a desperate Mutiny amongst the Soldiers, propagated by the Cossacks,
as was supposed, upon the news of Demetrius his recovery and approach. This
gave so great a terror to the rest of the Army, that being possessed with a
pannick fear, they ran out of the Camp in the night in so great disorder, that
they left their Baggage behind them, and made toward Musko with all their
might. The Cossacks seeing themselves left to their own disposal, called upon
the Garrison to receive them into the Town, assuring them of their friendship,
and the flight of the Russians. The Garrison wondering their deliverance should
be so near and so unexspected, could not upon the sudden (being agitated with
the passions of hope and fear) resolve what to do; until being ascertained by
their Spies and Parties they had sent out, of the truth of it, they opened
their Gates and arms to receive their Deliverers, and jointly with them
plundered the Camp, bringing into the Town in Triumph all the Provisions and
Cannon of the same. The Cossacks themselves would not enter into the City, but
hastening to meet Demetrius, joined themselves to his Army, with the mutual
congratulations of both sides.

Demetrius being thus revived, many Muskovites, and very many Lithuan^ and
Poles came flocking in to him (...) out of Novelty, others out of resp^, many
for Pillage, and most for Revenge, and being now rendered considerable by the
accession of the revolted Cossacks, he marched in quest of the Enemy, whom he
encountered and defeated, being 8000 men, and took Matthew Misinowski their
General Prisoner; with which success having gained a strong reputation, the Towns
of Severia gladly returned to the obedience of their old Lord, and furnished
him abundantly with all necessaries for the War.

But the Supplies from Poland were the main appay of his Army. Duke Roman
Rosinski being engaged in the Quarrel, sent great Forces under the Command of
Walareski, a Creature of his, out of that Country; and a while after, Duke Adam
Wisnioweski, Tischievicz, Charlinski, Mielski, men of Eminence; and at length
Rosinski in person came up with the rest of the Army; and at the same time
there arrived at the Rendezvous a Recruit of 8000 Zoporensian and Dumensian
Cossacks; so that the Army being now great, and united into one body, Rosinski
by the suffrage of all the Peers and great Officers was declared General.
Basilius Zuiski observing the great growth and progress of his Rival, caused
new Levies to be made, with which having formed an Army of 170000, though most
raw men, he placed his Brother Demetrius Zuiski in the head of them, with
Orders to find out and fight the Enemy. And now behold both Armies in sight of
each other, encamped near the Town of Bolchow! The first day was spent in
Skirmishes, Picqueering, and other hostile Braveries. The next Morning both
Armies impatient of looking upon each other, were drawn out in Battalia with
all the advantages that the ground would admit, or able Officers could
contrive; the Generals caressing, exhorting, and encouraging their Soldiers to
do well with all their Rhetoric. Zuiski fierce in the confidence of his
numbers and conduct, told his men, that now was the time to chastise the
hereditary Enemy of their Country, the Pole, whose malice had been at work to
create them those mischiefs under which their Kingdoms had labored for diverse
years: That this was the second mock- Demetrius, framed and set up in Poland to
be imposed upon them: That it would be a reproach to the Glory of their Empire,
to receive Laws from Strangers, who by all Arts conspired their ruin: That
this Demetrius whom they had now in the head of their Army, was one Master
John, a Schoolmaster of Pocala, a Town in Russia Alba, as the other was one
Grisko notoriously known in Muskovy; and his violent death suffered in the face
of the whole world in Musko universally acknowledged, till the wicked Pole,
maligning their Greatness, had raised another Impostor, under whose countenance
they proposed to themselves the inslaving of their Country, and the rooting out
of their Religion: That there was no deliverance from all these, and thousands
more of miseries impending over them, but in their Courage: That they must
resolve to win or die, and to lose the day at no other rate than the Ioss of
their lives: That they must never survive their own happiness and the Glory of
their Country; and that for his part, he would in that days fight give them the
Example of a true lover of it. Demetrius on the other side, especially
Rosinski, were not wanting to inflame the courage of their Soldiers by all the
Arguments of Power to sway them; as desire of Empire, Revenge, and Spoils: That
the Conquest of Russia depended upon the Points of their Swords, and that they
had but that days labor to go in and possess that vast Empire. In short, both
Armies join, with equal hopes and equal courage: The Fight proved but short
though obstinate, and the success doubtful, till the Demetrians having
beforehand placed their Chariots and Carriages; attended with their Servants,
with Drums, Trumpets, and Colors at a distance out of sight (an usual Polish
Stratageme) caused them in the heat of the Battle to appear in view with cries
and shoutings; which was so dreadful an object to the Zuiskians, that they
began to shrink, not daring to trust in their Courage against that fresh
Reserve that advanced toward them: which the Polish Horse observing, seconded
their fears with a violent Charge, wherewith they put the whole Army to an
entire Rout, leaving behind them all their Cannon and Baggage upon the place.
5000 of the Muskovites saved themselves in Bolchow, who after being four days
beleaguered, rendered themselves and the Town to the mercy of the Conqueror,
and were for their encouragement disposed and listed amongst his Troops. The
fame of this Victory opened him a passage into all the Cities and Forts in that
Quarter, only Mosaise gave him the trouble of drawing before it, and then
surrendered. And now Demetrius being absolute Master of the Field, marched by
great Journeys toward Musko, the Imperial City; confident, upon the stock of
his last signal Victory, that the Citizens upon his approach would quit Zuiski,
and receive him into their Town: and questionless the issue had justified his
computation, but for the new perfidy of those 5000 men, who upon the rendition
of Bolchow had listed themselves under his Command; for these left him again,
and marched into Musko, assuring the Townsmen, that the Polish Army was neither
so numerous nor so formidable as Fame had rendered them: which comfortable
Intelligence and Aid giving new life to the heartless Citizens, they resolve to
adhere to the Fortunes of Zuiski; and taking advantage by the delays of
Demetrius, who instead of improving his Victory as he ought, suffered his men
to ramble up and down the Country, they consented to new Levies for the recruit
of their Army, wherewith they blocked up the way between them and Severia: for
the Poles were moved Northward, so that no further Supplies out of the adhering
Provinces could well join with them; and many who were ignorant of this
obstacle, were daily intercepted. But the Poles, at length grown sensible of
their Error, drew back their Army to the South Side of the Town, and having
forced those Troops which interrupted their Passage, encamped at Tusin with
their whole strength, being environed and secured by the two Rivers Moska and
Tussin. From whence by their frequent and vigorous Excursions, they obliged the
Muskovites to keep within their Walls. The Citizens seeing themselves thus shut
up, and that they could not drive away the Enemy by force, betake themselves to
other shifts; they apply themselves to the Polish Ambassadors and the Palatine
of Sandomiria, and propose a Treaty of Peace to them; and in the mean time
mention a Cessation of Arms, as the only means to compass it. Their Design was
not so much a Reconciliation, as that the Poles, otherwise naturally careless
and licentious, should waste their force and heat in a languishing Truce, and
that the designed Succors for their relief might be ready against the designed
time. But the Ambassadors and the Palatine, who had been detained Prisoners
ever since the Massacre, desirous of Peace and their liberty, send Peter
Zbarouski to the Camp, to persuade their Countrymen to return into Poland, and
not disturb that Peace which they were then treating, with further hostilities;
but in vain: for the Poles refused all commerce or mention of Peace, unless
Demetrius, from whom they expected the reward of their labors, were first
restored to his Throne, and the Usurper delivered into their hands. Rosinski
was in the interim preparing for an attempt becoming the greatness of his
Quality and Courage; for Duke Basilius Masalski a Kinsman of Zuiski's having
raised an Army in the adjacent Provinces of 70000 men for the relief of the
Town, had entrenched himself upon the Banks of the River Chodiunka, three Miles
from the City. Rosinski being resolved to attempt his Quarters, drew out his
whole Army by favor of the night, and marching directly to the Enemies Camp,
in a manner secure in the greatness of their numbers and nearness of the City,
broke into it without any very great resistance, killed 14000 upon the place,
took the General prisoner, and scattered the whole Army. Neither was the
Victory cheap or bloodless on the Demetrian side; for while they were engaged
upon the Pillage, being dispersed over the Field to rake up the Spoils, the
touted Enemy faced about, and rallying (being further encouraged by a Party
come out of the City) returned to the Charge, and renewing the Fight with much
pertinacie, made a slaughter amongst the Conquerors of multitudes of their men;
in so much that they were upon the point of snatching the Victory out of their
hands: when the Poles armed with despair only (for all hopes of flying was
gone) rushed on with Resolutions to die or conquer, and finally compelled the
Muskovites to a disorderly retreat. This considerable Victory magnified the
Reputation and Terror of Demetrius his Arms. Many Provinces submitted to him,
and he was reinforced with many and great Supplies out of Poland. Alexander
Zlarowski brought him an addition of 1500 Horse, Sapiha as many, and several
others other great Troops; in so much that the Muskovites (their own Forces
being wasted, and such swarms of Foreiners pouring in upon them) despaired of
being able to repel them: they therefore betake themselves to new Counsels, and
coming to terms with the Ambassadors of Poland and the Palatine, still in their
custody, they gave them their liberty, upon their undertaking to oblige their
King to remand the Army of his Subjects which lay then at their doors: whereupon
they, together with the unfortunate Marina in their company, were permitted to
depart. Demetrius having intelligence of this, and not ignorant how
advantageous it would be to his Cause to have these Persons with him; he sent
Zbarowski with 2000 Horse to intercept their passage; which he did without
difficulty, bringing them to the Camp, where they were presented to Demetrius.
But his Party was much out of countenance to observe that strangeness of
Marina's carriage toward him, with that of her Father and the Ambassadors, all
of them affirming that this Demetrius differed very much from the slain Great
Duke. But this passage was hushed up with all possible care and caution, and she
sent to another Quarter of the Camp, no notice being taken that Demetrius had
yet seen her; but this could not be so carried as to escape every observation:
but what was most sensible was, that Kniasus Masalski, the routed Generals
Kinsman, then a prisoner in the Camp, made his escape; and getting into the
Town, told the Muskovites the whole Story of Marina's arrival and doubts; which
wrought so powerfully upon the wavering people, that they made new Vows of
Allegiance and Fidelity to Zuiski; seeming resolved to suffer any hardship
rather than this second Imposture, or to be imposed upon at the will of their
Enemies. And therefore to testify the fallacious dealing of their Adversaries
to the whole world, and to satisfy all others as well as themselves, they did
by the instigation of Zuiski, depute some persons of Honor in principal esteem
amongst them, to repair to Vglecz, with Orders to disinter the body of the true
Demetrius, which had lain there 15 years, and to convey it to Musko, to be
deposited in the Sepulcher of his Fathers. The Body was scarce above ground,
when it was cunningly insinuated into the people, that the touch of it did work
miraculous effects, which had been experimented by the fortuitous touch of some
diseased Patients. The Veneration toward it was heightened by the Peoples
astonishment at the uncorruptedness of the Corpse (for it was found still
entire) which rendered it blasphemous to question what was become an Article of
their Faith, to wit, whether this was the true, or the other the false
Demetrius. Many lame and suborned blind by their intercessions to this new
Saint were restored to their vigor and sight: so that the senseless Corpse, by
the importunities of the more senceless Vulgar, was ordered to remain
uninterred, until a Temple were built for its repose and their Superstition. A
while after, the business grew so absurdly public, that the Relics of this
fictitious Deity were by Zuiski's command, lest the fallacy should be
discovered, suddenly, but very solemnly inhumed; this Reason being given, that
though all manner of Honor was due to the Sacred Memory of their Prince, yet
that Cult and that Veneration might by the mistaken zeal of the people be paid
to a Mortal Creature, which is only due to the Immortal Creator; and so
rendered them all in tangled in the same error, obnoxious to the Divine
Indignation.

But to return to the Camp, where we left the unsatisfied Marina, whose
Ambition had exposed her to extraordinary turns of Fortune; and that being
still the predominant passion of her Soul, when she was retired from Demetrius
to an Appartment prepared for her and her Father, she had better leisure to
digest and weigh the posture of her Affairs; and consulting the matter with her
Father and some of their most secret Confidents, they brought it to this, that
she must either own this Demetrius, or return into her Country with all the
disreputation and reproaches that could be invented by either Party. The
Zuiskians would affirm she had married a mean wretch, a suborned property, a
Mushrome started out of the earth, and as soon extinct: and Demetrius and his
Adherents would give out, that she was indeed his Wife, but that he had
repudiated her for Incontinencie. On the other side, if she should receive this
man as her former Demetrius, she was sure to cast her self into the arms of
some ignoble sordid person, set up only to gratify the Interests of the Poles,
and she must thus prostitute her self as it were to serve their ends. But then
after a full consultation they came to this, that by owning this second
Impostor (if the first were one) she should sit upon the Throne of Muskovy; and
that how ungenerous or mean soever Demetrius were in the reality of his
extraction, the Crown (as it cures and wipes off all Attainders) would
Nobilitate and purify his Blood; and that in truth Nobility it self was no
other than a continued Succession of Greatness beyond the memory of the present
times, there being no essential differences in the Extractions, but what is
made by Wealth and Education. These wholesome considerations being received by
this wise Lady, she resolved to submit to the condition of the times, and to
serve her self of this opportunity to ascend to the Throne of Russia, which she
had but seen as it were before like a Scene in a Play. But now she proposed to
her self, that this Demetrius being upon the point of reducing Musko it self,
and bringing the Nobility to a greater subjection than they had formerly been,
she hoped her Dominion would be longer-lived, as laid upon Foundations of
greater Policy. So that after ten days separation (upon several pretenses of
indisposition) she suffered her self to be conducted to the arms of her
Demetrius, as she called him. The business being a Design of a popular nature,
was advised to be acted in the face of the whole World; in order whereto,
Demetrius was to meet his Empress in the presence of the whole Army, when all
the Nobility, Ambassadors of foreign Princes, and Deputies of revolted Provinces
were upon the place. The Enterview was solemn, and full of passion. Demetrius
received Marina into his arms, and intermingling their tears with their
embraces, the whole business was acted so to the life, that the most subtle and
doubting observers could not refuse to be satisfied. The Lady mingled the
testimony of her love with marks of esteem and reverence as to her Lord as well
as Husband; and he repeated his embraces and endearments with so vive a
passion, that they drew tears of joy from the Beholders. He was not wanting in
a particular application to the Palatine, making him his acknowledgments for
all the Honors he had received from him in the Infancy of his Affairs; and
they failed not to mention some particular passages of that time, which both of
them seemed to remember very well, and with much pleasure. This Ceremony being
performed with all necessary circumstances, the most wavering seemed now
confirmed of the reality of Demetrius, and came flocking to the Camp from all
Quarters. And thus did this Fable, contrary to the nature of Untruths, gain
ground by age. In the mean time it was judged needful to fortify and
accommodate the Camp, as well against the approaching Winter, as the attempts
of the Enemy. Several goodly Edifices were erected for the Nobility, and Tents
and Huts prepared for the rest of the Army; so that the whole being divided
into Streets and public places, had the resemblance of a great City. All the
Provinces of the Empire except Novogrodock and Smolensko made their submissions
to Demetrius, supplying his Camp with abundance of Provisions of all sorts. The
Inhabitants of Musko being by the defection of the Country and the ill
neighborhood of the Camp reduced to great straights, yet had courage enough
not to yield, but applied themselves to Charles King of Sweden, who having
usurped the Crown upon his Nephew Sigismund, was glad of any opportunity to
incommode him; and therefore sent them a considerable force under the Command
of Pontus de la Guarde, which gave them a strong diversion the Summer
following; and many Provinces of the Empire being tired and exhausted by
intolerable Contributions exacted from them by the Poles, grew to a detestation
of them; which having rendered the distractions of that vast Country universal,
the Camp it self was not without strong effects of them, by Schism and
Dissension amongst the Great Ones, whereby many opportunities of well-doing
were omitted and neglected. Hence arose a new face of Affairs, and prodigious
Vicissitudes; for all things seeming to conspire against the Imposture of
Demetrius, fatally opposed him, even in the moment that in humane appearance he
should have triumphed over all his Enemies.

Whilst these things are thus moving in Muskovy, Sigismund the Third King of
Poland was induced by the persuasions of his Senate and Council to invade that
divided Empire: and to what was objected that there was a Truce in being, the
time of it not yet expired; it was answered, that this was no Violation of
that, but rather an adhering to it, by appearing for Demetrius the lawful Great
Duke, and in actual possession of the greatest part of the Empire, against an
Usurper, who had caused himself to be elected by perfidie and force. This would
acquit them as to the world; and then as to that thing, it was very advisable
with relation to the present posture of their Affairs. Their civil Dissentions
were but newly calmed; and if any seeds of them remained, this would be a means
to root them up, by diverting the humor upon another Enemy, and burying in
Oblivion the former heats and animosities among themselves, by a nobler War
abroad. It would also purge their Country of those swarms of vagrant Fellows
and Robbers which now infested it, being the Excrements of their unhappy
Discords; and to all this 'twas urged, that this War carried no charge with it:
The Army was ready upon the least Summons, and would be able without difficulty
to march into Russia, where they should live upon the Country as soon as they
should set foot in it. There were many other Arguments of Honor and Interest,
as to revenge the Massacre of their Countrymen, and the detention of their
Ambassadors, and the employing so powerful a Neighbor at his own home and
charges, etc. all which being laid together, it was determined to invade
Muskovy with a Royal Army, and the King in the Head of it, where he could not
in a divided and distracted State fail to give Law to both Parties.

Sigismund in order to this Design mustered his Army at Orsa, which consisted
of 6000 Lances, 18000 Light Horse, and 5000 foot; and passing the River
Boristhenes, entered Muskovy in Aug. 1609. Leo Sapiha Chancellor of Lithuania,
had persuaded the King that if he but appeared before Smolensko the place would
be immediately surrendered into his hands This Temptation put him upon a hasty
March, taking with him neither Cannon nor any other Engines of Battery, going
rather to receive than force a City stored with all manner of Provisions
necessary for War. But having by long Marches got near the Town, he found
himself very much mistaken in his computation, the Garrison making strong
Sallies upon him; which looked so unlike a Surrender, that he concluded himself
deceived in his Intelligence.

Michael Sehin Palatine and Governor of the place had 30000 Soldiers with him
besides the Townsmen, being as many more able to bear Arms, with an immense
quantity of Ammunition, Artillery, and Provisions to serve for a long Siege: so
that the Palatine upon a confidence of his strength, despised the Chancellors
invitation for a Surrender. The King then seeing there was no entrance to be
had unless forced, sat down before it, fancying that a short time would reduce
so great a multitude to distress, however plentifully provided at present;
being restrained from forraging, or the Country from bringing in their
Provisions: or at worst, that they might be forced in a few Months, by a
vigorous Attack. With these hopes he lays siege to the Place; which did not end
so, for it held out above two years, with various changes and toils on both
sides. Smolensko the Metropolis of a Province of that name, is famous for its
largeness, wealth, and beauty; and being seated on the Banks of the
Boristhenes, is encompassed with Hills and vast Woods. The Walls of the City
are eight cubits thick, and 35 in height, whereof 15 are of freestone, and the
other 20 of Brick, built after the old fashion, as also without Ditches or
Outworks to hinder Approaches. Sigismund considering the obstinacy and power
of the Enemy, commanded Cannon for Battery, Spades, Mattocks, and all other
Instruments for a Siege, to be brought him from Vilna and Ticcocino, whilst he
shuts up the Passages and Avenues of the City with his Quarters and
Circumvallation. The King himself lay on Orsa side, his Quarters extending to
the Banks of the Boristhenes; the Cossacks kept the Eastside, reaching that way
to the same River: Potocki Palatine of Bracl had his Post on the North-side
beyond the River; and having burnt a Village near the City, which lay
convenient for them to fetch in their supplies of Water, gave them some
distress that way. Nowodorski a Knight of Malta, and Captain of the Kings
Guards, rendered himself famous for an Attempt, wherein if he had been
vigorously seconded, the place had run the risk of falling into the Kings
hands. He fastened a Petard to St. Michaels Gate, which laid the passage open
into the Town; but being ill seconded by his own men, and multitudes of the
Russians flocking to the danger, he was forced to retreat without having
effected any thing more, than to render the Enemy more diligent: who
immediately blocked up their Gates with Mountains of earth, making also great
Trenches before them, to prevent the like Attempt for the future. And thus the
Siege continued with various labors on both sides; the King having lain about
a year before it with more pertinacie than was judged conducible to the state
of his Affairs, which seemed to invite him to Musko the Imperial Seat, as a
place more probable to fall into his hands.

It was now the Year 1610, and the Zuiskians had labored long against a
prevailing Enemy at their Doors, when the Aids came from Sweden. The Poles in
the Camp wanted not their inconveniences: They had a multitude of Chief
Commanders, which occasioned frequent Disputes, to the disappointing of many
probable Designs; they had to this a licentiousness in their Discipline,
secure carelessness in the conduct of their Affairs (the natural infirmity of
that Nation) and an instability and irresolution in their Councils, all things
seeming to portend their ruin.: Most of the great Cities and Provinces, except
Severia, had revolted from their Obedience: Their Taxations were become
intolerable, which the unseasonable Seditions of the Army had extorted from
Demetrius for want of Pay; the People now too late repenting themselves of the
Contributions already paid them, without which they must have left them to the
enjoyment of that peace, which by their own folly and fickle nature they had
deprived themselves of. They proceeded so far in many parts of the Empire, as
to seize upon, imprison, and kill the Taxgatherers; which caused the Poles to
disperse strong Parties of their Army into several parts of the Land, insomuch
that their force in the Camp did not suffice to check the excursions of the
Town, by whom they were several times baffled. Their Commander in Chief
Rosinski upon one of those Sallies was shot into the side with an Arrow, of
which hurt he lay long sick, and never perfectly recovered. Upon an Encounter
which happened in May, the Poles had gained a notable advantage over them; but
delaying their Retreat, gave the Enemy time to come on with fresh Troops
against their wearied Soldiers, whom they routed; and snatching the Victory
out of their hands, took diverse Prisoners, and destroyed most of their Foot.
The time was thus wasted, as well as the strength of each Party. The Poles
having received Intelligence of the advance of the Swedish Aids toward Musko
under the Command of Pontus de la Guard, sent Alexander Zbarowski with 2000
Horse to check their progress. He beat one of their Regiments at Toccinum, and
killed 600 Germans upon the place. The Muskovites concerned in the safety of
these Auxiliaries, drew out their whole strength and joined with them. The
Poles also reinforced Zbarowski with their best Troops; and being now in the
Field again, both Armies met at Twer, 30 Leagues from Musko: the Dispute was
fierce, the Demetrians rushing with contempt upon those they had so often
beaten; and the Russians seemed more willing to die than be overcome; which
made the Fight bloody and doubtful, until these were forced yet again to give
place to the Ascendant Virtue of the Poles. And certainly the business had
there received an end, had not the main body of the Army, commanded by
Zbarowski himself, shrunk from the ground: for both his Wings prevailed over
those of the Enemy, and dispersed those who had beaten his Battalia; but their
number being inferior to that of the Enemy, they durst not follow the pursuit,
or attack the body of Foot, which stood immovable, notwithstanding the
defection of their Horse. There were slain in this Fight 1000 German Horse, and
6000 Muskovites, with the loss of but 50 Poles. The Main Body of Zbarowski's
Army emulous of the Success of their Fellows, and pressed with the shame of
their own miscarriage, resolved upon the very spot of ground to redeem their
sullied Honor, though contrary to the advice of some of their ablest
Soldiers, who counseled them to withdraw to a more advantageous Post. The
Army laboring thus under divided Counsels, but united in a careless security,
some lying in the Field, and others quartered in the Town: The rallied Enemy
about break of day fell upon them with a surprise so violent, that they had no
choice left them, but to fly for their lives, or lie by it. Many save
themselves in Twer, which was Garrisoned with Cossacks; others scarce looked
till they got to the Camp at Musko. The Poles did indeed what they could to
have rallied, but the Assault being universal, it was impossible for them to do
it; which probably saved most of them; but they lost all their Baggage, and
most of their Horses. The Muskovites raised upon the stock of this Victory,
stormed the Castle of Twer thrice, but were as often beaten off with loss; and
now despairing of carrying the place, they raised the Siege, and marched
toward the Volga, where they met again with the Demetrian Forces, and fought
them at Kolasinum, but parted upon equal terms.

Whilst Zuiski and Demetrius do thus with various Fortune strive for the
Empire of Russia, Sigismund continues obstinate at the Siege of Smolensko;
which if he had raised, and transferred his Arms to Musko, it is very probable
he might have given Law to both those wearied and implacable Parties: but he
was absolutely resolved not to quit the place till he had taken it, though it
may be presumed he failed in his unseasonable distracting and weakening the
Demetrian Poles, which he ought rather to have assisted with fresh Supplies,
lest the Muskoviters prevailing, Zuiski might be confirmed in the Government,
and attempt the relief of Smolensko with the united Forces of the Empire; which
also happened. The King had not his Recruits so opportunely out of Poland as he
desired; but he could not well call his Countrymen from Demetrius without
satisfying their Arrears, and the rewards they had proposed from the Victory
they seemed assured of; and the exhausted Treasury of the Commonwealth could
not suffice for such a sum: but he positive in his resolves, sent some eminent
Emissaries to persuade them to abandon Demetrius, and return to their Duty.
They on the other side, sent their Ambassadors to the King, that they might not
by an untimely desertion be defrauded of the fruit of their labors: and after
many altercations and disputes of Duty and Rewards, the Soldiery resolved to
persevere in their faith to Demetrius, and which they were obliged to by the
Sacred Ties of Vows and Oaths. There were, for all that, some who promised
Obedience, provided they might be paid their Arrears due to them from
Demetrius. But the Kings wisest Counselors judged that they ought still to
keep in with Demetrius, and by no means to distract his Forces until Smolensko
were taken: for then they might march to Musko without opposition; with
assurance, that all the Polish Forces, and all the places possessed by them,
would of course fall into their hands. It was certain, that every disgrace that
happened to Demetrius would advantage Zuiski: for the City of Musko would not
only be delivered by dispersing his Army, but all the Demetrian Provinces
revolt also from him; which proved true, as will appear hereafter: For the
Kings Agents having at length gained Rosinski, Zlarowski, and some other Chief
Officers, the rest began to waver; which did so terrify Demetrius, that being
sollicitous for his own security, looking now upon the Kings Engagement as a
Design to expose him, he resolved to withdraw, rather than be made a Sacrifice
either to his Interest, or the Avarice of the Soldiery, who for the
satisfaction of their Arrears, would (he thought) have delivered him up to
Zuiski himself. He would however first speak with Rosinski, and endeavor to
conserve him if possible, still; but to no purpose: which irritated him so
much, that he reproached him with levity and breach of Trust. This enraged
Rosinski to that height, that he dared to call the Emperor to his face an
Impostor, and the Son of a Whore. These Speeches not to be suffered by a
private man, did so disturb the Prince, that seeing himself not in a condition
to revenge them, or indeed to secure his own Person in his own Camp, he
resolved to leave it; and taking Horse with only a very few of his Friends to
Guard him, he privately got away, and fled to Caluga All the Boyarian
Muskovites of his party did follow him; and his Lady, however left in the Camp,
would not stay behind. The Ambassadors endeavored to detain her, and to
persuade her return into Poland; but she, like another Texena, affirmed, that
she had not only wedded the good Fortunes of her Husband, but his Adversities
also. The Ambassadors did notwithstanding persist and earnestly press her to
submit her self to the Kings Clemency and Munificence. They did at length so
much, that she seemed vanquished by their Reasons, promising she would send
Ambassadors of her own to the King; and gave them for the present her Letters
to his Majesty, wherein having congratulated his arrival in Muskovy, she wished
him all good Success. She farther complained o^ the sad Vicissitudes of her
Fortune, submitting her self and her Concerns to God, from whom she did expect
an end of her calamities and sorrows; she added, My adverse Fate has deprived
me of all: I have nothing left but the justice of my Cause, and my right to the
Muskovitish Empire, confirmed by my Inauguration, and the double Oaths of all
Orders of men. I relinquish all to your Majesty's disposal, being assured of
your Equity and Justice; only I beg, that you will treat me and my Family (who
will be no small support to you in the acquisition of the Muskovitish Empire)
according to our Dignity and your Magnificence.

Demetrius his flight being known, the whole Camp was in an alarm and tumult.
Some would follow the Great Duke, some would go to the King, and others would
continue in their Quarters till they had their Arrears. The Complaints against
Rosinski were high and furious, by whose artifice and wickedness, they said
Demetrius had been forced to quit the Camp, whereby the Soldiers should be
deprived of the reward of their Blood and Labors. Demetrius his Letters read
publicly did extremely foment their Seditions, but the presence and carriage
of Marina transported them beyond all bounds. She with a Courage more than
Masculine, and a Countenance composed of sorrow and sweetness, wandered through
the Camp, spoke to all she met, called such as she knew by their names, and
urged those she did not, by the Charms of her looks and presence; to conclude,
she inflamed all with her winning Discourses. She tells them, that their Valor
and Courages were to expect their Stipend and Reward of so many Travels from
Demetrius only, it not being likely that the King would remunerate the Services
they had done for others otherwise than with scorn and contumely. She
demonstrates to them the infinite Treasures of Muskovy, and the Greatness of
the Empire; and assures them that the Great Duke would deny them nothing by
whose fidelity and fortitude he should be restored to what had been so cruelly
usurped from him. The Soldiery being incensed with these and the like
Discourses, the Dumensian Cossacks immediately leave the the Camp to follow the
fortunes of Demetrius. Rosinski would hinder them; but they persisting,
endeavored to break through the Polish Horse in their way They fought, and two
thousand fell i^ that Conflict on both sides. After this Fight, some ran into
the City, and some went to Demetrius to Caluga, and the rest remained with
their Chieftain Zarucki in the Camp. Some days after happened another more
grievous, but less bloody Sedition, begun by the Polish Horse, and which
threatened all with ruin. The Cause of this Tumult was Marina's flight, who
when she had effected what she could with the Soldiers, omitting nothing to
reconcile them to her own and her Husbands Interest, and now secure of a great
part of the Army, she disguised her self in man's Apparel, and accompanied only
with one Maid and a few Cossacks, came safe to Caluga. Before she parted, she
wrote a Letter to the Army, which she left upon her Table in her Chamber,
wherein she tells them, that she was forced to retire from amongst them, to
save her Honor, her Fame, and her Life. She could suffer no longer the fast
and opprobrious Language of that insolent and drunken fellow (meaning
Rosinski.) She invoked God, the Avenger of wrongs; minds the Soldiers of the
Religion of their Vows: Inveighs against the flagitious perfidy of her
Adversaries; and finally, extolling the Fidelity and Courage of her Friends,
bids them not only hope for, but assure themselves of all they could wish for
from the Great Duke, as soon as he had recovered his Empire. The last word of
the Letter was, I part. This Epistle being read, was like the sounding of an
Alarm, all being full of tumult and horror. The Soldiers ran to their Arms,
and in threatening Troops haste to the Generals Tent, crying out, Is it so
Rosinski, that by thy Pride and Debaucheries thou did force the injured
Marina to follow her banished Lord? What Captains shall we now follow? Thee
perfide, and betrayer of the Soldiery, who being bought and deluded by the
vain promises of the Kings Emissaries, would deceive us of our Stipend, and
the rewards of our Labors; Restore to us our Princes, and try thou first that
butchery thou do prepare for us. And therewith they made several shot with
their Pistols at him; but he escaped that danger, though he could not appease
the tumult; neither would they any more be Commanded by him, but choosing one
Tiskevicius for their General, prepare to follow Demetrius their old Lord. For
all this, the Chief Officers, and those most in favor with the Soldiery, had
by their diligence and Authority welnigh appeased these disorders; which they
had also probably effected, if new Commotions had not intervened, upon new
considerations, to wit, that it was not safe to remain longer in the Camp so
distracted and divided, without Order or Discipline, and in sight of an Enemy
vigilant and intent upon every occasion. This hurried them into new Confusions,
and like so many Furies they all cry out they would immediately be gone; and
packing up their Baggage, fired their Camp, which for the variety and
Magnificence of its Structures seemed another great City; and being ready to
march, mutually engaged to keep together till they came to Volock, where every
body should be at liberty to dispose of himself as he thought most for his
advantage. Being come thither, Sapiha and all his men resolving to follow the
fortune of Demetrius, went to Caluga to him. Rosinski and Alexander Zbarowski
with 4000 Horse and the Dunensian Cossacks, went to their King at Smolensko.
And thus this power which had so long blocked up Musko, and had trampled upon
the Empire two years, and would certainly have subjugated both, was dispersed
in the beginning of March 1610, by the ill Counsel, and to the very great
detriment of King Sigismund; for the Enemy being well-nigh broke with the long
Siege of their Metropolitan, gathered new force and vigor upon the raising of
it; and the King, who might have prosecuted the War at the expense and danger
of others, drew the whole burden of it, as it were, voluntarily upon his own
shoulders.

In the mean time, the Zuiskian Muskovites, not ignorant of the dissentions in
the Camp, began to hope well; but leaving them to their discords, lest by
attempting them the sense of their common danger might unite them, they turned
their forces another way. They turned the Poles out of Peraslaw and Alexandria
which lay there; drive Sapiha from the Siege of Troyeze, and reduced all the
places about the Volga into their power. But when the City it self was
delivered from their troublesome Neighbors, then, as if they had broken their
Fetters, and been delivered out of a long Imprisonment, they reassumed new
courage and new vigor; and having in a short time recovered most of the
Provinces which revolted to them, they sent the best part of their Army to
follow Rosinski, who had possessed himself of Volock and the strong Monastery
of Osippow. He was necessitated to stay there, by reason of the indisposition
his hurts had procured him. He kept with him 1500 Poles and 400 Cossacks,
having sent the rest of the Army with Zbarowski to the King. His health was
much impaired, through his daily toils and the smart of his old hurt; to which
also contributed the perturbation and grief of his mind, which his ill
Successes had created him, in that he had quitted Musko with less Glory and
Splendour than he had attempted it. Nature and strength being decayed in him, he
was overcome by the violence of his Malady; and unable to resist longer, was
forced to submit to the necessity of his Fate, which deprived him of his life
and hopes in a strange Country, which he had entered in Pomp and Triumph.

Rosinski being dead, Volviovius the Zuiskian General taking the occasion of
the distraction his loss had bred amongst the Garrison, besieged Volock, and
took it without much difficulty. Ossipow defended it self better, in so much
that the Auxiliaries from Sweden, being French, and desirous to show of what
importance they were to their Party, having opened a passage into the Fortress
with a Petard, were after a very bloody Assault baffled and beaten off. But the
place being more oppressed by wants from within, than by any force from the
Enemy from without, were forced to yield to the necessity of their condition;
but scorning a tame surrender, they resolved upon a Salley, and to take the
hazard of that as their safest and last refuge. The obscurity of the night was
judged fittest for the Exployt; which being come, they refreshed themselves
with the whole Provisions of the place, and after mutual embracings and
encouragement of each other, they set open their Gates, and made toward
Smolensko. Their Sally was furious, like that of men resolved to die, and they
performed it with a Courage hurried on by despair, which made the Fight bloody,
and the carnage great amongst the Muskovites; but they abounding in their
numbers, and not being surprised upon this occasion, killed most of the Poles,
so that scarce 300 of them escaped in safety (and they were 1200 who sallied
out) to Sigismund's Camp.

The Muskovites raised with this variety of Successes, formed to themselves an
Army of 30000 men, to which were added 1000 French, De la Garde's Germans, and
6000 Suedes newly arrived under the Command of Count Edward Horn. Demetrius
after his quitting the Camp lay with a few Sapihans at Caluga; but they
despising his small force, marched to the relief of Smolensko. King Sigismund
having notice of these preparations and their approach, Commanded Stanislaws
Zolkievius his General with 8000 choice men to obstruct their passage. The two
Armies engaged at Clusinum, where the Muskovites were again overcome by the
Fatal Virtue of the Poles, in a great and memorable Battle. But it cost the
Poles dear: for though their Right Wing had routed the Enemies Left, Commanded
by Demetrius Zuiski the Great Dukes Brother; yet the other Wing, consisting of
Germans and other Strangers, stood their ground, which they had chosen
advantageously amongst shrubs and other rubbage, in such a place where the
Enemies Horse could not come up to charge them without much difficulty; but
being well seconded by their Reserves, they at last made so violent an
impression upon this Wing also, that it was put to flight. There remained yet
the Main Body of Foot, made up of Germans and Swedes, which kept entire; and
the Polish being recalled from the pursuit, prepared to make a Charge upon
them; but they seeing themselves abandoned by their Horse, and left singly to
the fortune of the day, many of their men likewise stealing from them and
running to the Enemy, durst not stand out the shock, but waved their Hats and
hands about their Heads in sign of Parley; which being granted, and Hostages
delivered, they surrendered themselves, for all what la Guarde (who was newly
returned from the flight, whilst they were in Treaty) could entreat or do to
the contrary. Those Wings that had been defeated, having rallied themselves,
returned also to their Station, upon a confidence their Foot had stood their
ground; but they came only time enough to be beaten over again, the Poles
having the pursuit of them till late in the night: and thus the Field being
cleared of the Enemy, they had the entire Pillage of it, with all their Cannon
and Baggage. The Germans, a Mercenary Soldatesque, took pay in the Polish Army;
the rest of the Captives, the Colors, and other Ensigns of Victory, were sent
to the King at Smolensko; who showed them to the Besieged with what Military
Pomp and Ostentation they could be exposed, who were also invited to a
Surrender after so signal and irrecoverable a loss; but to no purpose: for
Sehin being of an intrepid Courage, as if he alone would stay the declining
fate of his Country, did dare singly to resist the course of so many Victories.
Volviovius lay at Czarow with a Party of 8000 Zuis kians, but terrified with
this Success, did upon the first Summons render himself and his Army to the
Conquerors discretion, Czarow being taken, the Polish Army marched toward
Musko, whither the Sapihans, having routed the Zuiskian Tartars at Troycze, and
a thousand Muskovites at Borowsko, did also hasten. The Russians broken with so
many evils, being vanquished at Clusinum, at Troycze, and at Borowsko, and
seeing the Poles approached their City, and that the Demetrians did meditate a
new Siege; and finally, being the Germans were revolted to the Enemy, and that
there was no appearance of repairing their ruined Troops, did not know to what
Saint to devote themselves, or how to extricate themselves out of so many
impending miseries. At length, after many and various agitations and
consultations, they fix upon an expedient of a very extraordinary nature for
their deliverance. In the first place they seize upon and depose their Great
Duke Basilius Zuiski, as the unhappy Author of all their miscarriages, and
infamous for his Misfortunes, his Tyranny, and his Sorceries, with which they
charged him; and with a passion equal with that wherewith they had raised him
to the Throne, they pulled him down again, and thrust him into a Cloister;
giving at the same time out, that they would elect Vladislaws, King Sigismund's
Son, Great Duke in his stead: proposing by this means that they should quit
their hands of Demetrius, whom they equally scorned and hated; take away the
cause of the War in one instant, and compose their harrassed Country with such
a Government, that would immediately rescue them from all other pretensions.
They knew the Poles (whom they naturally hated like emulous Neighbors) would
become secure by this Election, and that they themselves having breathed a
while, and quit themselves of the War, should be able either to elude the
Election of Vladislaws, or remove him as obnoxious to their Artifices, by
reason of his Childhood, in due time. They then proposed to themselves the
choice of a Prince of their own Blood and Manners, and the reverting of their
Government into its ancient Channel: all which happened as they did design, and
their Counsels laid upon profound Reasons of State, had a Success accordingly.
The Poles swayed by a nearer Interest than that of Demetrius, had no care of
recruiting his Party, but on the contrary prepared for the reinforcing of the
City of Musko against his Attempts; in order whereunto (upon this bare Promise
of choosing Vladislaws for their Great Duke) Zalkievius sent Troops to their Aid
to defend them against Demetrius; and following himself with the whole Army, he
sat down on the East Side of the City ( Demetrius his Camp being on the other)
and a while after the Gates being set open for him, he marched through the
City, and encamped with all his forces near Demetrius his Camp. It was no hard
matter for Zolkievius to debauch the Sapihans, upon his engagement for the
Public Faith of the Kingdom of Poland to be given them for their Arrears; so
that they revolted unanimously to him. Demetrius thus forsaken by them he
confided most in, retreated again to Caluga as an auspicious place, for the
shelter he had formerly received there. His most faithful Friends, as if they
had been obliged to his Fortune, not to him, did in this disastrous juncture of
his Affairs expose him to his own despair. Zarucki that courageous Leader of
the Dunensian Cossacks, with Kasinowski Prince of Tartary, his greatest
Confidents, did likewise leave him for a time, submitting themselves with the
rest to the will of the Conquereror. The Muskovites being freed from Demetrius,
would have respited the Election of their new Duke, but that there was no other
choice now left them. They had an Army in their Bowels, resolved not to quit
the City till they saw their Prince seated upon the Throne. They therefore
proceeded to the Election according to the usual Ceremonies, causing him,
though absent, to be Proclaimed, and Fealty sworn to him as Great Duke and
Emperor, hiding all their secret aversions under the Mask of Joy and
Acclamations: and that they might remove all shadow of suspicion from
themselves, they delivered the unfortunate Basilius Zuiski, with his Brethren
John and Demetrius, into Zolkievius his hands; who also engaged, as likewise
the great Officers of his Army, to the Russians, that the new Duke should
speedily come to them, conserve their Religion inviolable, and maintain all the
Privileges of the Nobility and People. And thus was the Government upon a
sudden translated into new hands.

SECT. IV.
The Muskovites deal fraudulently with the Poles, refusing to deliver Smolensko
in Prince Uladislaws's Name. Zolkievius lodges his Army in Mosko; but being
disgusted, returns into Poland. Demetrius is slain by his Guards. The Russians
revolt from the Poles, and fight them in their Chief City. Smolensko is taken,
and King Sigismund returns into Poland. Zolkievius his Triumph, Life and Death.
The Poles plunder the Ducal Treasury; but being closely besieged in the Palace,
are forced to surrender. King Sigismund returns, but too late, to the relief of
Musko. Marina and her Son are drowned, being thrust under the Ice. Zarucki is
impaled. Another Pseudo-Demetrius. Who he was He gathers an Army, but is
delivered up by his own men. Michael Federowicz is chosen Duke of Muskovy, by
whose Command this last Demetrius is hanged.

ZViski being thus laid aside, and Vladislaws chosen in his place, there was a
splendid Embassy sent to King Sigismund still before Smolensko, with an account
of what they had done. They were received with much Honor, many prime
Courtiers, and all the Horse being sent to meet them. Being introduced into the
King's presence, they humbly besought him in the name of all the Orders of
Muskovy, that he would be pleased to take them and their afflicted Country into
his Royal protection. They then solicit the speedy dispatch of the Prince to
them, that in order to the completing of their unanimous Election, he might
publicly be Crowned in the Royal City Great Duke and Emperor; and that they
might enjoy the comfort of his Presence and Protection. They likewise brought
with them the Conditions upon which he was to be received; wherein the most
considerable were: That a General Amnesty and Act of Oblivion should be passed,
and all their Laws and Customs confirmed and established; and that for the
better settlement of the Kingdom, their Duke must abjure the Romish Profession,
and declare himself for the Greek Rites. The King having received their
Message, and not ignorant of the wiliness and reserves of that subtle Nation,
was not wanting in a return suitable to the occasion. He told them, that he did
receive this Honor conferred upon his Son with great satisfaction, which
should oblige him at all times to serve their Country with his best Aids and
Counsels. And as to the Treaty, relating to its particulars, he did purpose to
give Zolkievius (then upon the place) full Instructions for the completing of
it at their own homes. The Ambassadors after this Answer, and having been
sumptuously feasted by the Prime Officers of the Court, with great and mutual
professions of kindnesses, in so much as they seemed to be but one people, were
dismissed.

The King having by this fully weighed the state of his Affairs, gathered to
himself many reasons not to believe the reality of the Moscovites; for else why
did they elect his Son and not him, but that they should be able when he had
withdrawn his Forces out of their Land, to practice upon the unexperience of
his Son by reason of his youth, and to justle him out of the Throne, to which
they had raised him out of necessity, not choice? And on the other side, if the
King should forbear to send him to them till he were of Age, they would take
occasion from this delay to transfer their Suffrage upon another. He took a
further Umbrage of their Designs from the refusal of the Garrison of Smolensko
to surrender their City in the name of Prince Vladislaws, though he were
declared and proclaimed Great Duke with the usual Ceremonies: their excuse was,
that they could not own him by so public an Act, till he had been received in
the Capital City, Crowned and Sworn to the maintenance of their Laws and their
Protection. Zolkievius had many ill-willers about the King, who were not
wanting to cherish these apprehensions of prejudice contracted by him against
the Russians; and having gained the Kings ear, they instilled new Counsels into
him: That this Election of his Son was an affront, and an imposing upon his
Majesty, instead of receiving Law from him: That he had by his Arms reduced
them to those distresses, that they must suddenly lay themselves, that they
must suddenly lay themselves at his feet; whereas now they addressed to him by
their Ambassadors with Conditions not only inglorious, but inconsistent with
the state of his Affairs, and impossible for him to subscribe to: And that upon
the reducing of Smolensko, he might consider himself as a Conqueror, and Rule
that false People by such Laws as he should judge suitable to his Honor and
Safety. But there were others of his Council that advised the preserving of
that Faith which Zolkievius had Sworn to them in his Name, and by his
Approbation: That by confirming of that, he would in one day render himself
Master of a vast Empire, which it might cost him some years, besides a great
expense of Blood and Treasure to reduce. And they being an obstinate people,
might fall upon new Counsels, and close with Demetrius, whose Title would give
him a trouble to resist, as well upon the account of Reason, as the power of
his Arms. For it was upon the pretense of aiding Demetrius, that he invaded
their land; who being restored to the Throne, the King could have no more a
fair color to stay in it: That his Army might by this means be paid all their
Arrears, as the Soldiers of Vladislaws the Great Duke, out of the Treasures of
Russia; whereas the Kingdom of Poland, if it fell to them to pay it, would grow
uneasy under so intolerable a burden: That the practices of the Russians
might easily be eluded by seating Vladislaws upon the Throne with an able
Council about him, who should immediately provide pay for the Army, which they
would not refuse upon his first reception, and while it lay in their Chief
City: And as to the Articles, they might be well enough evaded and delayed,
while more Recruits were coming out of Poland. But the King's mind being
prepossessed, as if carried on by an irresistible Fate, adhered to the more
violent Counsels of such as blew him up with a Punctilio of Honor, not to rise
from before Smolensko before he had reduced it, having cost him already above a
years Siege, and was now upon the point of a rendition, or being forced. The
King had raised a Battery against it, but did not prosecute his matters with
that quickness, but that they within had time to make a deep Ditch, and to
raise new Ramparts in opposition to the Battery: after which the Cannon began
to play; which indeed laid flat a great part of the Wall, with two Flankers
that stood next it: the Assault was made, but in vain, they being repulsed with
great loss. The Russians in the mean time clamoured at this breach of the
Treaty, which had been celebrated with the Solemnity of an Oath; and that
contrary to the Law of Nations, their Ambassadors were detained. Which the King
justified upon this Reason, that they refused to give order to the Governor of
Smolensko to surrender the Town in their Great Dukes Name; and which they
excused, as not within their Instructions.

The Affairs of Russia hung thus in suspense for some time, the people not
daring to do more than mutter, while Zolkievius and his Army lay enquartered in
their Chief City. Demetrius also began to look up again, having sheltered
himself in Caluga, while he was reinforcing his Party, which was much
countenanced by the return of Zarucki and Prince Kazimowski to him, whose
reception by King Sigismund bearing no proportion with what they proposed to
themselves, left him, and returned again to the Service of their old Lord. But
Zolkievius disdaining to be thus treated by the King, contracted violent
discontents, in so much that taking the pretense of going to fetch the Prince
to Musko, he left the Army; and passing by Smolensko, where he but saluted the
King, he retired into Poland. The Russians, after the Generals departure,
understanding that the King had refused sending his Son at his intercession,
that the captive Zuiskius's, together with their Ambassadors were sent away
Prisoners into Poland, and that the King took upon him the Administration of
the Affairs of the Empire, putting new Officers into all the great places, and
refusing to own them as a State, prepared for a Revolt; to which the death of
Demetrius did very effectually contribute. He had a little before, upon some
apprehensions of infidelity in Kasimouski against him, caused him to be thrown
into the River Occa, and drowned there; which the Tartars of his Guard so far
resented, as to study a revenge. He was of late time used to divert his
Melancholy with drinking, drowning, at least steeping his cares in liquor: and
having been one day a hunting, he retired himself with some of his particular
Friends to the enjoyment of this accustomed solace, when these enraged Tartars
broke in upon him, and murdered him upon the place. Neither did they escape
Vengeance: for Marina receiving this news with the most violent apprehension in
the world, and laying aside all respect to her Quality, being transported with
grief and rage, she ran into the Streets, calling to every person she met,
either to revenge the Murder of her Lord, or by the same cruelty to do an act
of Charity toward her, in delivering her from that loathed burden of her
life. The Cossacks inflamed by the Prayers and Tears of this great Lady, fell
with such fury upon the Tartars, that they sacrificed two hundred of them to
Demetrius his Manes, Marina's grief, and their own resentments. This second
Demetrius after his death, was by all hands admitted to be an Impostor. Most
would have him to have been a Schoolmaster in Socola a Town of Russia Alba,
and that he had been set up as a Property by the Poles, the better to
countenance their Designs upon Muskovy. Others supposed him a Jew, upon this
Reason, that there were found in his Closet some Hebrew and Talmudical Books;
the same being likewise affirmed by Michael Federowiez the succeeding Emperor,
in a Letter from him to Maurice Prince of Orange. But whoever he was, he was
slain by these Tartars as we have related, but did not die so entirely, but
that his Son was chose Great Duke by them of Caluga; and Zaruckius with all his
Forces addressed himself to the Russians, offering them their aid, upon promise
that so soon as they should quit their hands of the Poles, they should by the
example of Caluga, choose this Son of Demetrius Great Duke and Emperor. This
being assented to, this Son of Demetrius and Marina was in those Quarters
considered as Emperor; though many believed this yet a further Impostor, for
that Marina was supposed barren.

King Sigismund continued still the Siege of Smolensko, which he judged
ignominious and below him to abandon; though while he opiniatred there, he
omitted more specious opportunities of prevailing elsewhere, and by this
delaying gave the Muskovites means to regain what by their Divisions had been
extorted from them. It was now the beginning of the Year 1611, when they began
to take Arms under the Conduct of Lepanow a Great Lord of the Country, who
having made some private Levies, appeared in the field first about Prezlaw,
from whence he invited and gained most of the Boyarians to his Party,
dispersing Messengers into all the Provinces, to reproach the Poles of their
breach of Faith in detaining their Prince from them; complaining further, that
they had got their City of Musko by fraud and practice; and that they kept the
Zuiski's in Prison together with their Ambassadors, contrary to the Law of
Nations. Zarucki brought in his Force to this Party, upon the Conditions before
mentioned, that young Demetrius should be received and declared Emperor and
Great Duke, so soon as they should have cleared their Country from the Poles,
the plague of it. And Prosowecki another Great Lord raised another and greater
Army about Novogrodock; so that these Levies, from small beginnings, did by the
inadvertencie of the Poles improve to that bulk, that none of the Kings Forces
scattered in the Country for the securing its Obedience, durst look upon them,
they scarce sufficing to defend themselves. He could not spare any of his
Leaguer from before Smolensko, having a great Line to man, and the Enemy a
strong Garrison in the Town: his Army in Musko was little enough to keep the
numbers in the City in subjection; whose old aversion to the Poles was revived
to so high a pitch, that upon notice of Lepanow's being in Arms, they conspired
how to Massacre the Garririson, consisting of 6000 Horse, and 1000 Foot. They
wanted only Leaders, not a will to this bloody action. There were within the
circuit of this vast City one hundred and eighty thousand houses, a multitude
of Inhabitants, besides a great confluence of Strangers retired thither out of
the Neighbor-provinces for Sanctuary, to avoid the fury of a Civil War; and
many to assist the Conspirators, as conscious of the intended Design; so that
they only wanted a Head and Method for the carrying of it on. Goziouski General
of the Poles was not without his Intelligence of these Menes, but chose rather
to dissemble his notice, being only intent upon his fortifying of Kitaigrod and
Krimgrod, which contain within their Walls the Dukes Palace, with the
Warehouses of the wealthiest Merchants; proposing to himself that he should be
able to retire thither upon occasion. Gariouski had scarce finished his Works,
when the Russians supplying by their malice what they wanted in conduct, being
carried on as it were by the weight of their number, drawn together by the
ringing of their Bells, the third day after Palm Sunday made a furious Assault
upon the Enemy in their bosom. The Poles opposed Despair and Discipline to
their confused multitudes, and were so successful in it, as to kill 6000 upon
the place without any considerable loss; and prosecuting that advantage by
firing that part of the City next them, they destroyed multitudes of Houses,
Women, Children, Goods, and helpless People, by the aid of that raging Element.
The day following, Gariouski commanded the Suburbs on the other side of the
River Moscha to be burnt, because that Strusius, who was hastening to the
relief of his Countrymen with his Regiment from Mosaisco, was retarded there
by the Inhabitants. The City tamed thus by Fire and Sword, rejecting the fault
upon some few, petitioned for pardon, and had it without great difficulty, the
Poles not being in a condition to do more than secure their own Quarters,
though they had gained well to bring the Enemy to ask quarter of them. It was
neither compunction in the one, nor kindness in the other, that begat this
calm; for the Inhabitants upon the advance of Lepanow with Zarucki and
Prosowecki with an Army of 100000 men, joined with them, forcing the Poles into
their Works, where they were besieged, save on one passage over the River,
which they kept open a long time, and by which they got in their Provisions,
and made frequent Sallies with various Fortune and Success.

All this while King Sigismund lay immovable at the Siege of Smolensko, which
dured longer than he had fancied; but what was worse, the Soldiers grew
uneasy for want of Pay, clamouring in such sort, that he was in much dread of
a Mutiny. He had no Moneys, neither did he know how to compass any without a
Convention of the States of his Kingdom; and this he was put upon to calm the
Soldiers, who were prevailed with to expect the determinations of that
Assembly with patience. But the King, that no Objection might lie upon him for
not having made all imaginable Attempts for gaining the place, resolved upon a
general Assault before he left the Leaguer to go to the Convention, which he
had appointed in September following. The Assault was contrived to be made
before daybreak, and was carried on accordingly with less notice, or indeed
expectation of the Enemy than was imagined; for the Soldiers had without great
opposition raised three Ladders upon the Wall before it was light, upon the
13th of June. Potocki the Palatine of Brachlaw had his Post on the Eastside of
the Town; Wire with his Germans on the Kings side; who both of them got up to
the top of the Walls: but the descent being steep into the Town, and the
Garrison flocking to the place, rendered the dispute hot and doubtful, till
Bartholomew Novodwoski Captain of the Guards applying a Petar under the Kennel
on the Southside toward the Boristhenes, made a Breach of 30 Cubits long.
Dorostanski Marshal of Lithuania assaulted and entered the same in the head of
the Guards, and marched directly to the Marketplace, possessing himself of it
with little resistance: for the Garrison astonished with this unexpected
Adventure, swallowed up in their own fears, instead of making any defense,
threw down their Arms and quitted their Stations, leaving a free passage for
the Besiegers to enter in on all sides upon them. All was filled with horror
and confusion; the Poles enraged they had been so long a Conquering, put all
they met with to the Sword. The poor Citizens not knowing where to hide
themselves from the fury of this bloody Enemy, were butchered without remorse
or distinction; which possessing others with despair and indignation, very many
of them took their Wives, Children, and most precious Movables, and retired
with them into the great Church, where was kept the Magazine of Powder; and
putting fire to it, destroyed themselves with a more than Saguntine despair,
for fear of perishing. Sehin Palatine and Governor of the Town with 15 more,
got into a little Tower upon the Wall, where, though all was lost, he bravely
defended himself, telling the Enemy, that he resolved to die rather than render
himself, unless to some Chief Officer. He had been exemplary for his cruelty to
such as were taken upon any Sallies, which gave the Poles a particular hatred
for him; and he dreaded worse than death falling into their hands: but word
being brought to Potocki, who was near that Quarter, he came to the place, to
whom the Palatine and his fifteen Camerades yielded themselves upon Parole,
Prisoners of War. And thus was this great City, which had been the labor of
almost two years, taken in less than two hours time, with the loss only of
eight Germans. The gaining of the place was justly attributed to the success of
Novodwoski's Petar; that attempt of scaling the Walls being wholly desperate,
and in which the Assailants must inevitably have perished. So soon as the
possession of that place was secured, there was a strict Command to give
Quarter; only the Pillage of the Town was consigned to the Soldiers, as the
reward of their labors; but they not agreeing in the distribution of it, the
Booty was ordered to be brought into one place, whereby the dividend might be
more equal; but a fire by some accident happening, consumed all that Wealth,
with a great part of the City. There was found in the Magazines a proportion of
Corn and other Military Provisions sufficient for three years longer: Men were
only wanting, they being wasted from near 70000 to about 8000 fighting men; but
however, had they not been more conquered by their own fears than the power of
the Enemy, they had certainly made good the place against this Assault.

The King having appeased his Army, feasted them three whole days together; in
the solace of which, and the reflection of their Victory, they buried all their
former regrets and discontents. And he supposing he should now appear more
advantageously to his own Subjects, had a greater appetite of being at the
Assembly than before, proposing to himself, that Crowned with the Palms of this
Conquest, he ought to show himself in Triumph to his people: adding this Error
to the former (as if swayed by some secret Fatality) he turned his back upon
his new Acquisitions, to receive the flatteries and acclamations of his Polish
Subjects. And thus he yet again suffered the vanquished Empire of Muskovy to
slip out of his hands: for if he had prosecuted his Victory, and had carried
the Terror of his Arms, and the reputation of his Success to the Imperial City,
where his men disputed his Interest with great courage, against the multitude
that oppressed them, and where he had a considerable Party amongst the Russians
themselves, it is more than probable that he had not only kept the City in his
power, but by the Example of it have compelled the rest of the Provinces to
receive his Dictates at pleasure. But he, by an ill computation of his Affairs,
and that unhappy cunctation which lost him his Hereditary Kingdom of Sweden,
lost now also the Monarchy of Muskovy: For as soon as the Besieged and
Besiegers at Musko had notice that he was gone, it had different effects upon
them. The Army from without grew confident, repeating their Attempts upon the
Poles; who looking upon themselves as exposed, began to contrive for their own
safety; and taking a pretense from their want of pay (but the true reason was a
despair of Relief) they demanded their dismission.

The Assembly of the Estates at Warsow was held with the usual Ceremony, but
unusual Pomp, the King being received as a Conqueror, with all imaginary
Congratulations for the reducing of Smolensko, and adding so fair a Province to
their Commonwealth. Zolkievius his Triumph was Memorable and Magnificent: for
being attended by a gallant and numerous Cavallery, he was followed by Basilius
Zuiski late Emperor of Muskovy, who was clad in a red silk Vest, and seated in
a high Chariot betwixt his two Brothers, that he might be seen of all men. They
rode thus to the Senate House, where being admitted, Zolkievius presented the
Captive Princes to the King and Assembly; and in a grave and set Speech, having
magnified the Majesty of the Commonwealth, and the adverse Fortune of the
Prisoners, made no scruple to parallel the Conquest of these Illustrious
Captives to the most renowned Examples of former Ages. After this, the Zuiski's
were confined to Goston-Castle, where they were Royally treated, though
Basilius impatient of his Fetters, and not able to support the weight of his
sorrows, died soon after, and was privately buried betwixt Warsow and Thorn,
where he also reposed till the end of the War; at which time, his and his
Brother Demetrius his Ashes, who likewise died there, were at the intercession
of the Muskovitish Ambassadors translated out of Poland to the Tomb of their
Ancestors. In the mean time, King Sigismund, to perpetuate the Memory of so
great a Victory, caused it to be ingraved in Tables of Marble, and placed upon
his Monument, as follows: REGIS REGUM DEI EXERCITUM GLORIAE, SIGISMUNDUS
TERTIUS REX Poloniae and Sueciae, Exercitu Moscovitico ad Clusinum caeso,
Moscoviae Metropoli deditione accepta, Smolensko Reipublicae restituta, Basilio
Zuiskio Magno Duce Moscoviae Et Fratre ejus Demetrio Militiae Praefecto
Captivis jure Belli receptis, Et in Arce Gostienensi sub custodia habitis,
ibique vita functis, Humanae sortis memor Ossa illorum huc defer; Et ne se
regnante etiam hosts Injusteque Sceptra parantes, Justis Sepulturaque
carerent, IN HOC A se ad publicam Posteritatem Memoriam, Regnique sui Nomen,
Extructo Trophaeo DEPONI JUSSIT, ANNO A PARTU Virginis MDCXX Regnor' POLONIAE
XXXIII. SUECIAE XXVI.



And this was the end of Basilius Zuiski, who having by many extraordinary
Actions raised himself to the Throne, enjoyed it no more than his Predecessor,
either long or quietly. He had to do with an unstable People, hurried from one
extreme to another; and being of a jealous nature, had recourse to Witchcrafts
and Incantations, endeavoring by the help of Satan to preserve what he had
gained by improving the violent humor of the giddy multitude. And his Wizards
furnishing him with Discoveries of the unfaithfulness of some about him, or he
pretending such Discoveries, to gratify his fears, put many eminent Persons to
death; proposing to settle that Dominion by Blood and Fraud, the same Arts
whereby he had obtained it. And his nature by frequent practices being hardened
in cruelty, he caused three of his most faithful Servants and Friends to be
made away, only because their names were Michael; for he had been told by his
Soothsayers, that one of that name should Succeed him in the Empire (which
proved true, for all his barbarous precaution) which hurried him upon doing
those horrid things that hardly any Story can parallel. He would tear up the
Wombs of great-bellied women, and rip open the breasts of the mettledst Horses,
for the immature fruit of the one, and the hearts of the other, wherewith he
used to make his Diabolical Infusions; as well to charm the Poles whom he could
not overcome, as his Rebel-Subjects whom he could not bring to their Duty. But
no Magic is of power against the Providence of God, which after a short
turbulent Reign, removed him from the Throne to a Prison, where he ended his
days.

The Method of our Tragic History does invite us back to Musko, to observe the
actions of that place; but Zolkievius, whose Army we left there, having in the
succeeding course of his life rendered himself famous upon the account of many
Enterprises, especially his unparalled Retreat at Cicora from the Turks, a
short digression as to his Affairs may not be wholly impertinent, wherein I
shall observe my accustomed brevity, to relate only matter of fact, and so
return to where we left.

Stanislaws Zolkiewski (the Sirnames of most of the Polish Nobility do end in
ski) a Person of an eminent extraction, dedicated himself to Arms so soon as he
was well able to wield them, making his first Apprentiship under that Great
Chancellor, and greatest Captain that Poland has produced for many Ages, John
Zamoyski; who at the famous Battle of Byczin, which decided the contest between
Sigismund and Maximilian concerning the Crown, in favor of the former, had the
Honor to Command the Right Wing of Zamoyski's Army, to the defeating of that
Enemy that opposed him; in which encounter he received a sore wound in the
Knee. His Conduct in that Adventure raised him in short time after to the
Preferment of being Lieutenant General of the Kingdom; during which Command, he
was employed against the Rebellious Cossacks, whom after many doubtful Fights
he reduced to his own Terms, of delivering up their General (a Plebeian, but of
great Conduct) with three other of their Principal Officers into his hands. He
defeated the Swedes at Revel: And afterward being made General, he did beat
the Russians at Clusinum, entered Musko, forced Demetrius to quit his Siege, and
led away the Emperor Zuiski and his two Brothers Captive with him into Poland,
as we have formerly mentioned; and likewise that he left the Army in Musko upon
discontent, by reason Sigismund refused to ratify the Articles which
Zolkievius by his directions had in his name sworn to.

Being 70 years of Age, he was created Great Chancellor of Poland: He repressed
the Tartars in their Invasion at Orimin; and a while after marched with his
Army into Moldavia in aid of Gratian the Vayvod against the Turks, that
oppressed him to so great an extremity, that he came in to Zolkievius but with
six hundred Horse; but so fatally negligent, that he could give no account of
the Enemies number or force, even in his own County; so that the General had
nothing certain of them, till he saw them cover the Campania about him with
their numerous host. He himself had encamped upon the Plains of Cicora,
determining in that place to attend their motion. This was in Sept. 1620. The
Tartars, who had joined with the Turks upon this occasion, having taken some
Christian Prisoners, gained from them an account of the Christian strength,
which did not exceed 10000 effective men: whereupon they drew up within view of
them, with an Army of double their number, led by their Commander Cantimir
Mursa. A few hours after, they were followed by Skinder Bassa General of the
Turks and of the War, who pitched his Tents near those of his Confederates
within view of the Christians.

The Poles contained themselves within their Trenches, till a Squadron of
Cossacks who had the out-Guard, encountered that of the Tartars, whom after a
smart dispute, they forced to a Retreat; but being relieved by their own men,
they turned upon the Christians, pursuing them up to their very Trenches, where
they also being seasonably reinforced, opposed the prevailing Enemy with so
great Success, that having killed a great number, they chased them into their
Main Body; but giving no Quarter, did consequently take no Prisoners, and so
made no discovery of the Enemies strength; in so much that Zolkievius making
his computation by what appeared in view, and finding his Army cheerful upon
the Success of that days Action, resolved to put all upon the fottune of a
Battle. That night there came to the Turkish Camp Sultan Galga the Great Chams
Brother, with a fresh Army of 30000 choice Soldiers, whereof Zolkievius had no
knowledge; and therefore in order to the determinations of the day before, he
drew out his whole Army early the next morning, being the 19th of Sept. 1620.
and ranging them in Battalia, strengthened both Wings with Forts made of his
Wagons and Carriages, closed together on all sides, and filled with Foot and
Cannon, so that the Enemy could make no advantage of their numbers to infest
their Flanks. Skinder Bassa on the other side seeing the Order of the
Christians, drew his Army into a Line of Battle, placing only the Turks,
revolted Wallachians and Transylvanians in view, the Auxiliary Tartars being
placed out of sight, and commanded not to stir till a Signal was given them to
move, which should be when the Christians were engaged. The Poles had indeed
ordered their Reserves, but by an over-confidence advanced upon the Enemy from
without the protection of their Forts, contrary to the Generals Orders; which
the Enemy observing, the Tartars showed themselves on the Right Wing; and
extending that way, endeavored to get between the Christians Camp and the Rear
of their Army; which obliged Zolkievius to oppose against them his Reserves.
The Fight was Bloody and doubtful for two hours together; but the Main Battle
of the Poles having no Seconds (by reason of the diversion of their Reserves to
defend the Rear) oppressed by the often-repeated Charges of the Enemies fresh
Troops, however keeping within the protection of their Forts on the left Wing,
were no longer able to sustain the Impression of those multitudes that swarmed
upon them: they therefore faced about, and breaking through those Squadrons of
Tartars who had got between them and the Camp, made their retreat in reasonable
good order: the Barbarians being checked in their Pursuit by the Forts
beforementioned, which were still defended by the Poles. That on the Right
Wing was violently assaulted by the Enemy, who killed three hundred of the
Defendants, and took four of their Fieldpieces; neither had their Success
rested there, but that the Christians not wanting to themselves in that
extremity, advanced with their best Troops to their relief, forcing the
Infidels, after a hot dispute, to a confused Retreat. The Fort or Castle on the
other Wing was left unattempted; and night drawing on, the Enemy, after a kind
of drawn Battle, wherein there fell 1000 of theirs, and about six hundred of
the Christians, retreated to their Tents. The rest of that night and the
following day were past without any Attempt on either side. The Poles in the
mean time went to counsel, what was to be done upon this pressing occasion; which
being of an extraordinary nature, they were able to fall upon no probable
Resolutions. During this time of their Consultation, there was a report spread
about the Camp, of a purpose in the Chief Officers to steal away from the Army;
which put the Soldiers into confusion, till they were undeceived by the
generous professions of their Leaders, who vowed to live and die with them.
Zolkievius proposed in Council, that they should the next day try the fortune
of another Battle, wherein they might easily correct the errors of the former
day; and being now informed of their own and the Enemies strength, they could
better lay hold of such advantages as should occur, having failed more in
Conduct than Courage; and if the Success of the next day should not answer the
Attempt, they might then think of retiring toward the confines of their
Country, where they should be sure to meet with new Supplies for the further
prosecution of the War. The very mention of another Battle surprised many of
the Great Persons, especially Alexander Kalinowski, Duke Corecki, and Nicholas
Struse, three of the most eminent Lords in the Army, who maligning the Command
of Zolkievius, were the more apt to oppose his Counsels, especially in this
juncture, which must bring their lives to an apparent hazard. They therefore
absolutely declared against it, and that there was no safety but in a sudden
flight; by which means they might avoid death, or a Turkish Bondage, which was
yet more terrible: and being resolved to put the Counsels they had given in
execution that night, they took the first opportunity after the Watch was set,
to quit the Camp, proposing to themselves, that by the favor of the darkness
they might get over the River Prut, which covered the Rear of the Camp, before
the Enemy could take the Alarm of their departure. Gratian the Vayvod, for
whose preservation the War was undertaken, went away with them; and having by
the number of their Train and Dependants made a considerable Party, they
concluded themselves of strength able, by the advantage of the night, to break
through all opposition. There was a second Rumor spread about in the Army,
that the General himself was likewise gone; which bearing terror with it, the
inferior Officers and Soldiers were upon preparation for their flight also;
whereof he having speedy notice, mounted on Horsback, and causing many lighted
Torches to be carried before him, showed himself to his Soldiers; surrounded
the Quarters, spoke to every one he met, and animated all with his presence and
cheerfulness. He added, That he could not be guilty of so nefarious a Treason,
as to desert so many brave men, his Fellow Soldiers; they had served too long
under his Command, to conceive their General capable of so wretched an act, as
to sully all his Honor by so sordid a Retreat. That for his part he had no
other consideration for his life, but in order to their preservation: and since
some (he must confess, eminent Persons) had preferred that to all sense of
Honor, he was glad they were gone, hoping they had carried away with them that
infection of Cowardice, which might have tainted the whole Army. He also would
wish them a good Journey, provided they would tell the King and such of their
Friends that should enquire after them, that they had abandoned the Army and
their General in the Plains of Cicora, engaged against theirs and the Common
Enemy of Christianity. Zolkievius, though he had harangued his Soldiers in
these kind of Terms, and with a serene Countenance, yet had he much ado to
compose those minds which were agitated with terror and fear; who could not be
persuaded to return to their Duty, until a sense of the danger of their
disobedience obliged them to it. But they were wholly confirmed by the ill
Success of those who had deserted them, who by their degenerous flight had
hastened, not prevented their ruin. For in passing the River, which was rather
rapid than deep, many of them missing the Ford, were overwhelmed in it.
Kalinowski himself perished in the stream; and such as got over, at least most
of them, were knocked in the head by the Tartars, who had the Guard of that
Post. Gratian and his Moldavians being skilled in the Passage and ways, got
clear off; but being pursued by his ill Fate, had the recompense of his
infamous flight rewarded upon him by the perfidy of his own Servants, who
murdered their Lord, to possess themselves of what Treasure he had brought
away with him. The rest of the Party, after a vain Attempt to pass the River,
not daring to land on the other side, wet, weary, and confounded with shame,
came back for refuge to the Camp, which a while before they had forsaken as
desperate, reposing now all their safety in that of the Army. The Poles by
these losses, and the escape of 900 Cossacks (who by a more lucky fate than
that of their Fellows, had broke through a neglected Quarter of the Enemy
without opposition) being much weakened, and far unequal in strength to the
Enemy, and not daring to attempt another fight without manifest hazard to loose
all, resolved upon a retreat.

They had lost many of their Horses, and more died daily for want of Forage:
they were harrassed with duty, and had no hopes of relief from Poland, being
besieged by a barbarous Enemy, ready every moment (at least in their
apprehension) to storm their Camp: their Provisions were short, and no
possibility of Supplies from without, all the sides of their Camp being
invested, so that it was impossible for them to subsist for want of Food, in
expectation of succor from their own Country. Neither had the King, by reason
of the interruption of the Passages, received but one Letter from Zolkievius,
when it was too late, wherein he gave him an account of his condition, and how
he had been unseasonably abandoned by some of the Army. This was the state of
Affairs in the Camp, while the Enemy without lay close upon them; and computing
the distresses and disorders within, by the desertion of those that had left
them, they were much raised in their hopes, despising all proposals and
overtures of quitting the place: In so much that upon the 22th of September the
whole Turkish Army was drawn up before the Camp, threatening a general Assault,
unless they immediately surrendered at discretion. On the 23th they did the
like; and on the 26th the Galga or Prince of Tartary approaching nearer the
Trenches, was met by Duke Corecki upon Parole, who proposed to him an excessive
ransom for himself and some few with him; and descending to some particulars
for a rendition of the Camp, only that the Soldiers might march away with
their Swords, the Tartarian left him in scorn and anger, and clapping his hand
upon his Sable, bid him expect no other conditions than what the sharpness of
that would afford him. Zolkievius having thoroughly computed the state of his
Affairs, resolved to quit the Camp; and having ordered all things accordingly,
which took up three days time, being assisted in the method of his Design by
Martin Kasanowski an old experienced Colonel: and upon the 29th of September
that part of the Wall through which the Camp was to pass being opened, the Army
about Sunset began its march in the order following: On both sides a row of
Wagons, as it were chained together, five hundred paces in length, drawn by
their Horses, closed the Wings. The Front consisting likewise of linked
Wagons, took up three hundred paces; and the Rear being fenced with the like
Barricado, was (as also the other extremities of the Camp) fortified with
Cannon. The wounded, sick, Baggage, and all the best Horses of the Army, were
placed in the midst, while the Officers and Soldiers marched on the outside
of the Camp with Colors flying, and their Arms ready fixed to resist any
impression. The Tartars observing this order of the Poles, did at first think
they had drawn out to fight; but when they discerned the whole Camp to move,
and that no man stirred out of his Rank, they stood amazed at the Novelty; and
the night being so near, they durst do no more but send out small Parties to
observe their motion. And so they marched two Moldavish Miles that night
without any disorder, save what they received at the passage of a Lake; which
was supplied well enough, in respect they were not eagerly pressed upon by the
Enemy. On the 30th of September, Skinder Bassa assaulted the Camp on all sides
with his united Forces; but being repelled with great loss, they marched yet
two Moldavish Miles more that night. A Molvish Mile is more than a German.

On the first of October, the Camp being lodged near a great Pool, continued
there that whole day and the night following. The Infidels did extremely gall
them from the other side of the Water with their shot, and from the open side
by their Excursions; but were bravely repulsed with great slaughter of their
men. About Noon that day they prepared for a fresh Assault; but instead
thereof, sent a Trumpet to the Camp to demand their Turkish Interpreter, that
they might speak with him; which being granted, they only detained him, making
no Attempt that day.

October. 2. The Turks having the day before observed the Camp, stormed it with
greater fury than ever; and being repulsed, returned fifteen times to the
Assault. The Courage of the Defendants growing, by their being able to resist;
in so much that at last it did not only suffice them to make good their
Station, but that they followed the flying Enemy to a good distance from it; in
which Pursuit they took two Colors and a Piece of Ordnance, having killed
multitudes of their men. Toward Sunset they began their March, with their
shot about them; which must needs retard their pace; and yet they advanced
three of their Miles before Morning, being by computation fifteen English.

October. 3. Having gained the Advantage of a Rivulet and heights of Ground, they
easily repressed the Enemies fury, and took a Tartar Colors; they also eluded
an Ambush of the Enemy, and continued their Journey that night.

October. 4. They had strengthened their Camp by the Neighborhood of a River.
But Skinder Bassa considering that by these Marches by night, the Prey might
slip out of his hands; and sensible of the disgrace that would attend him to
suffer it, resolved to make an Attempt at the hazard of his whole Army; and
consequently gave order for a general Assault. But being the Tartars were not
so forward as he expected, having been so many times baffled, pretending the
difficulty by reason of the posture of the Camp, seated upon the advantage of
the River, by the help of which they would be able to bring more hands to the
defense of those parts that were assaultable; but the enraged Bassa impatient
of Arguments, turned hastily to his Janissaries: And are you also affrighted
with the greatness of the danger? said he, And will you suffer this handful of
men to slip out of your hands for want of a vigorous Attempt upon them? But
they cried out, He should not reproach but Command them, for nothing was
terrible to them but the anger of their General. The rest of the Turks swayed
by this Example, would be of the Party, prompted by an Ambition to do the
Service with their own hands, without the aid of the Tartars. And armed with
these Resolutions, they assaulted the Camp from all their Quarters; and pressed
on by a mixture of shame and fury, broke in upon it in one place, carrying
their terror into the Bowels of their Enemy, maugre all the resistance made
against them. All their former disputes and conflicts seemed but sport to this.
The Turks hurried on by their Principle of Predestination, added to a zeal of
gratifying their General, made havoc of their lives to preserve the footing
they had gained in the Camp, doing more than men in prosecution of the
advantage. The Christians armed with a native courage, inflamed yet by their
despair, did more than they: for despising their multitudes, and resolving to
conquer or die, they made a charge upon those who had entered, with a fury
suitable to the constitution of their Affairs; and forcing them back, and upon
those that followed, made them contribute to their own disorders, in such sort,
that not being able to rally, they were repelled with a great slaughter. And
having cleared themselves from this violent storm, they continued their march
that evening along the Banks of the River for three Miles, the enemy coasting
them on the other side with an equal pace.

October. 5. The Tartars having got before them the day before, lay directly in
their way; but they carrying with them the resolution of surmounting every
difficulty, and grown skilful in this new kind of March, broke through all the
resistance made against them; though not without some disorder in their Rear,
occasioned by the fears of the Waggon-men, which rendered them less exact and
faithful in their charge. But by the valor and conduct of Zemberg, who
commanded in that part, the Enemy was repulsed; and the disorder being
repaired, they performed a March of two Miles that day.

October. 6. They still advanced, and like a wedge of Iron divided their passage
through the numerous Squadrons of the Enemy, who clouded their very sight with
their showers of Shot and Arrows: but seeing they could make no impression upon
them, they burnt up and destroyed all their grass and forage in their way,
whereby they were extremely incommodated, and by reason whereof, and their
often Skirmishes, they were that day able to march but one Moldavish Mile.

The Poles still followed the Banks of the River Tire, with a design to gain
Mohilow, a safe Retreat after their tedious March. They were constrained to
avoid the nearest way thither, as mountainous and boggy, besides great Woods in
it, which would obstruct them in the manner of their motion; choosing for the sake
of a more even passage, to go about by such a way as brought them within a Mile
of their desired Harbor. The Camp was in perfect order; and the Enemy tired
with a repetition of fruitless Attempts and labors, had forborne to press upon
them, being content to wait on their motion by a few Scouts only. The Poles
about the evening of this seventh day of their March, continued their Journey
according to their former Method; and meeting in their Passage with some Barns
stored with great quantities of Hay and Corn, many of them, but without order,
ran to the Bait, to supply themselves with Provisions for their
well-nigh-starved Horses. In the mean time, the Van of the Camp began to march,
without calling in their Forragers, or giving notice, as they ought and used,
to the Rear, of their motion. The Rear for want of the accustomed Sign, being
thus separated from the Main Body, was seized on by a sudden horror and pannick
fear; which having laid hold on some, was like Wildfire, carried through all.
Their apprehensions were various, but all upon the account of fear, heightened
by the darkness and imaginary noises, concluding their Van was cut off, and
that the Sword was at their Throats. The same plague being spread over the rest
of the Army, infected the whole in a moment with its contagion: whereupon the
Carters, Waggon-men, Pedees, and Servants employed about the Carriages,
unloosed the Horses, to serve themselves by flight upon them; so that the whole
Fabric and Machine of the Camp being dissolved, they could move no further.
There was yet another cause (at least contributary) to these Evils. Upon the
departure of Gratian and other Fugitives from the Camp at Cicora, the Raskality
of the Army, with a mixture of Soldiers, robbed and plundered their Tents and
Lodgings; whereof the Officers in that juncture durst not be over-inquisitive:
but being got on the Banks of the River Tire, they began to speak of it; and
Koninkspolski the Lieutenant General had that very evening (improvidently
enough) let fall some threatening expressions concerning it. The number of the
guilty being many, they began to think of their proper safety, and the avoiding
that punishment, which if they stood to it would fall upon them; they therefore
in great numbers fled away from their friends as well as their foes. These
wretches having begun a Tumult upon this occasion, the same was seconded by the
dividing of the Camp, as is before declared. The confusion was so great, that
Zolkievius and the chief Officers about him could not be heard; the variety of
noises, with the apprehension of the danger, and the darkness of the night,
rendering the Army deaf to all his Commands and Orders. The Tartars being by
their Scouts advertised of these Tumults, failed not to hasten thither; and
working upon the advantage given them by the Poles, prepared to it by their own
fears, fell in among them with shouts and terror. Zolkievius had Commanded,
that for the better safety of the Quarters, and encouraging of the Soldiers,
all men should quit their Horses, and march on foot; wherein himself was the
first example; which was the reason that so many of the Chief Commanders fell,
and were taken in that encounter: for when the Rout was become so universal,
that all resistance was to no purpose, they perished upon the place, for want
of Horses to carry them off, except such as escaped by swimming, and so got
away. Zolkievius his Son, with his Nephew and Strusius, the two former being
weak of their Wounds, and forsaken by their Coachmen, were made Prisoners, and
presented to the Tartarian Galga. Zolkievius had before taken an eternal
Farewell of his Son, and then having made a short Confession to his Ghostly
Father, was lost in the confusion, but found dead next morning upon the skirts
of the Camp: some say, he caused himself to be killed by one of his Followers,
a Cossack, choosing rather to perish with his Army, than fall into the Enemies
hands, or survive his own glory. But the Wounds in his Sword-hand, on his Face,
and Breast, and a Tartarian laid dead along by him, seem to declare that he was
killed fighting. However it was, Skinder Bassa caused his Head to be cut off
and fixed upon a Pike, exposing it for that day to the view of his whole Army;
and afterward to be sent to the Grand Seignior his Master, as a Testimony of
his Victory. The Lieutenant General, Corecki, the young Zolkievius, with the
other Prisoners of Quality, were sent to Constantinople, where after a three
years imprisonment they were ransomed, and returned to their own Country. And
thus, like a Ship after a long voyage sunk in the harbor, Zolkievius, having
through all the accidents of his Life proceeded regularly from the Quality of a
private Soldier to the Supreme Command of an Army, was raised by his own
Virtue to those Honors which rendered him eminent in those parts of the World.
Neither was there any thing wanting to complete his Glory, besides the Success
of this Retreat, which was reduced to that point, that there wanted but two
hours space to render him eminent amongst the most illustrious Captains of
Antiquity.

It is held of all hands, that the most difficult part of Military Service is
in the right conduct of a Retreat; and it may be judged hard measure to deny
Zolkievius the Honor of having acquitted himself well in that particular,
since he had brought it within view of the Harbor: but as the Honor of the
Success would have been entirely his had he prospered, so his Memory must be
patient of this Cloud drawn over the luster of it, by the failing of some mean
Officer in omitting to give the Signal of his March. But here did he fall, and
was laid upon the Bed of Honor in the extremity of his Age; refusing to live,
when he could not do it gloriously. Skinder Bassa, either grown uneasy by the
accession of this Victory, or that some Great Ones at Court were unworthily
emulous of his Glory, had contracted many Enemies near the Grand Seignior, who
upon all occasions did him ill offices: but finding that Infection to work
slowly, they corrupted some of his nearest Servants, who by the Infusion of
Poison in his Drinks, destroyed him suddenly; so that he did not long survive
the unfortunate Zolkievius: being in this more unfortunate, that he died in the
quality of a Criminal, and that no certain account can be given of him, but
that he died in the year 1620.

And having by this digression given the Reader a short survey of this great
Action, which wanted only one moment more of Success to render it the most
glorious that any Age had produced; we will return to the continuation of our
History where we left, which was the condition of the Polish Garrison in the
Palace of Musko; who being grown weary with their unprofitable strivings, had
taken a rise from their ill Pay, to propose Terms for their dismission. Their
General Goziowski used all his Arts to quiet them; and having the Treasure of
the Empire in his possession, he resolved to Sacrifice that to their Avarice.
There was amongst other things in the Treasury a Statue of our SAVIOVR, of the
bigness of a man, weighing C C C lib. of massive Gold; which the Soldiers
mangled into parcels, not making their dividend so exactly by Rule, but that
every one got what he could. Basilius Zuiski, in his short Reign, had destroyed
the Twelve Apostles, being composed of the same Mettle and largeness. And this
part of the Polish Army despairing of relief, were become careless of that
Representation of Christ which by the practice of the Church of Rome, they were
used to worship. Their General having by this and other dividends out of the
Treasury appeased, though not satisfied, his Army for the present though what
by an equal estimate might have sufficed all they bargained for, but a^ part of
their Recompense; he was industrious in all his other Contrivances for their
satisfaction, as well as safety. H^ caused counterfeit Letters to be brough^
him from the King of Poland, with Promises of a powerful relief in short time;
and that his Soldiers might not be disused to beat the Muskovites, he made
frequent advantageous Sallies upon them. There was in that part of the City
which had been wasted by the fire, a house in which the Magazine of Salt had
been laid up, which having escaped the fury of that merciless Element, was
become a considerable Commodity to both Parties. It lay more under the Command
of the Poles than the City; but Gariowski, because he would have somewhat for
his Army to do, forbore to bring it in to his Garrison but as he had daily use
for it; this gave his men constant employment: for what between their own wants
and those of the Enemy, they had perpetual Skirmishes; wherein for the most
part they came off with the advantage, but that the wasting of their men was an
incurable evil, for which they had no remedy. Gariowski made use of all his
Arts, and had recourse to yet other Finesses: he laid a train for the
destruction of Lepanow the Russian General, by causing Letters to be dispersed
in his name into the several Provinces, requiring them to Massacre all the
Dunensian Cossacks in their Quarters, as designing a Revolt, and too
passionately promoters of the interest of Demetrius, to which they had always
adhered. One of these Packets being put into Sidorus his hand (he was General
of the Cossacks) so terrified him (that believing what he feared) and too
sensible of the danger, he resolved to prevent it; in order whereto, having
consulted the Principal Officers in so weighty an affair, they all concluded to
anticipate their own Fate by Lepanow's fall; and immediately thereupon mutined;
their Soldiers transported with the apprehension of their imaginary peril:
whereupon Lepanow running to appease the Tumult, being no way warned of his own
danger, was overpowred, and slain upon the place. The General being thus
removed, the Muskovites gave the Command of their Army to Trubecius; who being
more wary of the Artifices of Gaziowski, which by this time had taken air,
caused some of his Emissaries, who were found tampering afresh with the
Cossacks, to be seized upon; and to render the cheat more public, had them put
to death with exquisite Torments: And after the Kings departure from Smolensko,
applied himself so vigorously in prosecution of the Siege, pressing so hard
upon the Poles, that he shut them up close within their Fortifications. And now
they were out of all hope of any relief, and so closely pent up, that they
began to want every thing necessary for their subsistence. They endured these
hardships seven full weeks, after which time they were delivered by a Miracle
on the 15th of August, as one of their Priests had foretold. Before they were
reduced to this narrow compass, they had sent all their Boys and Servants out,
to the number of betwixt three and four thousand upon a Party, for forage.
These by the time of their return, found all the Avenues shut up. At first they
were upon thoughts of retiring and shifting for themselves, until detained with
the shame of abandoning their Masters without attempting their relief, they
took new courage and resolutions to endeavor to force the Passage. Being thus
animated, having some Soldiers amongst them, they drew up into as large a
front as they could, extending their Wings to a great distance, and advancing
up within sight of the Leaguer upon that side where the Moska runs, put
themselves into a posture to pass it; which they did without opposition, and
were received into the Fortress with the acclamations of the Besieged, and the
congratulations of their Masters. The Russians had been surprised with this
unexpected relief, as they termed it; and having had no room left in their
apprehensions for the exercise of their courage, concluded that the whole force
of Poland was at their backs; which obliged them to quit their Trenches on that
side of the Town, and leave an open and uninterrupted Passage for the Boys to
enter at. The Besieged taking the opportunity of their Enemies fears, made a
seasonable Sally, whereby they reduced all those Forts and Outworks which had
been formerly taken from them, enlarging their Quarters to a more commodious
distance. But all this being considered by them but as a small intermission of
their miseries, and no solid Supply able to sustain the force of all Muskovy,
they dispatched Letters to their King in Poland with an account of their
condition, upbraiding his carelessness of their safety; and declaring, that if
by the 6th of Jan. their Prince were not sent to them, they would quit the
place, and come back to Poland to require their Arrears. The Chief Officers of
the Polish Army, by a misunderstanding amongst themselves, contributed
unhappily to the Service of the Russians. Potocki Palatine of Brachlaw was left
Governor and Commander of the Forces about Smolensko; but he could not suffer
that Charles Chodkievicius Lieutenant General of the Lithuanian Army should be
sent to prosecute the Relics of the Muskovitish War, as to the possession of
the Imperial Seat, toward the gaining of which he had contributed little; and
reckoning upon this as a Design fit to be reserved for his own Conduct, he
managed all his Counsels accordingly: and though Chodkievits was, maugre all
his contrivements, marked out for the Service of Musko, yet the enraged Potocki
perverted some of his Chief Officers, and as it happened there was a
concurrence of Causes to thwart the Polish Interest: for upon the 15th of
August, it seemed more than probable that the Muskovites being hotly pursued,
might have been driven out of the City, but that an old Colonel amongst the
Poles considering if they should improve this Success to the utmost, there
would be nothing left for their General Chodkievits to do (upon whom this
Colonel had a particular dependence, and it seems consulted his Glory more than
the Common Good) and therefore dissuaded his Party from pressing their Fortune
upon an apprehension of some supposed dangers. In the mean time Chodkievits
being designed for the relief of the place, marched thither with an Army; but
the fame of his severe Discipline flying thither before him, and augmented by
the envy of his ill-willers, begot a very great prejudice in the minds of the
Soldiers against him, and an aversion for him; so that they upon his arrival
disputed his Commands, and looking upon all his Proposals with an eye of
diffidence, would not be engaged upon any more Sallies; but as if they had
placed a Religion in the performance of their former Letter to the King, they
quitted the Palace upon the sixth of Jan. as they had before declared.

They left indeed the Sapihan Regiment in Garrison behind them, but upon the
Temptation of vast advantages. These had the rest of the Crown-Jewels put into
their hands, as caution for their pay: which Jewels consisted of two Crowns of
Gold richly beset with Jems, a Scepter of Unicorns-Horn likewise gloriously
adorned with Jewels; two whole Unicorns-horns, and another half cut; the Great
Dukes Saddle embroydered with Pearl and Gold; two Hats wrought with Diamonds,
with the Scepter and Golden Apple, both enriched with precious Stones of huge
value. And having ordered the Affairs of the Fort at this rate, they chose one
Joseph Cieclinski for their General, and appointing him a new Council of War,
they quitted the place, notwithstanding the Kings Commands, and the entreaties
and threats of their Officers to the contrary, and marched directly into
Poland, being 7000 effective Horse; and being arrived at Leopolis, made that
their Headquarters: and distributing their Troops into the several Palatinates
of the lesser Poland, they seized upon the Kings Domains, and the
Ecclesiastical Revenues, which were very great, under pretense of their Arrears
due from the Commonwealth. But to return to Musko which they had quitted; the
Sapihan Regiment which they had left there, was reinforced and reassured by the
access of fresh Troops brought thither by the two Konickspolski's from
Smolensko; but they were followed by an envy amongst the Great Officers, as
their evil Genius. Potocki led on by his Ambition, which had an influence upon
all his Councils, having suffered affairs to run up to a pitch of desperation,
judged it a fit time for him to step in to the preservation of the place; in
order whereto, he sent his Kinsman Nicholas Strusius with part of the
Smolenskian Foot, as most proper for the Service in Garrison. The Passage along
the River Moscha was kept open all this time, whereby they were able to receive
in their supplies of Men and Victuals in spite of the Besiegers; but their
divisions and emulations within growing up to a height, gave the Russians the
opportunity to perfect their Line by blocking up that Passage. Not long after,
the Sapihan Regiment consisting of 4000 Horse, debauched likewise by the same
spirit of Mutiny, forsook Chodkiowits, and choosing one John Zalinski to Command
them by the Title of Marshal, took the opportunity of breaking through the
Enemies Leaguer, and marching into Lithuania, seated themselves at Brestia,
where they fixed; dividing the neighbour-Palatinates, the Kings Revenues, and
the Ecclesiastical Incomes as a subsistence for themselves, till their Arrears
were paid. The Commonwealth of Poland being provoked by these repeated
insolences of their Soldiers, failed not to charge their King with the causes
of them, in not permitting his Son to go to Musko, which he was now inclined
to; and though dilatory in his nature, resolved now to bring him thither in
Person. The Confederate Horse which had formerly desired Vladislaws with so
much heat, and in which the King confided most, refused now to stir, and change
their repose and affluence of all things, for penury and new toils. Sigismund
however, with what Forces he could get together, came to Vilna the Metropolis
of Lithuania, where two German Regiments of Foot were newly arrived; from
thence he went by slow Marches to Smolensko, where encountering with new
difficulties, he was at a stand for the prosecution of his Design: for the
Horse which quartered there (his best hopes) refused to march with him till
their Arrears were paid them. The dispute was unseasonable to the Kings
Affairs, who wanted Moneys to answer their demands, and strength to exact their
Obedience. He therefore had recourse to entreaties, and the temptation of fair
Promises (not only Arrears, but Rewards) which having no impression upon their
hardened natures, the King was forced to march with his Guards only, and a few
Light Horse; though he was after overtaken by twelve hundred of those Horse,
who, persuaded by some Officers most in credit with them, not to expose their
King now upon the Crisis of his Affairs, but to signify to the world by that
Act of Obedience both their Loyalty and Courage. These being overcome by such
Arguments, marched after the King to Viasna, midway betwixt Smolensko and
Musko, where Chodkiovits also with his Forces joined the Royal Army.

It happened (and I would not omit a circumstance that carried noise with it)
that the Portcullis of the Kings Gate at Smolensko through which Sigismund was
to go, fell down at that instant, filling up the Passage with its bulk, in so
much that it could not be removed by any force, so that he was forced to turn
back and go another way; which was esteemed by some as an inauspicious Omen,
that the Royal way to the Empire of Musko should not be opened by him. During
these Traverses at Court and in the Camp, the Siege is pressed on at Musko with
more fervor than before. Chodkiewits weakened with the departure of the Sapihan
Horse, could not suffice to hinder their approaches, wanting Foot to oppose
their raising of Sconces and Redoubts, wherewith they very much straightened the
Castle. However, he did in spite of them bring in, by the Aid of his Horse,
supplies of Provision for the Garrison that whole Summer; and in September,
though all ways of communication were obstructed, and the Garrison reduced to
extreme want, he forced the Guards by that way which he had formerly entered,
and brought in a small quantity of Provisions; which bearing no proportion with
the necessities of the place, he made a new supply of four hundred Wagons
laden with all manner of necessaries, which he attempted to put into the Castle
by the same way of the River, where the Muskovites opposed him with their whole
Power. The dispute was long and obstinate, where the Polish Horse were much
inconvenienced by the disadvantages of rubbish, and other difficulty that
hindered them to effect what they had so bravely intended. Strusius was blamed
for not having advanced with his Foot to the rescue of the Horse which fought
so well; but whatever the fault was, all hopes of Conquering the Russian Empire
vanished with this disgrace; and all the fruit of so many Victories, of so much
Blood, and of so much Treasure as had been expended in this War, was lost in
the misfortune of that day: for before Chodkievicius could gather new
Provisions, and open a Passage to the Castle now more carefully fortified and
warded than formerly; the Besieged having consumed every thing that was edible,
eaten all their Horses, Cats, Dogs, Rats, Mice, Leather, Covers of Books and
Trunks, and whatever else they could devise to get into their Stomachs,
proceeded to humane flesh, ready to feed upon one another, as if they had
preferred that to a surrender: but the latter prevailed at last over their
obstinacy, and they yielded themselves and the place up at discretion.

The King was at Viasna when news of this fatal Surrender reached him; and being
by that time become sensible of this great blow to his Affairs and Interest, he
consulted what was to be done; whether to retire as from a baffled design, or
to advance further, upon a computation that the Muskovites being yet in
disorder, might be overawed by the presence of him and his Army, and might
thereby be induced to receive his Son for Emperor; at least he proposed to
himself an advantageous Peace: and this latter Counsel prevailing, he continued
his March till he arrived at Fedorouscum; and Commanding the Smolenskian Horse
to proceed forward, they advanced to the very Walls of Musko; but instead of
any Parley, or other address to them, they were received with shot from the
City, and a furious Salley, which obliged them to draw off to places of more
safety. The King was likewise disappointed in his expectation, the Country
standing upon their Guards, as having an Enemy in their Bowels; carried all
their Provisions into Garrisons and fenced Places; in so much that what with
that, and the impressions of the Winter, he was much distressed for Forage for
his Horse; and being obliged to lie in the Field, it was more than his Army
could endure in that season. The Poles enraged at this evil posture of their
Affairs, and to revenge the Indignity, as they called it, assaulted the Town of
Voloc, but in vain; so that having no choice left them, they returned back by
the way of Smolensko into Poland. And thus ended the Expedition of King
Sigismund, the Election of Vladislaws, and the unfortunate Endeavors of the
two Demetrius's, the causes of so many Vicissitudes and Calamities.

The Muskovites being by the retreat of the Poles restored to a state of
quietness, consulted the settlement of their Empire, by such an Election as
might best tend to it: and having looked about them for a fit Person to place
upon the Throne of their shattered Dominions, the universal Suffrage fell upon
Michael Federowicz, Son to the Patriarch of Rostock, who was at that time
detained Prisoner in Marieburg-Castle; Him they Crowned with one of the Diadems
which they found amongst the Rapines of the Poles; fought constantly for him,
and forced the Enemy, after many and Bloody Conflicts, to abdicate their
pretended Dominion over them, and to emancipate them from the Sacrament of that
Oath which they had Sworn to Prince Vladislaws. That same Winter, to strike at
the Root of Demetrius his Pretensions, they attempted his Remnant enquartered
about Caluga. The Cossacks being overcome by the Muskovites Gold, delivered the
unfortunate Marina with her Son into their hands; who, to destroy all Color of
future Claims from that Interest, made the Water her Grave, thrusting her and
her Son under the Ice, into that destroying Element, where she and her hopes
sunk together; as if nothing less than an Ocean could suffice to satisfy the
thirst of her Ambition. I am not ignorant that Kobierzickius in his History of
Vladislaws delivers, that she was strangled by the Great Dukes Command, and her
Son hanged. However it was, she was a Lady of an immense Spirit, and greatness
of Mind above her Sex. All other considerations in her, gave place to her
aspiring thoughts, which swayed her as the only Pilot of her Soul. The desire
of Empire did so eat out her joys, that she was seldom happy; and though her
Misfortunes were not of a common rank, yet the greatness of her Constancy as
well as Courage, seemed to brave them. She abhorred the thought of being
treated in her lowest Condition at a less rate than as Empress: upon which
score it was observed, that she slighted the Letters of a near Kinsman, who
coming with King Sigismund into Muskovy, judged it fit to advise her, that she
should cast her self upon the Kings Clemency: But she reflecting upon the
omission of her Titles (which it is like her Kinsman forbore upon an account of
freedom, and not to perplex his Paper with hard Names) answered, She did not
doubt, but that God the Avenger of Injuries, would be yet propitious to her
afflictions: She said nothing of the King, as not approving of his coming into
Muskovy; but complaining of the omission of her Titles, added with her own
hand, That what God had illuminated, could not be obscured; and that the Sun,
however sometimes overcast with thick Clouds, could never be totally deprived
of his light: and Signed, The Empress Marina. Some time after, she rejected
with scorn the offer that the King made her Husband and her, of the fair
Governments of Sambore and Grodners, provided they would not oppose him in his
Conquest of the Empire, sending him this answer: That the King should deliver
Cracovie to Demetrius, and he might in return receive Warsovie from his Great
Duke. But she is now overwhelmed in another Deluge besides that of her grief.
And the brave, though unconstant Zarucki, who had adhered to her Fortunes,
falling likewise into the hands of the Great Duke, was impalled; shutting up
the Tragedy of his Mistress by his own death.

And now the Competitorship upon the account of the Blood Royal seemed to have
extinguished: but as if to be Demetrius were to be immortal, and that he had
not been slain, but rescued yet again; an inconsiderable Scrivener, by what
inducement swayed to it is unknown, gave himself out to be Demetrius the Son of
John Basilius; and that besides his deliverance at Vglecz and Musko, he had yet
this farther Miracle of his preservation at Caluga. The Fellow being of a ready
Tongue, and subtle, got together some hundreds of men, such whom the War had
indisposed to any thing of labor. And to these there flocked all the
Vagabonds, Bandites, and idle persons, the excrements of their late
Dissentions, that proposed to themselves any advantage from Rapine and Plunder.
His numbers being by this means increased to the bulk of a considerable Party,
he caused a Manifest to be published of his Birth and several Deliverances,
invited all his Loyal Subjects (as he styled them) to that Obedience which they
owed to him as Great Duke of Muskovy, the only surviving Issue of John
Basilius. And to put the more countenance upon his Imposture, he marched with
his Force to Novogrod, from thence to Jama, and on to Iwanogrod, where he was
by the giddy multitude received, honored, and owned as the undoubted Demetrius
Great Duke of Muskovy. Having proceeded successfully in this great Attempt, he
assumed yet more state: and to give a becoming Reputation to his pretensions,
he dispatched an Embassy to Sweden, to solicit aids against the Treachery and
ill-dealing of his Subjects, who contrary to all Law Humane and Divine, had set
up another upon his Throne. King Charles surprised with this Address, could not
satisfy his Wonder, not ceasing to admire how that Demetrius who had been so
often slain, should now survive, to demand his assistance. But resolving not to
be abused or imposed upon, he dispatched Petreius as his Ambassador to
Iwanogrod, with Letters of Credence, and Power to conclude; but first exactly
to inform himself of the truth of all things: And if he found this Person to be
that real Demetrius, who had been acknowledged, Crowned, and Sworn to at Musko,
then to give him all encouragement of Supplies for the regaining of his Rights,
and bringing his Subjects to their due Obedience. Petreius being arrived at
Iwanogrod, could get no Audience from this new Duke: for he being advertised
that the Ambassador had formerly seen the murdered Demetrius both in Poland
and Musko, would by no means admit of him into his Presence; but pretending an
indisposition in point of health, referred him to his Council to treat with
him, and that he himself (hoping he might in a few days be fit for business)
would ratify the Treaty in Person. The Swedish Ambassador answered, that the
King his Master desired to enter into a strict League with the Great Duke, and
had therefore given him some particular Commands, which he was to communicate
to his Highness in Person; but since it was not consistent with his health to
receive him into his presence (he being restrained by his Instructions not to
entrust his Masters Secrets to any other) would return for Sweden; not
doubting, but if the Great Duke should think fit to send his Ambassador
thither, but that the King his Master would be ready to comply with all his
Honorable Designs and Desires. And thus Petreius having ended his Negotiation,
left the place; gathering from the refusal of Demetrius to admit him into his
Presence, and from other Observations made by him, that he was only a
fictitious Person, who had assumed a Name and Title wherewith he had nothing to
do.

But he having by this time got together a Force, which might well enough bear
the reputation of an Army, took the Field; and upon the 24th of June faced
Pleschow, a considerable place; which being summoned in the Name of the Great
Duke Demetrius, was upon the point of surrendering; when the Muskovitish Army
advancing, he made a hasty retreat, leaving behind him his Cannon, and most of
his Baggage; and being followed by them, he hardly escaped to Iwanogrod. The
Russians having with so much ease, and without a blow, dispersed this new Army,
careless of prosecuting the success further, retired. Whereupon the Inhabitants
of Plescow dispatched their Deputies to Iwanogrod, with an humble offer to this
Pseudo-Demetrius of their Town and Services, as their Prince and Sovereign. He
overjoyed with this unexpected Success, went immediately away for Plescow with
the Ambassadors; where he was received with all the imaginable demonstrations
of Joy, Honor, and Obedience. He transported with this Progress in his Affairs,
and not capable of improving the same to his advantage, gave himself up to all
manner of licentiousness and lust, violating many of the Prime Citizens Wives
and Daughters; and proceeding from one degree of Debauchery to another, he let
loose the Reins to his Party, who by his Example committed all manner of
Insolences and Villainies upon the people. The Plescovites tired out, and
provoked with the barbarous behavior of their Prince, took Arms, beat his
Guards, and forced him to fly the City for his safety. The Cossacks seeing him
thus forsaken of all, resolved also to leave him; but some of them more
advised, considered of seizing upon his Person, whereby they might the better
make their own peace. He advertised of this Design, being well mounted,
clapped Spurs to his Horse; and had undoubtedly escaped their hands, but that
he was overtaken by an Arrow out of a Cossack-Bowe, which wounded him in the
shoulder. Hereupon he was taken; and being bound hand and foot, was sent to
Pleskow, and from thence to Musko, where he was tied by a great Chain to one of
the Gates, remaining there an object of scorn and reproach to all the world,
until the Coronation of Michael Federowicz, by whose Command this last
Pseudo-Demetrius, the fictitious Son of Jo. Basilius, was hanged in public:
This Mushrome, after it had but peeped up, expiring with shame and infamy.

THE END.

