The CASE and TRIAL of Capt. ROBERT NORWOOD, now prisoner in Newgate, truly
and impartially stated, and published for satisfaction of my allied friends,
and very many others desirous thereof.

Together with some Observations upon the Law and its Professors, very worthy a
most serious consideration.

Both which, (with a brief Answer, by way of Postscript, to a secret Calumny
charged upon me) are here presented to the view and judgment of the whole
Nation: Which, if duly considered, with the shrot Discourse annexed, will
clearly discover where England 's Death and Life lies.

IN March last, some Gentlemen with whom I had formerly held society, coming to
my house to speak with me, did declare that they heard or understood of some
erroneous Opinions which I should hold, and speak forth to the people; at which
they seemed to be offended. Whereupon, I told them I was not ashamed, but
should be ready to give an account, not only of my Faith, but of my Life and
Conversation also, in Westminster Hall, or at Paul's Cross, to themselves, or any
other Gentlemen who should reasonably, upon a fair and just account, desire the
same. Some time after that, I was desired to give them a meeting at Ab-Church
London; which (as to so many pri(...)e and particular Gentlemen) I promised I
would; and accordingly did. And lest there should be any mistakes
misapprehensions, or misconstructions of words, but that it might stand to be
tried and examined by all men; I put it in writing read it publicly to the
whole Assembly, and then gave it them, with my Hand subscribed thereto: unto
which was annexed some Queries, whereunto I desired an Answer in writing from
M. Shidrack Simpson their called-Pastor, on that day seven-night; or else that
some other might in love, peace, and quietness, have liberty to give answer
thereunto, as my printed Papers testify. Which request would not be received,
neither has himself, or any other of the Clergy given answer thereunto, to
this day: but in stead of answering the Questions, he (my self being not there
present) excommunicates me. Whereupon, within four or five days after, I sent
him a Letter, in which was enclosed another Paper, signifying my desire to have
him prove those things which he calls Error and Blasphemy, to be so, and that
from Scripture or Reason; wherein I also promised Repentance, and public
Recantation thereof, in case he should so prove them; as also, my earnest
desire of answer to those and the former Queries proposed, in reference not
only to my own, but many others satisfaction: one whereof was this, verbatim,
What the true and very hell is spoken of in Scripture, and you from God or
Christ (as you say) so much promise to, and threaten the people with: the very
right and true knowledge whereof, is of the greatest and highest concernment to
be clearly made known and discovered to the people, of all other things; all
other things being but as it were accessaries thereunto; therefore must
certainly be made known to you, of you be what you say you are: yet it is very
much to be feared, that very few of you have the true knowledge either of the
one or the other; but that most fancy both the one and the other as the
Papists their Purgatory, and the Poets their Elizian fields, is abundantly
manifest: both God and the Devil, both Death and Life, both Heaven and Hell,
being very much nearer to us then we are aware of. Whether this be the denial
of the things or no, I commit to the judgment of all men. As also in the 20
and 21 pages of my Book entitled Parson Simpson's Excommunication
excommunicated, where speaking of the Clergy, you shall find it thus: Let me
tell them this of a truth, and that which they shall assuredly find one day,
that except they break off their sins by true and unfeigned repentance their
lying, their hypocrisy, their covetousness their railing and persecuting, they
shall to hell, and be tormented day and night with the devils, yea and remain
there until they have paid the utmost farthing. You have also in several other
places of the said book, both heaven and hell according to the Scripture fully
asserted by me. In my Letter before spoken of, I wrote to him that if he would
promise me answer within some certain days therein prefixed (the number whereof
I do not now remember) I should forbear to publish my second Paper: which he
not doing I then made publication thereof to the world, with this Assertion,
That if I proved not him and the rest of the Clergy of England generally, who
cry out of others for heresy and blasphemy the greatest deceivers or
falsifiers of the truth, and blasphemers (as themselves call it) in the Nation,
let me die the death. I am the same still, and shall be ready upon my life to
prove and make good the same against them, whenever I shall in a fair and just
way be called to it. Which I speak only out of the love I have unto this
Nation, and the desire of its peace; which cannot be, whilst they have any
power or influence in, upon, and over the same: they have been, they are the
chief occasioners of all the bloodshed that has been, and is yet likely to be,
in England, nay in all Nations.

Some few weeks after this, I obtained a Copy of the Form of his
Excommunication, with his Arguments against my Positions; to which I very
shortly after gave answer in Print: which Discourse I dedicated to the
Parliament. Which said Book and Papers, any who desires further satisfaction in
the things discoursed may have them at M. Giles Calvert's Bookseller, at the
sign of the black Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's.

Not many days after this, Tho. Andrews, the Cities Lord Mayor, and one of the
said Simpsons Society, who by his Place and Office is more especially bound to
keep, defend, and preserve the Laws of the Nation, the Liberties and Freedoms
of the people inviolate; yet he, contrary thereunto, signs and sends a Warrant
to bring me before the Bench at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey; no fault,
crime, or misdemeanour being specified in the said Warrant: the illegality
whereof was then and there declared by the Lord Chief Justice Rolls and Baron
Thorp: by which act he is perjured, and ought of right to give an account to
the Commonwealth for his mal-administration of Justice in this and several
other particulars of far higher weight and concernment, which I now forbear to
instance in.

At my being brought thither, there were only these two Articles found and
read against me, viz. That the soul of man is of the essence of God, and, That
there is neither heaven nor hell but what is here. The Lord Chief Justice Rolls
asked me what I said to it and whether I spoke those words or no. My answer
was, That there had been diverse and several Disputes at my house about those
things; and what my own opinion or judgment was therein, I had made it public
in Print, and presented several Members of the Parliament and Council of State
therewith. And I farther said, that if I had said them very words as they were
there laid down, yet was it not contrary unto, or against any act of
Parliament. To which neither the Lord Chief Justice, nor any other of the
Bench, gave answer; but there I stood some space of time, whilst they fell upon
other business. At length, I asked the Lord Chief Justice what I should do in
the case, being thus like a Rogue, Murderer, or Felon forcibly and violently
taken out of my house, and that, now I was brought thither, no breach of any
Law whatsoever was found against me. The Lord Chief Justice fell again upon
other business. Whereupon, I asked him again what I must do in the case; and
desired that he, as he was Lord Chief Justice of England, would advise me. He
answered, You must (I think) put in security to answer it the next Sessions. To
which I replied, I was forcibly, suddenly, and violently taken out of my house,
and brought hither; and I have no friend here. Whereupon, M. Recorder Steel
very civilly replied, that I was very well known, and my own word was
sufficient. Whereupon, my own word was taken to appear the next Sessions; which
I accordingly did. Then I found an Indictment drawn against me, with much
addition of words, and them laid down in another form then before, and much
different from my true sense and meaning. Then I was compelled to put in
security to appear the Sessions following, to answer to that Indictment.
Accordingly I did appear: where, that morning they had appointed for my
hearing, appeared also Judge Nicols, who, as he came not all the Sessions
before that morning, so he went away again as soon as he had given me my
dispatch. Before I came to answer, I demanded to have my prosecutors bound
over, according to Law, to make good the several Charges laid down in the
Indictment against me. Which by him was refused. I told him, I should then make
no answer at all, except that he would there declare that the Bench, upon my
requiring, were not bound thereunto by Law. He answered, No. Whereupon I
replied, and told him, How then, or of whom should I expect to receive
satisfaction, for my molestation, injury, and charge, in case the Crimes should
not be proved against me? His answer was, that it was now in this case, as it
was formerly in the Kings time: he that then prosecuted for the King, was not
bound over; neither is it necessary that he who prosecutes for the State
should; for there was but only the change of the name: before, it was in the
name of the King; and now, in the name of the State. Here (Gentlemen) you have
the judgment and opinion of a learned and reverend Judge given upon the Bench
at the Sessions what the Nation has run so many hazards, spent so much
treasure, lost so many precious lives for, made so many fatherless and widows,
so many poor dismembered creatures the Land over, only for the change of a
name. And verily, as yet we have very little, if any thing at all more; neither
indeed shall or can we have, until those square-headed Benchers be dismounted;
and their long-tail'd retinue thrown over the Bars, and turned out of their
several Cloisters and Meeting-places; amongst whom is little to be found,
except corruption, deceit, and confusion; their very Formalities, which they so
much glory in, speaks no less: Square-heads nor Longtails neither will nor can
perfect and settle the Peoples or Nations Rights; no, it must be Roundheads:
for nothing is or can be perfect, or bring forth perfection, but that which is
round, perfectly round: Square-heads are fit subjects to receive, and treasures
to retain in their Quadrangle-points, the several forms, dictates, subtle,
diabolical, sophistical Reasons and Arguments of the corruptest times, persons,
and interests; accordingly are their critical, uncertain, irrational, corrupt,
false, contradictory Judgments, Motions and Arguments. Let not themselves, or
any other, be offended at these expressions, in discovery of truth, since the
Pleaders at the several Bars, and those also upon the Benches, are notoriously
known to be conversant in such quibbles or expressions, upon most weighty
occasions, to hide and obscure the truth. Are their studies so much to study
the Law for defense of truth, or to contract the Law into one perfect undivided
and undividable being speaking one and the same thing always alike to all? But
contrarily, their care and study is, how to make the Law speak multiplicities
of Riddles, whereby to confound the entire union-meaning thereof, and so to
serve their own, their Lords and Masters turn, what the Prince, State, or
Clients desires occasions and interests call for, or have occasion to use it
in, though never so contrary to, or against it self, as it is or should be one
pure simple act in Reason neither looking backward nor forward but ever, and
always, and in all times the same. How came the Law in the late King's time so
loudly, so strongly, so certainly and undeniably to speak his designs and
interests so legal, so justifiable, that, in the grand Case of Ship Money, but
two (as I remember) of all the Judges dissented? And also, how many went away
with him, owned his proceedings to be according to Law and sat at Oxford in
Judicatory executing all things in a formality of Law? Those who remained here,
and joined with the Parliament, they declare and judge their proceedings
warrantable, and justifiable also; and both these by one and the same Law.
Some, upon putting to death the late King, desert the Parliament in that
particular: Others justify that also to be legal and warrantable. Some of the
Parliaments party, by those with the King, are adjudged and condemned for
Traitors: others, that were for the King against the Parliament, are by those
here adjudged and condemned for Traitors also; and this still by one and the
same Law. I would ask them all this one single question. Whence, from what, or
from whom your selves, or any other at this time, hold and derive your Rights,
Power, and Authority? in, from, and by the Law; or in, from, and by the Sword?
If in, by, and from the Law; then he or they who shall offer violation to any
so holding and deriving, offers violation to the Law, and ought to suffer for
the breach and violation thereof according to the Law. If in, from, and by the
Sword only; then are you, and all others so holding and deriving, accountable
only thereunto. In, from, and by both, you cannot hold and derive. To say,
Partly from one, and partly from the other, is inconsistent. The Sword, indeed,
as servant to the Law, may execute its commands; and so protect the Law, which
is its proper work: but then you must first find a command in and from the Law
for the Swords actings: if not, know, you are completely under the power,
dictates and commands of the Sword. What use or need then is there of any of
your sittings, of any of your Judgments or Judicatories? Whilst the Sword is
in its Regencie, there is no room for, nay all other Laws, Commands, and
Actings whatsoever, which are not subservient unto it, cease, as being
altogether inconsistent; and must be and remain so, until it have ended its
conquest, and the people reunited into one free and entire body, for the
settling and establishing themselves in peace, security, and rest, by such Laws
as themselves shall choose: then is the Sword again given up into the Peoples
power and command; having effected its right end, is transmitted unto its right
place. Its true original was from the people, for their defense in their Rights
and Liberties: and when it has attained that, then must it to them be
resigned; and this is the right end and nature of all true Conquests, and
truly noble Conquerors, or rather, of all true and noble Saviors, Redeemers,
or Deliverers. And truly, for any man or men to conquer, that him or
themselves may reign and rule, sit in and enjoy their Seats and Places
conquered, his or their private and particular interests and accommodations, is
not thank-worthy; but this, To make or give enjoyments to others: and this, at
least in form and show, has been the practice of all Conquerors; of which this
Nation has had manifest experience: No sooner has any conquest been made by
any, but the Conqueror calls a Parliament, summons the people to choose
themselves Laws; though their ends have been to settle themselves.

Here, Gentlemen, you may see who or what has been, next to the Clergy, the
greatest cause of England's miseries. The Clergy has preached us into blood,
and has brought Gospel for justification of each party; and the other
Long-Rob'd Gentlemen, they have pleaded and argued us into blood, and adjudged
each parties actions and proceedings legal: and by them of each party, has the
people been condemned by one and the same Law. Thus both Clergy and Lawyer can
make their Cameleon show any color. How then we the People can expect peace
and settlement whilst either of these two generations remain amongst us, is to
me a Paradox.

I would not here be taken to charge or condemn every particular Gentleman of
either Calling or Profession; for I know of both that are truly honorable,
for the sincerity of their affections to the Nations Rights and Privileges,
its peace and prosperity; in respect to which they are willing not only to
sacrifice their Places, Callings, and Professions, but their Lives also: But I
speak as to that Principle which reigns in and guides the most or generality of
them, who have ever been found to transgress for a morsel of bread; and whom if
I prove not to be the greatest traitors and enemies to this Commonwealth in the
Nation (if to subvert and pervert the Laws of the Nation be the greatest
Treason, as it in many Parliaments has been adjudged; or that (according to
that undeniably-true and generally-received Maxim) it be granted, that Salus
populi suprema Lex, that the highest, supremest Law of Laws and so end of all
Law, is the Peoples safety) or if those two Judges died justly, whose fact and
execution, for their brethren the Judges sakes, are still kept in remembrance,
in that place at Westminster where the King and Lords used to sit in the time
of Parliaments by the Wool-sacks, the Judges seats, when called in for their
counsel, as a continual Monitor unto them, and all that succeed them for ever:
I say, if I prove it not, then let me die the death, as I justly deserve,
should I not make good this my Charge against them, which I am and shall be
ready to do, at any time, before a competent Judge and Jury. And, to say the
truth, the highest treason must needs arise from the breach of the highest
trust. Now then, he or they to whom the Law, with the administration thereof,
is entrusted, have undoubtedly the highest and greatest trust: for it, namely
the Law, is of the highest and greatest concernment to all and every particular
person in the Nation, of any or all other things: there is a sacredness in it,
and it ought to be kept sacred and inviolate by every one of us, upon the
highest penalties; it being that, and that only, which without and in stead of
Castles, Bulworks, Forts, and Towers, keeps, preserves, and maintains the whole
Nation or People, not only in a joint union and communion one with another,
but also all and every one in their several and particular Rights and Liberties
in peace and security. And this, Gentlemen, my brethren of this Nation, is our
Law; which had our Judges and their dependencies kept pure and inviolate; had
they fully, plainly, and stoutly cleared and maintained, according to their
Oaths, Places, and Trusts reposed in them, these Wars must of necessity have
been prevented. And if we yet could by any means obtain this thing, namely, the
clearing and vindicating of our Laws in the particulars mentioned, we might
presently turn our swords into plow-shares, and our spears into pruning hooks;
which cannot be done, until these men, with their appendixes, be undone.

I shall now, after this long digression made for the Nations sake and cause,
(which I hope pleads me justly excused) return to the prosecution of my
Relation.

My next reply to Judge Nicols was that in case he would there in open Court
declare that it was a legal and just proceeding, not (as is before expressed)
to have my prosecutors bound over to make good the Indictment against me, I
would then proceed to answer the Charge. He answered, It was legal. Then I did
proceed, and spoke to the Indictment it self, which runs thus: That Robert
Norwood being one most monstrous in his opinions loose wicked, and abominable
in his practices, not only to the notorious corrupting and disordering, but
even to the dissolution of all humane society, rejecting the use of any
Gospel Ordinances, Does deny the necessity of civil and moral righteousness
amongst men. To which things when I came to speak, and declare in open Court to
the people, that if any man or men could prove these things against me, I was
willing not only to suffer imprisonment, but death also; I was answered from
the Bench, That that was no part of my Charge, but it was only as a Preamble.
Then I am sure it was a most scandalous Indictment, or an Indictment drawn most
scandalously; which is contrary to our Law, and for which, he who drew the same
is accountable to the Law: and for what end it was, except to make me odious to
the people, or to pick men's pockets, or both I know not.

When I came to the several things in the Indictment, which were a number of
words put together, to what end or purpose I know not, except to make me (as I
said before) more odious to the people; there being but One thing in the whole
Indictment, consisting of Thirteen sheets and a half, colourably coming within
the compass of the Act or Law by which I was tried, called, An Act against
several atheistical blasphemous and execrable Opinions; which is, that I should
say, as it is laid down in one part of the Indictment, that there is not any
such thing as the people call hell and damnation: and in another place, that I
should say, There is neither hell nor damnation. Neither of which, were my
opinion such as condemned by that Act, which condemns such only who deny both
heaven and hell, both salvation and damnation; and this must be testified to be
avowedly done, and that by two witnesses, as is expressly laid down in that Act.
Now my Charge in the Indictment at most is only for saying there is neither
hell nor damnation, or such a hell and damnation as the people imagine; and
this is testified but by one witness; which also was spoken in Discourse, or
Dispute, therefore could not, upon a rational and just account, be said to be
avowedly; especially my Book and Papers, attested with my own hand fully
speaking my owning and acknowledging both heaven and hell, both salvation and
damnation; which I offered to give as evidence, but it would not be received.
And the Law always ought to be interpreted in the best sense, to the most
advantage; and not in the worst sense, or to the most and greatest disadvantage
to the party accused. So that you may here see what ground there was for either
Judge or Jury to find me guilty. Let all men take, and lay my Charge in the
Indictment to their own Rule, without showing me the least favor, or being in
the least tittle partial, and see and judge what agreement there is between
them; how or wherein any thing charged upon me in that Indictment, is condemned
or adjudged by that Act or Rule. Yet see the close combination between the
Clergy and the other Gentlemen of the Long-Robe, together with the chief Judge
at the Sessions, the present Lord Mayor Andrews. Sidrack Simpson his
called-Pastor excommunicates me; but as yet has not, either to the world, or
my self, given an account of that action, nor proved the things asserted by me
such as he condemns them for; no, he dares not that his doings should betried
and examined; neither himself, nor the rest of his brethren, dare come unto the
light; why? because their deeds and doctrines are evil: Truth never shuns the
light, but readily comes to the Test and trial. He having excommunicated me,
Andrews gets me to the Sessions House, being (as I said before) chief Judge
there. The Clergy ply it hard, to get me turned out of the High Court of
Justice, that I might not have any shadow of honor, esteem, or protection from
the State. Parson Caryl by name, to whom I sent one of my Papers for answer, in
respect of what passed between him, his brother Owen, and my self, before his
Excellency the Lord General Cromwell; but from none of them ever did I receive
any answer: only Caryl meeting of me, told me he wondered the Parliament would
continue me in that Court. To which I answered I never was a dishonor to the
Nation, nor ever did any thing unworthy a Gentleman. And I would have him and
all men know, that it is neither Names nor Places will make me or any man the
less or the more honorable; no, it is the inward power or spirit acting it
self forth in truly honorable and noble actings, that makes or gives those
denominations: it is not Names that makes or gives the Things; but it is Things
that gives or makes the Names.

Upon my being indicted at the Sessions, Alderman Estwick moved that I might be
turned out of the Court, though yet no crime was found or proved against me. If
not Justice, yet Wisdom and Discretion would have led him to have forborne such
a motion, until some crime worthy thereof had been proved against me: He knows
very well, that many times an innocent and guiltless person is indicted yea,
and condemned too, when the nocent and guilty goes free: He needed go no
further for a president or example, then himself and the Lord Mayor; which in
due time shall be made appear to the world; both of them deserving to be
indicted upon a far higher account then an error in judgment, which yet also
remains to be proved such.

Upon this motion, and perhaps the instigation of one or two more, without the
consent, vote, order, or desire of the Court, the Attorney General makes a
motion in the House for my discharge from that Place. What just ground or cause
he had for it, I leave the world to judge; as also, if he had not just ground
and cause so to do, whether he did not therein notoriously abuse the House. The
Attorney General, and some other of the Long-Robe-Benchers, taking themselves
(as some of themselves were pleased to speak) to be often affronted by me,
especially in the case of Sir John Stowel; first, in that I told the
Atturney-General it was not fit for him publicly to threaten that Court, to
which, in that capacity, he was but a servant: and then, when the Court was in
argument concerning the business of the said Sir John Stowel, the aforesaid
Judge Nicols, contrary to the Orders of the Court, took me up very angerly,
because I said I loved the Nation so well, and so much respected its reputation
and honor, that rather then the Faith thereof, so solemnly given by the Army,
and confirmed by both Houses of Parliament, should be violated, and so his
blood brought upon the Nation; I had rather go to the Gallows, and be hanged my
self: or words to this purpose. But, in stead of looking into the true state of
the matter, and weight of so blunt an Argument, he told me expressly, he would
endure no such words: yet was not he President of the Court, neither had he in
the least more privilege of vote or speech there then my self. Some other
words passed, which I shall forbear to report.

This Judge Nicols, as I said before, comes now down on purpose to be my Judge.

Here lies the sum of the whole matter: Simpson excommunicates me, but as yet
has proved nothing worthy of blame against me, much less of such a Censure;
gives no account either to me, or to the world, of this action. The Lord Mayor
Andrews gets me indicted at the Sessions House, sends an illegal Warrant for
me, declared so by Judge Rolls and Baron Thorp, upon the Bench at the Sessions;
executes the said Warrant by a hired Constable, one of no worth, by whom I was
forcibly taken out of my house, and carried to the Sessions. Estwick (perhaps
smelling that I was acquainted with and took notice of something he must give
an account of) moves my ejectment out of the High-Court of Justice. The
Attorney General glad thereof, receives the motion, though without order or
direction from the Court, and moves the House: the House receives the motion,
coming from one of their own Members, he being also in great trust for the
management of business for that Court, and gives me a discharge.

Now comes the last game to be played, and that is, by some means or other, if
possible, to fasten something upon me that should render or make appear to the
whole world, that I justly deserved all these things; else it must lie as a
blot upon them all for ever: Therefore must Judge Nicols be sent down to do the
work.

Now let all the Nation be judge in the case; I will be silent: if I have
transgressed the Law, let me not be spared, but let the Law be executed in its
rigor; I beg no favor. But in case I had said or held some such thing in
discourse, or by way of disputation, as that Act condemns, as the Witnesses
testified it was; shall that be taken and received for an avowed act, rather
then that which I have attested under my Hand, dedicated and presented to the
highest Judicatory in the Nation, which, as I said before, I offered as
testimony, but it was refused? This is a strange acting construction, and
interpretation of the Act, and an unheard of Judgment upon a man's avowed
Principles.

I further told the Court, that if Disputations were not allowed, or if men
must be called to account and judged for what in Disputation is either affirmed
or denied, the Universities and Schools of Learning must be shut up, and all
men's mouths stopped: for, in all Disputes, there must be the Negative and the
Affirmative; Disputes being still of Contraries. And verily, this is no other
then to bind men up according to the Laws of the Bishop of Rome, and our
former Bishops here, to their Faith and Belief; which is contrary to what the
Parliament has constantly held forth to the people in their several Votes and
Declarations; that Act being intended principally, if not only, against the
carnal and fleshly actings of corrupt and bestial men. But, if I mistake not,
as I have formerly published, the true knowledge of God and of the Devil, of
Hell and Heaven, of Salvation and Condemnation or Damnation, is of the highest
concernment to be truly known, and rightly understood, of any other thing;
these being, or at leastwise are made to be, the very end of all the Religion,
Praying, Preaching, and all things else of that nature: therefore doubtless men
may not reasonably be debarred from searching for or after the knowledge of
that upon which the All of man depends. Men have as little reason to trust the
Clergy now, as those in Christ's time had to trust the Scribes and Pharisees:
as they were advised not to trust them, so, say I, it is good not to trust too
much to these, lest the blind leading the blind, both fall into the ditch.
And verily, if they cannot tell us truly what either of them be, or wherein,
whereby, or wherewith they consist, subsist, and exsist; they may as well lead
us to hell as to heaven, into condemnation or damnation, as well as into
salvation; to the Devil, as well as to God. This I am sure of, that most of
their Preachings and Practices are from the devil, if the Scriptures speak
truth; and therefore must needs lead thither: what else means the bleating of
those many poor Ewes and Lambs left fatherless through your instigations and
preachings? Have you not, amongst you preached three Nations into blood? Can
you, now you have kindled this fire from hell, which is like to devour and
consume all can you (I say) by your Preachings quench it again? You may see
it is true what James says, Behold, how great a thing a little fire kindles!
M. Simpson you see your self, and all men may see it, in this matter, what
inconveniences you have put the State and many others upon; and you your self
know your self to be the occasioner of it: and should not a spirit of more
meekness and moderation appear in those that are persecuted, then in their
persecutors, a new fire, or fresh flame would presently lay hold upon the
Nation. I have done with you for this time.

Then I told the Court likewise, that it was an easy matter to be mistaken, or
to be traduced in a man's words, especially in Argument or Disputation; and it
was a very easy matter to do it by any man in his Pulpit; he might take one
part of his speech, and not the other.

I told the Court also, that if I did speak the words in the sense they
understood them, I did there unsay them again. Yet therein I desired I might
not be mistaken: for as I accounted it my honor to desert an Error, so I did
also account it my honor not to desert the least Truth; neither should I, were
I presently to die in the place.

I further said, I never did, neither do I now deny the things; but do here, in
the presence of the Court, and all the people, acknowledge both.

And I further told the Court, that if any man accused for Heresy and an
Heretic, even in the hottest of persecutions in Queen Mary's days; yet if at
the Stake, or any time before, he made his Recantation, he was acquitted,
discharged, and delivered. And I did there solemnly declare, that I held and
owned both heaven and hell, both salvation and damnation: but all this would
not serve turn; I must to Newgate, there to be kept prisoner for six months,
without Bayl or Mainprise.

I have concluded my Relation, and give all the world to know, I am not at
enmity with, nor bear I evil will unto or against any person in the Nation. I
know every one is in his proper work, and that all and every one, yea all
things (as it is written) shall work together for good; therefore am I not
offended at any. And because I love the Nation therefore would I that the
Nation might be saved: it cannot be saved but in righteousness: For as all
things that are made and created, must be saved by him that made and created
them; so also must they be saved in that way or word, in or by which they were
made and created; and that is in righteousness; which Way or Word is Christ the
Righteousness, or Christ the Wisdom of the Father: for Wisdoms works or goings
forth are all in righteousness; or what is done or brought forth in
righteousness, is the work of wisdom, or wisdoms workings, in which and by
which the worlds were made, as is fully asserted and inserted by and in the
Scriptures. All and every unrighteousness is sin, as the Scriptures also
testify; and all sin is weakness: and therefore, as it is written, sin or
weakness certainly brings forth death. Every departure from Light, is
Darkness; every departure from Strength, is Weakness; every departure from
Life, is Death: according to the several measures or degrees of their departure
or separation, so much are they wrapped, infolded, involved, or sealed up in
their contraries; though all these Names signify but one and the same Thing.
And verily, nothing is truly righteous, will or can work righteousness
perfectly, but Love, Love in truth: Names, and Shows, and Forms, will not do
it; but Love in Life, Love in Power. The reason is, nothing is truly wise but
it; and it is better then Wisdom, or it is Wisdoms excellency; or the
excellency of Wisdom is Love: and therefore says Christ of himself, Behold a
wiser then Solomon is here: Hence Christ is said to come out of the bosom of
the Father, because he is the Father's Love, or the love of, or rather in the
Father: And hence is he said to be the Savior of the world because nothing but
love either will or can save it; because nothing else can in truth work
righteousness but it; nothing else being truly righteous, or righteousness in
truth, but it. Brethren be not deceived; it is not the sufferings, it is not the
blood, it is not the death of Christ slain at Jerusalem, will save you, as
witnesses the Scriptures: this is the Savior or Salvation, that great
Salvation God sent into the world: therefore when he comes, he brings this
Command with him, namely, Love one another; and says, as the truth is, that
under that is comprehended all. And you must know God, or Christ; and his
Commands are himself. Now I say, as before it has been said, that Light or
Truth is come into the world, or has received its resurrection, though not as
yet its ascension in and over the world: but as men then did, so men now do,
love darkness more then light; why? because their deeds are evil; and this
therefore is the condemnation. Brethren, it is undeniably true, that he which
does, or that which is Truth, willingly and readily comes unto the light, at
least, if it may have liberty so to do: And on the contrary, it is as certain,
that he which does, or that which is evil, as much a voids and shuns the light.
Brethren, the days of your ignorance God has hither to winked at, but now he
wills that all men should come to the knowledge of the truth: Wherefore,
Brethren, let me in love, in the bowels of love, of mercy and compassion,
entreat and beseech you. And I do earnestly entreat you all of and in the
Nation, of all ranks, qualities, states, and conditions; you of the Clergy,
you the professors of the Law, I beseech you again and again, to consider, All
unrighteousness is sin, all sin is weakness, weakness brings forth death:
Why, O why then will you die? Behold, death lies at the very door of this
Nation. Consider, is any thing called for but your unrighteousness, which will
certainly be your death? What is it you are to part with? is it any thing but
that which will evidently and eminently be your destruction? Consider, all
things must die, must pass away, but Love, but Charity; and they, or that,
abides for ever; that is God, that is Christ; to whom or to which when the
whole man is in the same Love subjected and united, then indeed is it properly
said to be saved, or to be in a condition of salvation, when that true light
which is life, or life which is light, that wisdom which is pure and unspotted
of the world, free from all flesh and fleshliness, yet living in flesh, but not
flesh; that is, he or it which is not touched with Humanity, even the
alone-wisdom of the eternal Deity in himself; which when he or it shall arise
in his or its own pure light, life, and strength in us, and we in the sight of
the loveliness, beauty, and excellency thereof, are in our selves, in our
earthly, selfish, fleshly, carnal, or worldliness, subjected and united in love
thereunto; then, from thence, in the light, life, power, and strength thereof,
shall we act in the Righteousness of, or rather, in Love unto All.

Verily, I cannot but abhor the Doctrine and Principles of most Christians; and
I profess before all the world, they are Principles and Doctrines of devils,
and the very bane of or unto all Godliness and Honesty, wholly destructive to
the true Scripture, which has and must have its union with, and so its life,
subsistence, existence, and consistence in the light and truth it self; the
very form, shadow, or outside of things, being set up, worshipped, adored,
received, trusted unto, and rested in, in stead of the light, life, power, and
truth it self. I will give you a very late example or president, (just now
brought to my hand by an honest Gentleman) which was of an Officer belonging to
the Excise-Office London, who having wickedly forsworn himself, and being
reproved for it, readily replied, that Christ died for perjured persons. And,
to say the very truth, it is that we all wipe our mouths with: We sin by
oppression, by injustice, by deceit, or by other carnal, fleshly, sensual, and
devilish actings: why Christ died for sinners; we lay all upon the back of a
poor weak man like our selves, dying at Jerusalem: and this also the Clergy
(when men are upon their deathbeds) stop into their mouths, with some of their
bread and wine perhaps also; and then all is well, they must to heaven without
dispute. O Rome, Rome, Rome!

My dear Countrymen, you of this Nation, I speak unto you all; for whom, and
whose true and real peace and happiness, I could (God is my witness, from my
very soul I speak it) with much more cheerfulness and readiness of spirit be
offered up a sacrifice in the fire, then to be freed and delivered from my
present bonds and imprisonment: O that I could deliver you from the present,
and those future sorer evils that are coming upon you, except repentance indeed
prevents them! Brethren, you may easily see where your salvation lies, who or
what your salvation is: There is no salvation but in union with Light and Life;
no salvation but in Christ, the Righteousness and Wisdom of the Father;
wherefore, in Isaiah he is called the Wonderful Counselor, and so the Prince
of peace, whose Kingdom must be established with judgment and justice: He is
there also called The mighty God, and The everlasting Father. In Isai. 42. 6, I
have (says the text) called thee in righteousness: So that you see there is no
peace, no salvation, no rest, but in Union; no Union, but in Righteousness; no
Righteousness, but in Love: your inward or inmost salvation lies here, and
your outward, utmost or outmost salvation lies here also. If the outmost
figures stand and hold in Union and Communion each with other, according to,
and in proportion with the inmost light and life, receiving their strength and
subsistence from thence; then are they safe or saved. Thus One operating into
Three, and Three operating again into One, is the life of all and every one;
which speaks the wisdom, love, and righteousness of or in the Father, which is
the only and alone Savior or Salvation, and that is Union. He who died at
Jerusalem, I say, my brethren, is not the Christ, is not the Savior the
Scriptures point you unto: I deny not but that he or that which is the life and
light, and so the Savior of the world, abode or dwelt in, and manifested it
self with, by, and through that veil of flesh, the Anointing or Anointed of the
Father; and that he was the anointed above his fellows: And it must be the very
same Anointing that must save you: Know you not that Christ is in you, except
you be reprobates? that is, as it in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, as
he is of God made unto us his power and wisdom, and his wisdom and
righteousness. Christ in or after the flesh, in his particular form, cannot be
in any man: in and after the Spirit in the love, wisdom and righteousness of
the Father, he is and may be: so that this must be your eye salve, your meat
and your drink which you must be made partakers of, have fellowship and
communion with, even the pure Virgin-Spirit, which has not, neither can it
defile it self with women, with fleshly or earthly weaknesses; and not his
corporeal flesh and blood: for consider, That which you cannot participate of,
that can you not be saved by: Can you eat his flesh, and drink his blood? Could
you, that could but feed and refresh the flesh and blood: for nothing can feed
or refresh that which is not of the same nature and essence with it self. In
all Unions, there is necessarily required oneness or sameness: then needs must
it be meant of a more near invisible nature and essence which we are to be made
partakers of. And as that place cannot be taken in a literal sense, according
to the outward form of flesh; for, as it is said, his words are spirit and life:
so of necessity must all the other texts in Scripture coherent to that,
speaking of his outward form and figure in all things relating thereunto, be
taken in reference to an inward invisible power, nature and essence.

And indeed, we all who will live in the life of the Spirit, must be slain in,
to or after the flesh, the life of the flesh must be totally extinguished,
before we shall or can live the pure Virgin-life of or in the Spirit. Brethren,
consider and know, that the whole Scripture, yea the whole Creation, is but a
dark Mystery, Riddle, Parable, ar Sealed Book unto us, until the Spirit of
light from God open, unfold unriddle, or unseal the same.

I having much exceeded what I intended, in this last and some other discourses
occasionally falling in with this Relation of the state of my Case, must
necessarily break off very abruptly, having only leisure to subscribe my self,

The Nations

Faithful and truely-real friend and servant, in and under the highest and
supremest law of Love, unto death to be commanded, Robert Norwood.

POSTSCRIPT.
UNderstanding that it is by diverse reported that I should carry on some
private or particular design, I thought it convenient, both in respect to my
self, and all others, to make this my solemn Protestation, in the sight of God,
and all men, That I am, and ever have been, so far from designing, or joining
with designers, that I have constantly declined all converse with, and
temptations from men in or of that way. Yet, according to that little spark of
wisdom and light in me, have I been made willing and ready to embrace and
receive every Truth made known to me, in and from whomsoever it has appeared,
without respect to persons, or minding my particular outward advantage or
disadvantages therein, or thereby: which must and will be acknowledged and
subscribed to by all that know me; and this in peace and love: My voice has
not been lifted up, nor my cry ever heard in the streets. In the late King's
time, my temptations were not little, nor solicitations few, with offers
suitable, and far exceeding what upon any account could be thought of by me,
would I but have complied with, or but sat silent in reference to the
interests then on foot. All that know me, know me to be very free, plain, and
open, almost to all men: I was plain in the King's time, plain with him and his
Council at the then-Council-Board; by whom, and for my noncompliance with his
illegal, unjust, destructive proceedings to Himself and the Nation or
Commonwealth, my sufferings were not small nor inconsiderable. In the late Earl
of Essex his time, I had the like solicitations for a compliance with them
then in their plottings, complottings, and counterplottings: I was then by them
threatened also for opposing the Scottish interest then on foot; though then I
did nothing but in the public view of all men: I dealt plainly with those
designers: I usually, as in other things, so in this, declared my self, that I
would not be guilty of so great an absurdity and ridiculousness, as to say,
when I fought against the King's Army, I fought not against the King, when he
was in the head of it, and they Commissioned by him. I have not, from the
beginning of these times, wanted the counsel of many, and they no slender or
weak Statists or Politicians in account of the world, as to the carriage and
ordering of my self and affairs according to the Maxims and Principles
thereof: I have ever answered, Honesty slights Policy; and that I ever
accounted plain honesty the best of policies. Neither ever could I, or shall I,
by all the Politicians in the world, be beaten out of that Maxim. To me it is
most safe and sure: for what is attained by Policy, must be kept by Policy,
Force, or both; in both which (besides the various perplexing courses,
countercourses the spirit of man must run, act or be acted in, the continual
cares and fears that possess, and so dispossess, not only themselves, but
others, of all true and real enjoyments; and to the securing whereof, nothing,
no relations, no conditions may or must be spared) there is, neither can there
be any thing but uncertainty of and in the end: and this truly and properly is
the Devil, or that Deceiver in Man. Politics and Designers ever run in a
retrograde motion unto God or Truth: therefore can there be no rest or peace,
no certainty or stability. Where there is not a true and certain Foundation,
there cannot be a firm, stable, and lasting structure. It has been often told
me by a Gentleman known to and coversant with most of the actors and plotters
of these times, and is pretty well read in Politics, That I had always luck to
rise of the right side. My answer still was, Would he be honest, he would do so
too. I never did, neither will I ever do any thing that relates to the Public,
but what I care not who sees and knows. So far am I from a Designer, that I
could willingly carry all my actings, designings, and plottings, upon my
forehead, plain, open, and evident, to be seen and read by all men, of all
sorts, sides, or parties whatsoever. Nay, I do, and ever did account it much
below a truly worthy, noble, and ingenuous spirit, to act, or be acted in,
with, or by any designs or designers whatsoever. It Is said, That every wise
man has his end: I say too, If his end be true, and that his end and way be
one and the same, else he is no: a wise man, or acts not in wisdom. If that I
would have, desire or seek, be just and right, I neither care nor fear who sees
or knows it. I must and will say, Whatsoever man or men judge me a Plotter or
Designer, they are themselves deeply guilty, and from that guilt ises that his
suspicion. He who stands firm in himself, whose deeds and actings have been and
are in truth, fears not the greatest or suddenest approaches of the highest
light. I will give them and all men these two Reasons, which may strongly
induce them to believe the contrary. First, I never did, neither do I desire
Greatness in the world. Secondly, I never did, nor do I desire Popularity. For
I well know them both, and what their natural tendencies are. Though many
things of high, if not of highest concernment to this Nation, have come through
my hands, as is known to many; yet have I seldom or never appeared in them.
Verily, I have had as many opportunities and advantages cast upon me for my
particular advancement, as most men; and many have judged me of as answerable
parts. It Is true, I had once, and but once (in all these Troubles) thoughts of
enjoying my self quietly in peace and rest, without any more meddling or looking
upon the present state and course of things; and so of building unto my self a
nest here: and to that end, did my heart and hand exceed perhaps its due
bounds: But God met me, and fell upon me with blow upon blow. I ever did, and
do still desire a private life above all, and have again endeavored it, though
in a very mean condition comparatively: but I must not be my own carver. I
have, I do, and that upon the duest, most serious, and most deliberate advices,
thoughts, and consultations in and with my self, judge and determine, neither
poverty nor riches to be the best, the surest and safest condition; therefore
the most desirable. The Lord, who knows my heart, knows it was unfeigned love
to the Nation, its common good, common weal, or weal common, not to my private
or particular self, has drawn me forth in and unto all my public actings. Had
I sought advantages to and for my self, I could not have missed them: but, in
stead thereof, I have spent my self, my time, and estate, without any
satisfaction. What I was at first, I am the same still. There seemed to me, in
the beginning of these times, to be a very free, upright, ingenuous, innocent
conjunction of hearts and spirits for a real common good, for Liberty and
Freedom in truth, for Reformation in all things according to the Rule of Truth,
real, and not verbal, formal, or notional only; and this indeed was the end of
all our Covenants and Engagements; which shall yet be brought to pass and
accomplished, which shall yet stand for and against: And this continued, until
the corrupt, private, and particular interests of some in Authority, (with the
Clergy, and by their instigations) rent and tore in pieces, making that which
in a true, rational, grammatical sense is one entire union in it self, looking
only one way, to look as many several ways as their several interests and
foolish fancies led them to imagine; even as they do the Scriptures, and all
things else; Union speaking death to them, their subsistences being in and by
dividings and divisions. I must deal plainly with the Actors and Officers of
and in this State, as I have formerly with those in the late King's time: Your
actings, your ways, and workings, are not suitable to, nor agreeable with
Principles of honor and honesty, peace and safety, either in reference to your
selves, or the Commonwealth, but directly destructive to both. Have you brought
Salvation, Liberty, and Freedom to your selves? Know, you cannot enjoy these
without them; your All lies wrapped up in them, though not theirs in you. Look
to it, I entreat you. Should I say otherwise, I should be found a Flatterer,
Liar, and Dissembler, and for ever unworthy to have respect from, or be
admitted to the meanest Trust or Service in or to any Prince or State
whatsoever.

ROBERT NORWOOD.

FINIS.
Reader, in stead of Judge Nicols, read Judge Warberton.


