AN ANSWER TO Sir PETER LEICESTER'S Addenda, OR, Some things to be Added in his
ANSWER to Sir THOMAS MAINWARINGS BOOK.

WRITTEN By the said Sir Thomas Mainwarings

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Lowndes over against Exeter-House in the Strand,
1673/4.

TO Sir Peter Leicester Baronet.
SIR;
I Received your Addenda to the Answer to my former Book, on Monday the 12th of
January last; in writing of which, whether you are just to your word; or not,
let the whole World Judge.

As for that which you say in the first Page thereof, I think it was not worth
your adding to what you had formerly written, unless you could make it to
appear that those persons whom you call judicious men, be such whose opinions
are like to be of equal weight with those Judges and Heralds who are against
you, which (I believe) will be very hard for you to do: And if you could, we
should therein be but upon equal terms.

When you tell me in your 2 Page, that you do give me two or three precedents
more, besides that of Geva, to prove that Lands in those elder ages did pass in
libero maritagio, I cannot but smile, to see that you still say, that the gift
to Geva was such a Precedent, considering how in my Defense of Amicia, Page 43,
44. and so on to the middle of the 50 Page, as also, in my Reply to your
Answer, p. 23. and p. 45, 46. and so on to the 60. Page, I have made it to
appear, that it is very uncertain that the said Geva was a Bastard, but most
certain that the Gift to Geva was not a Gift in Frank-marriage.

And now I shall come to your pretended new precedents, which you mention Page
2. and so on to the end of the 6 Page of your Addenda, and in my Answer
thereto, I shall make it very clear that they are not such precedents as you
take them to be, but are gross mistakes of yours, you erring in no less then
these five particulars following. First, in conceiving that Joane wife of the
said Lhewellin, and daughter to King John, was that base daughter named Joane,
which King John had by Agatha daughter to the second William de Ferrars Earl of
Derby; Secondly, in saying that the said Lhewellin did marry Joane daughter of
King John in the year 1206. Thirdly, in alleging that King John gave Ellesmere
in libero maritagio with his said daughter Joane. Fourthly, in pretending that
the Manor of Budeford in Warwickshire, and the Manor of Suttehall in
Worcestershire were given by King John to the said Lhewellin with any daughter
of the said King John. And lastly, in saying that that Joane who was wife to
Robert de Andeley, was the same Joane who was wife to the said Lhewellin.

And first, you err in saying that Joane who was the wife of the said
Lhewellin, was the same Joane which King John had by the said Agatha; For as
you may see in your Historical Antiquities, p. 132. compared with Vincent, p.
204. (which is the place you bring for proof of what you say) the said Agatha
was daughter to William Ferrars Earl of Derby, by his wife Agnes the third
sister and coheir of Randle Blundevil Earl of Chester and Lincoln, which Agnes
was daughter of Hugh Cyveliok Earl of Chester by his wife Bertred. Now the said
Hugh Cyveliok dying as appears in your Hist. Ant. p. 134. in the year 1181. and
the said Bertred his wife (as is proved Rot. de Dominabus pueris, etc. in
Scacc. penes Remem. R. sub Tit. Linc. Rot. 1.) being but Twenty four years of
age when her said husband dyed, it will from thence appear, that Joane daughter
of the said Agatha could not possibly be the wife of the said Lhewellin; For,
if we suppose that Randle Blundevil was younger then his third sister Agnes
(which I am confident you do not believe) and that the said Bertred was
begotten with Child at thirteen years of age, and came so nimbly with her
children as to have her first daughter when she was fourteen years old, her
second daughter when she was fifteen years old, and her third daughter Agnes
when she the said Bertred was sixteen years old, then the said Agnes would be
eight years of age in the said year 1181. If we also suppose the said Agatha to
be the eldest of the six children of the said William Ferrars and Agnes,
(though she might be the youngest) and that she the said Agnes had the said
Agatha when she the said Agnes was but fourteen years old, then she the said
Agatha would be born in the year 1187. If we also suppose that the said Agatha
had her daughter Joane when she the said Agatha was but fourteen years old,
then the said Joane would be born in the year 1021. and yet by all this strange
way of reckoning, Joane the daughter of Agatha would have been but about three
years of age, when the said Lhewellin was married, which (as anon will appear)
was in the year 1204. So that this Joane daughter of Agatha was so far from
being wife to the said Lhewellin, that there is no likelihood that she was born
at the time of the said Lhewellins marriage. But the said Lhewellin was 28
years of age in the year 1204, For, Sylvester Giraldus Cambrensis in his
Itiner. Cambr. printed at London 1585. p. 64. and 203. tells us, that in the
year 1188, (at which time the said Silvester was living) the said Lhewellin was
12 years old.

Secondly, you run in to another erro in alleging that the said Lhewellin did
marry his wife Joan in the year 1206. whereas he was her Husband in the year
1204. in the 6 year of King John, as will appear by your own Authors, Stow and
Speed, and by several others; as also by this Copy of King John's Precept to
the Sheriff of Shropshire, to make Livery of the said Lordship of Ellesmere.

Ex Rot. Clauso de anno Sexto Regis Johannis ( in arce Land.) membrana 7.

Rex Vicecom. Salop. Salutem. Scias quod dedimus dilecto filio nostro Lewellino
manerium de Ellesmere, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, in maritagio filiae
nostrae, Et ideo, etc. Test, etc, apud Wigorn. 23. Martii.

Thirdly, You are guilty of a third error, in pretending that King John did
give the Lordship of Ellesmere, in libero maritagio with his Daughter Joan; for
your own Authors, as well as the aforesaid Record, do only say, that it was
given in Maritagio; so that your arguing that Ellesmere was given in maritagio,
and therefore was given in libero maritagio, is very irrational; For I have
showed in the 39 and 40 pages of my Reply to your Answer, that maritagium is
twofold, and that Lands may be given in maritagio, to one that is not of the
Blood, but (as I have often proved) Lands cannot be given in free-marriage, but
with one that is of the whole Blood, neither can they be so given, unless the
word liberum be used as well as the word maritagium, as I have showed in the 56
and 57 pages of my said Reply.

But if it were so, that you could have proved Joan, the wife of the said
Lhewellin, to have been the base Daughter of King John by the said Agatha: and
if it had been so, that this gift of Ellesmere had been in libero maritagio,
yet it would have stood you in no stead; for as you may see Coke upon
Littleton, fol. 21. b. if the Donee (in a Gift of Frank-marriage) that is cause
of the gift be not of the blood of the Donor, yet there may pass an Estate for
life, if Livery be made; And in this case of Ellesmere (as appears before)
Livery was made; And you may find in the Welsh History, put out by Doctor
Powell, p. 306. and Mat. Par. p. 625, and 626. that though Ellesmere was
enjoyed by the said Lhewellin, yet it was not long enjoyed by his Son David,
but was the next year after the death of Lhewellin in (or about) the Feast of
the Decollation of St. John Baptist, in the hands of King Henry the III. and as
appears by good Record, the custody thereof, together with the Hundred of
Ellesmere, was afterward committed by the same King to the Trust of Hamonle
Strange.

Fourthly you are also mistaken in thinking that the Manors of Budeford and
Suttehall, were given by King John to Lhewellin with his Daughter Joan, and for
all your boasting demand of what can be clearer? yet your Deed is far from
proving what you suppose it does; For it neither says that King John gave those
Manors cum filia sua bastarda, or that he gave them cum filia sua.

And whereas you say in the fourth page of your Addenda, that the said Prince
Lhewellin never married any Daughter of King John but the said Joan, I shall
thus far agree with you, That he married a Daughter of King John's, named Joan;
and but one Daughter of his, but not that Joan which you suppose. But certainly
your conceit that Lhewellin could not have a former Wife, unless she was
another Daughter of the said K. John, is a very wild one; For, King John might
give those Manors to Lhewellin with any Woman that was of his kindred; and it
is very apparent that our English Kings about that time were very desirous to
have Alliance with the Princes of North Wales; For, besides that Match of
Lhewellin with the Daughter of King John, and this Match of John Scot with
Hellen, Daughter of the said Lhewellin, David ap Owen (Uncle to the said
Lhewellin) did marry a Sister of King Henry the II. as you may see in Sylvester
Giraldus. p. 203. and the Welsh History, p. 235. And King Edward the I. also
caused Lhewellin ap Griffith Lhewellin, to marry a Daughter of Simon de
Mountford, Earl of Liecester, which Daughter the said Earl had by a Daughter of
King John, and this, although the said Lhewellin, ap Griffith Lhewellin would
have married elsewhere, as you may read in Knighton col. 2462. number. 26, and
number. 50. And although we cannot tell the name of her who was the first wife of
that Lhewellin, who married Joan the Daughter of King John as aforesaid, we
being ignorant of that, as we also are of the Wives of many great persons, and
of many other things in those elder ages, yet the said Lhewellin must
necessarily have a former Wife, as will appear by these following Reasons.

First, because most Writers, as Fabian in the 7 Part of his Chronicle, p. 13.
a. Stow, p. 167. a. Doctor Powell in his Notes on the Welsh History, p, 259.
York, p. 20. Speed in his History printed at London, 1632. p. 573. Vincent on
Brook, p. 204. Cambden in his Britania, in Latin, Printed at London, 1607. p.
453. and Knighton, col, 2417. number. 42. do all tell us of Lands given by the
said King John to the said Lhewellin, with his Daughter Joan, and yet none of
them do say, that these Manors of Budeford and Suttehall, or either of them
were given with the said Joan.

Secondly, Because our best Authors, who tell us what Children the said
Lhewellin had by the said Joane, do only name one son, viz. David, and two
daughters, viz. Marret married to John de Bruise, and Gladys married to Sir Baph
Mortimer, but none of them does name Hellen, so that it seems Hellen was no
daughter of his by the said Joane.

Thirdly, Because (as before appears) the said Lhewellin married the said Joane
in the year 1204. Now Randle Earl of Chester coming to the City Damiata in the
beginning of the year 1218. as you may see in Matt. Paris, p. 303. n. 24. and
309. n. 16. compared together, and this Match of John Scot and the said Hellen
as you may find in Knighton, col. 2430. n. 9. being agreed on by Randle Earl of
Chester and the said Lhewellin before the said Randle went thither (and by
consequence about the year 1217.) What likelihood is there that the said Joane
could have any daughter old enough to be married to the said John Scot, it
being impossible that Lhewellin could at that time have any Child by King
John's daughter, who could be above the age of twelve years; And though you
pretend that John Scot did marry the said Hellen about the year 1222, yet you
do that, because she could not well be marriageable till about that time if her
Mother had been married in that year, which you fasly supposed she was. But
there is no likelihood that Randle Blundevil would go to the Holy Land after
the said marriage was agreed on, before it was Consummated, and that he had
thereby some assurance that the said Lhewellin would keep that peace which was
then made: But, Lhewellen might very well have a daughter by a former wife, who
in the year 1217. might be old enough to be married to John Scot, for the said
Lhewellin (as appears by the proofs before) was then aged 41 years; And it is
like that John Scot was then of a good age, for, if his Grandmother Bertred had
his Mother Maude when she the said Bertred was 18 years of age, and if his
Mother Maude had him the said John Scot when she was also 18 years of age, yet
John Scot would be born in the year 1193, and would be 24 years old in the year
1217.

Fourthly, (which does absolutely clear the point) the said Lhewellin could not
possibly have given the Manors aforesaid in free marriage with his daughter
Hellen unto the said John Scot, unless they had been given to the said
Lhewellin with a former wife, and that the said Hellen was the heir unto his
former wife; For when lands are given in free marriage, the husband has not
the inheritance of the said lands, neither has he so much as an estate for
life, until he be Tenant by the Courtesy of England; And you cannot pretend
(according to your old subterfuge) that the Law in this point was differently
holden in those elder times from what it is now; For, as you may see in my Lord
Coke on Littleton, fol. 22. a. the husband in the time of King Edward the
Third, was so far from having the inheritance of Lands given to him in
Frankmarriage, that if he and his wife were divorced, the woman should enjoy
the whole land; And for this he cites in the Margent 13 Edw. 3. tit. Ass. 19
Edw. 3. Ass. 83. with several other proofs of the like nature; Also in the
time of King Edw. 1. as you may see in the Ancient Treatise called Fleta, the
inheritance in these cases was in the wife, and not in the husband: For in the
3 Book and 11th Chapter, de donationibus in maritagiis it is thus said, Et
quamvis fiat mentio in donatione, quod terra data sit in maritagium tali viro,
cum tali uxore, res data tamen est liberum tenementum uxoris, and non viri, cum
non habeat nisi custodiam cum uxore, donec liberum tenementum sibi accrescat,
per legem Angliae: Secus si pro homagio and servitio viri and in Maritagium
facta fuerit donatio. And so also Bracton (who lived in the time of King Henry
the Third, and also in the time of the said Lhewellin) lib. 2. cap. 11. says,
Si autem fiat mentio quod terra data sit in maritagium cum uxore and eorum
haeredibus, communes haeredes de corpore utriusque admittantur, qui si
defecerint, revertitur terra data, and alii remotiores excluduntur: quia res
data est liberum tenementum uxoris, and non viri, cum non habeat nisi custodiam
cum uxore. Si autem sic terra detur in Maritagium, viro cum uxore and eorum
haeredibus, pro homagio and servitio viri (quod fit aliquando) licet detur in
liberum maritagium, quae sunt sibi ad invicem adversantia sive repugnantia,
tunc prefertur homagium, and erit acsifieret donatio tam viro quam uxori. And
so also my Lord Coke on Littleton, fol. 21. b. tells us, That if the King give
Land to a man with a woman of his kindred in frank-marriage, and the woman
dies without issue, the Man in the Kings case shall not hold it for his life,
because the woman was the cause of the gift, but otherwise it is in the case
of a common person, and for this in the Margent he cites 9 H. 3. Dower. 202. So
also Mr. Glanvile (who l^ved in the time of King Henry the Second, and before
the time of the said Lhewellin) lib. 7. cap. 18. to the same purpose says, Cum
quis itaque terram aliquam cum uxore sua in maritagium ceperit, si ex eadem
uxore sua haeredem habuerit filium, vel filiam clamantem and auditum infra
quatuor parietes si idem vir uxorem suam supervixerit, sive vixerit haeres sive
non, illi in vita sua remanet maritagium illud, post mortem vero ipsius ad
donatorem vel ejus haeredes est reversurum. Sin autem ex uxore suae nunquam
habuerit haeredem, tunc statim post mortem ^xeris ad donatorem vel haeredes
ejus revertetur maritagium; so that it is clear that the lands which were given
with the said Hellen to the said John Scot were given to the said Lhewellin
with a former wife, who was Kinswoman to the said King John, and Mother to the
said Hellen, for otherwise the said Gift to John Scot could not be good; But if
they were given to the said Lhewellin with a wife who was Mother to the said
Hellen, but dead at the time of the gift to the said John Scot, then the said
Lhewellin being Tenant by the Courtesy of England, and the inheritance being in
the said Hellen he might pass away his Estate to the said John Scot with the
said Hellen, and they might lawfully hold the said Manors in libero maritagio,
according to the Agreement made betwixt the said Randle Earl of Chester and
Lincoln, and the said Lhewellin Prince of North Wales.

Lastly, You err a fifth time in saying, that Joane the wife of Robert de
Audeley was the same Joane who was wife to the said Lhewellin; For, that cannot
possibly be, because Robert de Audeley married Joane the base daughter of King
John by Agatha, who might well be marriageable in the 14 year of King Henry the
Third, which fell out to be in the years 1229. and 1230. But, I have before
showed that there is no possibility that the said Joane daughter of Agatha
could be wife to Lhewellin in the year 1204. nor any likelihood that she then
was born. And this mistake of yours does further appear, because (as before is
showed) Prince Lhewellin was husband to the said Joane in the year 1204. and
(as you well know and confess) he dyed not till the 24th year of King Henry the
3d. How then can that Ioane who was wife to Robert de Audeley in the 14th year
of King H. 3. be the same Joane who was wife to Lhewellin? unless she had two
husbands living at one time. Or, How can what your Author Vincent says be
true, That she was re-married to Robert de Audley, 14 H. 3. after the death of
Lhewellin, seeing the said Lhewellin died not till the 24th year of Henry 3d?
and did also outlive his wife Joane three years? Certainly, if Vincent had
known as well as you, how long the said Lhewellin lived, he would never have
said that Joane the wife of Robert de Audley was the same Joane who was wife of
Lhewellin; But though you do acknowledge that Vincent did err in saying
Lhewellin was dead, when Joane was married to Robert de Audeley, yet you would
willingly justify the other part of his error, in making Audeleys wife Joane
to be the same woman with Lhewellins wife Joane, and to do this, you fancy that
Lhewellin was divorced from his wife Joane, though there be no Author who does
allege any such thing. And, Can we think that a Prince of North Wales, and a
daughter of King John could be divorced, and one or both of them marry again in
the lifetime of each other, and no writer take notice thereof? Or, can it be,
that Mat. Paris, who lived at that very time, should (in his 365. Page) speak
of William de Braus his being taken in Adultery with the said Joane, with an
(ut dicebatur) only? Or, the Welsh History ( p. 286.) with an (as it was
reported) if the Adultery was so notorious, as that she was divorced for it?
Indeed, you tell us out of Knighton, col. 2439. that Anno Domini 1228. 13 H. 3.
Leolinus Princeps Walliae rebllare cepit: -- Tandem vero post concursus varios,
and discrimina multa, per quoddam maritagium cum Rege concordatus est, and in
pace dimissus; and from these words, per quoddam maritagium, you would
insinuate a Divorce, and a new Marriage of the said Joane, with Robert de
Audeley, which divorce and marriage is further fetched then any thing that I
ever heard of in all my life; For, it is not likely that the putting away of the
Kings Sister could be a means to procure Peace, and none knows betwixt what
parties the marriage there spoken of was; But you did well to break off at the
words in pace dimissus, for if you had added these words of Knighton, which
immediately follow the other, viz. Anno Domini sequenti (the Figures 1229.
being also put in the margent) Lewelinus eundem Willielmum de Braus Baronem
nobilem quem ad festa Paschalia invitaverat, post epularum copiam super
adulterio and violatione uxoris suae accusans, and malitiose eum and hostiliter
ingressus est, and eum in carcerem trudens morte turpissima and absque omni
judicio sententialiter interemit. It would from thence have appeared that
neither the Divorce or second marriage of the said Joane could thereby be
meant, unless you would have a Divorce in the year 1228, for an Adultery not
committed till the year 1229. And with Knighton agrees the said Mat. Maris, p.
365. n. 10. (mentioned in the 5 Page of your Addenda) who says, that William
de Braus was hanged for that supposed Adultery, in the month of April, in the
year 1230. And we well know, there is but one week betwixt the last day of the
year 1229. and the first day of April 1230.

Also, in the 6 Page of your Addenda, where you tell us out of the Welsh
History put out by Doctor Powel, that Lewellin's wife died in the year 1237. if
you would have added what is further said in the same Page, it would have given
satisfaction that Lhewellins wife was never divorced, For, Page 293. you may
thus read, The next Spring (1237.) died Joane daughter to King John, Princess
of Wales, and was buried upon the Sea shore within the Isle of Anglesey at
Lhanvaes as her pleasure was, where the Prince did build an house of
barefoot-Friars over her grave. Now certainly the Welsh History would not then
have called her Princess of Wales, nor her husband have built that house over
her, if she had been divorced from Lhewellin, and Married to the said Robert de
Audeley.

If any object, That though Joane the wife of Lhewellin was not the base
daughter of King John by Agatha, yet it is like she was his base daughter by
some other woman, because of those Authors which you cite to that purpose; I
answer, and say, that it is nothing to the case of Amicia, whether the said
Joane was a Bastard or not, as I have before proved; But however it does not
yet certainly appear to me that she was so; For, though Vincent upon Brook,
Speed, Stow, and the Monk of Chester who did write the Poly-Chronicon, and
some others do say, that she was a Bastard, yet they are not much to be
regarded, because the said Author of the Poly-Chronicon, (as Vossius tells you
in his Book de Historicis Latinis, p. 487.) dyed in the year 1363. which was
159. years after Lhewellin married the said Ioane, and yet the said Monk lived
long before any other Author (which I have taken notice of) who does call her a
Bastard. Let us therefore examine the matter a little; and in order thereto,
let us observe how many wives the said King John had.

First, he married Alais daughter of the Earl of Moriana in the year 1173. as
you may read in Brompton's Chronicon, col. 1082. n. 35. Hoveden ( Frankfurt
Edition, printed 1601.) Page 532. n. 5. Matt. Paris (put out by Doctor Watts)
Page 127. n. 5. (which Editions of Hoveden and Paris, I do all along follow)
and the like you may find in Vincent upon Brook, Page 133. who also there
tells you, that by Moriana is not meant Moreton, but Savoy, with which Matt.
Par. p. 751. n. 46. does also accord; But the said Alais being then scarcely
seven years of age, as you may see in Matt. Paris, p. 127. n. 6. and dying
presently after, the said King John could not possibly have any issue by that
wife.

Soon after this, viz. in the year 1176. (as you may read in Hoveden, p. 553.
n. 46. and Matt. Paris, p. 132. n. 29) there was an Agreement for a marriage to
be had between the said John (then youngest son of the said King H. 2.) and a
daughter of William Earl of Gloucester, son of Robert Earl of Gloucester, which
said daughter is not there named, but her name was Hawisia or Avis, and the
marriage afterward took effect, but he was divorced from her in the year 1200,
as will anon appear.

Thirdly, immediately upon his Divorce he married Isabel daughter of the Earl
of Engolisme, who was his last wife; for, she survived him; and by her he had
issue (as will be agreed by all) Henry, (afterward King Henry the Third)
Richard, Earl of Cornwall, (afterward King of the Romans) Ioane wife of
Alexander the second, King of Scots, Eleanor, first married to William Marshal
the younger, Earl of Pembroke, and afterward to Simon Mountford Earl of
Leicester, as also Isabel, who was sixth wife to Frederick the second, Emperor
of Germany.

But King John marrying the said Isabel in the year 1200. could have no child
by her old enough to be married to the said Lhewellin in the year 1204.

Neither could Ioane the wife of Alexander King of Scots be the same Ioane who
was wife to Robert de Audeley, for, she was wife to the said Alexander in the
year 1221. as appears in your Hist. Ant. p. 60. and Mat. Paris, p. 313. n. 12.
and died before her husband (say you) in the year 1236. and was buried at
London; But, Mat. Paris, who lived in the same time with her ( p. 468. n. 34.)
tells you the very day of her death, and says she died in the year 1238. in
England, and was buried at Tarente. But you in your 60 p. and Mat. Paris, p.
770. n. 39. do agree that the said Alexander did survive the said Ioane, and
that he died in the year 1249.

The only question then will be, Whether Lhewellins wife was King John's
legitimate daughter by his wife Hawisia? which if she was, then some of our
Authors taking notice but of two daughters named Ioane, which the said King
had, did thereupon mistake Ioane the wife of Lhewellin, for Ioane the wife of
Robert de Audeley, and so did mislead several of our later Authors into the
like error.

Sure I am, that Mat. Paris, who was contemporary with the said Ioane, p. 231.
n. 52. calls her the Kings daughter, without the addition of Bastard, or any
thing tending thereto; His words are these, Quo facto, venit alius Nuncius ex
part filiae ejusdem Regis uxoris videlicet Leolini Regis Walliae, etc. Also in
the reign of King H. 3. her son David is by him ( p. 537. 569. and in many
other places) styled Nepos Regis, and p. 695. called Nepos Regis ex Sorore, and
p. 570. he is said to be propinquus Regi consanguinitate. Also Knighton, col.
2417. n. 42. thus says of her, Rex Johannes dedit filiam suam Leolino Principi
Walliae in uxorem, and cum ea dedit castellum and totum territorium de
Ellesmere in confinio Walliae. And the King himself in the aforesaid Record
gives her the title of filiae nostrae.

Also in Lib. Barlings (in which Book besides what concerns the Abbey of
Barlings in Lincolnshire, there are certain Annals (beginning An. 1050. and
ending An. 1231.) she is called the said Kings daughter, without the Addition
of Bastard; For, as I am informed by a judicious person, who, at my request did
lately search the said Book in Sir John Cottons Library, these words Lewelinus
disponsavit filiam Regis I. are the only words, fol. 22. b. which concern the
said matter: And yet you, in the 2d. Page of your Addenda do say, That the said
Joane Lib. Barlings, Fol. 22. b. is acknowledged and called base daughter of K.
John. I hope therefore the Reader will take heed how far he gives credit to
what you say.

Neither have I as yet found any Author who lived in that Age with her, who
has said that she was a Bastard; Indeed, our later Authors as Vincent and
others, who say that she was illegitimate, do many of them say, That King John
was divorced from his second wife, as well for that she was barren, as within
the degrees of consanguinity, which barrenness, if it could be made to appear,
would certainly prove the said Ioane to be a Bastard; And, this opinion has so
far prevailed in this last age, that whereas learned Mr. Cambden, as you may
see in his Britannia in Latin printed at London 1607. p. 259. speaking of the
Divorce of the said Hawisia (whose name he mistakes and calls Isabel) does only
use these words illam repudiatam, Doctor Philemon Holland in the English
Translation (unjustly) renders it thus, That King John did repudiate her upon
pretenses, as well that she was barren, as that they were within the prohibited
degrees of consanguinity. But our ancient Historians say nothing of her being
Barren.

For this see Hoveden (who was living all the time that Hawisia was wife to K.
John) p. 803. n. 34. in the year 1200. Eodem Anno factum est divortium inter
Johannem regem Angliae et Hawisam uxorem ejus filiam Willielmi comitis
Gloucestrriae per Heliam Burdegalensem Archiepiscopum, and per Willielmum
Pictavensem, and per Henricum Sanctonensem episcopos: erant enim affines in
tertio gradu consanguinitatis. Facto itaque Divortio inter Johannem regent
Angliae, and uxorent suam, ipse Rex Angliae consilio domini sui Philippi regis
Franciae duxit sibi in uxorem Isabel filiam Ailmari comitis de Engolismo, etc.

So also Mat. Paris (living in the time of the said Ioane) p. 200. n. 23. in
the said year 1200. Eodem tempore celebrato Divortio inter Regem Anglorum and
uxoorem suam Hawisam comitis Gloverniae filiam, eo quod affines erant in tertio
gradu consanguinitis. Duxit idem Rex, consilio Regis Francorum Isabel filiam
comitis Engolismi.

So also Mat. Westminster in that Edition printed at London, 1570. lib. 2. p.
76. n. 25. Anno gratiae. M. CC. Rex Johannes Isabellam filiam comitis Engolismi
duxit in uxorem and Dominica proxima ante festum sancti Dyonisii consecrata est
in reginam ab Huberto Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, quia celebratum fuit
divortium inter ipsum and Hawisiam comitis Gloverniae filiam, eo quod
contingebant se in tertio consanguinitatis gradu.

Now certainly these ancient Authors must needs in this point be credited
before those that lived so long after them, and especially since all those that
I have met with who say she was barren, or do call her a Bastard, do not one of
them know her true Christian-name, but are either silent therein, or else
(which the most of them do) do call her Isabel instead of Hawisia.

See also the words of Rad. de Diceto (who lived in the time of the said King
John) col. 706. n. 5. which words are these, Celebratum est divortium inter
Johannem regem Angliae and filiam comitis Glocestriae in Normannia, ab
episcopis Lisoriensi, Baiocensi, Abrincensi. and aliis episcopis qui
interfuerant, quam ipse tempore patris permissione Romanae ecclesiae duxerat in
uxorem cum Comitatibus de Glocestria, de Sumersatum, de Devenesire, de
Cornwaille, et aliis quamplurimis per Angliam honoribus. Set ille sublimioris
thori spe raptatus, consilio pravorum came abegit, unde magnam summi Pontificis
scilicet, Innocentii tertii, et totius curiae Romanae indignationem incurrit,
praesumens temere contra leges et canones dissolvere quod eorum fuerat
auctoritate colligatum.

And now let any man judge, if she had been barren, whether that would not have
been alleged as a cause of King John's putting her away, as well as his desire
of matching into a more sublime family; So that I see no reason to conclude the
said Ioane to be a Bastard, until it be proved that she was so, by some Record,
Deed, or good Author who lived in that Age, and especially since the said
Hawisia's daughter (if she had one) might very well be old enough in the year
1204. to be married to the said Lhewellin Prince of North Wales; But it is not
material to the case in hand, whether the said Ioane was a Bastard or not,
Because all the Gifts you mention in your Addenda, were either not gifts in
free-marriage, or else were not given to the said Lhewellin with the said Ioane.

As to what you say in your 7 Page, I did in my former Book give you several
Reasons, why the words of Glanvil did not prove what you supposed they did, and
in the 38 and 39 Pages of my Reply did tell you how you had left them
unanswered, and did also there nform you, that Mr. Glanvil did not say, That
Lands might be given with any woman in liberum maritagium, but only in
maritagium; and yet after all this, you have the confidence again to father
upon Mr. Glanvil what he never either meant or said.

In your 8. Page, you say I have charged you with many absolute untruths and
gross absurdities, and in stead of modest and clear Answers to the very point
or hinge of the controversy, did burst out into extravagant expressions in
things upon the By, which gives you occasion to imagine that I think my cause
declining. But those, and several other of your expressions, seeming to proceed
more from passion then reason, I shall at present pass them by, and do not
doubt, but I shall be able to clear my self, from any thing which you have or
can particularly charge me withal; And whereas you pretend that my confidence
did arise, because you are tied up by your Promise to write no more touching
Amicia. I will assure you I received no encouragement thereby, for I do not
take you to be so great a Bugbear as you suppose your self to be; And if I had
relied upon your promise, I had been much mistaken, but I did very well know
what you meant to do, for (besides what I heard from others) the same day my
Reply was finished, you did write a Letter to me, wherein was your pretended
new precedent of Budeford and Suttehal, and before any part of my last Book was
printed, I received notice from your servant by your command, that you would
print some precedents as Addenda to your former Book, but it seems that
resolution, as also another, (as I was informed) of writing an Answer in a
third persons name, were both laid aside, and what you did came out as Addenda
to your later Book; But how, in so doing, you were just to your word, I cannot
imagine, for, what you did write till the end of the 7. Page, did all concern
Amicia; and, by the same reason you did write now, you may write always, and
say you do so as Addenda only to your said second Book.

In your 9 Page you again tell me, That I begin my Reply with an untruth,
because I say, that those of our County who are understanding persons will
easily discern from some of your Omissions, that it was something else besides
your great love to truth which occasioned you to Asperse your deceased
Grandmother, and you tell me I might have done well to have showed; To which I
answer, that I will not reflect upon persons in print, but if any one desire
privately to know what those Omissions were, if I cannot give full satisfaction
of your gross partiality, let me bear the blame: And, I know no reason, since
you pretended it was your great love to truth which did occasion you to Write
against Amicia, but that I might in general terms let the World know it was
something else which moved you so to do; and I will appeal to the Reader,
whether I did not avoid all offensive expressions in what I said.

In your 10. Page, you are also overcaptious; For I having found in your
Historical Antiquities two Deeds made by Randle de Gernoniis father to Hugh
Cyveliok, (in the time of which Hugh, Raph Mainwaring was Justice of Chester)
and those two Deeds being directed Justiciariis, although I know of none who
can tell the name of any more then one of them; I did therefore, lest there
should be two Justices in the time of the said Raph, in my first Book call him
Chief Justice, because he acted alone, but did withal in my second Book
acknowledge, that I had not found that there was then any other Justice in the
time of the said Raph, and for this, you tell me I should have been more
ingenious, and do say, I do very well know that there was no other Judge of
Chester at that time, which being a Negative, it is impossible for me to know;
Also, as you may see in Monasticon Anglicanum, Part 3. p. 97 and 226. and in
your Hist. Ant. p. 130. and 131. there was in the time of the said Earl Hugh
sometimes two Justices of Chester, and sometimes but one; So that there
possibly might be another Justice of Chester, when the said Raph was Judge
there: And whereas you give a glance at my vainglory, by pretending you are
loath to say it was so: I desire to know how I could possibly be vainglorious
therein* since it was full as honorable for the said Raph to be sole Justice
of Chester, as to be Chief Justice in case there were two.

In your 11 and 12 Pages, you deny that you said that Geffrey Dutton was
witness to his own Deed or Deeds, but to the Deeds of others, and say, it was
my gross mistake in saying so; But, if any persons read the 4 and 5 Pages of
your Answer to my first Book, they may easily see that you apply the words
Domino Galfrido de Dutton in that Deed of Tabley to that Jeffrey de Dutton who
made the said Deed, and they will also find you saying, That in several other
Deeds of the same person (meaning still the same Geffrey) you dare affirm among
the witnesses subscribed he has five times and more the word Dominus omitted,
for once that we find it prefixed to his name. Let the Readers therefore (if
they can) find out, how you could imagine his name to be at any time amongst
his own Witnesses, if you did not take him to be a Witness to his own Deeds.

You also in the same Pages of your Addenda say, That if he had been a Knight
he would have called himself by his Title, Ego Galfridus de Dutton Miles; or,
Ego Dominus Galfridus de Dutton dedi, etc. But, this is directly contrary to
what you did write at the bottom of the 5. Page of your second Book; and it is
well known, that in very ancient times, every one who was a Knight, did not
always give himself the Title of Miles or Dominus in his own Deeds, neither
had he always the same Title given to him by others, which, if occasion
required, I could make to appear.

You also tell me, that when I say That Dominus Galfridus de Dutton witness to
the other Geffrey Duttons Deed of Nether-Tabley was his Father, it was my gross
mistake, For it was Geffrey Dutton of Chedle. And you also say, that there were
four Geffrey Duttons, two of Budworth, Father and Son, and two of Chedle Father
and Son, much contemporary; and for the proving of those two of Budworth (those
of Chedle being not there named) you send me to your Book of Antiquities, Page
226. there to be informed of what (you say) you see I do not know. But, if I
did not know of those two Geffrey Duttons, how could I tell you in the 10. Page
of my Reply that Adam de Dutton had issue Sir Jeffrey, who had issue Geffrey
who made the said Deed of Tabley? or, How could I say that Geffrey the Father
was a Witness to that Deed? and, How does it yet appear that the Dominus
Galfridus de Dutton, who was Witness to the said Deed of Tabley was Geffrey
Dutton of Chedle, and not the other Sir Geffrey Dutton of Budworth? For, though
the year 1238 be the last time you say you met with him, yet, as appears in
your Hist. Antiq. p. 216. you have not seen the Deeds of Sir George Warburton,
who is his heir-male; therefore the said Geffrey might very well live on to be
a Witness to that Deed. But, whether the said Sir Geffrey of Budworth the
Father was then living or not, one of the Geffrey Duttons of Chedle was also a
Knight, as appears in your Hist. Ant. p. 206. (though you conceal it in your
Addenda because you would have the Reader to believe there was no Sir Geffrey
Dutton living when that Deed of Tabley was made) which will as well serve my
turn; for, if Sir Geffrey of Budworth was then dead, then the Domino Galfrido
de Dutton is in that Deed to be applied to Sir Geffrey Dutton of Chedle; And
whilst they were both living, whenever you sind Domino Galfrido de Dutton
among the witnesses, it is certainly to be applied to one of the Knights, and
when you find Galfrido without Domino, it is as certainly meant of some Geffry
Dutton that was no Knight.

And whereas you object, p. 13. That Sir Geffrey Dutton of Budworth must needs
be dead, or else Geffrey the Son could not have passed away those Lands. That
does not follow, for I have known more then once, not only Sons in the
life-times of their Fathers, but also Grandchildren, who have been possessed of
Lands in their grandfathers time; And whereas you say that Margaret was
daughter, but not Daughter and heir of Geffrey Dutton; I cannot tell how that
will appear without the sight of Sir George Warburtons Deeds; Because Sir Peter
Dutton might be son to a Geffrey Dutton, and yet be Brother and heir-mal to
Geffrey the Father of Margaret. But be it how it will, she having the Manors
of Nether-Tabley, Wethale, and Hield, it can be no gross one, if it be any
mistake at all.

In your 14 Page, you would willingly heal an expression in your former Book,
by confessing it was too short; but, to make amends for this, you now overdoe
it; and because you would make us believe that you formely meant as you now
pretend, you say, that a little after, you did speak of Knights who usually
styled themselves thus -- Ego Dominus A. B. dedi, etc. or, Ego Dominus A. B.
Miles dedi, etc. But, whoever can find those words in your Answer, can find out
that which I am not able to do.

In your 16, 17 and 18 Pages, you keep a great stir about the word domino, when
it is prefixed to any names in subscriptions, and though you were willing in
your last Book to call Sir Raph Mainwaring, Sir Roger Mainwaring, Sir Thomas
Mainwaring, and Sir William Mainwaring, all of them Knights, yet now you are
dissatisfied concerning all but Sir Thomas Mainwaring, to whose name in a Fine
you find the word Milite added, and you would willingly insinuate that the
Dominus Willielmus Mainwaring was he who was Parson of Wernith, (though without
any cause as appears by the Deed wherein he is named.) And you ask me, whether
I have any Deed of Raph Mainwaring Judge of Chester, with the word Milite
added, which you well know that I have not, it being much, that I have those
Deeds of his which I have, being he was Judge of Chester so long since, viz. in
the time of Richard the First; But, I pray you, Why is not the word Domino,
when prefixed to the name of a Witness who was not a Clergyman, good proof
that he was a Knight? (especially since some who are likely to be the most
skilful in those matters, are of opinion that it is.) And why, if it be not
good proof, were you lately more complemental then you are now, and did break
your old Rule of Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, etc. in calling Raph, Roger,
and William Mainwaring Knights? Or, Why do not you prove the word domino
prefixed to some persons name, before he was made a Knight? Or, to one who was
no Clergyman, and but an Esquire, at the time of his death? Or, Why does not
the word domino prefixed to each of the names of the aforesaid Raph, Roger, and
William Mainwaring prove them to be Knights, as well as it does prove one of
the Geffrey Duttons of Budworth, and one of the Geffrey Duttons of Chedle to be
Knights? For, you confess, Page 13. of your Addenda, that you do not remember
any of them writing Ego Dominus Galfridus Dutton, dedi, etc. And, Why did not
you answer the Question which I asked of you in the 16. Page of my Reply? viz.
If the word Dominus do only signify Master, (as you would have it) What is the
reason, that in some Deeds it is only put before the names of some of the
witnesses, and not before the names of others? although those other persons to
whose names it is not put, many times are Lords of several Manors, and persons
of very great Estate. And, What is the reason that you do not call all the four
Geffrey Duttons Knights, as well as two of them? seeing in the 13 p. you say,
You have (if you mistake not) seen them all sometimes subscribed with Domino
prefixed, but not any of them writing himself, Ego Dominus, etc. Or, How comes
it to pass, that neither of the two Knights did ever write so, if what you say
in your 11th Page be true? Sure the Reader will easily perceive, what strange
work you yet make with these Geffreys and their Deeds.

In your 18th Page you also say, That I fasten upon you another untruth, where
I tell you, that you have seen the opinion of a Judge under his hand, with
Reasons for the same touching Amicia. But, whether this be an untruth or not,
let what you formerly sent me under your own hand determine, where you name the
Judge, and also take notice that his reasons were given under his hand; Let me
therefore advise you for the future to be more cautious what you write. And
whereas you also say, That your memory is not so bad, but you could remember
something of it or his name; Let the Reader look in your Hist. Ant. p. 135. l.
3. and p. 136. l. 43. or see your words in the 5 p. l. 15. and 12. p. l. 5.
printed with my Defense of Amicia, and he will there find that you did know the
Reasons of the said Judge.

And whereas you pretend, It was impossible for you to have alleged to the
two Heralds, the tenth part of what you could have done in so short a space; I
shall leave that to them, they being both yet living, as also whether they have
found any thing in your former Books concerning Amicia, which they have not
heard from you before. And as for your Lawyer of very good note, and good
Antiquary, you do well in concealing his Name, But certainly he was very unkind
that would not furnish you with some Precedents to make good what he said.

What you say in the 20th Page, and so on to the middle of the 23 Page, shows
clearly, that you are resolved not to be convinced; For, when at the first I
proved out of Monast. Angl. Part 2. p. 267. that Richard Bacuns Mother could
not be Hugh Cyveliok's daughter, because it was Randle de Gernoniis, not Randle
Blundevil, whom the said Richard called Uncle, in regard there was a William
Archbishop of York, and one whose Name began with an R. which was then Bishop
of Chester, both living in the time of the said Randle de Gernoniis: but that
there was no William Archbishop of York, during all the time of Randle
Blundevil, nor any man Bishop of Chester whose name began with R, after the
said Randle Blundevil could be old enough to seal a Deed, as also, because
Bacuns witnesses were contemporary with Randle de Gernoniis; You in the 54 and
55 Pages of your Answer, do not only say that you conceive the Roll from whence
the Deed in Monasticon was written is mistaken in Will. and R. (which was a
strange Answer) but you also say, There was no such Archbishop of York called
William, nor Bishop of Chester whose Christian name began with R. both living
at one time, either in the time of Randle Blundevil or Randle de Gernoniis that
you can find. But when you perceived that I had clearly proved by several
Authors, that a William was Archbishop of York, and that Roger Clinton was
Bishop of Chester in the time of Randle de Gernoniis, so that you could no
longer deny the same; You now in your Addenda would willingly avoid the
Argument, because the said William upon his first Election had not the Pall,
which all that know any thing will easily perceive to be a very weak Answer;
For he was consecrated Archbishop, and had possession of the Archbishopric
till after the deaths of Pope Innocent the Second, Pope Celestine the Second,
and Pope Lucius the Second; And if he was reputed Archbishop, he would be
called so, as well in Deeds as otherwise: And it is no wonder, since he was
looked upon by many to be the right Archbishop, and to be wrongfully suspended
by Pope Engenius, (as you may see in my Reply, Page 77. and so on to the 87.
Page) if some persons do name him according to the time of Election, and others
according to the time of his Restoration, which does reconcile those different
placings which you mention in your 22 p.

And whereas you again object, That Chester was then within the Province of
Canterbury, not York; I answered that in my last Book, where I told you that
the Archbishop was not named upon that account, but because some of the places
mentioned in the said Deed were within the Province and Diocese of York, as
particularly Rosington was, it being within the Westriding of York shire; And
if that Deed was not directed to an Archbishop of York, How came the word
Eboracensi there? But if you had foreseen I would have asked you this question,
I doubt not but you would have said, That the word Eboracensi was miswrit, as
well as the word Will, and the letter R.

In your 23, 24, and 25 Pages, you are disingenious, and do not recite my
Argument aright; For you pretend it only to lie in this, That Hugh VVac and
Richard Pincerna (two of the Witnesses to Bacuns Deeds) were also Witnesses to
a Deed made Anno 1152. which falls in the latter end of the life of Randle de
Gernoniis, whereas whoever will read the 88 and 89 Pages of my Reply, will
find that I named five Witnesses of Richard Bacuns, viz. Hugh Wac, Richard
Pineerna, William Colevile, Thurstan Benaster, and William the Chaplain, and
also did instance in five Deeds to which Randle de Gernoniis was a party, to
each of which, one, two, or three of the said Bacuns said witnesses were also
witnesses; and if you please you may also find a sixth Deed in Monast. Angl.
Part 1. p. 987. b. and a seventh Deed in Monast. Angl. Part 2. p. 260. b.

That which you did alleadg concerning two Deeds made at a great distance, is
nothing like this Case; Neither is there any weight in William Bacun's being a
witness to a single Deed of Randle Blundevils, for, he might be a young Man
when he was witness to Richard Bacuns Deed, and living to be old might be a
witness to one of Randle Blundevils Deeds, But it is probable he was Son,
Grandson, or other Kinsman of the other William Bacun; But, you deal a little
fallaciously with your Reader, when you say it was but Twenty nine years
betwixt the death of Randle de Gernoniis, and the time that Randle Blundevil
was Earl; For, though that be true, yet it would be a longer time before Randle
Blundevil could be old enough to seal a Deed, for his Mother was but Twenty
four years old when he came to be Earl.

What you object, p. 26 and 27, concerning the deed of VVarranty of Randle de
Gernoniis, or concerning Richard Bacuns being contemporary with Randle
Blundevil, is sufficiently answered; For, Why might not the said Deed of
Warranty be lost, as well as many thousands of other Deeds are? And that
Richard Bacun was contemporary with Randle de Gernoniis, I have abundantly
proved. And though in your 27 Page, you would have Bacuns Mother to be Hugh
Cyvelioks daughter, yet in the 25 Page you confess, that it is probable she was
a Bastard of Randle de Meschines, but finding that to contradict what you
afterward said, you have since the Printing thereof blotted it out of those
Books which you have disposed of in these parts; And, although I do not see but
that Bacuns Mother might be a lawful daughter of the said Randle de Meschines,
yet I will not further engage in her defense, but pass by that, and the course
language which you repeat at the latter end of your Book.

I have now done with your Addenda but since you have so abounded in that,
particular, I hope you will give me leave to add a word or two to what I have
formerly said.

I have heretofore proved that the aforesaid Bertred was but Twenty four years
of age in the year 1181, when her Husband died, by which it appears, that she
was born in the year 1157. I do also find in the Third Part of Mr. Dugdales
Monasticon Anglicanum, p. 226. that Hugh Cyveliok and his Mother Maude did give
Stivinghale, with a Mill next the Park, and some other Grounds, to Walter
Durdent Bishop of Chester and his successors, to which Deed Eustace the
Constable was witness; Now the said Earl Hugh being not in a capacity to seal a
Deed until he was One and twenty years of age, and the said Eustace being slain
(as appears by your Hist. Ant. p. 266.) in a Battle against the Welsh in the
said year 1157. If the said Deed was made immediately before the said Eustace
was slain, the said Hugh must needs be at the least One and twenty years older
then his Wife Bertred; But, it is very likely that Deed was made some years
before, viz. immediately upon the death of Randle de Gernoniis, For the said
Randle died Excommunicate, and Stivinghale and those other Lands were given for
his Absolution, and the health of his Soul.

But, besides what is here proved, if you look at the latter end of the Welsh
History put out by Dr. Powel 1584, immediately before the Table, you will see
that the 16 line of the 197 page of the said Welsh History is misprinted, and
that in the said Page it should have been Printed thus: About the same time
Hugh son to the Earl of Chester, sprtified his Castle of Cymaron, and wan
Melienyth to himself. And you may also there find, that the time when the said
Hugh wan Mclienith was in the year 1142.

Now that this Welsh History is of good credit, I hope you will not deny; For,
in the 44 Page of your Historical Antiquities, you acknowledge, that in these
Welsh matters you chiefly follow the same; And Dr. Powel in his Epistle, as
also in his Notes on the said History, p. 206. tells us, That Caradocus
Lhanearuan is reputed and taken of all learned men to be the Author of what is
therein written, until the year 1156. And as you may find in Vossius his Book,
de Historicis Latinis, p. 389. and in Isaacksons Chronology, p. 323. the said
Caradocus was living when the said Hugh wan Melienith.

The only Question therefore is, Of what age the said Hugh then was? And
because that is uncertain, and that I am willing to reckon so, as may be most
advantageous to you, I will suppose him to be then but Twelve years old, which
is the same age that Silvester Giraldus, p. 203. says Prince Lhewellin ap
Jorweth was of, when he began to infest his Unckles, and is indeed as young, as
I have observed any to appear in such Martial Affairs. Now, if we should
believe that Hugh Cyveliok did Marry the said Berired so soon as she was
fourteen years of age, then the said Marriage would happen in the year 1171. at
which time, if Hugh Cyveliok was born in the year 1130, and was but 12 years
old when he was Melienith, in the year 1142, yet he would be 41 years of Age
when he Married the said Bertred. It cannot therefore be imagined, that so
great a person should continue unmarryed till he was above Forty years old,
or that he should Marry to his first Wife, one so much different from him in
years; But, when he had Married a former Wife, who dyed leaving him only a
daughter or daughters, it is no wonder if in his age, he Married a young Lady,
to the intent he might have Issue-male to succeed him in so great an Estate; I
hope therefore, though you told me in the 49 Page of your Reply, That you can
gather no such quantity of years in respect of Hugh Cyvelioks age, reasonably
to suppose him to have had a former Wife, that these proofs will show, that
there were very many years betwixt them, and that thereupon you will be so
reasonable as to believe he had a Wife before he Married Bertred; And, if he
had a former Wife, there would be no cause to suspect Amicia to be
illegitimate, if your pretended Precedents had been such as you did untruly
suppose them to be; with which I will conclude what I have now to say, when I
have subscribed my self

Your Affectionate Cousin and Servant, Thomas Mainwaring.
Baddeley, Feb. 13. 1673/4.

