ESSAYS OF MICHAEL SEIGNEUR DE MONTAIGNE. IN THREE BOOKS. With Marginal Notes
and Quotations, And an Account of the Author's Life. With a short Character of
the Author and Translator, by a Person of Honor.

Made English by CHARLES COTTON, Esquire

-- Viresque acquirit eundo.

Virg. lib. 4. Aen. The First Volume.

The Third Edition, with the Addition of a Complete Table to each Volume, and a
full defense of the Author.

LONDON, Printed for M. Gillyflower and W. Hensman in Westminster Hall, and R.
Wellington in St. Paul's Church Yard, and H. Hindmarsh in Cornhill. 1700.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Marquess, Earl, and Viscount Hallifax, Baron of
Eland, Lord Privy Seal, and one of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
IF I have set down, the only opportunity I ever had of kissing your Lordships
Hands, amongst the happy Encounters of my Life, and take this occasion, so many
Years after, to tell you so, your Lordship will not, I hope, think your self
injured by such a Declaration from a Man that honors You; nor condemn my
Ambition, when I publish to the World, that I am not altogether unknown to You.
Your Lordship, peradventure, may have forgot a Conversation so little worthy
your remembrance: but the memory of your Lordship's obliging fashion to me all
that time, can never die with me: and though my Acknowledgment arrives thus
late at you, I have never left it at home when I went abroad into the best
Company. My Lord, I cannot, I would not flatter you, I do not think your
Lordship capable of being flattered, neither am I inclined to do it to those
that are: but I cannot forbear to say, that I then received such an impression
of your Virtue, and Noble Nature, as will stay with me for ever. This will
either excuse the Liberty I presume to take in this Dedication, or, at least,
make it no wonder; and I am so confident in your Lordship's Generosity, that I
assure my self you will not deny your Protection to a Man whose greatest
Public Crime is that of an ill Writer. A better Book (if there be a better of
the kind (in the Original I mean) had been a Present more fitly suited to your
Lordship's Quality and Merit, and to my Devotion. I could heartily wish it
such; but as it is, I lay it at your Lordship's Feet, together with

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, And most Obedient Servant, Charles Cotton.

Place this next after the Epistle Dedicatory.

ADVERTISEMENT.
SInce the Death of the Ingenious Translator of these Essays, an imperfect
Transcript of the following Letter was intended for the Press, but having the
good fortune to meet with a more correct Copy, I thought my self under a
necessity of Publishing it with this Third Edition, not only to do Justice to
his Memory, but to the Great Person he Chose for his Patron.

M. G.

This for Charles Cotton Esquire at his House at Berisford. To be left at Ashburne
in Darby-shire.
SIR,
I have to long delayed my Thanks to you for giving me such an obliging
Evidence of your Remembrance: that alone would have been a welcome Present, but
when joined with the Book in the World I am the best entertained with, it
raises a strong desire in me to be better known, where I am sure to be so much
pleased. I have till now thought Wit could not be Translated, and do still
retain so much of that Opinion, that I believe it impossible, except by one
whose Genius comes up to that of the Author. You have so kept the Original
Strength of his Thought, that it almost tempts a Man to believe the
Transmigration of Souls, and that his being used to Hills, is come into the
Moor-Lands to Reward us here in England, for doing him more Right then his
Country will afford him. He has by your means mended his First Edition: To
transplant and make him ours, is not only a Valuable Acquisition to us, but a
Just Censure of the Critical Impertinence of those French Scribblers who have
taken pains to make little Cavils and Exceptions, to lessen the Reputation of
this great Man, whom Nature has made too big to Confine himself to the
Exactness of a Studied Style. He let his Mind have its full Flight, and shows
by a generous kind of Negligence that he did not Write for Praise, but to give
to the World a true Picture of himself and of Mankind. He scorned affected
Periods, or to please the mistaken Reader with an empty Chime of Words. He has
no Affectation to set himself out, and depends wholly upon the Natural Force
of what is his own, and the Excellent Application of what he borrows.

You see, Sir, I have Kindness enough for Monsieur de Montaigne to be your
Rival, but no Body can now pretend to be in equal Competition with you: I do
willingly yield, which is no small matter for a Man to do to a more prosperous
Lover; and if you will repay this piece of Justice with another, pray believe,
that he who can Translate such an Author without doing him wrong, must not only
make me Glad but Proud of being his

Very humble Servant, Hallifax.

THE TRANSLATORS PREFACE TO THE READER.
MY Design in attempting this Translation, was to present my Country with a
true Copy of a very brave Original. How far I have succeeded in that Design is
left to every one to judge; and I expect to be the more gently censured, for
having my self so modest an Opinion of my own Performance, as to confess that
the Author has suffered by me, as well as the former Translator: though I hope,
and dare affirm, that the misinter pretations I shall be found guilty of, are
neither so numerous, nor so gross. I cannot discern my own Errors, it were
unpardonable in me if I could, and did not mend them; but I can see his (except
when we are both mistaken) and those I have corrected; but am not so ill
natured as to show where. In truth, both Mr. Florio, and I are to be excused,
where we miss of the sense of the Author, whose Language is such in many
Places, as Grammar cannot reconcile, which renders it the hardest Book to make
a justifiable version of that I yet ever saw in that, or any other Language I
understand: ^nsomuch, that though I do think, and am pretty confident, I
understand French as well as many Men, I have yet sometimes been forced to
grope at his meaning. Peradventure the greatest Critic would in some Places
have found my Author abstruse enough. Yet are not these Mistakes I speak of
either so many, or of so great importance, as to cast any scandalous blemish
upon the Book, but such as few Readers can discover, and they that do, will I
hope easily excuse.

The Errors of the Press, I must in part take upon my self, living at so remote
a distance from it, and supplying it with a slubber'd Copy from an illiterate
Amanuensis; the last of which is provided against in the Quires that must
succeed.

THE LIFE OF MICHAEL SEIGNEUR DE MONTAIGNE, Almost entirely taken out of his
own WORKS,
THE Race of Michael Seigneur de Montaigne, in Perigord, was Noble, but Noble
without any great luster till his time: As to Estate, he was seized of above
two thousand Crowns of yearly Revenue. He was born to his Father the third in
order of Birth of his Children, and by him delivered to Gossips of the meanest
Condition to be baptized, with a Design rather to oblige, and link him to those
who were likely to stand in need of him, than to such as he might stand in need
of: He moreover sent him from his Cradle to be brought up in a poor Village of
his, and there continued him all the while he was at Nurse, and longer, forming
him to the lowest, and most common manner of Living: Wherein he certainly so
well inured himself to Frugality and Austerity, that they had much ado, during
all the time of his Infancy especially, to correct the refusals he made of
things that Children of his age are commonly greedy of; as Sugars, Sweetmeats,
Marchpanes, and the like.

No doubt the Greek and Latin Tongues are a very Fair, and a very great
Advance; but, as he himself observes, they are now adays too dear bought. His
Father having made all diligent inquiry that possibly could be amongst the
Learned Men for an exquisite method of Education, was cautioned of the
inconvenience then in Use, and told, that the tedious time that is employed in
the Languages of the Ancient Greeks and Romans, which cost them nothing, is the
only reason, that we cannot arrive to that grandeur of Soul, and perfection of
Knowledge that was in them. The expedient that he found out for this was, that
whilst he was at Nurse, and before he began to Speak, he delivered him to the
Care of a German, who since died a famous Physician in France, totally ignorant
of our Language, and very well versed in the Latin Tongue. This Man, that he
had brought out of his own Country, and entertained with a very great Salary
for this purpose, had the Child continually in his Arms, to whom there were
added two others more moderately Learned, to attend him, and to Relieve the
fir^^, which three entertained him with no other Language but Latin. As to the
rest of the Family, it was an inviolable Rule, that neither his Father, nor so
much as his Mother, Man or Maid, spoke any Word in his hearing, but such as
every one had learned only to prattle with him. And it is not to be believed how
all of them profitted by this Method; his Father and Mother learned by this
means Latin enough to understand, and to serve themselves withal at need, as
also those Servants did, who were most about his Person. To be short, they did
Latin it at such a Rate, that it overflowed to the Neighboring Villages,
where, by Use, several Latin Appellations of Artizans and their Tools, have got
footing, and there remain to this day. For his part, he was above six years old
before he understood any more of French, or Perigordin, than of Arabic, and
without Art, Books, Grammar, or Precepts, without Whipping, and without Tears,
he had learned to speak as pure Latin as his Master, for he could neither alter
it nor mix it. If, for Example, they gave him a Theme, after the College Mode
they gave it to others in French, but they were fain to give it him in ill
Latin to put it into good: And Nicholas Gronchi, who has writ a Book de
Commitiis Romanorum, Guiliaume Guerente, who has writ a Commentary upon
Aristotle, George Buchanan, that great Scotch Poet, and Mark Anthony de Mureta,
whom both France and Italy acknowledge for the best Orator of his Time, his
Domestic Tutors, have often since told him, that he had that Language in his
Childhood so ready, and at hand, they were afraid to accost him.

As to the Greek, his Father designed to have it taught him by Art, but by a
new Method, and that by way of Sport and Recreation, they tossed their
Declensions to and fro, after the manner of those, who by certain Tricks upon
the Chess board, learn Arithmetic, and Geometry: so, amongst other things, he
had been advised to make him relish Learning and Duty, by an unforced Will, and
his own Device, and to Educate his Soul with all Sweetness and Liberty, without
Austerity or Compulsion. Which he also did to such a degree of Superstition,
that seeing some are of Opinion, that it troubles the Brains of Children to be
suddenly roused in a Morning, and to be snatched away from sleep, wherein they
are much deeper plunged than men, with haste and violence; he always caused him
to be waked by the sound of some Musical Instrument, and was never unprovided
of a Musician for that purpose.

But as they who are impatient to be cured, submit to all sorts of Remedies,
and every ones Advice; the good Man, being extremely timorous of failing in a
thing he had so much set his Heart upon, suffered himself at last to be carried
away by the common Opinion, which like Cranes always follow that which went
before, and submitted to Custom, having now no more those Persons about him,
who had given him the first Instructions, that he had brought out of Italy. And
about the sixth Year of his Age sent him to the College of Guyenne, at that
time very flourishing, and the best in France. And there it was not possible to
add any thing to the Care he had in choosing for him the best Chamber-Tutors,
and in all other Circumstances of Education, wherein he reserved several
particular Forms, contrary to the College Usance; but so it was, that it was a
College still, and this unusual method of Education, was here of no greater
advantage to him, than at his first coming to prefer him to one of the higher
Classes, for at thirteen Years of Age, he had run thorough his whole Course.

At the Age of three and thirty he married a Wife, though, might he have been
left free to his own Choice, he would have avoided marrying, even Wisdom her
self, had she been willing. But it is to much purpose, says he, to resist
Custom, and the common Usance of Life will have it so. Nevertheless, this
Marriage of his was not Spontaneous, he was put upon it, and led to it by odd
Accidents. And as great a Libertine as he confesses himself to be, he more
strictly observed his Matrimonial Vow, than he expected from, or had proposed
to himself.

His Father left him Montaigne in Partage as the eldest of his Sons,
Prophesying that he would Ruin it, considering his Humor; so little disposed
to live at home: But he was deceived for he lived upon it as he entered into it,
excepting, that it was something better, and yet without Office, or any other
Foreign helps. As to the rest, if Fortune never did him any violent or
extraordinary Offense, so she never showed him any signal Favor: Whatever he
had in his House that proceeded from her Liberality, was there before he came
to it, and above a hundred Years before his Time: He never in his own
particular had any solid and essential Advantages, for which he stood indebted
to her Bounty. She showed him Airy, Honorary, and Titular Favors, without
Substance; She procured for him the Collar of the Order of St. Michael, which,
when young, he covered above all other things, it being at that time the utmost
mark of Honor of the French Nobless, and very Rare. But of all her Favors,
there was none with which he was so well pleased, as an Authentic Bull of a
Roman Burgess, that was granted to him with great civility and bounty, in a
Journey he made to Rome, which is transcribed in Form in the sixth Chapter of
the third Book of his Essays.

Messieurs de Bourdeax, elected him Mayor of their City, being then out of the
Kingdom, and at Rome, and yet more Remote from any such Expectation, which made
him excuse himself; but that would not serve his turn, and moreover the King
interposed his Command. It Is an Office that ought to be looked upon with the
greatest Esteem, as it has no other Perquisits and Benefits belonging to it,
than the mere honor of its Execution. It lasts but two years, but may, by a
second Election, be continued longer, though that rarely happens. It was to
him, and had been so twice before, once some years since to Monsieur de Lausac,
and more lately to Monsieur de Byron, Marshall of France, in whose place he
succeeded, and lest his to Monsieur de Matiguon, also Marshall of France,
proud of so noble a Fraternity. His Father, a Man of great Honor and Equity,
had formerly also had the same Dignity. All the Children his Wife brought died
at Nurse saving Leonor an only Daughter whom he disposed in marriage some two
Years before his Death.

The first printing of his Essaies was in the Year 1580, at which time the
public Applause gave him, as he says, a little more assurance than he
expected. He has since added, but corrected nothing: His Book having been
always the same, saving that upon every new Impression, he took the Privilege
to add something, that the Buyer might not go away with his Hands quite empty.
His Person was strong, and well knit; his Fa^e not fat, but full, his
Complexion betwixt Jovial and Melancholic, moderately Sanguine and hot; his
Constitution healthful and spritely, rarely troubled with Diseases, till he
grew into Years, that he begun to be afflicted with the Cholick and Stone. As
to the rest, very obstinate in his hatred, and contempt of Physicians
Prescriptions; an hereditary Antipathy; his Father having lived threescore and
fourteen Years, his Grandfather threescore and nine; and his great Grandfather
almost fourscore Years, without having ever tasted any sort of Medicine.

He died in the Year 1592* the 13th. of September, a very constant, and
Philosophical Death, being aged fifty nine Years, six Months, and eleven Days;
and was buried at Bourdeaux, in the Church of a Commendary of St. Anthony, now
given to the Religious Feuillantines: where his Wife Francoise de la Cassaigne,
and his Daughter, have erected for him an honorable Monument, having, like his
Ancestors, past over his Life and Death in the Catholic Religion.

The Contents of the Chapters of the first Book.
Chapter 1. THat Men by various ways arrive at the same End. Chap. 2. Of Sorrow.
Chap. 3. That our Aff^^ctions carry themselves beyond Us. Chap. 4. That the
Soul discharges her Passions upon false Objects, where the true are wanting.
Chap. 5. Whether the Governor of a Place besieged ought himself to go out to
parley. Chap. 6. That the Hour of Parley is dangerous. Chap. 7. That the
Intention is Judge of our Actions. Chap. 8. Of Idleness. Chap. 9. Of Liars.
Chap. 10. Of Quick or Slow Speech. Chap. 11. Of Prognostication. Chap. 12. Of
Constancy. Chap. 13. The Ceremony of the Interview of Princes. Chap. 14. That
men are justly punished for being obstinate in the Defense of a Fort, that is
not in reason to be defended. Chap. 15. Of the Punishment of Cowardice. Chap.
16. A Proceeding of some Ambassadors. Chap. 17. Of Fear. Chap. 18. That Men
are not to judge of our Happiness, till after Death. Chap. 19. That to study
Philosophy is to learn to Die. Chap. 20. Of the Force of Imagination. Chap. 21.
That the Profit of one Man is the Inconvenience of another. Chap. 22. Of
Custom, and that we should not easily change a Law received. Chap. 23. Various
Events from the same Counsel. Chap. 24. Of Pedantry. Chap. 25. Of the Education
of Children. To Madam Diana of Foix, Countess of Gurson. Chap. 26. That it is
folly to measure Truth and Error by our own capacity. Chap. 27. Of Friendship.
Chap. 28. Nine and twenty Sonnets of Estienne de la Boetie to Madam de
Grammont, Countess of Guisson. Chap. 29. Of Moderation. Chap. 30. Of Cannibals.
Chap. 31. That a Man is soberly to judge of Divine Ordinances. Chap. 32. That
we are to avoid Pleasures, even at the expense of Life. Chap. 33. That fortune
is oftentimes observed to act by the Rule of Reason. Chap. 34. Of one Defect in
one Government. Chap. 35. Of the Custom of wearing Clothes. Chap. 36. Of Cato
the younger. Chap. 37. That we laugh and Cry for the same thing. Chap. 38. Of
Solitude. Chap. 39. A Consideration upon Cicero. Chap. 40. That the Relish of
Goods and Evils does in a great Measure depend upon the Opinion we have of
them. Chap. 41. Not to communicate a Man's Honor. Chap. 42. Of the Inequality
amongst us. Chap. 43. Of Sumptuary Laws. Chap. 44. Of Sleep. Chap. 45. Of the
Battle of Dreux. Chap. 46. Of Names. Chap. 47. Of the Incertainty of our
Judgment. Chap. 48. Of Horses dressed to the Menage, called Destrials Chap. 49.
Of Ancient Customs. Chap. 50. Of Democritus and Heraclitus. Chap. 51. Of the
Vanity of Words. Chap. 52. Of the Parcimony of the Ancients. Chap. 53. Of a
Saying of Caesar. Chap. 54. Of Vain Subtilties. Chap. 55. Of Smells. Chap. 56.
Of Prayers. Chap. 57. Of Age.
A VINDICATION OF Montagne's Essays.
THe Essays of Michel de Montagne are justly ranked amongst Miscellaneous
Books: for they are on various subjects, without order and connection; and the
very body of the discourses has still a greater variety. This sort of confusion
does not however hinder people of all qualities to extol these Essays above all
the Books that ever they read, and they make them their chief study. They think
that other Miscellanies of ancient and modern Books are nothing but an
unnecessary heap of quotations, whereas we find in this authorities to the
purpose, intermixed with the Authors own thoughts; which being bold and
extraordinary, are very effectual to cure men of their Weakness and Vanity, and
induce them to seek Virtue and Felicity by lawful means. But because every body
is not of this opinion, we must take notice here of what is said against, and
in favor of these Essays, to know what we should believe of 'em; and this is
the more necessary, because one meets with frequent opportunities to talk of
this Author, his Book being almost in the hands of all people.

The enemies of Montagne tell us, that his Book is so far from inspiring his
Readers with the love of Virtue, that on the contrary, some of his discourses
being stuffed with free and licentious words, they teach them some Vices of
which they were ignorant, or else are the occasion that they take a pleasure in
speaking thereof, and at last induce them to fall into the same. That his
Discourses upon several effects of Nature are rather fit to divert their
thoughts from true Religion, than to convince them of the truth of it, and are
altogether unbecoming a Christian Philosopher. That notwithstanding his
Propositions and Assertions are for the most part weak and false, yet they are
very dangerous for several persons, who either want Learning, or have too great
a bias for Libertinism. That besides an indifferent knowledge of practical
Morals and History, which Montagne had acquired in reading Seneca and Plutarch,
having conversed with few other Books, as he owns himself, he had hardly a
tincture of other Sciences and Arts, even not of the Theory of Moral
Philosophy. That he was as ignorant in other Parts of Philosophy, as Physic,
Metaphysick and Logic; which does sufficiently appear by his wrong inferences
on several things. That he understood very little what we call Humanity, or
Belles Lettres, as one may see by his unpolite style, and the confusion of his
discourses, which show him a very ill Grammarian, and a bad Rhetorician; and as
he talks as positively and boldly as the most learned men, Scaliger was used to
style him a bold Ignorant. These angry Gentlemen do likewise pretend, that what
is most admired in Montagne is stole from some ancient Authors, and that if
those quotations and the little stories he tells us about his Temper and
Inclinations were taken out of his Book, the rest would be very little or
nothing at all.

This is the substance of the most material objections made against Montagne;
not to mention here several Authors, who have purposely written against his
opinions, as Mr de Silhon in his Book of the Immortality of the Soul, wherein
he confutes what Montagne has alleged to prove that Brutes are capable of
thinking. Chanet in his Treatise of the operations of the Understanding, quotes
Montagne's Essays, as a work wherein Judgment had no share, Because, says he,
every judicious man loves order, and there is nothing but confusion in that
whole Book.

Having thus impartially related what is urged against Montagne, we proceed now
to mention what is said in his vindication. And we might here, in the first
place, make use of the long Preface Mademoiselle de Gournay has prefixed to the
French Folio Edition of his Essays, 1652, wherein she does not only give a full
answer to all the objections made, or that can be made against Montagne, but
also talks of him as of a man whose works have revived Truth in his Age, and
which therefore she calls the quintessence of Philosophy, the Hellebore of Man's
Folly, the Setter at Liberty of Understanding, and the Judicial Throne of
Reason. But we do not think fit to insist upon her Evidence, for
notwithstanding the solid arguments her opinion is grounded upon, she may be
suspected to be blindfolded with the passionate Love she had for her excellent
Father: and besides, we have so many great men to produce in favor of
Montagne, that we may without any prejudice to his Cause, wave the evidence of
Mademoiselle de Gournay. These will tell you, that if he has handled any
matters with an uncommon freedom, this is an effect of his generous Temper,
which was free from any base or servile compliance; and as to his Love for
Virtue, and his Religion, they appeal to his very Book itself, whereby that
truth will appear, if the passages alleged to prove the contrary are examined
without partiality, and not by themselves, but according to the connection they
have with what precedes or follows.

Stephen Pasquier, that sincere Writer, deals more fairly with Montagne than
Silhon, Balzac, or any other of his opposers, for he does not conceal his
faults, nor pass by what may be said to attenuate or excuse them. Montagne,
says he in one of his Letters, has several Chapters, whereof the Body is no
ways answerable to the Head, witness these following, The History of Spurina;
of the Resemblance of Children to their Parents, of the Verses of Virgil, of
Coaches, of Lame people, of Vanity, and Physiognomy. These are incoherent
things, wherein the Author runs from one subject to another, without any order
or connection. But after all, we must take of Montagne what is good, and not
look upon his Titles, but into his Discourses, for possibly he designed to
laugh at himself, others, and humane capacity, slighting thus the Rules and
servile Laws of Authors.

I shall add on this point, that notwithstanding several of his discourses do
contain quite different things from what is promised in the Titles, as Pasquier
has observed it, yet it does not always happen so; and when he has done it,
methinks it is rather through affectation than inadvertency, to show that he
did not intend to make a regular Work. This does likewise appear, by the odd,
or rather fantastical connection of his discourses, wherein from one matter he
makes long digressions upon several others. No doubt but he thought that one
might take the same Liberty in his Meditations, as is assumed in common
Conversations, in which, tho there be but two or three Interlocutors, it is
observed that there is such a variety in their discourses, that if they were
set down in writing, it would appear that by digressions they are run away from
their first subject, and that the last part of their conversation is very
little answerable to the first. This I verily believe was his true intention,
that he might present the World with a free and original Work; for Chanct nor
any other of his Adversaries will not be able to convince the World, that this
proceeded from want of Judgment in a man of such parts as they are obliged to
own in Montagne.

He designed also sometimes to conceal his design in his Titles; as for
instance, in his third Book, when having spent almost a whole Chapter against
Physicians, it is most likely that his intention was to conceal it by intitling
the same, of the Resemblance of Children to their Parents. For this gives him
an opportunity to tell us that he was afflicted with the Gravel as his Father
was, and to discourse of the Cure of several distempers, and at the same time
of the uncertainty of Physic, or rather of the ignorance of Physicians; from
whence I conclude, that in this whole Chapter, and several others, there is
rather a resin'd Art, than Ignorance. It has been also objected against him,
that he was so much in love with himself, that he talks of no body else in his
Writings, as if he intended to propose himself as a necessary Pattern to the
rest of Mankind, tho what he says of himself is for the most part odd and
fantastical. To this I answer, that any man may be an example to others, either
for doing Good, or eschewing evil; and that Montagne does not pretend that what
he says of himself should be taken for any other thing than really it is,
having a sufficient knowledge of all humane frailties, and of his own in
particular.

It Is somewhat surprising that Montagne should be blamed for quoting ancient
Authors, when this quotations are made a propos, that is, for confirming or
illustrating what he says, seeing Plutarch and several other excellent Authors
have taken the same liberty; and if it be objected, that the quotations in
Plutarch are taken from Greek Authors, and consequently are in the same
Language as his, whereas Montagne has stuffed his French Book with Greek, Latin
and Italian Verses; I answer that this is trifling, for if Montagne found
nothing in his own Language worthy of being cited, or else if he thought that
Ancient or Foreign Writers had better treated the matter he speaks of, Pray by
what Law, is he forbidden to make use of their Authority? I own, that in some
places, he has translated some passages of Ancient Authors into French, and has
so dexterously incorporated them into his Work, that he has in some manner made
them his own, but where is the great Crime in this, especially seeing he has a
World of thoughts of his own, which are more sublime and excellent, than what
he has alleged from others?

Balsac, in his XIX Entretien, reflects upon his Language, tho at the same time
he excuses it. He lived, says he, in the Reign of the Family of Valois, and was
a Gascon by Birth, and therefore it is impossible, but his Language must have
something of the Vice common to his Age and Country. However, we must own, that
his Soul was eloquent, and that he expressed his thoughts in bold masculine
expressions, and that his Style has some Beauties, above what we could have
expected from his Age. I Will say no more on this' Head, and I know that it would
be a sort of miracle, that a Person could politely speak French in the Barbary
of Quercy and Perigord. Should a Man, beset with bad examples, and deprived of
good ones, have courage and strength enough to defend himself alone against a
whole Nation? against his own Wife, Relations and Friends, who are as many
enemies to the purity of the French Tongue? The Court was likewise as corrupted
as the Country, so that it was then lawful to fail, there being then no settled
rules for our language; and those faults, which are more ancient than the Laws
themselves, are doubtless Innocent. I conclude, says he in another place, that
I have a great veneration for him, and that in my opinion he is comparable to
those Ancients whom we call Maximos Ingenio, Art rudes, etc.

What Balzac says in relation to the Court of France in the days of Montagne is
true enough, and very much to the purpose; but observe here the vanity and
malice of that Hypercritick, who must reflect upon Montagne's Country, as if it
were impossible that any body born in Perigord or Quercy should write French as
politely as he who was not born within a days journey from Montagne. I know
Balzac has written more politely than Montagne, and that the French Tongue is
much indebted to him, but he whose excellency was chiefly in the connection of
words, must not for all that pretend to set up for a Judge of the thoughts of
Montagne, as he has rashly ventured upon in his 18th and 19th Entretien.

It Is true, Montagne has some provincial expressions, but they are few in
number; and it is to be observed, that several words of his which were at first
excepted against, have been since adopted by the best Writers, this being the
privilege of great Authors to introduce new words. The French word Enjoue
(Merry) has not been always in use, tho it is now in the mouth of all the
Learned and Polite people, and Montagne was the first Author that I know of who
made use of it; and so they are obliged to him for this word, which does not
only signify a merry man, but likewise expresses the very effects of mirth in
his face, and chiefly upon his cheek, ( joues).

Those who tell us that Scaliger was used to call him a bold Ignorant, do
certainly a greater Injury to Scaliger than to Montagne, for the reputation of
that great man will never so far bias mankind as to make them believe that the
Author of a Book wherein there is so much Learning should be an Ignorant
Fellow. Scaliger was a better Judge, and as this is not to be found in any one
of his Works, I think one may venture to say, that this Calumny was contrived
by some of his Envious Enemies, who having not strength enough to encounter
him, made use of this artifice, to run down his merit with that great name.

Monsieur de Plassac, a great admirer of Montagne, corrected his Chapter of the
Vanity of Words into Modern French, but as he owns it himself, it was no more
Montagne's, whose similes and proverbial expressions, have a greater strenght,
than the nice Politeness of the Modern French Language, and besides Montagne's
discourse is every where full of sentences and solid Reason, which do not
always admit that smooth but empty way of writing, so much in vogue in France.

I do not however design to defend Montagne in every thing; far from it, I
blame his freedom in several places, and I cannot abide, that after having
discoursed of the exemplary Life of a Holy Man, he should immediately talk as
he does of Cuckoldom and Privy Parts, and other things of this nature, which
tho perhaps tolerable in another place, cannot be suffered in this; and I wish
he had left out these things, that Ladies might not be put to the blush, when
his Essays are found in their Libraries, and that they might improve themselves
by reading this excellent Book, without putting their modesty to any torment,
as they must needs do, when they come to these places.

As for the rest, there is hardly any humane Book extant, so fit as this to
teach Men what they are, and lead them insensibly to a reasonable observation
of the most secret Springs of their Actions; and therefore it ought to be the
manuale of all Gentlemen, his uncommon way of teaching, winning People to the
practice of Virtue, as much as other Books fright them away from it, by the
dogmatical and imperious way which they assume.

Thus we have answered all the material objections made against Montagne; for I
think the other trifles, which are objected against him, do not deserve to be
taken notice of, and I wonder that the Author of the Search after Truth should
spend his time upon them in a manner so unbecoming his Character. He tells us,
after Balzac and some others, that Montagne's Vanity and Pride, are not suitable
to an Author and Philosopher, that it was ridiculous and useless to keep a
Page, having hardly 6000 Livres a year, and more ridiculous still to have so
often mentioned it in his Writings: but I may answer, that it was very common
in his time, for Gentlemen of noble extraction to keep a Page, to show their
quality, tho their Estate could hardly afford them to keep a Footman, and that
the 6000 Livres a year, were then more than 20000 now adays. It was likewise
very much uncoming the gravity of our famous Searcher after Truth, to rail at
Montagne because he does not mention in his Essays, that he kept a Clerk, when
he was Councellor in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, for Montagne having exercised
that noble employment but for a short time, in his youth he had no occasion to
mention it, and who shall believe, that he has concealed it out of Vanity, he
who, in the opinion of Malbranche himself, talks of his imperfections and
vices, with too great a freedom? It is likewise very ungenerous and ungentleman
like to take no^ice, that he did not very well succeed in his Mayoralty of
Bourdeaux; The times he lived in were very troublesome, and supposing he
committed some Error, which they say without any Proof, what is that to the
merit of his Book? Balzac introduces a Gentleman, speaking thus to an admirer
of Montagne. You may praise your Author if you will more than our Cicero, but I
cannot fancy that a man, who governed all the World, was not at least equal to
a Person, who did not know how to govern Bourdeaux. This may very well pass for
a jest; but is it a rational way for confuting an Author, to have recourse unto
personal Reflections, or some incidents relating to his private Person or
Quality, This is so mean, that I cannot fancy Balzac could be guilty of it, and
I wholly impute it to those, who have published after his Death, some loose
discourses on several Subjects, which they have entitled his Entretiens.

Notwithstanding these objections, Montagne always had, and is like to have
Admirers, as long as Sense and Reason have any credit in the World. Justus
Lipsius calls him the French Thales, and Mezeray the Christian Seneca, and the
incomparable Thuanus has made an Eulogy of him, which being very short, I shall
transcribe it here.

Michel de Montagne Chevalier, was born in Perigord, in a Castle, which had the
name of his Family. He was made Councellor in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, with
Stephen de la Boetie, with whom he contracted so great a Friendship, that that
dear Friend was even after his Death the object of his respect and veneration.
Montagne was extraordinary Free and Sincere, as Posterity will see by his
Essays, for so he has entitled that Immortal Monument of his Genius.

While he was at Venice, he was elected Mayor of Bourdeaux, which place was
only bestowed upon persons of the first quality, and even the Governors of the
Province thought it was an honor for them. The Marshall de Matignon, who
commanded the Kings Forces in that Province, during the troubles of the State,
had such an esteem for him, that he communicated unto him the most important
affairs, and admitted him into his Council. As I had a correspondence with him
while I was in his Country, and since at Court, the conformity of our Studies
and Inclinations united us most intimately. He dyed at Montagne in the 60th
year of his Age.

This testimony of Thuanus is sufficient to justify the memory of our Author,
for no body will believe that a man of that integrity, would have been so great
a Friend, with so vicious a man as Malbranche has represented Montagne. I shall
therefore conclude this discourse with a very remarkable circumstance mentioned
by Thuanus in his own Life, lib. 3. which show that Montagne was beloved by the
greatest Princes in his time and honored with their confidence. While the
States of the Kingdom, says he, were sitting at Blois, Montagne and I were
discoursing of the division between the King of Navarre and the Duke of Guise,
whereupon he told me, that he knew the most secret thoughts of those Princes,
as having been employed to compose their differences, and that he was
persuaded, that neither of 'em was of the Religion he professed. That the King
of Navarr would have willingly embraced the Religion of his Predecessors, if he
had not feared that his Party had abandoned him, and that the Duke of Guise
would have declared himself for the confession of Augsburg, which the Cardinal
of Lorrain his Uncle had inspired him with, if he could have done it, without
any prejudice to his Interests.

I thought this circumstance was not unworthy of being placed here; but I must
beg the Readers pardon for having been so long, which must be attributed to the
respect I have for the Memory of that excellent author* I designed to show the
reason why Montagne meets with a more favorable entertainment in England than
in his Native Country, but having been already too long, I shall content my
self to observe that an Author who talks freely of every thing, is not suitable
to the temper of a servile Nation, who has lost all sense of Liberty.

Monsieur La Bruyere in his celebrated Book of the Characters or Manners of the
Age, gives another reason why some people condemn Montagne. Two Writers, says
he, (meaning La Mothe Le Vayer and Malbranche) have condemned Montagne: I know
that Author may be justly blamed in some things, but neither of 'em will allow
him to have any thing valuable. One of 'em thinks too little to taste such an
Author, who thinks a great deal; and the other thinks too subtilely to be
pleased with what is natural. This, I believe, is the general Character of
Montagne's enemies.

ESSAYS OF Michael Seigneur de Montaigne. The First BOOK.
CHAP. I.
That Men by various Ways arrive at the same end.
THE most likely and most usual way in Practice of appeasing the Indignation of
such as we have any way offended, when we see them in Possession of the Power
of Revenge, and find that we absolutely lie at their Mercy, Submission
mollifies the Hearts of the offended.
is by Submission (than which, nothing more flatters the Glory of an Adversary)
to move them to Commiseration and Pity: and yet Bravery, Constancy, and
Resolution, however quite contrary means, have sometimes served to produce the
same effect. Edward the Black Prince of Wales (the same who so long governed
our Province of Guienne, Edward the Black Prince.
a Person whose high Condition, excellent Qualities, and remarkable Fortune,
have in them a great deal of the most noble and most considerable Parts of
Grandeur) having, through some Misdemeanors of theirs, been highly incensed by
the Limosins, and in the heat of that Resentment taking their City by Assault,
was not, in the Riot commonly attending such Executions, either by the
Outcries of the People, or the Prayers and Tears of the Women and Children,
abandoned to Slaughter and prostrate at his Feet for Mercy, to be stayed from
prosecuting his Revenge; till, penetrating further into the Body of the Town,
he at last took notice of three French Gentlemen, Remarkable Valor of three
French Gentlemen.
who with incredible Bravery, alone sustained the whole Power of his victorious
Army: And then it was, that the Consideration of, and the Respect unto so
remarkable a Virtue, first stopped the Torrent of his Fury, and that his
Clemency, beginning in the Preservation of these three Cavaliers, was
afterward extended to all the remaining Inhabitants of the City. Scanderbeg.
Scanderbeg Prince of Epirus, in great Wrath pursuing one of his Soldiers,
with a resolute Purpose to kill him, and the Soldier having in vain tried by
all the ways of Humility and Supplication to appease him, seeing him
notwithstanding obstinately bent to his Ruin, resolved, as his last Refuge, to
face about and expect him with his Sword in his Hand; which Behavior of his
gave a sudden stop to his Captain's Fury, who, seeing him assume so notable a
Resolution, received him to Grace: an Example, however, that might suffer
another Interpretation with such as have not read of the prodigious Force and
Valor of that invincible Prince. The Emperor Conrade the 3 d. having besieged
Guelpho Duke of Bavaria, would not be prevailed upon, what mean and unmanly
Satisfactions soever had been tendered to him, to condescend to milder
Conditions, than that the Ladies and Gentlewomen only who were in the Town
might go out without Violation of their Honor, on Foot and with so much only
as they could carry about them. Which was no sooner known, but that out of
Magnanimity of Heart, Conjugal Love.
and an Excess of good Nature, they presently contrived to carry out, upon
their Shoulders, their Husbands and Children, and even the Duke himself; a
Sight at which the Emperor was so pleased, that ravished with the Generosity
of the Action, he wept for Joy, and immediately extinguishing in his Heart the
mortal and implacable Hatred he had conceived against this Duke, he from that
time forward, treated Him and His with all Humanity and Affection. The one, or
the other, of these two ways, would with great Facility work upon my Nature;
for I have a mavelous Propensity to Mercy and Mildness, and to such a degree
of Tenderness, that I fancy, of the two I should sooner surrender my Anger to
compassion than Esteem: And yet Pity is reputed a Vice amongst the Stoics,
Pity reputed a Vice amongst the Stoics.
who will that we succor the Afflicted, but not that we should be so affected
with their Sufferings as to suffer with them. I conceived these Examples not
ill suited to the Question in hand, and the rather, because therein we observe
these great Souls, assaulted and tried by these two several ways to resist the
one without relenting, and to be shook and subjected by the other. It is true,
that to suffer a Man's Heart to be totally subdued by Compassion, may be
imputed Facility, Effeminacy, and Over-tenderness; whence it comes to pass,
that the weakest Natures, as of Women, Children, and the Common sort of People,
are the most subject to it: but after having resisted, and disdained the Power
of Sighs and Tears, to surrender a Man's Animosity to the sole Reverence of the
Sacred Image of Virtue, this can be no other than the Effect of a strong and
inflexible Soul, enamored of, and ravished with a Masculine and obstinate
Valor. Nevertheless, Astonishment and Admiration may in less generous Minds
beget a like Effect. Witness the People of Thebes, who having put two of their
Generals upon Trial for their Lives, for having continued in Arms beyond the
precise Term of their Commission, very hardly pardoned Pelopidas, who bowing
under the weight of so dangerous an Accusation, had made no manner of Defense
for himself, nor producd other Arguments than Prayers and Supplications to
secure his Head; whereas, on the contrary, Epaminondas being brought to the
Bar, and falling to magnify the Exploits he had performed in their Service,
and after a haughty and arrogant manner reproaching them with Ingratitude and
Injustice, they had not the Heart to proceed any further in his Trial, but
broke up the Court and departed, the whole Assembly highly commending the
Courage and Confidence of this Man. Dionysius the elder, The Cruelty of
Dionysius the Tyrant.
after having by a tedious Siege, and through exceeding great Difficulties,
taken the City of Rhegium, and in it the Governor Phyton, a very gallant Man,
who had made so obstinate a Defense, he was resolved to make him a tragical
Example of his Revenge; in order whereunto, and the more sensibly to afflict
him, he first told him, That he had the Day before caused his Son and all his
Kindred to be drowned: To which Phyton returned no other Answer but this, That
they were then by one Day happier than he. After which, causing him to be
stripped, and delivering him into the Hands of the Tormentors, he was by them
not only dragged through the Streets of the Town, and most ignominiously and
cruelly whipped, but moreover, vilified with most bitter and contumelious
Language: yet still, in the Fury of all this Persecution, he maintained his
Courage entire all the way, with a strong Voice and undaunted Countenance
proclaiming the glorious Cause of his Death; namely, for that he would not
deliver up his Country into the Hands of a Merciless Tyrant; at the same time
denouncing against him a sudden Chastisement from the offended Gods. At which
the Tyrant rolling his Eyes about, and reading in his Soldiers looks, that
instead of being incensed at the haughty Language of this conquered Enemy, to
the Contempt of him their Captain and his Triumph, they not only seemed struck
with Admiration of so rare a Virtue, but moreover inclined to Mutiny, and were
even ready to rescue the Prisoner out of the Hangman's hands, he caused the
Execution to cease, and afterward privately caused him to be thrown into the
Sea. Man (in good earnest) is a Mavelous vain, fickle, and unstable Subject,
and on whom it is very hard to form any certain or proportionate Judgment. For
Pompey could pardon the whole City of the Mammertines, Pompey.
though furiously incensed against it, upon the single Account of the Virtue
and Magnanimity of one Citizen, Zeno, who took the Fault of the Public wholly
upon himself; neither entreated other Favor, but alone to undergo the
Punishment for all: And yet Sylla's Host, having in the City of Perusia
manifested the same Virtue, obtained nothing by it, either for himself or his
Fellow Citizens. And, directly contrary to my first Examples, the bravest of
all Men, and who was reputed so gracious and civil to all those he overcame,
Alexander the Great, Alexander.
having after many great Difficulties forced the City of Gaza, and entering
found Betis, who commanded there, and of whose Valor in the time of this Siege
he had most noble and manifest Proof, alone, forsaken by all his Soldiers, his
Arms hacked and hewed to pieces, covered all over with Blood and Wounds, and
yet still fighting in the Crowd of a great Number of Macedonians, who were
laying on him on all sides, he said to him, netled at so dear bought Victory,
and two fresh Wounds he had newly received in his own Person, Thou shall not
die Betis so honorably as thou do intend, but shall assuredly suffer all the
Torments that can be inflicted on a miserable Captive. To which Menaces the
other returning no other Answer, but only a fierce and disdainful Look; What,
says the Conqueror Obstinate silence of Betis.
(observing his obstinate Silence) Is he too stiff to bend a Knee! Is he too
proud to utter one suppliant Word! I shall certainly conquer this Silence; and
if I cannot force a Word from his Mouth, I shall at least extract a Groan from
his Heart. And thereupon converting his Anger into Fury, presently commanded
his Heels to be boar'd through, causing him alive to be dragged, mangled, and
dismembered at an infamous Carts-Tail. Was it that the height of Courage was so
natural and familiar to this Conqueror, that because he could not admire, he
should the less esteem this Hero? Or was it that he conceived Valor to be a
Virtue so peculiar to himself, that his Pride could not, without Envy, endure
it in another? Or was it that the natural Impetuosity of his Fury was incapable
of Opposition? Certainly, had it been capable of any manner of Moderation or
Saticty, it is to be believed, that in the Sack and Desolation of Thebes, to
see so many valiant Men lost and totally destitute of any further Defense,
cruelly massacred before his Eyes, would have appeased it. Where there were
above six thousand put to the Sword, of which not one was seen to fly, or heard
to cry out for Quarter; but on the contrary, every one running here and there
to seek out and to provoke the Victorious Enemy to help them to an honorable
end. Not one who did not to his last Gasp yet endeavor to revenge himself, and
with all the Arms of a brave Despair to sweeten his own Death in the Death of
an Enemy. Yet did their Virtue create no Pity, and the length of one day was
not enough to satiate the Thirst of the Conquerour's Revenge; but the Slaughter
continued to the last drop of Blood that was capable of being shed, and stopped
not till it met with none but naked and impotent Persons, old Men, Women, and
Children, of them to carry away to the number of thirty thousand Slaves.

CHAP. II.
Of Sorrow.
NO Man living is more free from this Passion than I, who neither like it in my
self, nor admire it in others, and yet generally the World, (I know not why) is
pleased to grace it with a particular Esteem, endeavoring to make us believe,
That Wisdom, Virtue and Conscience shroud themselves under this grave and
affected Appearance. Foolish and sordid Disguise! The Italians however under
the Denomination of Un Tristo, decypher a clandestine Nature, a dangerous and
ill-natured Man: And with good reason, it being a Quality always hurtful,
always idle and vain, and as cowardly, mean, and base, by the Stoics expressly,
and particularly forbidden their Sages: But the Story, nevertheless, says, that
Psammenitus, King of Egypt, being defeated and taken Prisoner by Cambyses King
of Persia, seeing his own Daughter pass by him in a wretched Habit, with a
Bucket to draw Water, though his Friends about him were so concerned as to
break out into Tears and Lamentations at the miserable sight; yet he himself
remained unmoved, without uttering a Word of Discontent, with his Eyes fixed
upon the Ground: and seeing moreover his Son immediately after led to
Execution, still maintained the same Gravity and Indifference; till spying at
last one of his Domestics dragged away amongst the Captives, he could then
hold no longer, but fell to tearing his Hair, and beating his Breast, with all
the other Extravagancies of a wild and desperate Sorrow. A Story that may very
fitly be coupled with another of the same kind, of a late Prince of our own
Nation, who being at Trent, and having News there brought him of the Death of
his Elder Brother, but a Brother on whom depended the whole Support and Honor
of his House, and soon after of that of a younger Brother, the second Hope of
his Family, and having withstood these two Assaults with an exemplary
Resolution, one of his Servants happening a few days after to die, he suffered
his Constancy to be overcome by his last Accident; and parting with his
Courage, so abandoned himself to Sorrow and Mourning, that some from thence
were forward to conclude, that he was only touched to the Quick by this last
Stroke of Fortune; but, in truth, it was, that being before brim full of Grief,
the least Addition overflowed the Bounds of all Patience. Which might also be
said of the former Example, did not the Story proceed to tell us, That Cambyses
asking Psammenitus, Why, not being moved at the Calamity of his Son and
Daughter, he should with so great Impatience bear the Misfortune of his Friend?
It is (answered he) because this last affliction was only to be manifested by
Tears, the two first exceeding all manner of Expression. And peradventure
something like this might be working in the Fancy of the ancient Painter who
being in the Sacrifice of Iphigenia to represent the Sorrow of the Assistants
proportionably to the several Degrees of Interest every one had in the Death of
this fair innocent Virgin; and having in the other Figures laid out the utmost
Power of his Art, when he came to that of her Father, he drew him with a veil
over his Face, meaning thereby, that no kind of Countenance was capable of
expressing such a degree of Sorrow. Which is also the reason why the Poets
feign the miserable Mother Niobe, having first lost seven Sons, and
successively as many Daughters, to be at last transformed into a Rock, Ovid.
Met. lib. 6.
Diriguisse malis, -- Whom Grief alone,
Had Power to stiffen into Stone.
Thereby to express, that melancholic, dumb, and deaf Stupidity, which benumbs
all our Faculties when oppressed with Accidents greater than we are able to bear;
and indeed the Violence and Impression of an excessive Grief, must of necessity
astonish the Soul, and wholly deprive her of her ordinary Functions: As it
happens to every one of us, who upon any sudden Alarm of very ill News, find
our selves surpised, stupefied, and in a manner deprived of all Power of
Motion, till the Soul beginning to vent it self in sighs and Tears, seems a
little to free and disingage it self from the sudden Oppression, and to have
obtained some room to work it self out at greater liberty.

Aeneid. l. 11.
Et via vix tandem voci laxata dolor est. Yet scarce at last by struggling
Grief, a Gate
Unbolted is for Sighs to sally at.
In the War that Ferdinand made upon the Widow of King John of Hungary about
Buda, a Man at Arms was particularly taken notice of by every one for his
singular gallant Behavior in a certain Encounter; unknown, highly commended,
and as much lamented, being left Dead upon the Place: But by none so much as by
Raisciac a German Lord, who was infinitely unamour'd of so unparalleled a
Virtue. When the Body being brought off, and the Count with the common
Curiosity coming to view it, the Arms were no sooner taken off, but he
immediately knew him to be his own Son. A thing that added a second Blow to the
Compassion of all the Beholders; only he, without uttering a Word, or turning
away his Eyes from the woeful Object, stood fixtly contemplating the Body of his
Son, till the Vehemence of Sorrow having overcome his Vital Spirits made him
sink down stone dead to the Ground.

Petrarea, Sonetto 158.
Chi puo dir com' egli arde e in picciol fuoco? -- What Tongue is able to
proclaim How his Soul melted in the gentle Flame? say the Inamorato's when they
would represent an insupportable Passion.

Cat. Epig. 52.
misero quod omnes
Eripit sensus mihi. Nam simul te,
Lesbia, aspexi, nihil est super me
Quod loquar amens,
Lingua sed torpet tenuis, sub artus
Flamma dimanat, sonitu suopte
Tinniunt aures, gemina teguntur
Lumina nocte.
-- all conquering Lesbia, thine eyes
Have ravished from me all my Faculties:
At the first Glance of their victorious Ray
I was so struck I knew not what to say;
Nor had a Tongue to speak; a subtle Flame
Crept through my veins; my tingling ears became
Deaf without noise, and my poor eyes I found
With a black Veil of double darkness bound.
Neither is it in the height and greatest Fury of the Fit, that we are in a
condition to pour out our Complaints, or to sally into Courtship, the Soul
being at that time overburthened, and laboring with profound Thoughts: and the
Body dejected and languishing with Desire; and thence it is, that sometimes
proceed those accidental Impotencies that so unseasonably surprise the willing
Lover, and that Frigidity which by the force of an Immoderate Ardour, so
unhappily seizes him even in the very lap of Fruition: For all Passions that
suffer themselves to be relished and digested, are but moderate.

Seneca Hippol. Act. 2. Scen. 3.
Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. His grief's but easy, who his grief
can tell,
But piercing Sorrow has no Article.
A surprise of unexpected Joys does likewise often produce the same effect.

Virg. Aeneid.
Ut me conspexit venientem, and Troia circum
Arma amens vidit, magnis exterrita monstris,
Diriguit visu in medio, calor ossa reliquit,
Labitur, and longo vix tandem tempore fatur.
Soon as she saw me coming, and beheld
The Trojan Ensigns waving in the Field,
O'er-joy'd, and ravished at th'unlook'd for sight,
She turned a Statue, lost all feeling quite;
Life's gentle Heat did her stiff Limbs forsake,
She swoon'd, and scarce after long swooning spoke.
To these we have the Examples of the Roman Lady, who died for Joy to see her
Son safe returned from the Defeat of Cannae; and of Sophocles, and Dionysius
the Tyrant, who died of Joy; and of Talva, who died in Corsica, reading News of
the Honors the Roman Senate had decreed in his Favor. We have moreover one,
in the time of Pope Leo the tenth, who upon News of the taking of Milan, a
thing he had so ardently and passionately desired, was rapt with so sudden an
excess of Joy, that he immediately fell into a Fever and died. And for a more
authentic Testimony of the imbecility of Humane Nature, it is recorded by the
Ancients, that Diodorus the Logician died upon the Place, out of an extreme
Passion of Shame, for not having been able in his own School, and in the
presence of a great Auditory, to disingage himself from a nice Argument that
was propounded to him. I for my part am very little subject to these violent
Passions; I am naturally of a stubborn apprehension, which also by discourse, I
every day harden and fortify more and more.

CHAP. III.
That our Affections carry themselves beyond us.
SUch as accuse Mankind of the folly of gaping and panting after future things,
and advise us to make our Benefits of those which are present, and to set up
our rest upon them, as having too short a reach to lay hold upon that which is
to come, and it being more impossible for us, than to retreive what is past;
have hit upon the most universal of Humane Errors, if that may be called an
Error to which Nature it self has disposed us, who in order to the
subsistence, and continuation of her own Work, has, amongst several others,
prepossessed us with this deceiving Imagination, as being more jealous of our
Action, than afraid of our Knowledge. For we are never present with, but always
beyond our selves. Fear, Desire and Hope, are still pushing us on toward the
future, depriving us in the mean time of the Sense and Consideration of that,
which is to amuse us, with the thought of what shall be, even when we shall be
no more.

Seneca, Epist. 98.
Calamitosus est Animus futuri anxius. A Mind that anxious is of things to come,
Is still abroad, finding no rest at home.
We find this great Precept often repeated in Plato, Do thine own Work, and
know thy self. Of which two Parts, both the one and the other generally
comprehend our whole Duty, and consequently do each of them complicate and
involve the other; for, who will do his own Work aright, will find that his
first Lesson is to know himself: And who rightly understands himself, will
never mistake another Man's Work for his own, but will love and improve himself
above all other things, will refuse superfluous Employments, and reject all
unprofitable Thoughts and Propositions. And, as folly on the one side, though
it should enjoy all it can possibly desire, would notwithstanding never be
content; so on the other, Wisdom does ever acquiesce with the present, and is
never dissatisfied with its immediate Condition: And that is the reason why
Epicurus dispences his Sages from all Foresight and Care of the future.
Amongst those Laws that relate to the Dead, I look upon that to be the best, by
which the Actions of Princes are to be examined and sifted after their Decease.
They are equal at least, while Living, if not above the Laws, and therefore
what Justice could not inflict upon their Persons, it is but reason should be
executed upon their Reputations, and the Estates of their Successors, Things
that we often value above Life it self: A Custom of singular advantage to those
Countries where it is in use, and by all good Princes as much to be desired,
who have reason to take it ill, that the Memories of the Tyrannical and Wicked
should be used with the same Reverence and Respect with theirs. We owe, it is
true, Subjection and Obedience to all our Kings, whether good or bad, alike,
for that has respect unto their Office; but as to Affection and Esteem, those
are only due to their Virtue. Let it be granted, that by the Rule of Government
we are with Patience to endure unworthy Princes, to conceal their Vices, and to
assist them in their indifferent Actions, whilst their Authority stands in need
of our Support: Yet, the Relation of Prince and Subject being once at an end,
there is no reason we should deny the Publication of our real wrongs and
sufferings to our own Liberty and common Justice, and to interdict good
Subjects the Glory of having submissively and faithfully served a Prince, whose
Imperfections were to them so perfectly known, were to deprive Posterity of so
good an Example; and such as out of respect to some private Obligation, shall,
against their own Knowledge and Conscience, espouse the Quarrel, and vindicate
the Memory of a faulty Prince, do a particular Right at the Expense, and to the
Prejudice of the Public Justice. Livy does very truly say, That the Language
of Men bred up in Courts, is always sounding of vain Ostentation, and that
their Testimony is rarely true, every one indifferently magnifying his own
Master, and stretching his Commendation to the utmost extent of Virtue and
Sovereign Grandeur: And it is not impossible but some may condemn the freedom of
those two Soldiers, who so roundly answered Nero to his Face, the one being
asked by him, Why he bore him ill Will? I loved thee, answered he, whilst thou
were worthy of it, but since thou art become a Parricide, an Incendiary, a
Waterman, a Fiddler, a Player, and a Coachman, I hate thee as thou do deserve:
and the other, Why he should attempt to kill him? Because, said he, I could
think of no other Remedy against thy perpetual Mischiefs. But the public and
universal Testimonies that were given of him after his Death (and will be to
all Posterity, both of him and all other wicked Princes like him) his Tyrannies
and abominable deportment considered, who, of a sound Judgment, can reprove
them? I am scandalized, I confess, that in so sacred a Government as that of
the Lacedaemonians, there should be mixed so hypocritical a Ceremony at the
Enterment of their Kings; Ceremony of the Lacedaemonians at the Enterment of
their Kings.
where all their Confederates and Neighbors, and all sorts and degrees of Men
and Women, as well as their Slaves, cut and slashed their Foreheads in Token
of Sorrow, repeating in their Cries and Lamentations, That that King (let him
have been as wicked as the Devil) was the best that ever they had; by this
means attributing to his Quality the Praises that only belong to Merit, and
that of Right is properly due to the most supreme Desert, though lodged in the
lowest and most inferior Subject. Aristo^le (who will still have a hand in
every thing) makes a Quaere upon the saying of Solon, Th^^ none can be said to
be happy until he be dead Whether then any one of those who have lived and
died according to their Hearts Desire, if ^e have left an ill Repute behind
him, and the his Posterity be miserable, can be said to be happy? Whilst we
have Life and Motion, we convey our selves by Fancy and Preoccupation, whither
and to what we please; but once o^^ of Being, we have no more any manner of
Communication with what is yet in Being^ and it had therefore been better said
of Sol^* That Man is never happy, because never so till after he is no more.

Lucret. lib. 3.
-- Quisquam
Vix radicitus e vita se tollit, and ejicit,
Sed facit esse sui quiddam super inscius ipse,
Nec removet satis a projecto corpore sese; and
Vindicat.
No dying Man can truss his Baggage so,
But something of him he must leave below:
Nor from his Carcass that does prostrate lie
Himself can clear, or far enough can fly.
Bertrand de Glesquin, dying before the Castle of Rancon near unto Puy in
Auvergne, the Besieged were afterward, upon Surrender, enjoined to lay down
the Keys of the Place upon the Corpse of the dead General. Bartolcmew d'
Alviano, the Venetian General, happening to die in the Service of the Republic
in Brascia; and his Corpse being to be carried thorough the Territory of Verona,
an Enemy's Country, most of the Army were of Opinion to demand safe Conduct
from the Veronese, supposing, that upon such an occasion it would not be
denied: But Theodoro Trivulsio highly opposed the Motion, rather choosing to
make his way by force of Arms, and to run the hazard of a Battle, saying it was
by no means decent, and very unfit, that he who in his Life was never afraid of
his Enemies should seem to apprehend them when he was dead. And in truth, in
Affairs of almost the same Nature, by the Greek Laws, he who made Suit to an
Enemy for a Body to give it Burial, did by that Act renounce his Victory, and
had no more Right to erect a Trophy; and he to whom such Suit was made, was
ever, whatever otherwise the Success had been, reputed Victor. By this means it
was, that Nicias lost the Advantage he had visibly obtained over the
Corinthians, and that Agesilaus, on the contrary, assured what he had before
very doubtfully gained of the Boeotians. These Proceedings might appear very
odd, had it not been a general Practice in all Ages, not only to extend the
Concern of our Persons beyond the Limits of Life, but moreover, to fancy that
the Favor of Heaven does not only very often accompany us to the Grave, but
has also, even after Life, a Concern for our Ashes: of which there are so many
ancient Examples (waving those of our own Observation of later date) that it is
not very necessary I should longer insist upon it. Edward King of England, and
the first of that Name, having in the lo^^ Wars betwixt him and Robert King of
Scotland, had sufficient Experience of how great Importance his own immediate
Presence wa^ to the Success of his Affairs, having ever be^^ victorious in
whatever he undertook in (...) own Person; when he came to die, bound (...) Son
in a Solemn Oath, that so soon as he should be dead, he should boil his Body
(...) the Flesh parted from the Bones, and reser^^ them to carry continually
with him in his Army, so often as he should be obliged to go against the Scots;
as if Destiny had inevitably grapled Victory even to those miserable Remains.
Jean Zisca, the same who so often (...) Vindication of Wicklisse's Heresies,
infested (...) Bohemian State, left order that they should flea him after his
Death, and of his Skin (...) make a Drum, to carry in the War against (...)
Enemies, fansying it would much contribu^^ to the Continuation of the Successes
he had always obtained in the War against them. I^ like manner, certain of the
Indians, in a Day of Battle with the Spaniards, carried with them the Bones of
one of their Captains, i^ consideration of the Victories they had for merly
obtained under his Conduct. And other People of the same new World do yet carry
about with them in their Wars the Relics of valiant Men who have dyed in
Battle, to incite their Courage, and advance their Fortune: of which Examples,
the first reserve nothing for the Tomb, but the Reputation they have acquired
by their former Achievements; but these proceed yet further, and attribute a
certain Power of Operation. The last Act of Captain Bayard is of a much better
Composition; who, finding himself wounded to Death with a Harquebuze Shot, and
being by his Friends importuned to retire out of the Fight, made Answer, That
he would not begin at the last Gasp to turn his Back to the Enemy; and
accordingly still fought on, till feeling himself too faint, and no longer able
to sit his Horse, he commanded his Steward to set him down against the Root of
a Tree, but so that he might die with his Face toward the Enemy which he also
did. I must yet add another Example equally remarkable, for the present
Consideration, with any of the former. The Emperor Maximilian, great
Grandfather to Philip the Second, King of Spain, was a Prince endowed
throughout with great and extraordinary Qualities, and amongst the rest, with a
singular Beauty of Person; but had withal, a Humor very contrary to that of
other Princes, who for the dispatch of their most Important Affairs convert
their Closestool into a Chair of State, which was, that he would never permit
any of his Bedchamber, in what familiar degree of Favor soever, Modesty of
Maximilian the Emperor.
to see him in that Posture; and would steal aside to make Water as religiously
as a Virgin, and was as shy to discover either to his Physician, or any other
whatever, those Parts that we are accustomed to conceal: And I my self, who
have so impudent a way of Talking, am nevertheless naturally so modest this
way, that unless at the Importunity of Necessity, or Pleasure, I very rarely
and unwillingly communicate, to the Sight of any, either those Parts or Actions
that Custom orders us to conceal, wherein I also suffer more Constraint than I
conceive is very well becoming a Man, especially of my Profession: but he
nourished this modest Humor to such a degree of superstition, as to give
express Orders in his last Will, that they should put him on Drawn so soon as
he should be dead; to which methinks he would have done well to have added,
that he should have been hoodwinked too that put them on. The Charge that Cyrus
left with his Children, Cyrus's Reverence to Religion. Xenoph^n.
that neither they nor any other should either see or touch his Body after the
Soul was departed from it, I attribute to some superstitious Devotion of his;
both his Historian, and Himself, amongst other great Qualities, having strewn
the whole Course of their Lives with a singular Respect to Religion. I was by
no means pleased with a Story was told me by a Man of very great Quality, of a
Relation of mine, and one who had given a very good Account of himself both in
Peace and War; that coming to die in a very old Age, of an excessive Pain of
the Stone, he spent the last Hours of his Life in an extraordinary Solicitude
about ordering the Ceremony of his Funeral, pressing all the Men of Condition
who came to see him, to engage their Word to attend him to his Grave,
importuning this very Prince, who came to visit him at his last Gasp, with a
most earnest Supplication, that he would order his Family to be assisting
there, and withal representing before him several Reasons and Examples to prove
that it was a Respect due to a Man of his Condition; and seemed to die content,
having obtained this Promise, and appointed the Method and Order of his Funeral
Parade. I have seldom heard of so long lived a Vanity. Another, though contrary
Solitude (of which also I do not want domestic Example,) seems to be somewhat
akin to this; That a Man shall cudgel his Brains at the last Moments of his
Life, to contrive his Obsequies to so particular and unusual a Parsimony, as to
conclude it in the sordid expense of one single Servant with a Candle and
Lanthorn, and yet I see this Humor commended, and the Appointment of Marcus
Aemilius Lepidus, who forbad his Heirs to bestow upon his Hearse even the
common Ceremonies in use upon such Occasions. Is it not Temperance and
Frugality to avoid the Expense and Pleasure of which the use and knowledge is
imperceptible to us? See here an easy and cheap Reformation. If Instruction
were at all necessary in this Case, I should be of Opinion, that in this, as in
all other Actions of Life, the Ceremony and Expense should be regulated by the
Ability of the Person deceased; and the Philosopher Lycon prudently ordered his
Executors to dispose of his Body where they should think most fit, and as to
his Funerals, to order them neither too superfluous, nor too mean. For my part,
I should wholly referr the ordering of this Ceremony to Custom, and shall, when
the time comes, accordingly leave it to their Discretion, to whose Lot* it
shall fall to do me that last Office. Totus hic locus est contemnendus in
nobis, Cicero Tusc. l. 1.
non negligendus in nostris; The Place of our Sepulture is wholly to be
contemned by us, but not to be neglected by our Friends; but it was a holy
Saying of a Saint, August. de civit. Dei.
Curatio funeris, conditio Sepulturae, pompa Exequiarum, magis sunt vivorum
solatia, quam subsidia mortuorum; The Care of Funerals, the Place of Sepulture,
and the Pomp of Exequies, are rather Consolations to the Living than any
Benefit to the Dead. Which made Socrates answer Criton, who at the Hour of his
Death asked him, how he would be buried? How you will, said he. If I could
concern my self further than the Present about this Affair, I should be most
tempted, as the greatest Satisfaction of this kind, to imitate those who in
their Lifetime entertain themselves with the Ceremony of their own Obsequies
before hand, and are pleased with viewing their own Monument, and beholding
their own dead Countenance in Marble. Happy are they who can gratify their
Senses by insensibility, and live by their Death! I am ready to conceive an
implacable. Hatred against all Democracy and Popular Government, (though I
cannot but think it the most natural and equitable of all others) so often as I
call to mind the inhumane Injustice of the People of Athens, who, without
Remission, or once vouchsafing to hear what they had to say for themselves, put
to death their brave Captains, newly returned triumphant from a Naval Victory
they had obtained over the Lacedaemonians near the Arginusian Isles; the most
bloody and obstinate Engagement that ever the Greeks fought at Sea; for no
other Reason, but that they rather followed their Blow and pursued the
Advantages prescribed them by the Rule of War, than that they would stay to
gather up and bury their Dead: an Execution that is yet rendered more odious by
the Behavior of Diomedon, who being one of the condemned, and a Man of most
eminent, both politic and military Virtue, after having heard their Sentence,
advancing to speak, no Audience till then having been allowed, instead of
laying before them his own Innocence, or the Impiety of so cruel an Arrest,
only expressed a Solicitude for his Judges Preservation, beseeching the Gods to
convert this Sentence to their own Good, and praying that for neglecting to pay
those Vows which he and his Companions had done (which he also acquainted them
with) in Acknowledgment of so glorious a Success, they might not pull down the
Indignation of the Gods upon them; and so without more Words went courageously
to his Death. But Fortune a few Years after punishing them in their kind, made
them see the Error of their Cruelty: for Chabrias, Captain General of their
Naval Forces, having got the better of Pollis, Admiral of Sparta, about the
Isle of Naxos, totally lost the Fruits of his Success, and Content with his
Victory, of very great Importance to their Affairs, not to incur the danger of
this Example, and lose a few Bodies of his dead Friends that were floating in
the Sea, gave opportunity to a world of living Enemies to sail away in Safety,
who afterward made them pay dear for this unseasonable Superstition.

Seneca Tr. Cher. 2.
Quaeris quo jaceas post obitum loco?
Quo non natae jacent.
Do ask where thou shall lie when dead?
With those that never Being had.
This other restores the sense of Repose to a Body without a Soul?

Cicero Tusc. l. 1.
Neque sepulcrum, quo recipiat, habeat portum corporis: Ubi, remissa humana
vita, Corpus requiescat a malis. Nor with a Tomb as with a Haven blessed,
Where, after Life, the Corpse in Peace may rest.
As nature demonstrates to us, that several dead things retain yet an occult
Sympathy and relation to Life; Wine changes its flavor and complexion in
Cellars, according to the changes and seasons of the Vine from whence it came;
and the Flesh of Venison alters its condition and taste in the powd'ring-tub,
according to the seasons of the living Flesh of its kind, as it is observed by
the Curious.

CHAP. IV.
That the Soul discharges her Passions upon false Object, where the true are
wanting.
A Gentleman of my Country, who was very often tormented with the Gout, being
importuned by his Physicians totally to reclaim his Appetite from all manner of
salt Meats, was wont presently to reply, that he must needs have something to
quarrel with in the extremity of his Fits, and that he fansy'd, that railing
at, and cursing one while the Bolognia Sawsages, and another the dried Tongues
and the Hamms, was some mitigation to his pain. And in good earnest, as the Arm
when it is advanced to strike, if it fail of meeting with that upon which is
was designed to discharge the blow, and spends it self in vain, does offend the
Striker himself; and as also, that to make a pleasant Prospect the Sight should
not be lost and dilated in a vast extent of empty Air, but have some Bounds to
limit and circumscribe it at a reasonable distance: Ventus, ut amittit vires,
nisi robore densae
Occurant Sylvae, spatio diffusus inani.
As Winds do lose their strength, unless withstood
By some dark Grove of strong opposing wood.


So it appears, that the Soul being transported and discomposed, turns its
violence upon its self, if not supplied with something to oppose it, and
therefore always requires an Enemy as an object on which to discharge its Fury
and Resentment. Plutarch says very well of those who are delighted with little
Dogs and Monkeys; that the amorous part which is in us, for want of a
legitimate Object, rather than lie idle, does after that manner forge, and
create one frivolous and false; as we see that the Soul in the exercise of its
Passions, inclines rather to deceive it self, by creating a false and
fantastical Subject, even contrary to its own Belief, than not to have
something to work upon. And after this manner Brute Beasts direct their Fury to
fall upon the Stone or Weapon that has hurt them, and with their Teeth even
execute their Revenge upon themselves, for the Injury they have received from
another.

Claudian.
Pannonis haud aliter post ictum saevior Ursa
Cui jaculum parva Lybs amentavit habena,
Se rotat in vulnus, telumque irata receptum
Impetit, and secum fugientem circuit Hastam.
So the fierce Bear, made fiercer by the smart
Of the bold Lybian's mortal guided Dart,
Turns round upon the Wound, and the tough Spear
Contorted over her Breast does flying bear.
What causes of the misadventures that befall us do we not invent? what is it
that we do not lay the fault to right or wrong, that we may have something to
quarrel with? Those beautiful Tresses, young Lady, you may so liberally tear
off, are no way guilty, nor is it the whiteness of those delicate Breasts you
so unmercifully beat, that with an unlucky Bullet has slain your beloved
Brother: quarrel with something else. Livy, Livy dec. l. 5.
speaking of the Roman Army in Spain, says, that for the loss of two Brothers,
who were both great Captains, Flere omnes repent, and offensare capita, that
they all wept, and tore their Hair. It Is the common practice of Affliction. And
the Philosopher Bion said pleasantly of the King, who by handfulls pulled his
Hair off his Head for Sorrow, Does this man think that Baldness is a Remedy for
Grief? Who has not seen peevish Gamesters worry the Cards with their Teeth, and
swallow whole Bales of Dice in revenge for the Loss of their Money? Xerxes
whipped the Sea, and writ a Challenge to Mount Athos; Cyrus employed a whole
Army several days at work, to revenge himself of the River G^idus, for the
Fright it had put him into in passing over; and Caligula demolished a very
beautiful Palace for the Pleasure his Mother had once enjoyed there. I remember
there was a Story current, when I was a Boy, That one of our Neighboring Kings
having received a Blow from the Hand of GOD, swore he would be revenged, and in
order to it, made Proclamation, that for ten Years to come no one should pray
to him, or so much as mention him throughout his Dominions; by which we are not
so much to take measure of the Folly, as the Vainglory of the Nation of which
this Tale was told. They are Vices that indeed always go together; but such
Actions as these have in them more of Presumption than want of Wit. Augustus
Caesar, having been tossed with a Tempest at Sea, fell to defying Neptune, and in
the Pomp of the Circensian Games, to be revenged, deposed his Statue from the
place it had amongst the other Deities. Wherein he was less excusable than the
former, and less than he was afterward, when having lost a Battle under
Quintilius Varus in Germany, in Rage and despair he went running his Head
against the Walls, and crying out, O Varus! give me my Men again! for this
exceeds all Folly, forasmuch as Impiety is joined with it, invading God
himself, or at least Fortune, as if she had Ears that were subject to our
Batteries; like the Thracians, who, when it Thunders, or Lightens, fall to
Shooting against Heaven with Titanian Madness, as if by Flights of Arrows they
intended to reduce God Almighty to Reason. Though the ancient Poet in Plutarch
tells us, Plutarch.
Point ne se faut couroucer aux affairs,
Il ne leur chaut de toutes nos choleres.
We must not quarrel Heaven in our Affairs,
That little for a mortal's Anger cares.


But we can never enough decry nor sufficiently condemn the senseless and
ridiculous Sallies of our unruly Passions.

CHAP. V.
Whether the Governor of a place besieged, ought himself to go out to parley.
Lucius Marcius, the Roman Legate in the War against Perseus King of Macedon,
to gain time wherein to reinforce his Army, set on foot some Overtures of
Accommodation, with which the King being lulled asleep, concluded a Cessation
for certain days; by this means giving his Enemy opportunity and leisure to
repair his Army, which was afterward the Occasion of his own Ruin. The elder
sort of Senators, notwithstanding mindful of their Forefathers Virtue, were
by no means satisfied with this Proceeding; but on the contrary condemned it,
as degenerating from their ancient Practice, which they said was by Valor, and
not by Artifice, Surprises, and Night Encounters; neither by pretended Flight,
Ambuscadoes, and deceitful Treaties, to overcome their enemies; never making
War till having first denounced it, and very often assigned both the Hour and
place of Battle. Out of this generous Principle it was that they delivered up
to Pyrrhus his treacherous Physician, and to the Hetrurians their disloyal
Schoolmaster. And this was indeed a Procedure truly Roman, and nothing allied
to the Grecian Subtilty, nor the P^nick Cunning, where it was reputed a
Victory of less Glory to overcome by Force than Fraud. Deceit may serve for a
need, but he only confesses himself overcome who knows he is neither subdued by
Policy, nor Misadventure, but by dint of Valor, in a fair and manly War. And
it very well appears by the Discourse of these good old Senators, that this
fine Sentence was not yet received amongst them, Aeneid. l. 2.
-- Dolus an virtus quis in Host requiret? No Matter if by Valor, or Deceit,
We overcome, so we the better get.


The Achaians (says Polybius) adhorr'd all manner of double-dealing in War, not
reputing it a Victory unless where the Courages of the Enemy were fairly
subdued. Eam vir sanctus and sapiens sciet veram esse victoriam, quae salva
fide, Tncit. in Agric.
and integra dignitate parabitur. An honest and a prudent Man will acknowledge
that only to be a true Victory which he has obtained without Violation of his
own Faith, or any Blemish upon his own Honor, says another.

Ennius.
Vosne velit, an me regnare hera, quidve ferat fors,
Virtu^e experiamur.
If you or I shall rule, lets fairly try,
And Force or Fortune give the Victory.
In the Kingdom of Ternates, amongst those Nations which we so broadly call
Barbarians, they have a Custom never to commence War till it be first
denounced; adding withal, an ample Declaration of what they have to do it
withal, with what, and how many Men, what Ammunitions, and what both offensive
and defensive Arms; but that being done, they afterward conceive it lawful to
employ this Power without Reproach, any way that may best conduce to their own
ends. The ancient Florentines were so far from obtaining any Advantage over
their Enemies by surprise, that they always gave them a Months Warning before
they drew their Army into the Field, by the continual Tolling of a Bell they
called Martinella. For what concerns us who are not so scrupulous in this
Affair, and who attribute the Honor of the War to him who has the better of
it, after what manner soever obtained, and who after Lysander say, Where the
Lion's Skin is too short we must etch it out with the Fox's Case. The most
usual Occasions of Surprise are derived from this Practice, and we hold that
there are no moments, wherein a Chief ought to be more circumspect, and to have
his Eye so much at watch, as those of Parleys, and Treaties of Accommodation;
as it is therefore become a general Rule amongst the Martial Men of these
latter Times, that a Governor of a Place never ought in a time of Siege to go
out to Parley. It was for this that in our Fathers days the Signeurs de
Montmard and d' Assigni defending Mouson against the Count de Nassau, were so
highly censured; yet in this Case it would be excusable in that Governor, who
going out, should notwithstanding do it in such manner, that the Safety and
Advantage should be on his side; as Count Guido de Rangani did at Reggio (if we
are to believe Bellay, for Guicciardine says it was he himself) when Monsieur
de l' Esc^^ approached to parley, who stepped so little away from his Fort, that
a Disorder happening in the interim of Parley, not only Monsieur de l' Es^^ and
his Party, who were advanced with him, found themselves by much the weaker,
(insomuch that Alessandro de Trivulcio was there slain) but he himself was
constrained, as the safest way to follow the Count, and relying upon his Honor
to secure himself from the danger of the Shot within the very Walls of the
Town. Eumenes, being shut up in the City of Nora by Antigonus, and by him
importuned to come out to speak with him, as he sent him word it was fit he
should to a better Man than himself, and one who had now an Advantage over him,
returned this notable Answer, Tell him, said he that I shall never think any
Man better than my self, whilst I have my Sword in my hand: and would never
consent to come out to him, till first, according to his own Demand, Antigonus
had delivered him his own Nephew Prolomaeus in Hostage. And yet some have done,
rather better than worse in going out in Person to parley with the Assailant;
witness Henry de Vaux, a Cavalier of Champagne, who being besieged by the
English in the Castle of Commercy, and Bartholomew de Bone, who commanded at
the Leagure, having so sapp'd the greatest part of the Castle without, that
nothing remained but setting Fire to the Props to bury the Besieged under the
Ruins, he requested the said Henry to come out to speak with him for his own
Good; which the other accordingly doing, with three more in Company with him,
and his own evident Ruin being made apparent to him, he conceived himself
singularly obliged to his Enemy, to whose Discretion after he and his Garrison
had surrendered themselves, Fire being presently applied to the Mine, the Props
no sooner began to fail, but the Castle was immediately turned topsy turvy, no
one Stone being left upon another. I could, and do, with great Facility, rely
upon the Faith of another; but I should very unwillingly do it in such a Case,
as it should thereby be judged that it was rather an Effect of my Despair, and
want of Courage, than voluntary, and out of Confidence and Security in the
Faith of him with whom I had to do.

CHAP. VI.
That the Hour of Parley is dangerous.
I Saw notwithstanding lately at Mussidan, a Place not far from my House, that
those who were driven out thence by our Army, and others of their Party, highly
complain' d of Treachery, for that during a Treaty of Accommodation, and in the
very interim that their Deputies were treating, they were surprised, and cut to
pieces: a thing that per-adventure in another Age, might have had some color
of foul Play; but (as I said before) the Practice of Arms in these days is
quite another thing, and there is now no Confidence in an Enemy excusable, till
after the last Sea of Obligation; and even then the Conqueror has enough to do
to keep his Word; so hazardous a thing it is to entrust the Observation of the
Faith a Man has engaged to a Town that surrenders upon easy and favorable
Conditions, to the Necessity, Avarice, and License of a victorious Army, and to
give the Soldier free Entrance into it in the heat of Blood. Lucius Aemilius
Regillus, The Faith of military Men very uncertain.
a Roman Praetor having lost his time in attempting to take the City of Phocaea
by force, by reason of the singular valor wherewith the Inhabitants defended
themselves against him, conditioned at last to receive them as Friends to the
People of Rome, and to enter the Town, as into a Confederate City, without any
manner of Hostility; of which he also gave them all possible Assurance: but
having for the greater Pomp brought his whole Army in with him, it was no more
in his Power, with all the Endeavor he could use, to command his People: so
that Avarice and Revenge despising and trampling under foot both his Authority
and all Military Discipline, he there at once saw his own Faith violated, and a
considerable part of the City sack^ d and ruined before his Face. Cleomenes was
wont to say, That what Mischief soever a Man could do his Enemy in time of War
was above Justice, and nothing accountable to it in the Sight of Gods and Men.
And according to this Principle, having concluded a Cessation with those of
Argos for seven days, the third Night after he fell upon them when they were
all buried in Security and Sleep, and put them to the Sword; alleging for his
Excuse, That there had no Nights been mentioned in the Truce: but the Gods
punished his Perfidy. In a time of Parley also, and that the Citizens were
intent upon their Capitulation, the City of Cassilinum was taken by Surprise,
and that even in the Age of the justest Captains, and the best Discipline of
the Roman Militia: for it is not said, that it is not lawful for us in Time and
Place, to make advantage of our Enemies want of Understanding, as well as their
want of Courage: and doubtless War has a great many Privileges, that appear
reasonable, even to the Prejudice of Reason. And therefore here the Rule fails,
Neminem id agere ut ex alterius praedetur inscitia, Cicero de Offic. l. 3.
That no one should prey upon another Folly. But I am astonished at the great
Liberty allowed by Xenophon in such Cases, and that both by Precept, and the
Example of several Exploits of his complete General. An Author of very great
Authority, I confess, in those Affairs, as being in his own Person both a great
Captain and a Philosopher of the first Form of Socrates* his Disciples; and yet
I cannot consent to such a measure of License as he dispenses in all Things and
Places. Monsieur d' Aubigny, having besieged Capua, and played a furious
Battery against it, Signior Fabricio Colonne, Governor of the Town, having
from a Bastion begun to parley, and his Soldiers in the mean time being a
little more remiss in their Guard, our People took advantage of their Security,
entered the Place at unawan, and put them all to the Sword. And of later
Memory, at Yvoy, Signior Juliano Romero having played that part of a Novice to
go out to Capitulate with the Constable, at his Return found his Place taken.
But, that we might not escape Scot-free, the Marquess of Pescara having laid
Siege to Genoa, where Duke Octavio Fregosa commanded under our Protection, and
the Articles betwixt them being so far advanced that it was looked upon as a
done thing, and upon the Point to be concluded, several Spaniards in the mean
time being slipped in under the Privilege of the Treaty, seized on the Gates,
and made use of this Treachery as an absolute and fair Victory: and since at
Ligny in Barrois, where the Count de Brienne commanded, the Emperor having in
his own Person beleagur'd that Place, and Bartheville, the said Count's
Leiutenant, going out to parley, whilst he was Capitulating the Town was taken.

Aristo, Cant. 15.
Fu il vincer sempre maji laudabil cosa
Vinca sio per fortuna, o per ingegno.
Fame ever does the Victor's Praises ring,
And Conquest ever was a glorious thing,
Which way soever the Conqu'rour purchased it,
Whether by valor, Fortune, or by Wit.
say they: But the Philosopher Chrysippus was of another Opinion, wherein I
also concur; for he was used to say, That those who Run a Race, ought to employ
all the Force they have in what they are about, and to run as fast as they can;
but that it is by no means fair in them to lay any hand upon their Adversary to
stop him, nor to set a Leg before him to throw him down. And yet more generous
was the Answer of that great Alexander to Polypercon who persuaded him to take
the Advantage of the Nights Obscurity to fall upon Darius; By no means (said
he) it is not for such a Man as I am to steal a Victory, Quint. Curt. 1. 4.
Malo me fortunae poeniteat, quam victoriae pudeat, I had rather repent me of
my Fortune, than be ashamed of my Victory.

Aeneid. l. 10.
Atque idem fugientem haud est dignatus Orodem
Sternere, nec jacta coecum dare Cuspide vulnus:
Obvius, adversoque occurrit, seque viro vir
Contulit, haud furto melior, sed fortibus armis.
His Heart disdained to strike Orodes dead,
Or, unseen, basely wound him as he fled;
But gaining first his Front, wheels round, and there
Bravely opposed himself to his Career:
And fighting Man to Man, would let him see
His Valor scorned both Odds and Policy.
CHAP. VII.
That the Intention is Judge of our Actions.
It Is a Saying, That Death discharges us of all our Obligations. However, I
know some who have taken it in another Sense. Henry the Seventh, King of
England, articled with Don Philip, Son to Maximilian the Emperor, and Father
to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, when he had him upon English Ground, that
the said Philip should deliver up the Duke of Suffolk of the White Rose, his
mortal Enemy, who was fled into the Low Countries, into his Hands; which Philip
(not knowing how to evade it) accordingly promised to do, but upon condition
nevertheless, that Henry should attempt nothing against the Life of the said
Duke, which during his own Life he performed; but coming to die, in his last
Will, commanded his Son to put him to Death immediately after his Decease. And
lately, in the Tragedy, that the Duke of Alva presented to us in the Persons of
the two Counts, Egmont, and Horn, at Brussels, there were very remarkable
Passages, and one amongst the rest, that the said Count Egmont (upon the
security of whose Word and Faith Count Horn had come and surrendered himself to
the Duke of Alva) earnestly entreated that he might first mount the Scaffold.
to the end that Death might disinage him from the Obligation he had passed to
the other. In which Case, methinks Death did not acquit the former of his
Promise, and the second was satisfied in the good Intention of the other, even
though he had not died with him: for we cannot be obliged beyond what we are
able to perform, by reason that the Effects and Intentions of what we promise
are not at all in our Power, and that indeed we are Masters of nothing but the
Will, in which, by necessity, all the Rules and whole Duty of Mankind is
founded and established. And therefore Count ^gmont, conceiving his Soul and
will bound and indepted to his Promise, although he had not the Power to make
it good, had doubtless been absolved of his Duty, even though he had outlived
the other; but the King of England wilfully and premeditately breaking his
Faith was no more to be excused for deferring the Execution of his Infidelity
till after his Death, than Herodotus his Mason, who having inviolably, during
the time of his Life, kept the Secret of the treasure of the King of Egypt his
Master, at his Death discovered it to his Children. I have taken notice of
several in my time, who, convinced by their Consciences of unjustly detaining
the Goods of another, have endeavored to make amends by their Will, and afther
their Decease: but they had as good do nothing as delude themselves both in
taking so much time in so pressing an Affair, and also in going about to repair
an Injury with so little Demonstration of Resentment and Concern. They owe over
and above something of their own, and by how much their Payment is more strict
and incommodious to themselves, by so much is their Restitution more perfect,
just, and meritorious; for Penitency requires Penance: but they yet do worse
than these, who reserve the Declaration of a mortal Animofity against their
Neighbor to the last Gasp, having concealed it all the time of their Lives
before, wherein they declare to have little regard of their own Honor whilst
they irritate the Party offended against their Memory; and less to their
Conscience, not having the Power, even out of Respect to Death it self, to make
their Malice die with them; but extending the Life of their Hatred even beyond
their own. Unjust Judges, who deferr Judgment to a time wherein they can have
no Knowledge of the Cause! For my part, I shall take Care, if I can, that my
Death discover nothing that my Life has not first openly manifested, and
publicly declared.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Idleness.
AS we see some Grounds that have long lain idle, and untilled, when grown rank
and fertile by rest, to abound with, and spend their Virtue, in the Product of
innumerable sorts of Weeds, and wild Herbs, that are unprofitable, and of no
wholesome use, and that to make them perform their true Office, we are to
culvitate and prepare them for such Seeds as are proper for our Service. And as
we see Women that without the Knowledge of Men do sometimes of themselves bring
forth inanimate and formless Lumps of Flesh, but that to cause a natural and
perfect Generation they are to be husbanded with another kind of Seed; even so
it is with Wits, which if not applied to some certain Study that may fix and
restrain them, run into a thousand Extravagancies, and are eternally roving
here and there in the inextricable Labyrinth of restless Imagination.

Aen^id. l. 8.
Sicut aquae tremulum labris ubi lumen ahenis
Sole repercussum, aut radiantis imagine Lunae,
Omnia pervolitat late loca, jamque sub auras
Erigitur, summique ferit laquearia tecti.
Like as the quivering Reflection
Of Fountain Waters, when the Morning Sun
Darts on the Basin, or the Moon's pale Beam
Gives Light and Color to the Captive Stream,
Whips with fantastic motion round the place,
And Walls and Roof strikes with its trembling Rays.
In which wild and irregular Agitation, there is no Folly, nor idle Fancy they
do not light upon: Hor. de. Art Poetica.
-- velut aegri somnia, vanae
Finguntur species --
Like Sick men's Dreams, that from a troubled Brain
Phantasms create, ridiculous and vain.


The Soul that has no established Limit to circumscribe it loses it self, as
the Epigrammatist says,

Martial. lib. 7. Epig. 72.
Quisquis ubique habitat, maxim nusquam habitat. He that lives every where,
does no where live. When I lately retired my self to my own House, with a
Resolution, as much as possibly I could, to avoid all manner of Concern in
Affair, and to spends in privacy and repose the little remainder of time I have
to Live: I fansi'd I could not more oblige my mind than to suffer it at full
leisure to entertain and divert it self, which I also now hoped it might the
better be entrusted to do, as being by Time and Observation become more settled
and mature; but I find, Lucan. l. 4.
-- variam semper dant otia mentem. -- Even in the most retired Estate
Leisure it self does various Thoughts create.
that, quite contrary, it is like a Horse that has broke from his Rider, who
voluntarily runs into a much more violent Career than any Horseman would put
him to, and creates me so many Chimaera's and fantastic Monsters one upon
another, without Order or Design, that, the better at leisure to contemplate
their Strangeness and Absurdity, I have begun to commit them to Writing, hoping
in time to make them ashamed of themselves.

CHAP. IX.
Of Liars.
THere is not a Man living, whom it would so little become to speak of Memory
as my self, for I have none at all; and do not think that the World has again
another so treacherous as mine. My other Faculties are all very ordinary and
mean; but in this I think my self very singular, and to such a Degree of
Excellence, that (besides the inconvenience I suffer by it, which merits
something) I deserve methinks, to be famous for it, and to have more than a
common Reputation: though, in truth the necessary use of Memory considered,
Plato had Reason when he called it a great and powerful Goddess. In my Country,
when they would decypher a Man that has no Sense, they say, such a one has no
Memory; and when I complain of mine, they seem not to believe I am in earnest,
and presently reprove me, as tho I accused my self for a Fool, not discerning
the Difference betwixt Memory and Understanding; wherein they are very wide of
my Intention, and do me wrong: Experience rather daily showing us on the
contrary, that a strong Memory is commonly coupled with infirm Judgment: and
they do me moreover (who am so perfect in nothing as the good Friend) at the
same time a greater Wrong in this, that they make the same Words which accuse
my Infirmity, represent me for an ungrateful Person; wherein they bring my
Integrity and good Nature into Question upon the account of my Memory, and from
a natural Imperfection, unjustly derive a defect of Conscience. He has forgot,
says one, this Request, or that Promise; he no more remembers his Friends, he
has forgot, to say or do, or to conceal such and such a thing for my sake. And
truly, I am apt enough to forget many things, but to neglect any thing my
Friend has given me in charge, I never do it. And it should be enough methinks,
that I feel the Misery and Inconvenience of it, without branding me with
Malice, a Vice so much a Stranger, and so contrary to my Nature. However, I
derive these Comforts from my Infirmity; first, that it is an Evil from which
principally I have found reason to correct a worse, that would easily enough
have grown upon me; namely, Ambition; this Defect being intolerable in those
who take upon them the Negotiations of the World, an Employment of the greatest
Honor and Trust among Men: Secondly, that (as several like Examples in the
Progress of Nature demonstrate to us) she has fortified me in my other
Faculties, proportionably as she has unfurnished me in this; I should otherwise
have been apt implicitly to have reposed my Wit and Judgment upon the bare
Report of other Men, without ever setting them to work upon any Inquisition
whatever, had the strange Inventions and Opinions of the Authors I have read,
been ever present with me by the Benefit of Memory: Thirdly, That by this Means
I am not so talkative, for the Magazine of the Memory is ever better furnished
with matter than that of the Invention; and had mine been faithful to me, I had
ere this, deaf'd all my Friends with my eternal Babble, the Subjects themselves
rowsing and stirring up the little Faculty I have of handling, and applying
them, heating and extending my Discourse. It Is a great Imperfection, and what I
have observed in several of my intimate Friends, who, as their Memories supply
them with a present and entire Review of things, derive their Narratives from
so remote a Fountain, and crowd them with so many impertinent Circumstances,
that though the Story be good in it self, they make a shift to spoil it; and if
otherwise, you are either to curse the Strength of their Memory, or the
Weakness of their Judgment: And it is a hard thing to close up a Discourse, and
to cut it short, when you are once in, and have a great deal more to say.
Neither is there any thing wherein the Force and Readiness of a Horse is so
much seen, as in a round, graceful, and sudden stop; and I see even those who
are pertinent enough, who would, but cannot stop short in their Career; for
whilst they are seeking out a handsome Period to conclude the Sense, they talk
at random, and are so perplexed, and entangled in their own Eloquence, that
they know not what they say. But above all, old Men, who yet retain the Memory
of things past, and forget how often they have told them, are the most
dangerous Company for this fault; and I have known Stories from the Mouth of a
Man of very great Quality, otherwise very pleasant in themselves becoming very
troublesome, by being a Hundred times repeated over and over again. The fourth
Obligation I have to this infirm Memory of mine is, that by this means I less
remember the Injuries I have received; insomuch, that (as the Ancient said) I
should have a Protocoll, a Register of Injuries, or a Prompter, like Darius,
who, that he might not forget the Offense he had received from those of Athens,
so often as he sat down to Dinner, ordered one of his Pages three times to whoop
in his Ear, Sir, Remember the Athenians: and also, the Places which I revisit,
and the Books I read over again, still smile upon me with a fresh Novelty. It
is not without good Reason said, That he who has not a good Memory should never
take upon him the Trade of Lying. I know very well, that the Grammarians
distinguish betwixt an Untruth and a Lie, and say that to tell an Untruth (...)
to tell a thing that is false, but that we our selves believes to be true; and
that to Lie, is to tell a thing that we know in our Conscience to be utterly
false and untrue; and it is of this last sort of Liars only that I now speak.
Now these do either wholly contrive and invent the Untruths they utter, or so
alter and disguise a true Story, that it always ends in a Lie; and when they
disguise and often alter the same Story according to their own Fancy, it is very
hard for them at one time or another to escape being trap'd, by reason that the
real Truth of the thing having first taken Possession of the Memory, and being
there lodged, and imprinted by the way of Knowledge and Science, it will be
ever ready to present it self to the Imagination, and to shoulder out any
Falsehood of their own contriving, which cannot there have so sure and settled
Footing as the other; and the Circumstances of the first true Knowledge
evermore running in their Minds, will be apt to make them forget those that are
illegitimate, and only forged by their own Fancy. In what they wholly invent,
forasmuch as there is no contrary Impression to justle their Invention, there
seems to be less danger of tripping; and yet even this also, by reason it is a
vain Body, and without any other Foundation than fancy only, is very apt to
escape the Memory, if they be not careful to make themselves very perfect in
their Tale. Of which I have had very Pleasant Experience, at the Expense of
such as Profess only to form, and accommodate their Speech to the Affair they
have in hand, or to the Humor of the Person with whom they have to do; for the
Circumstances to which these men stick not to enslave their Consciences, and
their Faith being subject to several Changes, their Language must accordingly
vary: From whence it happens, that of the same thing they tell one Man, that it
is this, and another that it is that, giving it several Forms, and Colors;
which Men, if they once come to confert Notes, and find out the Cheat, what
becomes of this fine Art? To which may be added, that they must of Necessity
very often ridiculously trap themselves; for, what Memory can be sufficient to
retain so many different Shapes as they have forg^d upon one and the same
Subject? I have known many in my Time, very ambitious of the repute of this
fine piece of Discretion; but they do not see, that if there be a Reputation of
being wise, there is really no Prudence in it. In plain Truth, Lying is a
hateful and an accursed Vice. We are not Men, nor have other Tie upon one
another, but our Word. If we did but discover the Horror and ill Consequences
of it, we should pursue it with Fire and Sword, and more justly than other
Crimes. I see that Parents commonly, and with Indiscretion enough, correct
their Children for little innocent Faults, and torment them for wanton childish
Tricks, that have neither Impression, nor tend to any Consequence: whereas, in
my Opinion, Lying only, and (what is of something a lower Form) Stomach, are
the Faults which are to be severely whipped out of them, both in the Infancy and
Progress of the Vices, which will otherwise grow up and increase with them; and
after a Tongue has once got the Knack of lying, it is not to be imagined how
impossible almost it is to reclaim it. Whence it comes to pass, that we see
some, who are otherwise very honest Men, so subject to this Vice. I have an
honest Lad to my Tailor, who I never knew guilty of one Truth, no not when it
had been to his Advantage. If Falsehood had, like Truth, but one Face only, we
should be upon better Terms; for we should then take the contrary to what the
Liar says for certain Truth; but the Reverse of Truth has an hundred thousand
Figures, and a Field indefinite without Bound or Limit. The Pythagoreans make
Good to be certain and finite, and Evil, infinite and uncertain; there are a
thousand ways to miss the White, there is only one to hit it. For my own part,
I have this Vice in so great horror, that I am not sure I could prevail with my
Conscience to secure my self from the most manifest and extreme Danger, by an
impudent and solemn Lie. An ancient Father says, That a Dog we know is better
Company than a Man whose Language we do not understand. Plin. Not. Hist. lib.
7* cap. 1.
Ut externus non alieno sit hominis vice, As a Foreigner, to one that
understands not what he says, cannot be said to supply the Place of a Man,
because he can be no Company. And how much less sociable is false Speaking than
Silence? King Francis the First bragged, that he had, by this means, non-plus'd
Francisco Taverna, the Ambassador of Francisco Sforza, Duke of Milan, a Man
very famous for his Eloquence in those days. This Gentleman had been sent to
excuse his Master to his Majesty about a thing of very great Consequence; which
was this: King Francis, to maintain evermore some intelligence in Italy, out of
which he had lately been driven, and particularly in the Duchy of Milan, had
thought it (to that end) convenient to have evermore a Gentleman on his Behalf
to lie Leiger in the Court of that Duke; an Ambassador in Effect, but in
outward Appearance no other than a private Person who pretended to reside there
upon the single Account of his own particular Affairs; which was so carried, by
reason that the Duke, much more depending upon the Emperor, especially at a
time when he was in a Treaty of a Marriage with his Niece, Daughter to the King
of Denmark, and since Dowager of Lorrain, could not own any Friendship or
intelligence with us, but very much to his own Prejudice. For this Commission
then one Merveille a Milanois Gentleman, and Epuerry to the King, being thought
very fit, he was accordingly dispatched thither with private Letters of
Credence, his Instructions of Ambassador, and other Letters of Recommendation
to the Duke about his own private Concerns, the better to color the Business;
and so long continued in that Court, that the Emperor at last had some Incling
of his real Employment there, and complained of it to the Duke, which was the
Occasion of what followed after, as we suppose; which was, that under Pretense
of a Murder by him committed, his Trial was in two days dispath'd, and his
Head in the Night struck off in Prison. Signior Francisco then being upon this
Account, come to the Court of France, and prepared with a long counterfeit
Story to excuse a thing of so dangerous Example, (for the King had applied
himself to all the Princes of Christendom, as well as to the Duke himself, to
demand Satisfaction for this Outrage upon the Person of his Minister) had his
Audience at the morning Council; where, after he had for the Support of his
Cause, in a long premeditated Oration, laid open several plausible
Justifications of the Fact, he concluded, that the Duke his Master had never
look^d upon this Merveille for other than a private Gentleman, and his own
Subject, who was there only in order to his own Business, neither had he ever
lived after any other manner; absolutely disowning that he had ever heard he
was one of the King's Domestic Servants, or that his Majesty so much as knew
him, so far was he from taking him for an Ambassador. When having made an end,
and the King pressing him with several Objections and Demands, and sifting him
on all hands, gravelled him at last, by asking, why then the Execution was
performed by Night, and as it were by Stealth? At which the poor confounded
Ambassador, the more handsomely to disingage himself, made Answer, That the Duke
would have been very loath, out of Respect to his Majesty, that such an
Execution should have been performed in the Face of the Sun. Any one may guess
if he was not well schooled when he came home, for having so grossly trip'd in
the Presence of a Prince of so delicate a Nostril as King Francis. Pope Julius
the Second, having sent an Ambassador to the King of England, to animtate him
against King Francis, the Ambassador having had his Audience, and the King,
before he would give a positive Answer, insisting upon the Difficulties he
found in setting on foot so great a Preparation as would be necessary to attack
so Potent a King, and urging some Reasons to that Effect, the Ambassador very
unseasonably reply^d, That he had also himself considered the same
difficulties, and had represented as much to the Pope. From which saying of
his, so directly opposite to the Thing propounded, and the Business he came
about, which was immediately to incite him to War, the King first derived
Argument (which also he afterward sound to be true) that this Ambassador, in
his own private Bosom, was a Friend to the French; of which having advertised
the Pope, his Estate at his Return home was confiscate, and himself very
narrowly escaped the losing of his Head.

CHAP. X.
Of quick or slow Speech.
Onc ne fut a tous toutes Graces donnees. All graces by All-liberal Heaven
Were never yet to all men given.
AS we see in the Gift of Eloquence, wherein some have such a Facility and
Promptness, and that which we call a present Wit, so easy, that they are ever
ready upon all Occasions, and never to be surpised: And others more heavy and
slow, never venture to utter any thing but what they have long Premeditated,
and taken great Care and Pains to fit and Prepare. Now, as we teach young
Ladies those Sports and Exercises which are most Proper to set out the Grace
and Beauty of those Parts wherein their chiefest Ornament and Perfection lie;
so in these two advantages of Eloquence, to which the Lawyers and Preachers of
our Age seem Principally to pretend. If I were worthy to advise, the slow
Speaker, methinks, should be more Proper for the Pulpit, and the other for the
Bar; and that because the Employment of the first does naturally allow him all
the Leisure he can desire to prepare himself, and besides, his Carreer is
performed in an even and unintermitted Line, without stop or interruption*
whereas, the Pleader's Business and Interest compells him to enter the Lists
upon all Occasions, and the unexpected Objections and Replies of his adverse
Party, justle him out of his Course, and put him upon the Instant, to pump for
new and extempore Answers and Defenses. Yet, at the Interview betwixt Pope
Clement and King Francis at Marceilles, it happened quite contrary, that Monsieur
Poyet, a man bred up all his Life at the Bar, and in the highest Repute for
Eloquence, having the Charge of making the Harangue to the Pope committed to
him, and having so long meditated on it beforehand, as (it was said) to have
brought it ready made along with him from Paris; the very day it was to have
been pronounced, the Pope, fearing some thing might be said that might give
Offense to the other Princes Ambassadors who were there attending on him, sent
to acquaint the King with the Argument which he conceived most suiting to the
Time and Place, but by Chance quite another thing to that Monsieur de Poyet had
taken so much Pains about: So that the fine Speech he had prepared, was of no
use, and he was upon the Instant to contrive another; which finding himself
unable to do, Cardinal Bellay was constrained to perform that Office. The
Pleader's Part is, doubtless, much harder than that of the Preacher; and yet,
in my Opinion we see more passable Lawyers than Preachers. It should seem that
the nature of Wit is, to have its operation prompt and sudden, and that of
Judgment, to have it more deliberate, and more slow: but he who remains totally
silent for want of leisure to prepare himself to speak well, and he also whom
leisure does no ways benefit to better speaking, are equally unhappy. It Is said
of Severus, Severus Cassius.
that he spoke best extempore, that he stood more obliged to Fortune, than his
own Diligence, that it was an advantage to him to be interrupted in speaking,
and that his Adversaries were afraid to nettle him, lest his Anger should
redouble his Eloquence. I know experimentally, a Disposition so impatient of a
tedious and elaborate Premediation, that if it do not go frankly and gayly to
work, can perform nothing to purpose We say of some Compositions, that they
stink of Oil, and smell of the Lamp, by reason of a certain rough harshness
that the laborious handling imprints upon those where great Force has been
employed: but besides this, the solicitude of doing well, and a certain
striving and contending of a mind too far strained, and over-bent upon its
Undertaking, breaks, and hinders it self, like Water, that by force of its own
pressing violence and abundance cannot find a ready issue through the neck of a
Bottle, or a narrow Sluice. In this condition of Nature, of which I was now
speaking, there is this also, that it would not be disordered and stimulated
with such a Passion as the Fury of C^ssius; for such a Motion would be too
violent and rude: it would not be justled, but solicited, and would be roused
and heated by unexpected, sudden, and accidental Occasions. If it be left to it
self, it flags and languishes, Agitation only gives it grace and vigor. I am
always worst in my own possession, and when wholly at my own dispose. Accident
has more title to any thing that comes from me, than I; Occasion, Company, and
even the very rising and falling of my own Voice, extract more from my Fancy,
than I can find when I examine and employ it by my self; by which means, the
things I say are better than those I write, if either were to be preferred
where neither are worth any thing. This also befalls me, that I am at a loss,
when I seek, and light upon things more by chance, than by any inquisition of
my own Judgment. I perhaps sometimes hit upon something when I write that seems
queint and spritely to me, but will appear dull and heavy to another. But let
us leave this Subject. Every one talks thus of himself according to his Talent.
For my part, I am already so lost in it, that I know not what I was about to
say, and in such cases, a stranger often finds it out before me. If I should
always carry my Razor about me, to use so often as this inconvenience befalls me,
I should make clean work: but some Occurrence or other, may at some other time,
lay it as visible to me as the Light, and make me wonder what I should stick at.

CHAP. XI.
Of Prognostications.
FOr what concerns Oracles, it is certain, that a good while before the coming
of our Savior Christ, they began to lose their Credit; for we see that Cicero
is troubled to find out the cause of their decay, in these words; Cic. de
Divin. l. 2.
Cur isto mod^ jam Oracula Delphis eduntur, non modo nostra aetate, sed jam
diu, ut nihil possit esse contemptius? What should be the reason that the
Oracles at Delphos are so uttered, not only in this Age of ours, but moreover a
great while ago, that nothing can be more contemptible? But as to the other
Prognostics, calculated from the Anatomy of Beasts at Sacrifices, (which Plato
does in part attribute to the natural Constitution of the Intestines of the
Beasts themselves) the scraping of Poultry, the flights of Birds: Aves quasdam
rerum augurandarum causa natas esse putamus; Cic. de Natura Deor. l. 2.
We think some sorts of Birds to be purposely created upon the account of
Augury, Claps of Thunder, the winding of Rivers, Ibid.
Multa cernunt Aruspices, multa Augures provident, multa Oraculis declarantur,
multa Vaticinationibus, multa Somniis, multa Portentis, Soothsayers and Augurs
conjecture and foresee many things, and many things are foretold in Oracles,
Prophecies, Dreams and Portents; and others of the like Nature, upon which
Antiquity founded most of they: Public and Private Enterprises, Christian
Religion has totally abolished. And although there yet remain amongst us some
Practices of Divination from the Stars, from Spirits, from the Shapes and
Complexions of men, from Dreams and the like, (a notable Example of the wild
curiosity of our Nature to grasp at and anticipate future things, as if we had
not enough to do to digest the present. Lucan. l. 2.
-- cur hanc tibi, rector Olympi,
Solicitis visum mortalibus addere curam,
Noscant venturas ut dira per omnia clades?
Sit subitum quodcunque paras, sit caeca futuri
Men's hominum fati, liceat sperare timenti.
Why, thou great Ruler of Olympus, why
Have thou to timorous Mortality
Added this Care, that Men should be so wise
To know, by Omens, future Miseries?
Free us from this unnecessary care,
Unlooked for send the Ills thou do prepare;
Let humane Minds to future things be blind,
That Hope, amidst our Fears, some place may find.
( Ne utile quidem est scire quid futurum sit: Miserum est enim nihil
proficientem angi: It is not indeed convenient to know what shall come to pass;
for it is a miserable thing to be vexed and tormented to no purpose.) Yet are
they of much less Authority now than heretofore. Which makes the Example of
Francis Marquess of Saluzzo, so much more remarkable; who being Lieutenant to
King Francis the First, in his Army beyond the Mountains, infinitely favour^d
and esteemed in our Court, and obliged to the King's Bounty for the Marquisate
it self, which had been forfeited by his Brother; and as to the rest, having no
manner of Provocation given him to do it, and even his own Affection opposing
any such Disloyalty; suffered himself to be so terrified (as it was confidently
reported) with the fine Prognostics that were spread abroad in favor of the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, and to our Disadvantage, (especially in Italy,
where these foolish Prophecies were so far believed, that great Sums of Money
were laid, and others ventured out upon return of greater when they came to
pass, so certain they made themselves of our Ruin) that having bewailed to
those of his Acquaintance who were most intimate with him, the Mischiefs that
he saw would inevitably fall upon the Crown of France, and the Friends he had
in that Court, he unhandsomly revolted, and turned to the other side; but to
his own Misfortune nevertheless, what Constellation soever governed at that
time. But he carried himself in this Affair like a Man agitated with diverse
Passions; for having both Towns and Forces in his hands, the Enemy's Army under
Antonio de Leva close by him, and we not at all suspecting his Design, it had
been in his Power to have done more than he did; for he lost no Men by this
Infidelity of his, nor any Town, but Fossan only, and that after a long Siege,
and a brave Defense.

Hor. l. 3. Od. 29.
Prudens futuri temporis exitum
Caliginosa necte premit Deus:
Ridetque si mortalis ultra
Fas trepidat.
The Eternal Mover has in Shades of Night
Future Events concealed from humane sight,
And laughs when he does see the timorous Ass
Tremble at what shall never come to pass.
Ib. Ode 29.
-- ille potens sui
Laetusque deget, cui licet, in diem
Dixisse, vixi: Cras vel atra
Nube Polum pater occupato,
Vel sole puro.
He free and merrily may live, can say,
As the day passes I have lived to day;
And for to morrow little does take Care,
Let the World's Ruler make it foul or fair.
Id. l. 2. Ode 16.
Laetus in praesens animus, quod ultra est
Oderit curare:
A mind that is cheerful in its present State,
To think of any thing beyond will hate.
And those who take this Sentence in a contrary Sense, interpret it amiss. Ista
sic reciprocantur, ut si Divinatio sit, Dii sint, Cic. de Divin. l. 2.
and si Dii sint, sit Divinatio. These things have that mutual Relation to one
another, that if there be such a thing as Divination, there must be Deities;
and if Deities, Divination. Much more wisely Pacuvius; Id. ex Pacuvio.
Nam istis qui linguam avium intelligunt,
Plusque ex alieno jecore sapiunt, quam ex suo,
Magis audiendum, quam auscultandum censeo.
Who the Birds Language understand, and who
More from Brutes Livers than their own do know,
Are rather to be heard than hearkened to.


The so celebrated Art of Divination amongst the Tuscans, took its Beginning
thus: A Labourer striking deep with his Coulter into the Earth, saw the
Demy-God Indigniae dixere Tag^m, qui primus Hetruscam Edocuit gentem casus
aperire futuros. Ovid. Meta. l. 15.
Tages to ascend with an Infantile Aspect, but endued with a mature and Senile
Wisdom. Upon the Rumor of which all the People ran to see the sight, by whom
his Words and Science, containing the Principles and means to attain to this
Art, were recorded, and kept for many Ages. A Birth suitable to its Progress! I
for my part should sooner regulate my Affairs by the chance of a Dye, than by
such idle and vain Dreams. And indeed, in all Republics, a good share of the
Government has ever been referred to chance. Plato, in the civil Regiment that
he models according to his own Fancy, leaves the Decision of several things of
very great Importance wholly to it, and will, amongst other things, that such
Marriages as he reputes legitimate and good, be appointed by Lot, and
attributing so great Virtue, and adding so great a Privilege to this accidental
choice, as to ordain the Children begot in such Wedlock to be brought up in the
Country, and those begot in any other to be thrust out as spurious and base;
yet so, that if any of those Exiles, notwithstanding, should peradventure in
growing up give any early hopes of future Virtue, they were in a Capacity of
being recalled, as those also who had been retain^d, were of being exiled in
case they gave little Expectation of themselves in their greener Years. I see
some who are mightily given to Study, pore and comment upon their Almanacks,
and produce them for Authority when any thing has fallen out patt: though it is
hardly possible, but that these well-Wishers to the Mathematics in saying so
much, must sometimes stumble upon some Truths amongst an infinite Number of
Lies. Adagium Cic. de Divin.
Quis est enim qui totum diem jaculans non aliquando conlineet? For who shoots
all day at Buts that does not sometimes hit the White? I think never the better
of them for some accidental Hits. There would be more certainty in it, if there
were a Rule and a Truth of always lying. Besides, no Body records their
Flimflams and false Prognostics, forasmuch as they are infinite and common;
but if they chop upon one Truth, that carries a mighty Report, as being rare,
incredible, and prodigious. So Diogenes, surnamed the Atheist, answered him in
Samothrace, who showing him in the Temple the several Offerings and Stories, in
Painting, of those who had escaped Shipwreck, said to him, Look you (says he)
you who think the Gods have no care of humane things, what do you say by so
many Person's preserved from Death by their especial Favor? Why, I say,
(answered he) that their Pictures are not here who were cast away, which were
by much the greater number. Cicero observes, that of all the Philosophers who
have acknowledged a Deity, Xenophanes only has endeavored to eradicate all
manner of Divination: which makes it the less a Wonder, if we have sometimes
seen some of our Princes, to their own cost, rely too much upon these
Fopperies. I wish I had given any thing, that I had with my own Eyes seen those
two great Rareties, the Book of Joachim the Calabrian Abbot, which foretold all
the future Popes, their Names and Figures; and that of the Emperor Leo, which
prophesied of all the Emperors and Patriarchs of Greece. This I have been an
Eyewitness of, that in public Confusions, men astonished at their Fortune,
have abandoned their own Reason superstitiously to seek out in the Stars the
ancient Causes and Menaces of their present mishaps, and in my time have been
so strangely successful in it, as to make men believe, that this Study, being
proper to fix and settle piercing and volatile Wits, those who have been any
thing versed in this knack of unfolding and untying Riddles, are capable in any
sort of Writing, to find out what they desire. But above all, that which gives
them the greatest Room to play in, is the obscure, ambiguous, and fantastic
Gibberish of their prophetic Canting, where their Authors deliver nothing of
clear Sense, but shroud all in Riddle, to the end that Posterity may interpret,
and apply it according to their own Fancy. Socrates his Demon, or Familiar,
might perhaps be no other but a certain Impulsion of the will, which obtruded
it self upon him without the advice or consent of his Judgment; and in a Soul
so enlightened as his was, and so prepared by a continual exercise of Wisdom and
Virtue, it is to be supposed, those Inclinations of his, though sudden and
undigested, were ever very important, and worthy to be followed. Every one
finds in himself some Image of such Agitations, of a prompt, vehement, and
fortuitous Opinion. It Is I that am to allow them some Authority, who attribute
so little to our own Prudence, and who also my self have had some, weak in
Reason, but violent in Persuasion and Dissuasion, (which were most frequent
with Socrates) by which I have suffered my self to be carried away so
fortunately, and so much to my own Advantage, that they might have been judged
to have had something in them of a Divine Inspiration.

CHAP. XII.
Of Constancy.
THE Law of Resolution and Constancy does not imply, that we ought not, as much
as in us lies, to decline, and to secure our selves from the Mischiefs and
Inconveniences that threaten us; nor consequently, that we shall not fear lest
they should surprise us: on the contrary, all decent and honest ways and means
of securing our selves from Harms, are not only permitted, but moreover
commendable, and the Business of Constancy chiefly is, bravely to stand to, and
stoutly to suffer those Inconveniences which are not otherwise possibly to be
avoided. There is no motion of Body, nor any guard in the handling of Arms, how
irregular or ungraceful soever, that we dislike or condemn, if they serve to
deceive or to defend the Blow that is made against us; insomuch, that several
very warlike Nations have made use of a retiring and flying way of Fight, as a
thing of singular Advantage, and by so doing have made their Backs more
dangerous than their Faces to their Enemies. Of which kind of Fighting, the
Turks yet retain something in their Practice of Arms to this day; and Socrates
in Plato, laughs a Laches, who had defined Fortitude to be at standing firm in
their Ranks against the Enemy: What (says he) would it then be a reputed
Cowardice to overcome them by giving Ground? urging at the same time the
Authority of Homer, who commends Aeneas for his Skill in running away. And
whereas Laches, considering better on it, justifies his first Argument upon the
Practice of the Scythians, and in general all Cavalry whatever. He again
attacks him with the Example of the Lacedaemonian Foot, (a Nation of all other
the most obstinate in maintaining their Ground) who in all the Battle of
Platea, not being able to break into the Persian Phalanx, unbethought
themselves to disperse and retire, that by the Enemies supposing they fled,
they might break, and disunite that vast Body of Men in the Pursuit, and by
that Stratagem obtained the Victory. As for the Scythians, it is said of them,
that when Darius went his Expedition to subdue them, he sent, by an Herald,
highly to reproach their King, That he always retired before him and declined a
Battle; to which Indathyrsez (for that was his Name) returned Answer, That it
was not for fear of him, or of any Man living, that he did so, but that it was
the way of Marching in practice with his Nation, who had neither tilled Fields,
Cities, nor Houses to defend, or to fear the Enemy should make any Advantage
of: but that if he had such a Stomach to fight, let him but come to view their
ancient place of Sepulture, and there he should have his Fill. Nevertheless as
to what concerns Cannon Shot, when a Body of Men are drawn up in the Face of a
Train of Artillery, as the Occasion of War does often require, it is unhandsome
to quit their Post to avoid the Danger, and a foolish thing to boot, forasmuch
as by reason of its Violence and Swiftness we account it inevitable, and many a
one, by ducking, steping aside, and such other motions of Fear, has been
sufficiently laughed at by his Companions And yet in the Expedition that the
Emperor Charles the Fifth made into Prov^nce, the Marquis de Guast going to
discover the City of Arles, and venturing to advance out of the Blind of a
Windmill, under favor of which he had made his Approach, was perceived by the
Seigneurs de Bonneval and the Seneschall of Agenois, who were walking upon the
Theater Aux arenes; who having showed him to the Sieur de Villiers, A Theater
where public Shows of Riding, Fenceing, etc. were exhibited.
Commissary of the Artillery, he traversed a Culverine so admirable well, and
levelled it so exactly right against him, that had not the Marquis, seeing Fire
given to it, slipped aside, it was certainly concluded, the Shot had taken him
full in the Body. And in like manner, some Years before, Lorenzo de Medici,
Duke of Urbin, and Father to the Queen Mother of France, laying Siege to
Mondolpho, a Place in the Territories of the Vicariat in Italy, seeing the
Cannoneer give Fire to a Piece that pointed directly against him, it was well
for him that he duck'd, for otherwise, the Shot, that only rased the top of his
Head, had doubtless hit him full in the Breast. To say truth, I do not think
that these Evasions are performed upon the account of Judgment; for how is any
Man living able to Judge of high or low Aim on so sudden an Occasion? And it is
much more easy to believe, that Fortune favored their Apprehension, and that
it might be a means at another time, as well to make them step into the danger,
as to teach them to avoid it. For my own part I confess, I cannot forbear
starting when the Rattle of a Harquebuze thunders in my Ears on a sudden, and
in a place where I am not to expect it, which I have also observed in others,
brave^ Fellows than I; neither do the Stoics pretend, that the Soul of their
Philosopher should be proof against the first Visions and Fantasies that
surprise him; but as a natural Subject, consent that he should tremble at the
terrible noise of Thunder, or the sudden clatter of some falling Ruin, and be
affrighted even to Paleness and Convulsion. And so in other Passions, provided
a Man's Judgment remain sound and entire, and that the Site of his Reason
s^ffer, no Concussion nor Alteration, and that he yields no consent to his
Fright and Discomposure. To him who is not a Philosopher, a Fright is the same
in the first part of it, but quite another thing in the second; for the
Impression of Passions does not remain only superficially in him, but
penetrates further, even to the very Seat of Reason and so, as to infect and to
corrupt it. He Judges according to his Fear, and conforms his Behavior to it.
But in this Verse you may see the true State of the wise Stoic learnedly and
plainly expressed: Virg. Aen. l. 2.
Men's immota manet, lacrymae volvuntur inanes. The Eye, perhaps, frail,
fruitless showers rains,
Whilst yet the Mind firm and unshook remains.


The wise Peripatetick is not himself totally free from perturbations of Mind,
but he moderates them by his Wisdom.

CHAP. XIII.
The Ceremony of the Interview of Princes.
THere is no Subject so frivolous, that does not merit a Place in this
Rhapsody. Ac^ording to the common Rule of Civility, it would be a kind of an
Affront to an Equal, and much more to a Superior, to fail of being at home,
when he has given you notice he will come to visit you. Nay, Queen Margaret of
Navarre further adds, that it would be a Rudeness in a Gentleman to go out to
meet any that is coming to see him, let him be of what condition soever; and
that it is more respective, and more civil to stay a^ home to receive him, if
only upon the account of missing of him by the way, and that it is enough to
receive him at the door, and to wait upon him to his Chamber. For my part, who
as much as I can endeavor to reduce the Ceremonies of my House, I very often
forget both the one and the other of these vain Offices, and peradventure some
one may take Offense at it; if he do, I am sorry, but I cannot find in my heart
to help it; it is much better to offend him once, than my self every day, for
it would be a perpetual slavery; and to what end do we avoid the servile
attendance of Courts, if we bring the same, or a greater trouble, home to our
own private Houses? It is also a common Rule in all Assemblies, that those of
less quality are to be first upon the Place, by reason that it is a State more
due to the better Sort to make others wait and expect them. Nevertheless, at
the Interview betwixt Pope Clement and King Francis at M^rseilles, the King,
after he had in his own Person taken order in the necessary Preparations for
his Reception and Entertainment, withdrew out of the Town, and gave the Pope
two or three days respite for his Entry, and wherein to repose and refresh
himself before he came to him. And in like manner, at the Assignation of the
Pope and the Emperor at Bolognia, the Emperor gave the Pope leave to come
thither first, and came himself after; for which, the reason then given was
this; that at all the Interviews of such Princes, the greater ought to be first
at the appointed Place, especially before the other, in whose Territories the
Interview is appointed to be, intimating thereby a kind of deference to the
other, it appearing proper for the less to seek out, and to apply themselves to
the greater, and not the greater to them. Not every Country only, but every
City, and so much as every Society, have their particular Forms of Civility.
There was care enough taken in my Education, and I have lived in good Company
enough to know the Formalities of our own Nation, and am able to give Lesson in
it; I love also to follow them, but not to be so servilely tied to their
observation, that my whole Life should be enslaved to Ceremony; of which there
are some, that provided a man omits them out of Discretion, and not for want of
breeding, it will be every whit as handsome. I have seen some People rude, by
being over-civil, and troublesome in their Courtesy: though, these Excesses
excepted, the knowledge of Courtesy and good Manners is a very necessary
study. It is, like Grace and Beauty, that which begets liking and an
inclination to love one another at the first sight, and in the beginning of an
Acquaintance and Familiarity; and consequently, that which first opens the
door, and intromits us to Better our selves by the Example of others, if there
be any thing in the Society worth taking notice of.

CHAP* XIV.
That Men are justly punished for being obstinate in the Defense of a Fort that
is not in reason to be defended.
Valor has its bounds, as well as other Virtues, which once transgressed, the
next step is into the Territories of Vice, so that by having too large a
Proportion of this Heroic Virtue, unless a man be very perfect in its limits,
which upon the Confines are very hard to discern, he may very easily unawares
run into Temer^ty, Obstinacy, and Folly. From this consideration it is, that we
have derived the Custom in times of War, to punish even with Death those who
are obstinate to defend a Place that is not tenible by the Rules of War. In
which case, if there were not some Examples made, Men would be so confident
upon the hopes of Impunity, that not a Hen-roost but would resist, and stop a
Royal Army. The Constab^e Monsieur de Montmorency, having at the Siege of Pavie
been ordered to pass the Tesine, and to take up his Quarters in the Fauxburg
St. Antonie, being hindered so to do by a Tower that was at the end of the
Bridge, which was so impudent as to endure a Battery, hanged every man he found
within it for their labor. And again since, accompanying the Dauphine in his
Expedition beyond the Alps, and taking the Castle of Villane by Assault, and
all within it being put to the Sword, the Governor and his Ensign only
excepted, he caused them both to be trussed up for the same reason; as also did
Captain Martin du Bellay, then Governor of Turin, the Governor of St. Bony,
in the same Country, all his People being cut in pieces at the taking of the
Place. But forasmuch as the Strength or Weakness of a Fortress is always
measured by the Estimate and Counterpoise of the Forces that attack it (for a
Man might reasonably enough despise two Culverines, that would be a Madman to
abide a Battery of thirty pieces of Canon) where also the greatness of the
Prince who is Master of the Field, his Reputation, and the Respect that is due
unto him, is always put into the Balance; it is dangerous to affront such an
Enemy: And besides, by compelling him to force you, you possess him with so
great an Opinion of himself and his Power, that thinking it unreasonable any
place should dare to shut their Gates against his victorious Army, he puts all
to the Sword, where he meets with any Opposition, whilst his Fortune continues;
as is very plain in the fierce and arrogant Forms of summoning Towns, and
denouncing War: savouring so much of Barbarian Pride and Insolence in use
amongst the Oriental Princes, and which their Successors to this day do yet
retain and practice. And even in that remote Part of the World where the
Portuguese subdued the Indians, they found some States where it was an
universal and inviolable Law amongst them, that every Enemy, overcome by the
King in Person, or by his representative Lieutenant, was out of Composition
both of Ransom and Mercy. So that above all things a Man should take heed of
falling into the hands of a Judge who is an Enemy and Victorious.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Punishment of Cowardice.
I Once heard of a Prince, and a great Captain, having a Narration given him as
he sat at Table of the proceeding against Monsieur de Vervins, who was
sentenced to Death for having surrendered Bullen to the English, openly
maintained, that a Soldier could not justly be put to Death for his want of
Courage. And, in truth, a Man should make a great Difference betwixt Faults
that merely proceed from Infirmity, and those that are visibly the Effects of
Treachery and Malice; for in the last they will fully act against the Rules of
Reason that Nature has imprinted in us; whereas in the former it seems as if we
might produce the same Nature, who left us in such a state of Imperfection, and
defect of Courage for our justification. Insomuch, that many have thought we
are not justly questionable for any thing, but what we commit against the Light
of our own Conscience. And it is partly upon this Rule, that those ground their
Opinion, who disapprove of Capital and Sanguinary Punishments inflicted upon
Heretics and Miscreants; and theirs also, who hold that an Advocate or a Judge
are not accountable for having ignorantly failed in their Administration. But
as to Cowardice, it is most certain, that the most usual way of chastising that
is by Ignominy and Disgrace; and it is supposed, that this Practice was first
brought into use by the Legislator Cherondas; and that before his time the Laws
of Greece punished those with Death who fled from a Battle; whereas he ordained
only that they should be three days exposed in the public Place dressed in
Women's Attire, hoping yet for some Service from them, having awaked their
Courage by this open Shame; Suffundere malis hominis sanguinem quam effundere,
choosing rather to bring the Blood into their Cheeks than to let it out of
their Bodies. It appears also, that the Roman Laws did anciently punish those
with Death who had run away: for Ammianus Marcellinus says, that the Emperor
Julian commanded ten of his Soldiers, who had turned their Backs in an
Encounter against the Parthians, to be first degraded, and afterward put to
death, according (says he) to the ancient Laws, and yet elsewhere for the like
Offense, he only condemns others to remain amongst the Prisoners under the
Baggage Ensign. The punishment the People of Rome inflicted upon those who fled
from the Battle of Cannae, and those who run away with Cneius Fulvius, at his
Defeat, did not extend to Death. And yet methinks Men should consider what they
do in such Cases, lest disgrace should make such Delinquents desperate, and not
only faint Friends but implacable and mortal Enemies. Of late memory, the
Seigneur de Franget, Lieutenant to the Marshall de Chattilion's Company,
having by the Marshall de Chabanes been put in Governor of Fontarabie, in the
Place of Monsieur de Lude, and having surrendered it to the Spaniard, he was
for that condemned to be degraded from all Nobility, and both himself and his
Posterity declared ignoble, taxable, and for ever incapable of bearing Arms;
which severe sentence was afterward accordingly executed at Lions: and since
that all the Gentlemen who were in Guise when Count Nassau entered into it,
underwent the same punishment, as several others have done since for the like
Offense. Notwithstanding, in case of such a manifest Ignorance or Cowardice as
exceeds all other ordinary Example, it is but reason to take it for a sufficient
Proof of Treachery and Malice, and for such it ought to be censured and
punished.

CHAP. XVI.
A Proceeding of some Ambassadors.
I Observe in all my Travels this Custom, ever to learn something from the
Information of those with home I confer (which is the best School of all other)
and to put my Company upon those Subjects they are the best able to speak of:
Basti al nochiero ragionar de venti,
Al bifolco de i Tori, and le sue Pyaghe
Conti'l guerrier, conti'l Pastor gli armenti.
Ariosto. Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator, Ememorat miles vulnera,
pastor oves. Propert.
The Seamen best can reason of the Winds,
Of Oxen none so well as laboring Hinds;
The huffing Soldier best of Wounds and Knocks,
And gentler Shepherds of their harmlss Flocks.
For it often falls out, that, on the contrary, every one will rather choose to
be prating of another Man's Province than his own, thinking it so much new
reputation acquired; witness the Jeer Archidamus put upon Periander, That he
had quitted the Glory of being an excellent Physician to gain the Repute of a
very bad Poet. And do but observe how large and ample. Caesar is to make us
understand his Invention of building of Bridges, and contriving Engines of War,
and how succinct and reserved in Comparison, where he speaks of the Offices of
his Profession, his own Valor, and military Conduct. His Exploits sufficiently
prove him a great Captain, and that he knew well enough, but he would be
thought a good Engineer to boot; a quality something rare, and not much to be
expected in him. The Elder Dionystus was a very great Captain, as it befitted
his Fortune he should be; (...) he took very great Pains to get a particular
Reputation by Poetry, and yet he was never cut out for a Poet. A Gentleman of
the long Robe being not long since brought to see a Study furnished with all
sorts of Books, both of his own and all other Faculties, took no occasion at
all to entertain himself with any of them, but fell very rudely and
impertinently to descant upon a Barricado placed before the Study-door, a thing
that a hundred Captains and common Soldiers see every day without taking any
notice or offense.

Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus. The lazy Ox would Saddle have
and Bit,
The Steed a Yoke, neither for either fit.
By this course a Man shall never improve himself, nor arrive at any Perfection
in any thing. He must therefore make it his Business, always to put the
Architect, the Painter, the Statuary, as also every Mechanic Artizan, upon
discourse of their own Capacities. And to this purpose, in reading Histories,
which is every Body's Subject, I use to consider what kind of Men are the
Authors; which, if Persons that profess nothing but mere Learning, I in and
from them principally observe and learn the Style and Language; If Physicians,
I upon that account the rather incline to credit what they report of the
Temperature of the Air, of the Health and Complexions of Princes, of Wounds,
and Diseases; if Lawyers, we are from them to take notice of the Controversies
of Right and Title, the Establishment of Laws and Civil Government, and the
like; if Divines, the Affairs of the Church, Ecclesiastical Censures, Marriages
and Dispensations; if Courtiers, Manners and Ceremonies; if Soldiers, the
things that properly belong to their Trade, and principally the Accounts of
such Actions and Enterprises wherein they were personally engaged; and if
Ambassadors, we are to observe their Negotiations, Intelligences, and
Practices, and the Manner how they are to be carried on. And this is the reason
why (which perhaps I should have lightly passed over in another) I dwelt upon
and maturely considered one Passage in the History writ by Mounsieur de Langey
(a Man of very great Judgment in things of that nature) which was, after having
given a Narrative of the fine Oration Charles the Fifth had made in the
Consistory at Rome, and in the Presence of the Bishop of Mascon and Monsieur de
Velley our Ambassadors there, wherein he had mixed several tart and injurious
Expressions to the Dishonor of our Nation; and amongst the rest, That if his
Captains and Soldiers were not Men of another kind of Fidelity, Resolution,
and sufficiency in the Knowledge of Arms, than those of the King, he would
immediately go with a Rope about his Neck and sue to him for Mercy, (and it
should seem the Emperor had really this, or a very little better Opinion of
our military Men, for he afterward, twice or thrice in his Life, said the very
same thing) as also, that he challenged the King to fight him in his Shirt with
Rapier and Poiniard in a Boat: the said Sieur de Langey pursuing his History,
adds, that the forenam'd Ambassadors, sending a Dispatch to the King of these
things, concealed the greatest part, and particularly the two last Passages. At
which I could not but wonder, that it should be in the Power of an Ambassador
to dispense with any thing which he ought to signify to his Master, especially
of so great importance as this, coming from the Mouth of such a Person, and
spoke in so great an Assembly; and should rather conceive it had been the
Servant's Duty faithfully to have represented to him the whole and naked Truth
as it past, to the end that the Liberty of disposing, judging and concluding,
might absolutely have remained in him: for either to conceal, or to disguise
the Truth for fear he should take it otherwise than he ought to do, and lest it
should prompt him to some extravagant Resolution, and in the mean time to leave
him ignorant of his Affairs; should seem, methinks, rather to belong to him who
is to give the Law, than to him who is only to receive it; to him who is in
supreme Command, and best can judge of his own Interests, and not to him who
ought to look upon himself as inferior in Authority, so also in Prudence and
good Counsel: but let it it be how it will, I for my part would be loath to be
so serv^d in my little Concerns. We do so willingly slip the Collar of Command
upon any Pretense whatever, and are so ready to usurp upon Dominion, and every
one does so naturally aspire to Liberty and Power, that no Utility whatever
derived from the Wit or Valor of those he does employ, ought to be so dear to
a Superior, as a downright and sincere Obe^dience. To obey more upon the
Account of Understanding than of Subjection, is to corrupt the Office, and to
subvert the Power of Command; insomuch that P. Crassus, the same whom the
Romans reputed five times happy, at the time when he was Consul in Asia, having
sent to a Greek Engineer to cause the greater of two Masts of Ships that he had
taken notice of at Athens, to be brought to him, to be employed about some
Engine of Battery he had a design to make; the other presuming upon his own
Science and sufficiency in those Affairs, thought fit to do otherwise than
directed, and to bring the less; which also, according to the Rules of Art, was
really more proper for the use of which it was designed: but Crassus, though he
gave ear to his Reason with great Patience, would not however take them, how
sound or convinc^ng soever, for current Pay, but yet remained so highly
offended at his Disobedience, that he caused him to be sufficiently whipped for
his Pains, valuing the Interest of Discipline much more than of the thing.
Notwithstanding, we may on the other side consider, that so precise and
implicit an Obedience as this, is only due to positi^^ and limited Commands.
The Employment of an Ambassador is never so confined; several things in the
management of Affairs, and in the various and unforeseen Occurrences and
Accidents that may fall out in the Management of a Negotiation of this Nature,
being wholly referred to the absolute Sovereignty of their own Conduct: neither
do they simply execute only, but also to their own Discretion and Wisdom form
and model their Master's Pleasure; and I have in my time known Men of command
who have been checked for having rather obeyed the express Words of the King's
Letters, than the necessity of the Affairs they had in hand. Men of
Understanding do yet to this day condemn the Custom of the Kings of Persia, to
give their Lieutenants and Agents so little Rein, that upon the least arising
Difficulties they must evermore have Recourse to their further Commands; this
delay in so vast an extent of Dominion having often very much prejudiced their
Affairs. And Crassus, writing to a Man whose Profession it was best to
understand those things, and pre-acquainting him to what use this Mast was
designed, did he not seem to consult his Advice, and in a manner invite him to
interpose his better Judgment.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Fear.
Virg. Aen. l. 2.
Obstupui, steteruntque comae and vox faucibus haesit. I was amazed, struck
Speechless, and my Hair
On end upon my Head did wildly stare.
I Am not so good a Naturalist as to discern by what secret Springs Fear has
its motion in us; but I am wise enough to know, that it is a strong Passion,
and such a one, that the Physicians say there is no other what ever that sooner
disthrones our Judgments from its proper Seat; which is so true, that I my self
have seen very many become frantic thorough Fear; and even in those of the
best settled Temper, it is most certain, that it begets a terrible Astonishment
and Confusion during the Fit. I omit the Vulgar sort, to whom it one while
represents their Great-Grandsires, risen out of their Graves in their Shrowds,
another while Hob-Goblins, Specter and Chimaera's, but even amongst Soldiers
(a sort of men over whom, of all others, it ought to have the least Power) how
often has it converted Flocks of Sheep into armed Squadrons, Reeds and
Bull-rushes into Pikes and Lances, Friends into Enemies, and the French White
into the Red Crosses of Spain! When Mounsieur de Bourbon took the City of Rome,
an Ensign who was upon the Guard at the Bourg St. Pierre, was seized with such
a Fright upon the first Alarm, that he threw himself out at a Breach with his
Colun upon his Shoulder, and can directly upon the Enemy, thinking he had
retreated toward the inward Defenses of the City, and with much ado, seeing
Mounsieur de Bourbon's People, who thought it had been a Sally upon them, draw
up to receive him, at last came to himself, and saw his Error; and then facing
about, he retreated full speed through the same Breach by which he had gone
out; but not till he had first blindly advanced above three hundred Paces into
the open Field. It did not however fall out so well with Captain Julius his
Ensign at the time when St. Paul was taken from us by the Count de Bur^^ and
Monsieur du Reu, for he, being so astonished with Fear, as to throw himself and
his Fellows out at a Skyt-gate, was immediately cut to pieces by the Enemy; and
in the same Siege it was a very memorable Fear, that so seized, contracted, and
froze up the Heart of a young Gentleman, that he sunk down stone dead in the
Breach, without any manner of Wound or Hurt at all. The like Madness does
sometimes push on a whole Multitude; for in one of the Encounters that
G^rmanicus had with the Germans, two great Parties were so amazed with Fear,
that they ran two opposite ways, the one and the other to the same place, from
which either of them had fled before. Sometimes it adds Wings to the Heels, as
in the two first, and sometimes nails them to the Ground, and fetters them from
moving; as we read of the Emperor Theophilus, who in a Battle he lost against
the Agarens, was so astonished and stupefied, that he had no Power to fly;
Quint. Curt. l. 3.
adeo pavor etiam auxilia formidat, so much does Fear dread even the means of
Safety; till such time as Manuel, one of the principal Commanders of his Army,
having jogged and shak'd him so as to rouse him out of his Trance, said to him,
Sir, if you will not follow me, I will kill you: for it is better you should
lose your Life, than, by being taken, to lose your Empire. But Fear does then
manifest its utmost Power and Effect, when it throws us upon a valiant Despair,
having before deprived us of all sense both of Duty and Honor. In the first
pitched Battle the Romans lost against Hannibal, under the Consul Sempronius, a
Body of ten thousand Foot, that had taken a Fright, seeing no other Escape for
their Cowardice, went, and threw themselves headlong upon the great Battalion
of the Enemies, which also with wonderful force and fury they charg^d thorough
and thorough, and routed with a very great slaughter of the Carthaginians, by
that means purchasing an ignominious flight at the same price they might have
done a glorious Victory. The thing in the World I am most afraid of is Fear,
and with good reason, that Passion alone, in the trouble of it, exceeding all
other Accidents. What affliction could be greater or more just than that of
Pompe^'s Followers and Friends, who, in his Ship, were Spectators of that
horrid and inhumane murder? Yet so it was, that the Fear of the Egyptian
Vessels they saw coming to board them, possessed them with so great a Fear,
that it is observed they thought of nothing, but calling upon the Mariners to
make haste, and by force of Oars to escape away, till being arrived at Tire,
and delivered from the apprehension of further danger, they then had leisure to
turn their thoughts to the loss of their Captain, and to give vent to those
tears and lamentations that the other more prevalent Passion had till then
suspended.

Tum pavor sapientiam omnem mihi ex animo expectorat. My Mind with great and
sudden fear oppressed*
Was, for the time, of Judgment dispossessed.
Such as have been well banged in some Skirmish, may yet, all wounded and
bloody as they are, be brought on again the next day to charge: but such as
have once conceived a good sound Fear of the Enemy, will never be made so much
as to look him in the Face. Such as are in immediate Fear of losing their
Estates, of Banishment, or of Slavery, live in perpetual Anguish, and lose all
Appetite and Repose; whereas such as are actually poor, Slaves and Exiles,
oft-times live as merrily as Men in a better Condition: and so many People, who
impatient of the perpetual Alarms of Fear, have hanged and drowned themselves,
give us sufficiently to understand, that it is more importunate and
insupportable than Death it self. The Greeks acknowledge another kind of Fear
exceeding any we have spoke of yet, a Passion that surprises us without any
visible Cause, by an impulse from Heaven; so that whole Armies and Nations have
been struck with it. Such a one was that, which brought so wonderful a
Desolation upon Carthage, where nothing was to be heard but Voices, and
Outcries of Fear, where the Inhabitants were seen to sally out of their Houses
as to an Alarm, and there to charge, wound, and kill one another, as if they
had been Enemies come to surprise their City. All things were in strange
Disorder and Fury, till with Prayers and Sacrifices they had appeased their
Gods: and this is that they call a Panick Terror.

CHAP. XVIII.
That Men are not to judge of our Happiness till after Death.
Ovid. Met. l. 3.
-- scilicet ultima semper
Expectanda dies homini est, dicique beatus,
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
Men's last days still to be expected are,
E're we of them our Judgments do declare;
Nor cannot of any one be rightly said,
That he is happy, till he first be dead.
EVery one is acquainted with the Story of King Croesus to this purpose, who
being taken Prisoner by Cyrus, and by him condemned to die, as he was going to
Execution, cried out, O Solon, Solon! which being presently reported to Cyrus,
and he sending to enquire of him what it meant, Croesus gave him to understand,
that he now found the Advertisement Solon had formerly given him true to his
Cost, which was, That men, however Fortune may smile upon them, could never be
said to be happy, till they had been seen to pass over the last day of their
Lives, by reason of the uncertainty and mutability of Humane things, which upon
very light and trivial occasions, are subject to be totally changed into a
quite contrary condition. And therefore it was, that Agesil^us made answer to
one that was saying, what a happy young man the King of Pers^^ was, to come so
young to so mighty a Kingdom; It Is true, (said he) but neither was Priam
unhappy at his years. In a short time, of Kings of Macedon, Successors to that
mighty Al^xander, were made Joyne^^ and Scriveners at Rome, of a Tyrant of
Sicily, a Pedant at Corinth, of a Conqueror of one half of the World, and
General of so many Armies, a miserable Suppliant to the rascally. Officers of a
King of Egypt. So much the prolongation of five or Six Months of Life cost the
Great and Noble P^mpey, and no longer (...) than our Fathers da^s, Ludovico
Forza, the tenth Duke of Millan, whom all Italy had so long truckled under, was
seen to die a wretched Prisoner at Loches, but not till he had lived ten Years
in Captivity, which was the worst part of his Fortune. The fairest of all
Queens, Mary, Qu. of Scots.
Widow to the greatest King in Europe, did she not come to die by the hand of
an Executioner? Unworthy and barbarous Cruelty! and a thousand more Examples
there are of the same kind; for, it seems, that as Storms and Tempests have a
Malice to the proud, and overtow'ring heights of our lofty Buildings, there are
also Spirits above that are envious of the Grandeurs here below.

Lucret. l. 5.
Usque adeo res humanas vis abdita quaedam
Obterit, and pulchros Fasces, saevasque secures
Proculcare, ac ludibrio sibi habere videtur.
By which it does appear, a Power unseen
Rome's awful Fasces, and her Axes keen
Spurns under foot, and plainly does despise,
Of humane Power the vain Formalities.
And it should seem also that Fortune sometimes lies in wait to surprise the
last Hour of our Lives, to show the Power she has in a Moment to overthrow what
she was so many Years in building, making us cry out with Laberius, Macrob. l.
2. c. 2.
Nimirum hac die una plus vixi mihi quam vivendum fuit, I have liv^d longer by
this one day than I ought to have done. And in this Sense, this good Advice of
Solon may reasonably be taken; but he being a Philosopher, with which sort of
Men the Favors and Disgraces of Fortune stand for nothing, either to the
making a Man happy or unhappy, and with home Grandeurs and Powers, Accidents of
Quality, are upon the Matter indifferent: I am apt to think that he had some
farther Aim, and that his meaning was, that the very Felicity of Life it self,
which depends upon the Tranquillity and Contentment of a well-descended Spirit,
and the Resolution and Assurance of a well-ordered Soul, ought never to be
attributed to any Man, till he has first been seen to play the last, and
doubtless the hardest act of his Part, because there may be Disguise and
Dissimulation in all the rest, where these fine Philosophical Discourses are
only put on; and where Accidents do not touch us to the Quick, they give us
leisure to maintain the same sober Gravity; but in this last Scene of Death,
there is no more counterfeiting, we must speak plain, and must discover what
there is of pure and clean in the bottom.

Lucret. l. 3.
Nam verae voces tum demum pectore ab imo
Ejiciuntur, and eripitur persona, manet res.
Then that at last Truth issues from the Heart,
The Vizor's gone, we act our own true part.
Wherefore at this last all the other Actions of our Life ought to be tried and
sifted. It Is the Master-day, it is the day that is judge of all the rest, It Is
the Day (says one of the Ancients) that ought to judge of all my foregoing
Years. To Death do I refer the Eisay of the Fruit of all my Studies. We shall
then see whether my Discourses came only from my Mouth, or from my Heart. I
have seen many by their Death give a good or an ill Repute to their whole Life.
Scipio, the Father-in-law of Pompey the great, in dying well, wiped away the
ill Opinion, that till then every one had conceived of him. Epaminondas being
asked which of the three he had in greatest esteem, Chabrias, Iphicrates, or
himself; You must first see us die (said he) before that Question can be
resolved: and in truth, he would infinitely wrong that great Man, who would
weigh him without the Honor and Grandeur of his End. God Almighty has ordered
all things as it has best pleased him: But I have in my time seen three of the
most execrable Persons that ever I knew in all manner of abominable living, and
the most infamous to boot, who all dyed a very regular Death, and in all
Circumstances composed even to Perfection. There are brave, and fortunate
Deaths. I have seen Death cut the Thread of the Progress of a prodigious
Advancement, and in the height and Flower of its increase of a certain Person,
with so glorious an end, that in my Opinion his Ambitious, and generous Designs
had nothing in them so high and great as their Interruption; and he arrived,
without completing his course, at the Place to which his Ambition pretended
with greater Glory, than he could himself either hope or desire, and
anticipated by his Fall the Name and power to which he aspired, by perfecting
his Career. In the Judgment I make of another Man's Life, I always observe how
he carried himself at his Death; and the principal Concern I have for my own,
is, that I may die handsomely, that is, patiently, and without noise.

CHAP. XIX.
That to study Philosophy, is to learn to die.
CIcero says, That to study Philosophy is nothing but to prepare a Man's self
to die. The reason of which is, because Study and Contemplation do in some sort
withdraw from us, and deprive us of our Souls, and employ it separately from
the Body, which is a kind of Learning to die, and a resemblance of Death; or
else because all the Wisdom and reasoning in the World, does in the end
conclude in this Point, to teach us not to fear to die. And to say the Truth,
either our Reason does grossly abuse us, or it ought to have no other Aim but
our Contentment only, nor to endeavor any thing, but in Sum to make us live
well, and as the Holy Scripture says, at our Ease. All the Opinions of the
World agree in this. That Pleasure is our end, though we make use of diverse
means to attain unto it, they would otherwise be rejected at the first motion;
for who would give Ear to him that should propose Affliction and Misery for his
end? The Controversies and Disputes of the Philosophical Sects upon this Point
are merely verbal, Transcurramus solertissimas nugas, Let us skip over those
learned and subtle Fooleries and Trifles; Seneca Epist.
there is more in them of Opposition and Obstinacy than is consistent with so
sacred a Profession: but what kind of Person soever Man takes upon him to
personate, he over-mixes his own part with it; and let the Philosophers all say
what they will, the main thing at which we all aim, even in Virtue it self, is
Pleasure. It pleases me to rattle in their Ears this Word, which they so
nauseate to hear; and if it signify some supreme Pleasure and excessive
Delight, it is more due to the Assistance of Virtue than to any other
Assistance whatever. This Delight, for being more gay, more sinewy, more
robust, and more manly, is only to be more seriously voluptuous, and we ought
to give it the Name of Pleasure, as that which is more benign, gentle, and
natural, and not that of Vigor, from which we have derived it: the other more
mean and sensual part of Pleasure, if it could deserve this fair Name, it ought
to be upon the Account of Concurrence, and not of Privilege; I find it less
exempt from Traverses and Inconveniences, than Virtue it self; and besides
that, the enjoyment is more momentary, fluid, and frail; it has its Watchings,
Fasts, and Labors, even to Sweat and Blood; and moreover, has particular to it
self so many several sorts of sharp and wounding Passions, and so stupid a
Satiety attending it, as are equal to the severest Penance. And we mistake to
think that Difficulties should serve it for a Spur, and a seasoning to its
Sweetness, as in Nature one Contrary is quickened by another, and to say when we
come to Virtue, that like Consequences and Difficulties overwhelm and render it
austere and inaccessible; whereas, much more aptly than in Voluptuousness, they
enable, sharpen, and heighten the Perfect and divine Pleasure they procure us.
He renders himself unworthy of it who will counterpoise his Expense with the
Fruit, and does neither understand the Blessing, nor how to use it. Those who
Preach to us, that the quest of it is craggy, difficult, and painful, but the
Fruition pleasant and grateful, what do they mean by that but to tell us that
it is always unpleasing? The most perfect have been forced to content
themselves to aspire unto it, and to approach it only without ever possessing
it. But they are deceived, and do not take notice, that of all the Pleasures we
know, the very Pursuit is pleasant. The Attempt ever relishes of the quality of
the thing to which it is directed, for it is a good part of, and consubstantial
with the Effect. The Felicity and Beatitude that glitters in Virtue, shines
throughout all her Apartments and Avenues, even to the first Entry, and utmost
Pale and Limits. Now of all the Benefits that Virtue confers upon us, the
Contempt of Death is one of the greatest, as the means that accommodates Humane
Life with a soft and easy Tranquillity, and gives us a pure and pleasant Taste
of Living, without which all other pleasure would be extinct; which is the
Reason why all the Rules by which we are to live, center and concur in this own
Article. And although they all in like manner with one consent endeavor to teach
us also to despise Grief, Poverty, and the other Accidents to which humane Life
by its own Nature and Constitution, is subjected, it is not nevertheless with
the same Importunity, as well by reason the forenamed Accidents are not of so
great necessity, the greater part of Mankind passing over their whole Lives
without ever knowing what Poverty is, and some without Sorrow or Sickness as
Xenophilus the Musician, who lived a hundred and six Years in a perfect and
continual Health; as also because, at the worst, Death can, whenever we please,
cut short, and put an end to all these Inconveniences. But as to Death, it is
inevitable.

Horat. l. 2. Od. 3.
Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium
Versatur Urna; serius, ocyus
Sors exitura, nos in aeternum
Exilium impositura Cymbae.
We all are to one Voyage bound; by turn,
Sooner or later, all must to the Urn:
When Charon calls aboard we must not stay,
But to eternal Exile sail away.
And consequently, if it frights us, it is a perpetual Torment, and for which
there is no Consolation nor Redress. There is no way by which we can possibly
avoid it, it commands all Points of the Compass; we may continually turn our
Heads this way and that, and pry about as in a suspected Country, Cicero de
finib. l. 1.
quae quasi saxum Tantalo semper impendet, but it, like Tantal^s his Stone,
hangs over us. Our Courts of Justice often send back condemned Criminals to be
executed upon the Place where the Fact was committed, but carry them to all
fine Houses by the way, and prepare for them the best Entertainment you can,
Hor. l. 3. Od. 1.
-- non Sicula Dape^
Dulcem elaborabunt saporem:
Non avium, citharaeque cantus
Somnum reducent.
-- the tastes of such as these
Choicest Sicilian Dainties cannot please,
Nor yet of Birds, or Harps the Harmonies
Once charm asleep, or close their watchful Eyes.
do you think they could relish it? and that the fatal end of their Journey
being continually before their Eyes, would not alter and deprave their Palate
from tasting these Regalio's?

Claud.
Audit iter numeratque dies spatioque viarum
Me^itur vitam, torquetur peste futura.
He time and space computes, by length of ways
Sums up the number of his few sad days,
And his sad thoughts full of his fatal doom,
Can dream of nothing but the blow to come.
The end of our Race is Death, it is the necessary Object of our aim, which if
it fright us, how is it possible to advance a step without a Fit of an Ague?
The Remedy the Vulgar use, is not to think on it: but from what brutish
stupidity can they derive so gross a blindness? They must bridle the Ass by the
Tail, Lucret. l. 4.
Qui capite ipse suo instituit vestigia retro.
He who the order of his steps has laid
To light and natural motion retrograde,
it is no wonder if he be often trap'd in the Pitfall. They use to fright People
with the very mention of Death, and many cross themselves, as it were the name
of the Devil; and because the making a man's Will is in reference to dying, not
a man will be persuaded to take a Pen in hand to that purpose, till the
Physician has passed sentence upon him, and totally given him over, and then
betwixt Grief and Terror, God knows in how fit a condition of Understanding he
is to do it. The Romans, by reason that this poor syllable Death was observed
to be so harsh to the Ears of the People, and the sound so ominous; had found
out a way to soften and spin it out by a Periphrasis, and instead of
pronouncing bluntly, such a one is dead, to say, such a one has lived, or such
a one has ceased to live; for, provided there was any mention of Life in the
Case, though past, it carried yet some sound of Consolation. And from them it
is that we have borrowed our expression of the late Monsieur such and such a
one. Peradventure (as the Saying is) the term we have lived is worth our money.
The Author's birth.
I was born betwixt eleven and twelve a clock in the Forenoon the last of
February 1533. according to our Computation, beginning the Year the first of
January, and it is now but just fifteen days since I was complete nine and
thirty years old; I make account to live at least as many more. In the mean
time, to trouble a man's self with the thought of a thing so far of, is a
senseless Foolery. But what? Young and Old die after the very same manner, and
no one departs out of Life otherwise, than if he had but just before entered
into it; neither is any so old and decrepid, who has heard of Methusalem, that
does not think he has yet twenty years of Constitution good at least. Fool that
thou art, who has assured unto thee the term of Life? Thou depend^st upon
Physicians Tales and Stories, but rather consult Experience, and the fragility
of humane Nature: for, according to the common course of things, it is long
since that thou liv'dst by extraordinary Favor. Thou have already out-li'vd
the ordinary term of Life, and that it is so, reckon up thy Acquaintance, how
many more have died before they arrived at thy Age, than have attained unto it,
and of those who have ennobled their Lives by their Renown, take but an
Account, and I dare lay a Wager, thou will find more who have dyed before than
after five and thirty years of age. It is full both of Reason and Piety too, to
take Example by the Humanity of Jesus Christ himself, who ended his Life at
three and thirty years. The greatest man, that ever was no more than a man,
Alexander, died also at the same Age. How many several ways has Death to
surprise us?

Hor. l. 2. Od. 13.
Quid quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis
Cautum est in horas.
Man fain would shun, but it is not in his Power
T'evade the dangers of each threatening hour.
To omit Fevers and Pleurisies, who would ever have imagined that a Duke of
Britanny should be pressed to death in a Crow'd, as that Duke was at the entry
of Pope Clement into Lions? Have we not seen one of our Henry II. of France,
running against Montgomery. 2. Philip the eldest son of Lewis the Gross, the
40th. King of France.
Kings killed at a Tilting, and did not one of his Ancestors die by the justle
of a Hog? Aeschylus, being threatened with the fall of a house, was to much
purpose so circumspect to avoid that danger, when he was knocked of the head by
a Tortoise-shell falling out of an Eagles Talons in the Fields. Another was
choked with a Grape-stone; an Emperor killed with the scratch of a Comb in
combing his Head. Aemilius Lepidus, with a stumble at his own threshold, and
Aufidius with a justle against the door, as he entered the Council Chamber. And
betwixt the very Thighs of Women, Cor^elius Gallus the Prator, Tigillinus
Captain of the Watch at Rome, Ludovico Son of Guido de Gonzaga Marquis of
Mantua, and (of worse example) Speusippus, a Platonic Philosopher, and one of
our Popes. The poor Judge Bebi^^, whilst he repriv'd a Criminal for eight days
only, was himself condemned to death, and his own day of Life was expired.
Whilst Caius Julius the Physician was anointing the Eyes of a Patient, Death
closed his own; and if I may bring in an Example of my own Blood; A Brother of
mine, Captain St. Martin, a young man, of three and twenty years old, who had
already given sufficient testimomy of his Valor, playing a match at Tennis,
received a blow of a Ball a little above his right Ear, which, though it was
without any manner of sign of Wound, or depression of the Skull, and though he
took no great notice of it, nor so much as sat down to repose himself, he
nevertheless died within five or six hours after, of an Apoplexy occasioned by
that blow. Which so frequent and common Examples passing every day before our
Eyes, how is it possible a man should disingage himself from the thought of
Death; or avoid fansying that it has us every moment by the Collar? What matter
is it, you will say, which way it comes to pass, provided a man does not
terrify himself with the expectation? For my part, I am of this mind, that if
a man could by any means avoid it, though by creeping under a Calves skin, I am
one that should not be ashamed of the shift: all I aim at is, to pass my time
pleasantly, and without any great Reproach, and the Recreations that most
contribute to it, I take hold of, as to the rest, as little glorious and
exemplary as you would desire.

H^ra^e, Epist. 2 l. 2.
-- praetulerim d^lirus inersque videri,
Dum mea d^lectant m^la me, vel deni* fallant,
Quam sapere, and ringi.
A Fool, or Coward, let me censured be,
Whilst either Vice does please, or cozen me,
Rather, than be thought wise, and ^eel the smart
Of a perpetual aching, anxious Heart.
But it is folly to think of doing any thing that way. They go, they come, they
gallop and dance, and not a word of Death. All this is very fine, but withal,
when it comes either to themselves, their Wives, their Children, or Friends,
surprising them at unawares, and unprepared, then what torment, what outcries,
what madness and despair! Did you ever see any thing so subdued, so changed and
so confounded? A man must therefore make more early trial of it; and this
brutish negligence, could it possibly lodge in the Brain of any man of Sense
(which I think utterly impossible) sells us its merchandise too dear. Were it
an Enemy that could be avoided, I would then advise to borrow Arms even of
Cowardice it self to that effect: but seeing it is not, and that it will catch
you as well flying, and playing the Poltron, as standing to it like a man of
Honor.

Idem l. 3. Ode 2.
Nempe and fugacem persequitur virum,
Nec parcit imbellis juventae
Poplitibus timidoque tergo.
No speed of ^oot prevents Death of his prize,
He cuts the Hamstrings of the man that flies;
Nor spares the tender Stripling's back does start
TO outrun the distance of his mortal Dart.
And seeing that no temper of Arms is of proof to secure us, Propert. l. 3.
Eleg 17. altas 16.
Ille licet ferro, cautus se condat, and aere
Mors tamen inclusum protrahet inde caput.
Shell thee with Steel or Brass, advised by dread
Death from the Cask will pull thy cautious Head.
let us learn bravely to stand our ground, and fight him. And to begin to
deprive him of the greatest Advantage he has over us, let us take a way quite
contrary to the common course. Let us disarm him of his Novelty and
Strangeness, let us converse, and be familiar with him, and have nothing so
frequent in our thoughts as Death; Let us upon occasions represent him in all
his most dreadful shapes to our imagination; at the stumbling of a Horse, at
the falling of a Tile, at the lest prick with a Pin, let us presently consider,
and say to our selves, Well, and what if it had been Death it self? and
thereupon let us encourage and fortify our selves. Let us evermore amidst our
jollity and Feasting, set the remembrance of our frail condition before our
Eyes, never suffering our selves to be so far transported with our Delight, but
that we have some intervals of reflecting upon, and considering how many
several ways this Jollity of ours tends to Death, and with how many dangers it
threatens it. The Egyptians were wont to do after this manner, who in the
height of their Feasting and Mirth, caused a dried Skeleton of a Man to be
brought into the Room to serve for a Memento to their Guests.

Horat. l. 1. Epist. 4.
Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum,
Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur hora.
Think every day, soon as the day is past,
Of thy Life's date, that thou have lived the last;
The next day's joyful Light thine Eyes shall see,
As unexpected, will more welcome be.
Where Death waits for us in uncertain; let us every where look for him. The
Premeditation of Death is the Premeditation of Liberty; who has learnt to die
has forgot to serve. There is nothing of Evil in Life, for him who rightly
comprehends, that Death is no Evil; to know how to die delivers us from all
Subjection and Constraint. Paulus Aemilius answered him whom the miserable King
of Macedon, his Prisoner, sent to entreat him that he would not lead him in his
Triumph, Let him make that Request to himself. In truth, in all things, if
Nature do not help a little, it is very hard for Art and Industry to perform
any thing to purpose. I am in my own Nature not melancholy, but thoughtful; and
there is nothing I have more continually entertained my self withal, than the
Imaginations of Death, even in the gayest and most wanton time of my Age.

Catullus. Number. 69.
Jucundum cum aetas florida ver ageret. Of florid Age in the most pleasant
Spring. In the Company of Ladies, and in the height of Mirth, some have perhaps
thought me possessed with some jealousy, or meditating upon the Uncertainty of
some imagined Hope, whilst I was entertaining my self with the Remembrance of
some one surpised a few days before with a burning Fever of which he died
returning from an Entertainment like this with his Head full of idle Fancies of
Love and Jollity, as mine was then, and that for ought I knew the same Destiny
was attending me. Lucret. l 3.
J am fuerit, nec post unquam revocare licebit. But now he had a being amongst
Men,
Now gone, and never to be recalled again.
Yet did no^ this Thought wrinkle my Forehead any more than any other. It is
impossible but we must feel a sting in such Imaginations as these at first; but
with often revolving them in a Man's Mind, and having them frequent in our
Thoughts, they at last become so familiar as to be no trouble at all:
otherwise, I for my part should be in a perpetual Fright and Frenzy; for never
Man was so distrustful of his Life, never Man so indifferents for its Duration.
Neither Health, which I have hitherto ever enjoyed very strong and vigorous,
and very seldom interrupted, does prolong, nor Sickness contract my Hopes.
Methinks I escape every minute, and it eternally runs in my Mind, that what may
be done to morrow may be done to day. Hazards and Dangers do, in truth, little
or nothing hasten our end; and if we consider how many more remain and hang
over our Heads, besides the accident that immediately threatens us, we shall
find that the Sound and the Sick, those that are abroad at Sea, and those that
sit by the Fire, those who are engag^d in Battle, and those who sit idle at
home, are the one as near it as the other: Nemo altero fragilior est: nemo in
crastinum sui certior, Senec. ^p. 19.
No man is more frail than another: no more certain of the morrow, For any
thing I have to do before I die, the longest leisure would appear too short,
were it but an Hours business I had to do. A Friend of mine the other day
turning over my Table Book, found in it a Memorandum of something I would have
done after my Decease, whereupon I told him, as it was really true, that though
I was no more than a League's distance only from my own House, and merry and
well, yet when that thing came into my Head; I made have to write it down
there, because I was not certain to live till I came home. As a man that am
eternally brooding over my own thoughts, and who confine them to my own
particular Concerns, I am upon the matter at all hours as well prepared as I am
ever like to be, and Death, whenever he shall come, can bring nothing along
with him I did not expect long before. We should always (as near as we can) be
booted and spurred, and ready to go, and above all things to take care at that
time to have no business with any one but a man's self: Hor. l. 2. Od. 16.
Quid brevi fortes jaculamur aevo Multa? Why cut'st thou out such mighty Work,
vain man?
Whose Life's short date's comprised in one poor span?
For we shall there find work enough to do, without any need of Addition; One
complains, more than of Death, than he is thereby prevented of a glorious
Victory; another, that he must die before he has married his Daughter, or
settled, and provided for his Children; a third seems only troubled that he
must lose the society of his beloved Wife; a fourth, the conversation of his
Son, as the principal concerns of his Being. For my part, I am, thanks be to
God, at this instant in such a condition, that I am ready to dislodge, whenever
it shall please him, without any manner of regret. I disengage my self
throughout from all Worldly Relations, my leave is soon taken of all but my
self. Never did any one prepare to bid adieu to the World more absolutely and
purely, and to shake hands with all manner of Interest in it, than I expect to
do. The deadest Deaths are the best.

Lucret. l. 3.
-- miser, O miser, (aiunt) omnia ademit
Una dies infesta mihi tot praemia vitae;
Wretch that I am (they cry) one fatal day
So many joys of Life has snatched away.
And the Builder,
Aeneid. l. 4.
-- manent ( dit il.) opera interrupta, minaeque
Murorum ingentes, aequataque machina Coelo.
Stupendous Piles (say he) neglected lie,
And Towers whose Pinacles do pierce the Sky.
A man must design nothing that will require so much time to the finishing, or
at least with no such passionate desire to see it brought to Perfection. We are
born to action.

Ovid. Amor. lib. 2. Eleg. 10.
Cum moriar medium solvar and inter opus. When Death shall come, he me will
doubtless find
Doing of something that I had designed.
I would always have a man to be doing, and as much as in him lies, to extend,
and spin out the Offices of life; and then let Death take me planting Cabbages,
but without any careful thought of him, and much less of my Garden's not being
finished. I saw one die, who at his last gasp seemed to be concerned at nothing
so much, as that Destiny was about to cut the thread of a Chronicle History he
was then compiling, when he was gone no farther than the fifteenth or sixteenth
of our Kings.

Lucret. l. 3.
Illud in his rebus non addunt, nec tibi earum
J am desiderium rerum, superinsidet una.
They tell us not that dying we have no more
The same desires and thoughts that heretosore.
We are to discharge our selves from these vulgar and hurtful Humors and
Concerns. To this purpose it was, that men first appointed the places of
Sepulture, and Dormitories of the dead, near adjoining to the Churches, and in
the most frequent places of the City, to accustom (says Lycurgus) the common
People, Women and Children, that they should not be startled at the sight of a
dead Corpse; and to the end, that the continual Objects of Bones, Graves,
Monuments, and Funeral Obsequies should put us in Mind of our frail condition.

Silius Ita^icus, l. 11.
Quinetiam exhilarare viris convivia caede
Mos olim, and miscere epulis spectacula dira
Certatum ferro, saepe and super ipsa cadentum
Pocula, respersis non parco sanguine mensis.
'Twas therefore that the Ancients at their Feasts
With tragic Objects used to treat their Guests,
Making their Fencers with their utmost spite,
Skill, Force, and Fury, in their presence fight,
Till streams of Blood of those at last must fall,
Dashed over their Tables, Dishes, Cups and all.
And as the Egyptians after their Feasts were wont to present the Company with
a great Image of Death, by one that cried out to them, Drink and be merry, for
such shall thou be when thou art dead; so it is my Custom to have Death not
only in my Imagination, but continually in my Mouth; neither is there any thing
of which I am so inquisitive, and delight to inform my self, as the manner of
men's Deaths, their Words, Looks, and Gestures; nor any places in History I am
so intent upon; and it is manifest enough, by my crowding in Examples of this
kind, that I have a particular fancy for that Subject. If I were a Writer of
Books, I would compile a Register with a Comment of the various Deaths of men,
and it could not but be useful, for who should teach men to die, would at the
same time teach them to live. D^cearchus made one, to which he gave that Title;
but it was design^d for another, and less profitable end. Peradventure some one
may object, and say, that the pain and terror of dying indeed does so
infinitely exceed all manner of imagination, that the best Fencer will be quite
out of his Play when it comes to the Push: but let them say what they will, to
premeditate is doubtless a very great Advantage; and besides, is it nothing to
come so far, at least, without any visible Disturbance or Alteration? But
moreover, Nature her self does assist and encourage us. If the Death be sudden
and violent, we have not leisure to fear; if otherwise, I find, that as I
engage further in my Disease, I naturally enter into a certain loathing, and
disdain of Life. I find I have much more ado to digest this Resolution of dying
when I am well in Health than when sick languishing of a Fever; and by how much
I have less to do with the Commodities of Life, by reason I even begin to lose
the use and Pleasure of them, by so much I look upon Death with less Terror and
Amazement; which makes me hope, that the further I remove from the first, and
the nearer I approach to the latter, I shall sooner strike a bargain, and with
less Unwillingness exchange the one for the other. And, as I have experimented
in other Occurrences, that, as Caesar says, things often appear greater to us
at distance than near at hand, I have found, that being well, I have had
Diseases in much greater Horror than when really afflicted with them. The
Vigor wherein I now am, and the Jollity and Delight wherein I now live, make
the contrary Estat^ appear in so great a disproportion to my present condition,
that by Imagination I magnify and make those inconveniences twice greater than
they are, and apprehend them to be much more troublesome, than I find them
really to be, when they lie the most heavy upon me, and I hope to find Death
the same. Let us but observe in the ordinary changes and Declinations our
Constitutions daily suffer, how Nature deprives us of all sight and sense of
our bodily decay. What remains to an old man of the vigor of his Youth and
better days? Corn. Galli. vel potius Maximian. Eleg. 1.
He is senibus vitae portio quanta manet?
Alas, to men, of youthful Heat berest,
How small a Portion of Life is left?
Caesar, to an old weather-beaten Soldier of his Guards, who came to ask him
leave that he might kill himself, taking notice of his whither'd Body, and
decrepid motion, pleasantly answered, Thou fansiest then that thou art yet
alive. Should a man fall into the Aches and impotencies of Age, from a spritely
and vigorous Youth on the sudden, I do not think Humanity capable of enduring
such a change: but Nature, leading us by the hand, an easy, and as it were, an
insensible pace, step by step conducts us to that miserable condition, and by
that means makes it familiar to us, so that we perceive not, nor are sensible
of the stroke then, when our Youth dies in us, though it be really a harder
Death, than the final Dissolution of a languishing Body, which is only the
Death of old Age; forasmuch as the Fall is not so great from an uneasy being
to none at all, as it is from a spritely and florid Being to one that is
unweildy and Painful. The Body, when bowed beyond its natural spring of
Strength, has less Force either to rise with, or support a burden; and it is
with the Soul the same, and therefore it is, that we are to raise her up firm
and erect against the Power of this Adversary: for as it is impossible she
should ever be at rest, or at Peace within her self, whilst she stands in fear
of it; so if she once can assure her self, she may boast (which is a thing as
it were above Humane Condition) that it is impossible that Disquiet, Anxiety,
or Fear, or any other Disturbance, should inhabit, or have any Place in her.
Horat. l. 3. Od. 3.
Non vultus instantis tyranni
Mente quatit solida, neque Auster
Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae,
Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus.
A Soul well settled is not to be shook
With an incensed Tyrant's threatening Look;
Nor can loud Auster once that Heart dismay,
The ruffling Prince of stormy Adria;
Nor yet the advanced hand of mighty Jove;
Though charged with Thunder, such a Temper move.
She is then become Sovereign of all her Lusts and Passions, Mistress of
Necessity, Shame, Poverty, and all the other Injuries of Fortune. Let us
therefore, as many of us as can, get this Advantage, which is the true and
sovereign Liberty here on Earth, and that fortifies us wherewithal to defy
Violence and Injustice, and to contemn Prisons and Chains.

Horat. l. 1. Epist. 16.
-- in Manicis, and
Compedibus, saevo te sub custode tenebo.
Ipse Deus simul atque volam, me solvet, opinor,
Hoc sentit, moriar: mors ultima linea rerum est.
With rugged Chains I Will load thy Hands and Feet,
And to a surly Keeper thee commit;
Why, let him show his worst of Cruelty,
God will, I think, for asking, set me free:
Ay, but he thinks I Will die; that Comfort brings,
For Death's the utmost Line of Humane things.
Our very Religion it self has no surer humane Foundation than the Contempt of
Death. The contempt of Death a certain Foundation of Religion.
Not only the Argument of Reason invites us to it; for why should we fear to
lose a thing, which being lost, can never be missed or lamented? but also
seeing we are threatened by so many sorts of Death, is it not infinitely worse
eternally to fear them all, than once to undergo one of them? And what matter
is it when it shall happen, since it is once inevitable? To him that told
Socrates, the thirty Tyrants have sentenced thee to Death; and Nature them;
said he. What a ridiculous thing it is to trouble and afflict our selves, about
taking the only Step that is to deliver us from all Misery and Trouble? As our
Birth brought us the Birth of all things, so in our Death is the Death of all
things included. And therefore to lament and take on, that we shall not be
alive a hundred Years hence, is the same Folly as to be sorry we were not alive
a hundred Years ago. Death is the beginning of another Life. So did we weep,
and so much it cost us to enter into this, and so did we put of our former Veil
in entering into it. Nothing can be grievous that is but once, and is it
reasonable so long to fear a thing that will so soon be dispatched? Long Life
and short, are by Death made all one; for there is no long, nor short, to
things that are no more. Aristotle tells us, that there are certain little
Beasts upon the Banks of the River Hypanis, that never live above a day: they
which die at eight of the Clock in the Morning, die in their Youth, and those
that die at five in the Evening, in their extremest Age: Which of us would not
laugh to see this Moment of Continuance put into the consideration of Weal or
Woe? The most, and the least of ours in comparison of Eternity, or yet to the
Duration of Mountains, Rivers, Stars, Trees, and even of some Animals, is no
less ridiculous. But Nature compels us to it; Go out of this World, says she,
as you entered into it; the same Pass you made from Death to Life, without
Passion or Fear, the same, after the same manner, repeat from Life to Death.
Your Death is a part of the Order of the Universe, it is a part of the Life of
the World.

Lucret. l. 2.
-- Inter se mortales mutua vivunt,
Et quasi cursores vitai lampada tradunt.
Mortals amongst themselves by turns do live,
And Life's bright Torch to the next Runner give. Alluding to the Athenian
Games, wherein those that run a Race carried Torches in their Hands; and the
Race being done, delivered them into the Hands of those who were to run next.

It Is the Condition of your Creation; Death is a part of you, and whilst you
endeavor to evade it, you avoid your selves. This very Being of yours that you
now enjoy is equally divided betwixt Life and Death. The day of your Birth is
one days advance toward the Grave. Senec. Her. fur. chor. 3.
Prima, quae vitam dedit, hora, carpsit. The Hour that gave of Life the benefit,
Did also a whole Hour shorten it.
Manil. Ast. 4.
Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet. As we are born, we die, and our
Life's end
Upon our Life's beginning does depend.
All the whole time you live you purloin from Life, and live at the expense of
Life it self, the perpetual work of our whole Life is but to lay the foundation
of Death; you are in Death whilst you live, because you still are after Death,
when you are no more alive. Or if you had rather have it so, you are dead after
Life, but dying all the while you live; and Death handles the dying much more
rudely than the dead. If you have made your profit of Life, you have had enough
of it, go your way satisfied. Lucret. l. 3.
Cur non ut plenus vitae conviva recedis. Why should thou not go like a full
gorged Guest,
Sated with Life, as he is with a Feast?
If you have not known how to make the best use of it, and if it was
unprofitable to you, what need you care to lose it, to what end would you
desire longer to keep it? Ibid.
-- cur amplius addere quaeris
Rursum quod pereat male and ingratum occidat omne?
And why renew thy time, to what intent
Live over again a Life that was ill spent?
Life in it self is neither good nor evil, it is the Scene of good or evil, as
you make it; and, if you have lived a day, you have seen all; one day is equal,
and like to all other days; there is no other Light, no other Shade, this very
Sun, this Moon, these very Stars, this very Order and Revolution of things, is
the same your Ancestors enjoyed, and that shall also entertain your Posterity.
Lucret. vel Manil.
Non alium videre patres, aliumve nepotes Aspicient. Your Grandsires saw no
other things of old,
Nor shall your Nephews other things behold.
And come the worst that can come, the distribution and variety of all the Acts
of my Comedy, is performed in a Year. If you have observed the Revolution of
the four Seasons, they comprehend, the Infancy, Youth, Virility, and old Age of
the World. The Year has played his part, and knows no other way, has no new
Farce, but must begin and repeat the same again; it will always be the same
thing.

Lucret. l. 3.
Versamur ibidem, atque insumus usque. Where still we plot, and still contrive
in vain;
For in the same state still we do remain.
Vir. Georg. l. 2.
Atque in se sua per vestigia volvitur annus. By its own footsteps led, the Year
does bring
Both ends together in an annual Ring.
Time is not resolved to create you any new Recreations.

Lucret. l. 3.
Nam tibi praeterea quod machiner, inveniamque
Quod placeat, nihil est: eadem sunt omnia semper.
More pleasures than are made time will not frame,
For to all times, all things shall be the same.
Give place to others, as others have given place to you. Equality is the Soul
of Equity. Who can complain of being comprehended in the same Destiny wherein
all things are involved? Besides, live as long as you can, you shall by that
nothing shorten the space you are to lie dead in the Grave; it is all to no
purpose; you shall be every whit as long in the condition you so much fear, as
if you had died at Nurse. Ibidem.
-- licet quot vis vivendo vincere secla,
Mors aeterna tamen, nihilominus illa manebit.
And live as many Ages as you will,
Death ne'ertheless shall be eternal still.
And yet I will place you in such a condition as you shall have no reason to be
displeased; Ibidem.
In vera nescis nullum fore morte alium te
Qui p^ssit vivus tibi te lugere peremptum.
Stansque jacentem.
When dead, a living self thou can not have
Or to lament, or trample on thy grave.
Nor shall you so much as wish for the Life you are so concerned about.

Ibidem.
Nec sibi enim quisquam tum se vitamque requirit,
Nec desiderium nostri nos afficit ullum.
Life, nor our selves we wish in that Estate,
Nor Thoughts of what we were at first create.
Death were less to be feared than nothing. if there could be any thing less
than nothing. Ibidem.
-- multo mortem minus ad nos esse putandum,
Si minus esse potest quam quod nihil esse videmus.
If less than nothing any thing can show,
Death then would both appear, and would be so.
Neither can it any way concern you, whether you are living or dead: living, by
reason that you are still in being; dead, because you are no more. Moreover, no
one dies before his Hour; and the Time you leave behind was no more yours, than
that was lapsed, and gone before you came into the World; nor does it any more
concern you.

Ibidem.
Respice enim quam nil ad nos anteacta vetustas Temporis aeterni fuerit.
Look back and tho Times past eternal were,
In those before us yet we had no share.
Wherever your Life ends it is all there; neither does the Utility of living
consist in the length of days, but in the well husbanding and improving of
Time, and such an one may have been who has longer continued in the World than
the ordinary Age of Man; that has yet lived but a little while. Make use of
Time while it is present with you. It depends upon your Will, and not upon the
number of Days, to have a sufficient length of Life. Is it possible you can
imagine ever to arrive at the Place toward which you are continually going?
and yet there is no Journey but has its end. But if Company will make it more
pleasant, or more easy to you, does not all the World go the self same way?
Ibidem.
-- omnia te vita perfuncta sequentur. When thou art dead, let this thy Comfort
be,
That all the World, by turn, must follow thee.
Does not all the World dance the same Brawl that you do? Is there any thing
that does not grow old as well as you? A thousand Men, a thousand Animals, and
a thousand other Creatures, die at the same moment that you expire.

Lucret. l. 2.
Nam nox nulla diem, neque noctem aurora secuta est,
Quae non audierit mistos vagitibus aegris
Ploratus, mortis comites, and funeris atri.
No Night suceeds the Day, nor Mornings Light
Rises to chase the sullen Shades of Night,
Wherein there is not heard the dismal Groans
Of dying Men, mixed with the woeful moans
Of living Friends, as also with the Cries
And Dirges sitting funeral Obsequies.
To what end should you endeavor to avoid, unless there were a possibility to
evade it? you have seen Examples enough of those who have received so great a
benefit by Dying, as thereby to be manifestly delivered from infallible
Miseries; but have you Talked with any of those who have feared a Disadvantage
by it? It must therefore needs be very foolish to condemn a thing you neither
experimented in your own Person, nor by that of any other. Why (says Nature)
do thou complain of me and Destiny? Do we do thee any wrong? Is it for thee
to govern us, or for us to dispose of thee? Though peradventure thy Age may not
be accomplished, yet thy Life is. A Man of low Stature is as much a man as a
Giant; neither Men, nor their Lives, are measured by the Ell. Chiron refused to
be immortal, when he was acquainted with the Conditions under which he was to
enjoy it, by the God of time it self, and its Duration, his Father Saturn. Do
but seriously consider how much more insupportable an immortal and painful Life
would be to man than what I have already designed him. If you had not Death to
ease you of your Pains and Cares, you would eternally curse me for having
deprived you of the Benefit of Dying. I have, it is true mixed a little
Bitterness with it, to the end, that seeing of what Convenience and Use it is,
you might not too greedily and indiscreetly seek and embrace it: and that you
might be so established in this Moderation, as neither to nauseate Life, nor
have an Antipathy for dying, which I have decreed you shall once do, I have
tempered the one and the other betwixt Pleasure and Pain: and it was I that first
taught Thales, the most eminent of all your Sages, that to Live and to Die were
indifferent; which made him very wisely answer him who asked him, Why then did
he not die? because (says he) it is indifferent. The Elements of Water, Earth,
Fire, and Air, and the other Parts of this Creation of thine, are no more the
Instruments of thy Life than they are of thy Death. Why do thou fear thy last
day, it contributes no more to thy dissolution than every one of the rest? The
last Step is not the cause of lassitude, it does but confess it. Every Day
travels toward Death, the last only arrives at it. These are the good Lessons
our Mother Nature teaches. I have often considered with my self whence it
should proceed, that in War the Image of Death, whether we look upon it as to
our own particular danger, or that of another, should without Comparison appear
less dreadful than at home in our own Houses, (for if it were not so, it would
be an Army of whining Milk-sops) and that being still in all Places the same,
there should be notwithstanding much more Assurance in Peasants, and the meaner
sort of People, than others of better Quality and Education: and I do verily
believe, that it is those terrible Ceremonies and Preparations wherewith we set
it out, that more terrify us than the thing it self; a new quite contrary way
of living, the Cries of Mothers, Wives and Children, the Visits of astonished
and afflicted Friends, the Attendance of pale and blubbered Servants, a dark
Room set round with hurning Tapers, our Beds environed with Physicians and
Divines; in sum, nothing but Ghostliness and Horror round about us, render it
so formidable, that a Man almost fancies himself dead and buried already.
Children are afraid even of those they love best, and are best acquainted with,
when disguised in a Vizor, and so are we; the Vizor must be removed as well
from Things as Persons; which being taken away, we shall find nothing
underneath but the very same Death that a mean Servant, or a poor Chambermaid,
died a day or two ago, without any manner of Apprehension or Concern. Happy
therefore is the Death that deprives us of the leisure to prepare things
requisite for this unnecessary Pomp, a Pomp that only renders that more
terrible which ought not to be feared, and that no Man upon Earth can possibly
avoid.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Force of imagination.
FOrtis imaginatio generat casum, Axion Scholast.
A strong Imagination begets Accident, say the Schoolmen. I am one of those
who are most sensible of the Power of Imagination: Every one is justled, but
some are overthrown by it. It has a very great Impression upon me; and I make
it my Business to avoid wanting force to resist it. I could live by the sole
help of heathful and jolly Company. The very sight of another Pain does
materially work upon me, and I naturally usurp the Sense of a third Person to
share with him in his Torment. A perpetual Cough in another tickles my Lungs
and Throat. I more unwillingly visit the sick I love, and am by Duty interested
to look after, than those I care not for, and from whom I have no expectation.
I take possession of the Disease I am concerned at, and lay it too much to
heart, and do not at all wonder that Fancy should distribute Fevers, and
sometimes kill such as allow too much Scope, and are too willing to entertain
it. Simon Thomas was a great Physician of his time: I remember, that happening
one day at Tholouze to meet him at a rich old Fellows House, who was troubled
with naughty Lungs, and discoursing with his Patient about the method of his
Cure; he told him, that one thing which would be very conducing to it, was, to
give me such Occasion to be pleased with his Company, that I might come often
to see him, by which means, and by fixing his Eyes upon the Freshness of my
Complexion, and his Imagination upon the Sprightliest and Vigor that glowed in
my Youth, and possessing all his Senses with the flourishing Age wherein I then
was, his Habit of Body might peradventure be amended, but he forgot to say that
mine at the same time might be made worse. Gallus Vibius so long cudgelled his
Brains to find out the Essence and Motions of Folly, till by the Inquisition,
in the end he went directly out of his Wits, and to such a Degree, that he
could never after recover his Judgment; and he might brag that he was become a
Fool by too much Wisdom. Some there are who thorough Fear prevent the Hangman;
like him whose Eyes being unbound to have his Pardon read to him, was found
stark dead upon the Scaffold, by the Stroke of Imagination. Imagination
occasions Diseases and Death.
We start, tremble, turn pale, and blush, as we are variously moved by
Imagination; and being a-bed, feel our Bodies agitated with its Power to that
degree, as even sometimes to Expire. And boiling Youth when fast asleep, grows
so warm with Fancy, as in a Dream to satisfy amorous Desires.

Lucret. l. 4.
Ut quasi transactis saepe omnibus rebus, profundant
Fluminis ingentes fluctus vestemque cruentent.
Who fancy gulling Lies, his enflamed Mind
Lays his Loves Tribute there, where not designed.
Although it be no new thing to see Horns grown in a Night on the Forehead of
one that had none when he went to Bed; notwithstanding, what besell Cyppus, a
noble Roman, is very r^^merable; who having one day been a very delig^^d
Spectator of a Bull-baiting, and having all the night dreamt that he had Horns
on his Head, did by the Force of Imagination, really cause them to grow there.
Passion made the Son of Croesus to speak, who was born dumb, by that means
supplying him with so necessary a Faculty, which Nature had denied him. And
Antiochus sell into a Fever, enflamed with the Beauty of Stratonissa, too
deeply imprinted in his Soul. Pliny pretends to have seen Lucius Cressitius,
who from a Woman was turned into a Man upon her very Wedding day. Pontanus, and
others, report the like Metamorphoses that in these latter days have happened in
Italy, and through the vehement Desire of him and his Mother Ovid.
Vota puer s^lvit, quae foemina voverat Iphis. Iphis, a Boy, the Vow desray'd
That he had promised when a Maid.


My self passing by Vitry le Francois, a Town in Champagne, saw a Man, the
Bishop of Soissons had in Confirmation, called German, whom all the Inhabitants
of the Place had known to be a Girl till two and twenty Years of Age, called
Mary. He was at the time of my being there very full of Beard, Old, and not
Married, who told us, that by straining himself in a Leap, his male Instruments
came out; and the Maids of that Place have to this day a Song, wherein they
advise one another not to take too great Strides, for fear of being turned into
Men, as Mary German was. It is no wonder if this sort of Accident frequently
happen; for if Imagination have any Power in such things, it is so continually
and vigorously bent upon this Subject, that to the end it may not so often
relapse into the same Thought, and Violence of Desire, it were better once for
all to give these young Wenches the Things they long for. Some stick not to
attribute the Scars of King Dagobert, and St. Francis, to the Force of
Imagination; and it is said, that by it Bodies will sometimes be removed from
their Places; and Celsus tells us of a Priest whose Soul would be ravished into
such an Ecstasie, that the Body would, for a long time remain without Sense or
Respiration. St. Augustine makes mention of another, who, upon the hearing of
any lamentable or doleful Cries, would presently fall into a Swoon, and be so
far out of himself, that it was in vain to call, hollow in his Ears, pinch, or
burn him, till he voluntarily came to himself; and then he would say that he
had heard Voices as it were a far off, and did feel when they pinched and
burned him: and to prove that this was no obstinate Dissimulation in defiance
of his Sense of Feeling, it was manifest, that all the while he had neither
Pulse nor Breathing. It Is very probable, that Visions, Exchantments, and all
Extraordinary Effects of that Nature, derive their Credit principally from the
Power of Imagination, working and making its chiefest Impression upon vulgar
and more easy Souls, whose Belief is so strangely imposed upon as to think
they see what they do not. I am not satisfied, and make a very great Question,
Whether those pleasant Ligatures with which this Age of ours is so fettered,
and there is almost no other Talk, are not mere voluntary Impressions of
Apprehension and fear; for I know by experience, in the Case of a particular
Friend of mine, one for whom I can be as Responsible as for my self, and a Man
that cannot possibly fall under any manner of Suspicion of insufficiency, and
as little of being enchanted, who having heard a Companion of his make a
Relation of an unusual Frigidity that surpised him at a very unseasonable
time, being afterward himself engaged upon the same Account, the Horror of the
former Story on a sudden so strangely possessed his Imagination, that he ran
the same Fortune the other had done; and from that time forward (the scurvy
Remembrance of his Disaster running in his Mind, and tyrannizing over him) was
extremely subject to Relapse into the same Misfortune. He found some Remedy,
however, for this Incovenience, by himself franckly confessing, and declaring
beforehand to the Party with whom he was to have to do, the Subjection he lay
under, and the infirmity he was Subject to, by which means the Contention of
his Soul was in some sort appeased; and knowing that now some such Misbehaviour
was expected from him, the Restraint upon those Faculties grew less, and he
less suffered by it, and afterward, at such times as he could be in no such
Apprehension, as not being about any such Act (his Thoughts being then
disengaged and free, and his Body being in its true and natural Estate) by
causing those Parts to be handled and communicated to the Knowledge of others,
he was at last totally freed from that vexatious Infirmity. After a Man has
once done a Woman right, he is never after in danger of misbehaving himself
with that Person, unless upon the account of a manifest and inexcusable
Weakness. Neither is this Disaster to be feared, but in Adventures where the
Soul is over-extended with Desire or Respect, and especially where we meet with
an unexpected Opportunity that requires a sudden and quick Dispatch; and in
those Cases, there is no possible means for a Man always to defend himself from
such a Surprise as shall put him damnably out of Countenance. And yet I have
known some, who have secured themselves from this Mischance by coming half
sated elsewhere, purposely to abate the ardour of his Fury; and others, who by
being grown old, find themselves less impotent by being loss able; and
particularly one, who found an Advantage by being assured by a Friend of his,
that he had a Counter-charm against certain Enchantments that would defend him
from this Disgrace. The Story it self is not much amiss, and therefore you
shall have it. A Count of a very great Family, and with whom I had the Honor
to be very familiarly intimate, being married to a very fair Lady, who (...)
formerly been pretended to, and importunately courted by one who was invited
to, and present at the Wedding: all his Friends were in very great Fear, but
especially an old Lady his Kinswoman, who had the ordering of the Solemnity,
and in whose House it was kept, suspecting his Rival would, in Revenge, offer
soul Play, and procure some of these kind of Sorceries to put a Trick upon him;
which Fear she also communicated to me, who, to comfort her, bad her not
trouble her self, but rely upon my Care to prevent or frustrate any such
Designs. Now I had, by chance, about me a certain flat Plate of Gold whereon
were graven some Celestial Figures good to prevent Frenzy occasioned by the
Heat of the Sun, or for any Pains of the Head, being applied to the Suture;
where, that it might the better remain firm, it was sowed to a Ribban to be
tied under the Chin. A Foppery Cozen-German to this of which I am speaking, was
by Jaques Pelleti^r, who lived in my House, presented to me for a singular
Rarety, and a thing of Sovereign Virtue. I had a fancy to make some use of this
Knack, and therefore privately told the Count, that he might possibly run the
same Fortune other Bridegrooms had sometimes done; especially some Persons
being in the House, who no doubt would be glad to do him such a Courtesy, but
let him boldly go to Bed, for I would do him the Office of a Friend, and if
need were, would not spare a Miracle that it was in my Power to do, provided he
would engage to me, upon his Honor, to keep it to himself, and only when they
came to bring him his Cawdle, A Custom in France to bring the Bridegroom a
Cawdle in the middle of the night, on his Wedding night.
if Matters had not gone well with him, to give me such a Sign, and leave the
rest to me. Now he had his Ears so battered, and his mind so prepossessed with
the eternal Tattle of this Business, that when he came to it he did really find
himself tied with the Trouble of his Imagination, and accordingly at the time
appointed gave me the Sign: Whereupon, I whispered him in the Ear, That he
should rise under Pretense of putting us out of the Room, and after a jesting
manner pull my Nightgown from my Shoulders; throw it over his own, and there
keep it till he had performed what I had appointed him to do, which was, that
when we were all gone out of the Chamber he should withdraw to make Water,
should three times repeat such and such Words, and as often do such and such
Actions: that at every of the three times he should tie the Ribban I put into
his Hand about his Middle, and be sure to place the Medal was fastened to it
(the Figures in such a Posture) exactly upon his Reins, which being done, and
having the last of the three times so well girt and fast tied the Ribban that
it could neither untie nor slip from its Place, let him confidently return to
his Business, and withal not to forget to spread my gown upon the Bed, so that
it might be sure to cover them both. These ridiculous Circumstances are the
main of the Effect, our fancy being so far seduced, as to believe, that so
strange and uncouth Formalities must of necessity proceed from some abstruse
Science. Their inanity gives them Reverence and Weight. However, certain it is,
that my Figures approved themselves more Venerean than Solar, and the fair
Bride had no reason to complain. Now I cannot forbear to tell you, it was a
sudden Whimsey, mixed with a little Curiosity, that made me do a thing so
contrary to my Nature; for I am an Enemy to all subtle, and counterfeit
Actions, and abominate all manner of Fraud, though it be but for sport; for
though the Action may not be wicked in it self, yet it is done after a wicked
manner. Amasis King of Egypt, married Laodicea a mavelous beautiful Greek
Virgin, who, tho famous for his Abilities elsewhere found himself quite another
Man with his Wife, and could by no means enjoy her; at which he was so enraged,
that he threatened to kill her, suspecting her to be a Witch. As it is usually in
things that consist in Fancy; she put him upon Devotion, who having accordingly
made his Vows to Venus, he found himself divinely restored the very first Night
after his Oblations and Sacrifices. Now in plain truth, Women are to blame, to
entertain us with that disdainful, coy, and angry Countenance they commonly do,
which extinguishes our Vigor, as it kindles our Desire; which made the
Daughter-in-Law of Prthagoras to say, That the Woman who goes to Bed to a Man,
must put of her Modesty with her Petticoat, and put it on again with the same.
The Soul of the Assailant being disturbed with many several Alarms, is easily
astonished, and soon loses the Power of Performance; and whoever the
Imagination has once put this Trick upon and confounded with the Shame of it,
(and she never does it but at the first Acquaintance, by reason Men are then
More ardent and eager, and also at this first Account a Man gives of himself,
he is much more timorous of miscarrying) having made an ill Beginning, he
enters into such Indignations and Despite at the Accident, as will in following
Opportunities be apt to remain, and continue him in the same Condition. As to
what concerns Married People, having the Year before them (as we say) they
ought never to compel, or so much as to offer at the Feat, if they do not find
themselves very ready: and it is better indecently to fail of handselling the
Nuptial Sheets, and of paying the Ceremony due to the Wedding-night, when a Man
perceives himself full of Agitation and Trembling, expecting another
opportunity at a better and more private Leisure, when his Fancy shall be
better composed, than to make himself perpetually miserable for having
misbehav'd himself, and being baffled at the first Assault. Till possession be
taken, a man that knows himself subject to this Infirmity, should leisurely and
by degrees make several little trials and light offers, without obstinately
attempting at once to force an absolute conquest over his own mutinous and
indisposed Faculties; such as know their members to be naturally obedient to
their desires, need to take no other care but only to counterplot their Fancy.
The indocile and rude liberty of this scurvy Member, is sufficiently
remarkable, by its importunate, unruly, and unseasonable tumidity and
impa^ience, at such times as we have nothing for it to do, and by its more
unseasonable stupidity and disobedience, when we stand most in need of his
Vigor, so imperiously contesting the Authority of the Will, and with so much
obstinacy denying all solicitation both of Hand and Fancy. And yet though his
Rebellion is so universally complained of, and that proofs are not wanting to
condemn him, if he had nevertheless fee'd me to plead his Cause, I should
peradventure bring the rest of his fellow members into suspicion of complo^ting
this mischief against him, out of pure envy at the importance, and ravishing
pleasure particular to his Employment, so as to have by Confederacy armed the
whole World against him, by malevolently charging him alone with their common
offense. For let any one consider, whether there is any one Part of our Bodies
that does not often refuse to perform its. Office at the Precept of the Will,
and that does not often exercise its Function in defiance of her Command. They
have every one of them proper Passions of their own, that rouse and awake,
stupifie and benumb them, without our Leave or Consent. How often do the
involuntary motions of the Countenance discover our inward Thoughts, and betray
our most private Secrets to the Knowledge of the Standers by? The same Cause
that animates this Member, does also, without our Knowledge, animate the Lungs,
Pulse and Heart, the sight of a pleasing Object imperceptibly diffusing a Flame
through all our Parts with a febrifick motion. Is there nothing but these Veins
and muscles that swell, and flag without the Consent, not only of the Will, but
even of our Knowledge also? We do not command our Hairs to stand on end, nor
our Skin to shiver either with Fear or Desire. The Hands often convey
themselves to Parts to which we do not direct them. The Tongue will be
interdict, and the Voice sometimes suffocated when we know not how to help it.
When we have nothing to eat, and would willingly forbid it, the Appetite of
Eating and Drinking does not for all that forbear to stir up the Parts that are
subjected to it, no more not less than the other Appetite we were speaking of,
and in like manner does as unseasonably leave us. The Vessels that serve to
discharge the Belly have their proper Dila^ations and Compressions, without,
and beyond our Intelligence, as well as those which are destined to purge the
Reins. And that which to justify the Prerogative of the Will, St. Augustine
urges, of having seen a Man who could command his Backside to discharge as
often together as he pleased, and that Vives does yet fortify with another
Example in his time of one that could Fart, in Tune, does nothing suppose any
more pure Obedience of that Part; for is any thing commonly more tumultuary or
indiscreet? To which let me add, that I my se^f knew one so rude and
ungoverned, as for forty Years together made his Master-Vent with one continued
and unintermitted Hurricane, and it is like will do till he expire that way, and
vanish in his own Smoke. And I could heartily wish, that I only knew by
Reading, how often a Man's Belly, by the Denial of one single Puff, brings him to
the very door of an exceeding painful Death; and that the Emperor, who gave
Liberty to let fly in all Places, had at the same time given us Power to do it.
But for our Will, in whose behalf we prefer this Accusation, with how much
greater Similitude of Truth may we reproach even her her self with Mutiny and
Sedition for her Irregularity and Disobedience? Does she always will what we
would have her to do? Does she not often will what we forbid her to will, and
that to our manifest Prejudice? Does she suffer her self any more than any of
the other, to be governed and directed by the Results of our Reason? To
conclude, I should move in the Behalf of the Gentleman, my Client, it might be
consider^d, that in this Fact, his Cause being inseparably conjoined with an
Accessory, yet he is only called in Question, and that by Arguments and
Accusations that cannot be charged, nor reflect upon the other: whose Business
indeed is sometimes inopportunely to invite, but never to refuse, and to allure
after a tacit and clandestine manner; and therefore is the Malice and
Injustice of his Accusers most manifestly apparent. But be it how it will,
protesting against the proceedings of the Advocates and Judges, Nature will, in
the mean time, proceed after her own wav, who had done but well, if she had
endowed this Member with some particular Privilege. The Author of the sole
immortal Work of Mortals. A divine Work according to Socrates, and of Love,
Desire of Immortality, and himself an immortal Demon. Some one perhaps by such
an Effect of Imagination may have had the good luck to leave Videlicet the Pox
that behind him here in France, which his Companion who has come after, and
behaved himself better, has carried back with him into Spain. And that you may
see why Men in such cases require a mind prepared for the thing they are to do,
why do the Physicians tamper with, and prepossess beforehand their Patients
credulity with many false promises of Cure, if not to the end, that the effect
of imagination may supply the imposture and defect of their Apozem? They know
very well, that a great Master of their Trade has given it under his hand, that
he has known some with whom the very sight of a potion would work: which
Examples of Fancy and Conceit come now into my head, by the remembrance of a
story was told me by a domestic Apothecary of my Father's, a blunt Swisse (a
Nation not much addicted to vanity and lying) of a Merchant he had long known
at Toulouse, who being a valethdinary, and much afflicted with Fits of the
Stone, had often occasion to take Clysters, of which he caused several sorts to
be prescribed him by the Physicians, according to the accidents of his Disease:
one of which being one time brought him, and none of the usual forms, as
feeling if it were not too hot, and the like, being omitted, he was laid down
on his Belly, the Syringe put up, and all Ceremonies performed, injection
excepted; after which, the Apothecary being gone, and the Patient accommodated
as if he had really received a Clyster, he found the same operation and effect
that those do who have taken one indeed; and if at any time the Physician did
not find the Operation sufficient, he would usually give him two or three more
after the same manner. And the Fellow moreover swore to me, that to save
charges (for he paid as if he had really taken them) this sick man's Wife,
having sometimes made trial of warm Water only, the effect discovered the
Cheat, and finding these would do no good, was fain to return to the old way. A
Woman fansying she had swallowed a pin in a piece of Bread, cried out of an
intolerable pain in her Throat, where she thought she felt it stick: but an
ingenious Fellow that was brought to her, seeing no outward Tomour nor
alteration, supposing it only to be conceit taken at some Crust of Bread that
had hurt her as it went down, caused her to vomit, and cunningly, unseen, threw
a crooked Pin into the Basin, which the Woman no sooner saw, but believing she
had cast it up, she presently found her self eased of her pain. I my self knew
a Gentleman, who having treated a great deal of good Company at his house,
three or four days after bragged in jest (for there was no such thing) that he
had made them eat of a baked Cat; at which, a young Gentlewoman, who had been
at the Feast, took such a horror, that falling into a violent vomiting end a
Fever, there was no possible means to save her. Even brute Beasts are also
subject to the force of Imagination a well as we; as is seen by Dogs, who die
of grief for the loss of their Masters, and are seen to quest, tremble, and
start, as Horses will kick and whinney in their sleep. Now all this may be
attributed to the affinity and relation betwixt the Souls and Bodies of Brutes,
but it is quite another thing when the Imagination works upon the Souls of
rational men, and not only to the prejudice of their own particular Bodies, but
of others also. And as an infected Body communicates its Malady to those that
approach, or live near it, as we see in the Plague, the small Pox, and sore
Eyes that run through whole Families and Cities; Ovid. Amor. l. 2.
Dum spectant oculi laesos, laeduntur and ipsi:
Multaque corporibus transitione nocent.
Viewing sore eyes, eyes to be sore are brought,
And many ills are by transition caught.
So the Imagination being vehemently agitated, darts out Infection capable of
offending the stranger Object. The Ancients had an opinion of certain Women of
Scythia, that being animated and enraged against any one, they killed them only
with their looks: Tortoises and Ostriches hatch their Eggs with only looking on
them, which inferrs, that their Eyes have in them some ejaculative virtue. And
the Eyes of Witches are said to be dangerous and hurtful.

Virg. Eclog. 3.
Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos. What Eye it is, I do not know,
My tender Lambs bewitches so.
Magicians are no very good Authority for me, but we experimentally see, that
Women impart the Marks of their Fancy to the Children they carry in their
Wombs; witness her that was brought to Bed of a Moor: and there was presented
to Charles the Emperor, and King of Bohemia, a Girl from about Pisa, all
over-rough and covered with Hair, whom her Mother said to be so conceived by
reason of a Picture of St John Baptist, that hung within the Curtains of her
Bed. It is the same with Beasts, witness Jacob's ring-streaked and spotted
Goats, and Sheep, and the Hares and Partridges that the Snow turns white upon
the Mountains. There was at my House a little while ago, a Cat seen watching a
Bird upon the Top of a Tree, who for some time mutually fixing their Eyes upon
one another, the Bird at last let her self fall as dead into the Cats Claws,
either dazzled and astonished by the Force of her own Imagination, or drawn by
some attractive Power of the Cat. Such as are addicted to the Pleasures of the
Field, have, I make no question, heard the Story of the Faulconer, who having
earnestly fixed his Eyes upon a Kite in the Air, laid a Wager, that he would
bring her down with the sole Power of his Sight, and did so, as it was said;
for the Tales I borrow, I charge upon the Consciences of those from whom I have
them. The Discourses are my own, and found themselves upon the Proofs of
Reason, not of Experience; to which every one has Liberty to add his own
Examples: and who has none, (the Number and Varieties of Accidents considered)
let him not forbear to believe that these I set down are enough: and if I do
not apply them well, let some other do it for me. And also in the Subjects of
which I treat, viz. of our Manners and Motions, the Testimonies and Instances I
produce, how fabulous soever, provided they are possible, serve as well as the
true; whether it has really happened or no, at Rome or at Paris, to Peter or
John, it is still within the Verge of Possibility, and humane Capacity, which
serves me to good use, and supplies me with Variety in the things I write. I
see, and make my Advantage of it as well in Shadow as in Substance; and amongst
the various Examples I every where meet with in History, I cull out the most
rare and memorable to fit my own Turn. There are some Authors whose only end
and Design it is, to give an Account of things that have happened; mine, if I
could arrive unto it, should be to deliver what may come to pass. There is a
just Liberty allowed in the Schools, of supposing and contriving Simile's, when
they are at a Loss for them in their own Reading: I do not, however, make any
use of that Privilege, and as to that Affair in superstitious Religion surpass
all Historical Authority. In the Examples which I here bring in of what I have
heard, read, done, or said, I have forbid my self to dare to alter even the
most light and indifferent Circumstances; my Conscience does not falsify one
Tittle, what my Ignorance may do I cannot say. And this it is that makes me
sometimes enter into Dispute with my own Thoughts, whether or no, a Divine, or
a Philosopher, Men of so exact and tender Wisdom and Conscience, are fit to
write History: for, how can they stake their Reputation upon the Public Faith?
how be responsible for the Opinions of Men they do not know? And with what
Assurance deliver their Conjectures for Current Pay? Of Actions perform^d
before their own Eyes, wherein several Persons were Actors, they would be
unwilling to give Evidence upon Oath before a Judge; and cannot be so
familiarly and thoroughly acquainted with any for whose Intentions they would
become absolute Caution. For my part, I think it less hazardous to write things
past, than present, by how much the Writer is only to give an Account of things
every one knows he must of necessity borrow upon Trust. I am solicited to
write the Affairs of my own Time by some who fancy I look upon them with an
Eye less blinded with Prejudice, or Partiality, than another, and have a
clearer Insight into them by reason of the free Access Fortune has given me to
the Heads of both Factions; but they do not consider, that to purchase the
Glory of Salust, I would not give my self the Trouble, being a sworn Enemy as I
am to all Obligation, Assiduity, and Perseverance: besides that, there is
nothing so contrary to my Style, as a continued and extended Narrative, I so
often Interrupt, and cut my self short in my Writing only for want of Breath. I
have neither Fancy, nor Expression worth any thing, and am ignorant beyond a
Child, of the Phrases, and even the very Words proper to express the most
common things; and for that Reason it is, that I have undertaken to say only
what I can say, and have accommodated my Subject to my Force. Should I take one
to be my Guide, peradventure I should not be able to keep Pace with him, and in
the Precipitancy of my Career might deliver Things, which upon better Thoughts,
in my own Judgment, and according to Reason, would be criminal, and punishable
in the highest degree Plutarch would tell us of what he has delivered to the
Light, that it is the Work of others, that his Examples are all, and every
where exactly true, that they are useful to Posterity, and are presented with a
Luster that will light us the way to Virtue, which was his Design: but it is
not of so dangerous consequence as in a Medicinal Drug, whether an old Story be
so or so.

CHAP. XXI.
That the Profit of one Man is the Inconvenience of another.
DEmades the Athenian condemned one of his City, whose Trade it was to sell the
Necessaries for Funeral Ceremonies, upon Pretense that he demanded unreasonable
Profit, and that that Profit could not accrue to him, but by the Death of a
great Number of People. A Judgment that appears to be ill grounded, for as much
as no Profit whatever could possibly be made but at the Expense of another, and
that by the same Rule he should condemn all manner of Gain of what kind soever.
The Merchant only thrives, and grows rich, by the Pride, Wantonness, and
Debauchery of Youth; the Husbandman by the Price and Scarcity of Grain; the
Architect by the Ruin of Buildings; I awyers, and Officers of Justice, by
Suits and Contentions of Men; nay even the Honor and Office of Divines are
derived from our Death and Vices; a Physician takes no Pleasure in the Health
even of his Friends, says the ancient Comical Greek, nor a Soldier in the
Peace of his Country; and so of the rest. And, which is yet worse, let every
one but dive into his own Bosom, and he will find his private Wishes spring and
his secret Hopes grow up at another Expense. Upon which Consideration it comes
into my Head, that Nature does not in this swerve from her general Polity; for
Physicians hold, that the Birth, Nourishment, and Increase of every thing, is
the Corruption and Dissolution of another.

Lucret. l. 2
Nam quodcunque suis mutatum finibus exit,
Continuo hoc mors est illius, quod fuit ante.
For what from its own confines changed does pass,
Is straight the Death of what before it was.
CHAP. XXII.
Of Custom, and that we should not easily change a Law received.
HE seems to me to have had a right and true apprehension of the power of
Custom, who first invented the Story of a Country-woman, who having accustom^d
her self to play with, and carry a young Calf in her Arms, and daily continuing
to do so as it grew up, obtained this by Custom, that when grown to be a great
Ox she was still able to bear it. For in truth, Custom is a violent and
treacherous School-mistriss. She, by little and little, slily, and unperceived,
slips in the foot of her Authority, but having by this gentle and humble
beginning, with the benefit of Time, fixed and established it, she then unmasks
a furious and tyrannick Countenance, against which we have no more the Courage
or the power so much as to lift up our Eyes. We see it at every turn forcing
and violating the Rules of Nature: Plin. l. 6.
Usus efficacissimus rerum omnium magister; Custom is the greatest Master of
all things. I believe Plato's care in his Republic, and the Physicians, who so
often submit the Reasons of their Art to the authority of Habit; as also the
story of that King, who by Custom brought his Stomach to that pass, as to live
by Poison, and the Maid that Albertus reports to have lived upon Spiders; and
in that new World of the Indies, there were found great Nations, and in very
differing Climates, who were of the same Diet, made provision of them, and sed
them for their Tables; as also, they did Grasshoppers, Mice, Bats and Lizards;
and in a time of scarcity of such Rareties, a Toad was sold for six Crowns, all
which they cook, and dish up with several Sawses. There were also others found,
to whom our Diet, and the Flesh we eat were venomous and mortal. Consuetudinis
magna vis est: Cicero Tus^. l. 2.
Pernectant venatores in niv^: in montibus uri se patiuntur: Pugiles Caestibus
contust, ne ingemiscunt quidem. The Power of Custom is very great: Hunts-men
will one while lie out all night in the Snow, and another suffer themselves to
be parched in the Mountains; and Fencers, inured to beating, when banged almost
to pulp with Clubs and Whirl-Batts, disdain so much as to groan. These are
strange Examples, but yet they will not appear so strange if we consider what
we have ordinary experience of, how much Custom stupifies our Senses; neither
need we go to be satisfied of what is reported of the Cataracts of Nile; and of
what Philosophers believe of the Music of the Spheres, that the Bodies of
those Circles being folid and smooth, and coming to touch, and rub upon one
another, cannot fail of creating a wonderful Harmony, the changes and cadencies
of which, cause the Revolutions and Dances of the Stars: but that the heating
Sense of all Creatures here below, being universally, like that of the
Egyptians, deaf'd, and stupefied with the continual Noise, cannot, how great
soever perceive it. Smiths, Millers, Pewterers, Forge-men, and Armorers, could
never be able to live in the perpetual Noise of their own Trades, did it strike
their Ears with the same Violence that it does ours. My perfumed Doublet
gratifies my own Smelling at first, as well as that of others; but after I have
worn it three or four Days together, I no more perceive it; but it is yet more
strange, that Custom, notwithstanding the long Intermissions and Intervals,
should yet have the Power to unite, and establish the Effect of its Impressions
upon our Senses, as is manifest in such as live near unto Steeples, and the
frequent noise of the Bells. I my self lie at home in a Tower, where every
Morning and Evening a very great Bell rings out the Ave Maria, the Noise of
which shakes my very Tower, and at first seemed insupportable to me; but having
now a good while kept that Lodging, I am so used to it, that I hear it without
any manner of Offense, and often without awaking at it. Plato reprehending a
Boy for playing at some childish Game; Thou reprov'st me (says the Boy) for a
very little thing? Custom (replied Plato) is no little Thing. And he was in the
right; for I find that our greatest Vices derive their first Propensity from
our most tender Infancy, and that our principal Education depends upon the
Nurse, Mothers are mightily pleased to see a Child writhe off the Neck of a
Chicken, or to please it self with hurting a Dog or a Cat; and such wise
Fathers there are in the World, who look upon it as a notable Mark of a Martial
Spirit, when he hears his Son mis-call, or sees him domineer over a poor
Peasant, or a Lacquey, that dares not reply, nor turn again; and a great sign
of Wit when he sees him cheat and overreach his Play-fellow by some malicious
Trick of Treachery and Deceit; Deceit ought to be corrected in the greenest
Years.
but for all that, these are the true Seeds and Roots of Cruelty, Tyranny, and
Treason. They bud and put out there, and afterward shoot up vigo^ously, and
grow to a prodigious Bulk and Stature, being cultivated and improved by Custom:
and it is a very dangerous Mistake to excuse these vile inclinations upon the
Tenderness of their Age, and the triviality of the Subject, first, it is Nature
that speaks, whose Declaration is then more sincere, and inward thoughts more
undisguised, as it is more weak and young: secondly the Deformity of Cozenage
does not consist, nor depend upon the Difference betwixt Crowns and Pins; but
merely upon it self, for a Cheat is a Cheat be it more or less; which makes me
think it more just to conclude thus, Why should he not cozen in Crowns since he
does it in Pins, than as they do, who say, they only play for Pins, he would
not do it if it were for Money. Children should carefully be instructed to
abhor ever the Vices of their own contriving; and the natural Deformity of
those Vices ought so to be represented to them, that they may not only avoid
them in their Actions, but especially so to abominate them in their Hearts,
that the very Thought should be hateful to them, with what Mask soever they
may be palliated or disguised. I know very well, for what concerns my self,
that for having been brought up in my Chilhood to a plain, and sincere way of
dealing, and for having then had an Aversion to all manner of juggling and foul
Play in my Childish Sports and Recreations (and indeed it is to be noted, that
the Plays of Children are not performed in Play, but are to be judg^d in them
as their most serious Actions) there is no Game so small wherein from my own
Bosom naturally, and without study or endeavor, I have not an extreme Aversion
for Deceit. I shuffle, and cut, and make as much clatter with the Cards, and
keep as strict Account for Farthings, as it were for double Pistols, when
winning or losing against my Wife and Daughter is indifferent to me, as when I
play in good earnest with others for the roundest Sums At all Times, and in all
Places, my own Eyes are sufficient to look to my Fingers; I am not so narrowly
watched by any other, neither is there any I more fear to be discovered by, or
to offend.

I saw the other day, at my own House, a little Fellow who came to show himself
for Money, a Native of Nants, born without Arms, who has so well taught his
Feet to perform the Services his Hands should have done him, that indeed they
have half forgot their natural Office, and the use for which they were
designed; the Fellow too calls them his Hands, and we may allow him so to do,
for with them he cuts any thing, charges and discharges a Pistol, threads a
Needle, Sows, Writes, and puts off his Hat, combs his Head, plays at Cards and
Dice, and all this with as much Dexterity as any other could do who had more,
and more proper Limbs to assist him; and the Money I gave him he carried away
in his Foot, as we do in our Hand I have seen another, who being yet a Boy,
flourish^d a two-handed Sword, and (if I may so say) handled a Halbert with the
mere Motions and Writhing of his Neck and Shoulders for want of hands, tossed
them into the Air, and ca^ch'd them again, darted a Dagger, and cracked a Whip
as well as any Coachman in France. But the Effects of Custom are much more
manifest in the strange Impressions she imprints in our Minds, where she meets
with less Resistance, and has nothing so hard a Game to play. What has she not
the Power to impose upon our Judgments and Belief? Is there any so fantastic
Opinion (omitting the gross Impostures of Religions, with which we see so many
populous Nations and so many understanding men, so strangely besotted; for this
being beyond the reach of Humane Reason, any Error is more excusable in such as
through the Divine Bounty are not endued with an extraordinary Illumination
from above) but of other Opinions, are there any so senseless and extravagant,
that she has not planted and established for Laws in those Parts of the World
upon which she has been pleased to exercise her Power? And therefore that
ancient Exclamation was exceeding just, Non pudet Physicum, Cicero (...) Not.
(...)
id est, speculatorem, venatoremque naturae, ab animis consuetudine imbutis
quaerere testimonium veritatis? Is it not a Shame for a Philosopher, that is,
for an Observer and Hunter of Nature, to derive Testimony from Minds
prepossess*d with Custom? I do believe, that no so absurd or ridiculous Fancy
can enter into Humane Imagination, that does not meet with some Example of
Public Practice, and that consequently our Reason does not ground, and support
it self upon. There are People amongst whom it is the Fashion to turn their
Backs upon him they salute, and never look upon the Man they intend to honor.
There is a Place, where, whenever the King spits, the greatest Ladies of his
Court put out their hands to receive it; and another Nation, where the most
eminent Persons about him stoop to take up his Ordure in a Linen-cloth. Let us
here steal room to insert a Story. A French Gentleman, of my acquaintance, was
always wont to blow his Nose with his Fingers, (a thing very much against our
Fashion) would justify himself for so doing, and was a man very famous for
pleasant Repartees, who, upon that occasion, asked me what Privilege this
filthy Excrement had, that we must carry about us a fine Handkerchief to
receive it, and which was more, afterward to lap it carefully up, and carry it
all day about in our Pockets, which, he said, could not but be much more
nauseous and offensive, than to see it thrown away, as we did all other
Evacuations. I found that what he said was not altogether without Reason, and
by being frequently in his Company, that slovenly action of his was at last
grown familiar to me; which nevertheless we make a face at, when we hear it
reported of another Country. Miracles appear to be so, according to our
ignorance of Nature, and not according to the Essence of Nature. The
continually being accustomed to any thing, blinds the eye of our Judgment.
Barbarians are no more a wonder to us, than we are to them; nor with any more
reason, as every one would confess, if after having traveled over those remote
Examples, Men could settle themselves to reflect upon, and rightly to confer
them. Humane Reason is a Tincture equally infused almost into all our Opinions
and Customs, of what form soever they are, infinite in Matter, infinite in
Diversity. But I return to my Subject.

There are a People, where (his Wife and Children excepted) no one speaks to
the King but through a Trunk. In one and the same Nation the Virgins discover
those Parts that Modesty should persuade them to hide, and the married Women
carefully cover and conceal. To which, this Custom in another Place has some
Relation, where Chastity, but in Marriage is of no Esteem, for unmarried Women
may prostitute themselves to as many as they please, and being got with Child,
may lawfully take Physic in the sight of every one to destroy their Fruit. And
in another Place, if a Tradesman marry, all of the same Condition, who are
invited to the Wedding, lie with the Bride before him; and the greater number
of them there is, the greater is her Honor, and the Opinion of her Ability and
Strength: if an Officer marry, it is the same, the same with a Nobleman, and so
of the rest, except it be a Labourer, or one of mean Condition, for them it
belongs to the Lord of the Place to perform that Office; and yet a severe
Loyalty during Marriage is afterward strictness enjoined. There is a place
where Bawdy-houses of Young Men are kept for the Pleasure of Women, as we know
there are of Women for the Necessities of Men; and also Marriages, where the
Wives go to War as well as the Husbands, and not only share in the dangers of
Battle, but moreover in the Honors of Command. Others, where they wear Rings
not only through their Noses, Lips, Cheeks, and on their Toes, but also wighty
Gymmals of Gold thrust through their Paps and Buttocks: Where, in eating, they
wipe their Fingers upon their Thighs, Genetories, and the Soles of their Feet:
Where Children are excluded, and Brothers and Nephews only inherit; and
elsewhere, Nephews only, saving in the Royal Family, and the Succession of the
Crown: where, for the Regulation of Community in Goods and Estates observed in
the Country, certain Sovereign Magistrates have committed to them the universal
Charge, and over-seeing of the Agriculture, and Distribution of the Fruits
according to the Necessity of every one: Where they lament the Death of
Children, and Feast at the Decease of old Men: Where they lie ten or twelve in
a Bed, Men and their Wives together: Where Women, whose Husbands come to
violent Ends, may marry again, and others not: Where the servile Condition of
Women is looked upon with such Contempt, that they kill all the native Females,
and buy Wives of their Neighbors to supply their Use; Where Husbands may
repudiate their Wives, without showing any Cause, but Wives cannot part from
their Husbands, for what cause soever. Where Husbands may sell their Wives in
case of sterility; Where they boil the Bodies of their dead, and afterward
pound them to a pulp, which they mix with their Wine, and drink it; Where the
most coveted Sepulture is to be eaten with Dogs, and elsewhere by Birds; Where
they believe the Souls of the happy live in all manner of Liberty, in
delightful Fields, furnished with all sorts of Delicacies, and that it is those
Souls, repeating the words we utter, which we call Echo. Where they fight in
the Water, and shoot their Arrows with the most mortal aim, swimming; Where,
for a sign of Subjection, they lift up their Shoulders, and hang down their
Heads, and put off their shoes when they enter the King's Palace. Where the
Eunuchs, who take charge of the Religious Women, have moreover their Lips and
Noses cut away, and disguised, that they may not be loved; and the Priests put
out their own Eyes, to be better acquainted with their Demons, and the better
to receive and retain their Oracles: Where every one creates to himself a Deity
of what he likes best, according to his own Fancy; the Hunter, a Lion or a Fox;
the Fisher, some certain Fish, and Idols of every Humane Action or Passion; in
which place the Sun, the Moon, and the Earth are the principal Deities, and the
form of taking an Oath is to touch the Earth, looking up to Heaven; and there
both Flesh and Fish is eaten raw; Where the greatest Oath they take is, to
swear by the Name of some dead Person of Reputation, laying their hand upon his
Tomb; Where the Newyears Gift the King sends every Year to the Princes, his
Subjects, is Fire, which being brought, all the old Fire is put out, and the
neighboring People are bound to fetch of the new, every one for themselves
upon pain of Treason; Where, when the King, to betake himself wholly to
Devotion, retires from his Administration, (which often falls out) his next
Successor is obliged to do the same; by which means the Right of the Kingdom
devolves to the third in Succession; Where they vary the Form of Government,
according to the seeming necessity of Affairs: Depose the King when they think
good, substituting ancient men to govern in his stead, and sometimes
transferring it into the hands of the Common People; Where Men and Women are
both Circumcised and also Baptized; Where the Soldier, who in one, or several
Engagements, has been so fortunate, as to present seven of the Enemies Heads to
the King, is made noble: where they live in that rare and singular Opinion of
the Mortality of the Soul: Where the Women are delivered without Pain or Fear:
Where the Women wear Copper Fetters upon both their Legs, and if a Louse bite
them, are bound in Magnanimity to bite them again, and dare not marry till
first they have made their King a Tender of their Virginity, if he please to
accept it: Where the ordinary way of Salutation is by putting a Finger down to
the Earth, and then pointing it up toward Heaven: Where Men carry Burdens
upon their Heads, and Women on their Shoulders, the Women pissing standing, and
the Men cowring down: Where they send their Blood in token of Friendship, and
cense the men they would honor, like Gods: Where not only to the fourth, but
in any other remote Degree, Kindred are not permitted to marry: Where the
Children are four Years at Nurse, and sometimes twelve; in which Place also it
is accounted mortal to give the Child suck the first day after it is born:
Where the Correction of the male Children is peculiarly design' d to the
Fathers and to the Mothers of the Females; the Punishment being to hang them by
the Heels in the Smoke. Where they eat all sorts of Herbs, without other
Scruple, than of the Illness of the Smell: Where all things are open, the
finest Houses, and that are furnished with the richest Furniture, without
Doors, Windows, Trunks, or Chests to lock, a Thief being there punished double
to what they are in other Places: Where they crack Lice with their Teeth like
Monkeys, and abhor to see them killed with ones Nails: Where in all their
Lives they neither cut their Hair, nor pare their Nails; and in another Place,
pare those of the Right hand only, letting the Left grow for Ornament and
Bravery: Where they suffer the Hair on the right side to grow as long as it
will, and shave the other; and in the neighb^ring Provinces, some let their
Hair grow long before, and some behind, shaving close the rest: Where Parents
let out their Children, and Husbands their Wives, to their Guests to hire:
Where a man may get his own Mother with Child, and Fathers make use of their
own Daughters, or their Sons, without Scandal or Offense: Where, at their
solemn Feasts, they interchangeably lend their Children to one another, without
any consideration of Nearness of Blood. In one Place Men feed upon Humane
Flesh, in another, it is reputed a charitable Office for a Man to kill his
Father at a certain Age; and elsewhere, the Fathers dispose of their Children
whilst yet in their Mothers Wombs, some to be preserved and carefully brought
up, and others they proscribe either to be thrown off, or made away. Elsewhere
the old Husbands lend their Wives to Youngmen; and in another place they are in
common, without offense; in one place particularly, the Women take it for a
mark of Honor to have as many gay fringed Tassels at the bottom of their
Garment, as they have lain with several men. Moreover has not Custom made a
Republic of Women separately by themselves? Has it not put Arms into their
Hands, made them to raise Armies, and fight Battles? and does she not by her
own Precept instruct the most ignorant Vulgar, and make them perfect in things
which all the Philosophy in the World could never beat into the Heads of the
wisest men? For we know entire Nations, Where Death was not only despised, but
entertained with the greatest Triumph; where Children of seven years old
offered themselves to be whipped to death, without changing their Countenance;
where Riches were in such Contempt, that the poorest and most wretched Citizen
would not have deigned to stoop to take up a Purse of Crowns. And we know
Regions very fruitful in all manner of Provisions, where, notwithstanding the
most ordinary Diet, and that they are most pleased with, is only Bread,
Cresses, and Water. Did not Custom moreover work that Miracle in Chios, that of
seven hundred Years it was never known that ever Maid or Wife committed any act
to the prejudice of her Honor? To conclude; there is nothing in my opinion,
that she does not, or may not do; and therefore with very good reason it is,
that Pindar calls her the Queen, and Empress of the World. He that was seen to
beat his Father, and reproved for so doing, made answer, that it was the Custom
of their Family; that in like manner his Father had beaten his Grandfather,
his Grandfather his great Grandfather, and this, says he, pointing to his
Son, when he comes to my Age, shall beat me. And the Father, whom the Son
dragged and haled along the streets, commanded him to stop at a certain Door,
for he himself, he said, had dragged his Father no farther, that being the
utmost limit of the hereditary Insolence the Sons used to practice upon the
Fathers in their Family. It is as much by Custom as Infirmity, (says Aristotle)
that Women tear their Hair, bite their Nails, and eat Coals, Chalk, and such
Trash, and more by Custom than Nature, that men abuse themselves with one
another. The Laws of Conscience, which we pretend to be derived from Nature,
proceed from Custom; every one having an inward Veneration for the Opinions and
Manners, approved and received amongst his own People, cannot without very
great Reluctance depart from them, nor apply himself to them without applause.
In times past, when those of Creet would curse any one, they prayed the Gods to
engage them in some ill Custom. But the principal effect of the power of Custom
is, so to seize and ensnare us, that it is hardly in our power to disengage our
selves from its gripe; or so to come to our selves, as to consider of, and to
weigh the things it enjoins. To say the Truth, by reason that we suck it in
with our Milk, and that the face of the World presents it self in this posture
to our first sight, it seems as if we were born upon condition to pursue this
Practice; and the common Fancies that we find in repute every where about us,
and infused into our Minds with the Seed of our Fathers, appear to be most
universal and genuine. From whence it comes to pass, that whatever is off the
hinge of Custom, is believed to be also off the hinges of Reason; and how
unreasonably for the most part, God knows. If, as we who study our selves, have
learned to do, every one who hears a good Sentence, would immediately consider
how it does any way touch his own private Concern, every one would find, that
it was not so much a good Saying, as a severe Lush to the ordinary Bestiality
of his own Judgment: but men receive the Precepts and Admonitions of Truth, as
generally directed to the Common Sort, and never particularly to themselves;
and instead of applying them to their own manners, do only very ignorantly and
unprofitably commit them to memory, without suffering themselves to be at all
instructed, or converted by them: But let us return to the Empire of Custom.
Such People as have been bred up to Liberty, and subject to no other Dominion
but the authority of their own Will, every one being a Sovereign to himself,
Democracy.
or at least governed by no wiser Heads than there own, do look upon all other
Forms of Government as monstrous, and contrary to Nature. Those who are inured
to Monarchy do the same; Monarchy.
and what opportunity soever Fortune presents them with to change, even then,
when with the greatest difficulties they have disengaged themselves from one
Master, that was troublesome and grievous to them, they presently run, with the
same difficulties, to create another; being not able, how roughly dealt with
soever, to hate the Government they were born under, and the obedience they
have so long been accustomed to. It Is by the mediation and persuasion of
Custom, that every one is content with the place where he is planted by Nature;
and the High-landers of Scotland no more pant after the better Air of Tourain,
than the starved Scythian after the delightful Fields of Thessaly. Darius
asking certain Greeks what they would take to assume the Custom of the Indians,
of eating the dead Corpse of their Fathers, (for that was their Use, believing
they could not give them a better, nor more noble Sepulture, than to bury them
in their own Bodies) they made answer, That nothing in the World should hire
them to do it; but having also tried to persuade the Indians to leave their
barbarous Custom, and after the Greek manner, to burn the Bodies of their
Fathers, they conceived a much greater horror at the motion. Every one does
the same, for as much as Use veils from us the true Aspect of things.

Lucret. l. 2.
Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quicquam
Principio, quod non minuant mirarier omnes
Paulatim.
Nothing at first so great, so strange appears,
Which by degrees, Use in succeeding Years
Renders not more familiar.
Taking upon me once to justify something in use amongst us, and that was
received with absolute Authority for a great many Leagues round about us, and
not content, as men commonly do, to establish it only by force of Law, and
Example, but enquiring still farther into its Original, I found the foundation
so weak, that I who made it my business to confirm others, was very near being
dissatisfied my self. It Is by this Receipt that Plato undertakes to cure this
unnatural and preposterous Love of his Time, which he esteems of sovereign
Virtue; namely That the public Opinion condemns them; That the Poets, and all
other sorts of Writers, relate horrible Stories of them. A Recipe, by virtue of
which the most beautiful Daughters no more allure their Fathers Lust; nor
Brothers of the finest Shape and Fashion their Sisters desire. The very Fables
of Thyestes, Oedypus, and Macareus, having with the Harmony of their Song
infused this wholesome Opinion and Belief into the tender Brains of Infants.
Chastity is in truth a great and shining Virtue, and of which the Utility is
sufficiently known; but to govern, and prevail with it according to Nature, is
as hard, as it is easy to do it according to Custom, and the Laws and precepts
of sober Practice. The original and fundamental Reasons are of very obscure and
difficult search, and our Masters either lightly pass them over, or not daring
so much as to touch them, precipitate themselves into the Liberty and
Protection of Custom; such as will not suffer themselves to be withdrawn from
this original Source, do yet commit a greater Error, and submit themselves to
wild and beastly Opinions; witness Chrysippus, who in so many of his Writings
has strewn the little Account he made of incestuous Conjunctions committed
with how near Relations soever. Whoever would disengage himself from this
violent Prejudice of Custom, would find several things received with absolute
and undoubting Opinion, that have no other Support than the hoary Head and
rivell'd Face of ancient Use; and things being referred to the Decision of
Truth and Reason, he will find his Judgment convinced and overthrown, and yet
restored to a much more sure Estate. For Example, I shall ask him, what can be
more strange than to see of People obliged to obey and pay a Reverence to Laws
they never understood, and to be bound in all their Affairs, both of private
and public Concern, as Marriages, Donations, Wills, Sales, and Purchases, to
Rules they cannot possibly know, being neither writ nor published in their own
Language, and of which they are of Necessity to purchase both the
Interpretation and the Use? Not according to the ingenious Opinion of Socrates,
who counseled his King to make the Trafficks and Negotriations of his
Subjects, free, frank, and of Profit to them, and their Quarrels and Debates
burdensome, and tart, and laden with heavy Impositions and Penalties; but by a
prodigious Opinion to make Sale of Reason it self, and to allow the Law a
course of Traffic. I I think my self obliged to Fortune that (as our
Historians report) it was a Gascon Gentleman, a Countryman of mine, who first
opposed Charlemain, when he attempted to impose upon us Latin and Imperial
Laws. What can be more severe or unjust, than to see a Nation, where, by lawful
Custom, the Office of a Judge is to be bought and sold, where Judgments are
paid for with ready Money, and where Justice may legally be denied to him that
has not wherewithal to pay; a Merchandise in so great Repute, as in a
Government to serve a fourth Estate of wrangling Lawyers, to add to the three
ancient ones of the Church, Nobility, and People; which fourth Estate, having
the Laws in their hands, and sovereign Power over Men's Lives and Fortunes, make
another separate Body of Nobility: from whence it comes to pass, that there are
double Laws, those of Honor, and those of Justice, in many things positively
opposite to one another; the Nobles as ^gorously condemning a Lie taken, as the
other do a Lie revenged: By the Law of Arms, he shall be degraded from all
Nobility and Honor who puts up an Affront; and by the Civil Law, he who
vindicates his Reputation by Revenge incurs a Capital Punishment: who applies
himself to the Law for Reparation of an Offense done to his Honor, disgraces
himself; and who does not, is censured and punished by the Law. Yet of these
two so different things, both of them referring to one Head, the one has the
Charge of Peace, the other of War; those have the Profit, these the Honor;
those the Wisdom, these the Virtue; those the Word, these the Action; those
Justice, these Valor; those Reason, these Force; those the long Robe, these
the short divided betwixt them.

For what concerns indifferent things, as Clothes, who would debauch them from
their true and real use, which is the Bodies Service and Convenience, and upon
which their original Grace and Decency depend, for the most fantastic, in my
Opinion, that can be imagined: I will instance amongst others, our flat Caps,
that long Tail of Velvet that hangs down from our Women's Heads, and that
lascivious and abominable model of a Member we cannot in Modesty so much as
name, which nevertheless we shamefully strut withal in public. These
Considerations notwithstanding will not prevail upon any understanding Man to
decline the common Mode; but on the contrary, methinks all singular and
particular Fashions are rather marks of Folly and vain Affectation, than of
sound Reason, and that a wiseman ought within to withdraw and retire his Soul
from the Crowd, and there keep it at Liberty, and in power to Judge freely of
things; but as to this outward Garb and Appearance, absolutely to follow and
conform himself to the Fashion of the Time. Public Society has nothing to do
with our Thoughts, but the rest, as our Actions, our Labors, our Fortunes and
our Lives, we are to lend and abandon them to the common Opinion and Public
Service, as did that good and great Socrates who refused to preserve his Life
by a Disobedience to the Magistrate, though a very wicked and unjust one: for
it is the Rule of Rules, and the general Law of Laws, that every one observe
those of the Place wherein he lives. (...). The Countries Customs to observe,
Is decent, and does Praise deserve.
Besides it is a very great doubt, whether an^ so manifest Benefit and
Advantage can accrue from the Alteration of a Law or Custom received, let it be
what it will, as there is Danger and Inconvenience in doing it; forasmuch as
Government is a Structure composed of several Parts and Members joined and
united together, with so strict Affinity and Union, that it is almost
impossible to stir so much as one Brick or Stone, but the whole Body will
settle and be sensible of it. The Legislator of the Thurian^ ordained, That
whosoever would go about either to abolish old Laws, or to establish new,
should present himself with a Halter about his Neck to the People; to the end,
that if the Innovation he would introduce should not be approved by every one,
he might immediately be hanged; and that of the Lacedaemoni^ns made it the
Business of his whole Life, to obtain from his Citizens a faithful Promise,
that none of his Laws should be violated. The Ephorus who so rudely cut the two
Strings that Phrynis had added to Music, never stood to examine whether that
Addition made better Harmony, or that by that means the Instrument was more
full and complete; it was enough to him to condemn the Invention, that it was a
Novelty, and an Alteration of the old Fashion. Which also is the Meaning of the
old rusty Sword carried before the Magistracy of Marcelles. For my own part, I
have my self a very great Aversion for Novelty, what Face, or what Pretense
soever it may carry along with it, and have reason, having been an Eyewitness
of the great Inconveniences it has produced. A man cannot, I confess, truly
say, That the Miseries, which for so many Years have lain (...) heavy upon the
Kingdom of France, are wholly occasioned by it; but a Man may say, and with
color enough, that it has accidentally produced and begot both the Mischiefs
and Ruins that are since continued both without and against it, and is
principally that we are to accuse for these Disorders.

Ovid in Ep.
H^u patior telis vulnera facta meis. Alas? the Wounds I now endure
Which my own Weapons did procure.
They who give the first shock to a State, are voluntarily the first
overwhelmed in its R^^ne; the Fruits of public Commotion are seldom enjoyed
by him who was the first Motor, he only troubles the Water for another Net,
and beats the Bush whilst another gets the Hare. The Unity and Contexture of
this Monarchy, having been manifestly in her old Age ripped and torn by this
thing called Innovation, has since laid open a Rent, and given sufficient
Admittance to the like Injuries in these latter Times. The Royal Majesty does
with greater Difficulty stoop and debase it self from the height to the Middle,
than it falls and tumbles headlong from the Middle to the Foundation. But if
the Inventors did the greater mischief, the Imitators are more vicious, to
follow Examples of which they have felt, and punished both the Horror and the
Offense. And if there can be any degree of Horror in ill doing, these last are
indebted to the other for the Glory of contriving, and the Courage of making
the first Attempt. All sorts of new Disorder easily draw from this primitive
and overflowing Fountain, Examples and Presidents to trouble and discompose
our Government. We read in our very Laws made for the remedy of this first
Evil, the Beginning and Pretenses of all sorts of naughty Enterprises; and in
favor of public Vices, give them new and more plausible Names for their
Excuse sweetning and disguising their true Titles, which must be done to win
forsooth, and reclaim us; Honesta oration est, but the best Pretense for
Innovation is of very dangerous Consequence; and freely to speak my Thoughts,
it argues methinks a strange self Love, and a great Presumption of a Man's
self, to be so fond of his own Opinions, that a public Peace must be
overthrown to establish them, and to introduce so many inevitable Mischiefs,
and so dreadful a Corruption of Manners, as a Civil War, and the Mutations of
State consequent to it, always brings in its Train; and to introduce them in a
thing of so high Concern, into the Bowels of a Man's own Country. Can there he
worse Husbandry than to set up so many certain and detected Vices against
Errors, that are only contested, and disputable whether they be such or no? And
are there any worse sorts of Vices than those committed against a man's own
Conscience, and the natural Light of his own Reason? The Senate, upon the
Dispute betwixt it and the People about the Administration of their Religion,
was bold enough to return this Evasion for current Pay: Ad Deos, id magis quam
ad se pertinere; ipsos visuros, ne sacra sua polluantur: That those things more
belong to the Gods to determine, than to them; let them therefore have a care
their sacred Mysteries were not profaned: according to that the Oracle
answered to those of Delphos, who, fearing to be invaded by the Persians, in
the Median War, inquired of Apollo, how they should dispose of the holy
Treasure of his Temple, whether they should hide, or remove it to some other
Place? He returned them Answer, that they should stir nothing from thence, and
only take care of themselves, for he was sufficient to look to what belonged to
him. Christian Religion has all the Marks of the utmost Utility and Justice:
but none more manifest than the severe Injunction it lays indifferently upon
all to yield absolute Obedience to the Civil Magistrate, and to maintain and
defend the Laws: of which, what a wonderful Example has the Divine Wisdom left
us, who to work and establish the Salvation of Mankind, and to conduct this his
glorious Victory over Death and Sin, would do it after no other way, but at the
Mercy of our ordinary forms of Justice, submitting the Progress and Issue of so
high, and so salutiferous an Effect, to the blindness and injustice of our
Customs and Observations, suffering the innocent Blood of so many of his Elect,
and so long a loss of so many Years to the maturing of this inestimable Fruit?
There is a vast difference betwixt the Cases of one that follows the Forms and
Laws of his Country, and another that will undertake to regulate and change
them; of which the first pleads Simplicity, Obedience, and Example for his
Excuse, who, whatever he shall do, it cannot be imputed to Malice, it is at the
worst but Misfortune. Quis est^ enim, Cicero de Divin. l.
quem non moveat clarissimis monumentis testata, consignataque antiquitas? For
who is it that Antiquity, sealed, and attested with so many glorious Monuments
cannot move? Besides what Isocrates says, that Defect is nearer allied to
Moderation than Excess. The other is a much more ruffling Gamester: for
whosoever shall take upon him to choose, to alter, and usurp the Authority of
judging, ought to look well about him, and make it his Business to discover the
Defect of what he would abolish, and the virtue of what he is about to
introduce. This so easy, and so vulgar consideration, is that which settled me
in my Station, and kept even my most extravagant and ungoverned Youth under the
rein, so as not to burden my Shoulders with so great a weight, as to render my
self responsible for a Science of that importance; and in this to dare, what in
my better and more mature Judgment, I durst not do in the most easy, and
indifferent things I had been instructed, and wherein the temerity of judging
is of no consequence at all. It seeming to me very unjust to go about to
subjest public and established Customs and Institutions, to the weakness, and
instability of a private and particular Fancy, (for private Reason is but a
private Jurisdiction) and to attempt that upon the Divine, which no Government
will endure a Man should do upon the Civil Laws. With which, though humane
Reason has much more Commerce, than with the other; yet are they sovereignly
judged by their own proper Judges, and the utmost sufficiency, serves only to
expound, and set forth the Law and Custom received, and neither to wrest it,
nor to introduce any thing of Innovation. And if sometimes the Divine
Providence have gone beyond the Rules, to which it has necessarily bound, and
obliged us Men; it is not to give us any Dispensation to do the same; those are
only master strokes of the Divine hand, which we are not to imitate, but
admire, and extraordinary Examples, marks of purposed and particular
Testimonies of Power, of the Nature of Miracles, presented before us for
Manifestations of its Almighty Operation, equally above both our Rules and
Forces, which it would be folly, and Impiety to attempt to represent and
imitate; and that we ought not to follow, but to contemplate with the greatest
Reverence and Astonishment. Arts proper for his Person who has Power to do
them, and not for us Cotta very opportunely declares, that when Matter of
Religion is in question, he will be governed by T. Corunconus, P. Scipio, P.
Scaevola, who were the High Priests, and not by Zeno, Cleanthes, or Chrysippus,
who where Philosophers. God knows in the present Quarrel of our Civil War,
where there are a hundred Articles to dash out and to put in, and those great
and very considerable ones too, how many there are who can truly boast, they
have exactly and perfectly weighed and understood the Grounds and Reasons of
the one and the other Party. It Is a Number (if it make any number) that would
be able to procure us very little Disturbance: but what becomes of all the
rest, under what Ensigns do they march, in what Quarter do they lie? Theirs
have the same Effect with other weak and ill applied Medicines, they have only
set the Humors they would Purge, more violently in working, stirred and
exasperated them by the Conflict, and left them still behind. The Apozem was
too weak to purge, but strong enough to weaken us; so that it does not work,
but we keep it still in our Bodies, and reap nothing from the Operation but
intestine Gripes and Dolours; so it is nevertheless, that Fortune still
reserving her Authority in Defiance of whatever we are able to do or say, does
sometimes present us with a Necessity so urgent, that it is requisite the Laws
should a little yield, and give way; and when one opposes the Increase of ann
Innovation that thus intrudes it self by Violence, to keep a Man's self in so
doing in all Places, and in all things, within the Bounds and Rules prescribed,
against those who have the Power, and to whom all things are lawful, that may
any way serve to advance their Design, who have no other Law nor Rule but what
serves best to their own Purpose; is a dangerous Obligation, and an intolerable
Inequality.

Aditum nocendi perfido praestat fides. Seneca in Oedip. Act. 3. Scen. 1.
So simple Truth does her fair Breast disarm,
And gives to Treachery a Power to harm.
Forasmuch as the ordinary Discipline of a healthful State does not provide
against these extraordinary Accidents, she presupposes a Body that supports it
self in its principal Members and Offices, and a common consent to its
Obedience and Observation. A legal Proceeding is cold, heavy and constrained,
and not fit to make Head against a headstrong and unbridled Proceeding. It Is
known to be to this day cast in the Dish of those two great Men, Octavius and
Cato, in the two Civil Wars of Scylla and Caesar, that they would rather suffer
their Country to undergo the last Extremities, than to relieve their Fellow
Citizens at the Expense of its Laws, or to be guilty of any Innovation; for in
truth, in these last Necessities, where there is no other Remedy, it would
peradventure be more discreetly done, to stoop, and yield a little to receive
the Blow, than by opposing without Possibility of doing any good, to give
occasion to Violence to trample all under foot; and better to make the Laws do
what they can, when they cannot do what they would. After this manner did he
who suspended them for four and twenty Hours, and he who for once shifted a day
in the Calendar, and that other who in the Month of June made a Second of May.
The Lacedaemonians themselves, who were so religious Observers of the Laws of
their Country being straightened by one of their own Edicts, by which it was
expressly forbidden to choose the same Man to be Admiral; and on the other side,
their Affairs necessarily requiring, that Lysander should again take upon him
that Command, they made one Aratus Admiral, it is true, but withal, Lysander
went Superintendent of the Navy. And by the same Subtilty and Equivocation, one
of their Ambassadors being sent to the Athenians to obtain the Revocation of
some Decree, and Pericles remonstrating to him, that it was forbid to take away
the Tablet, wherein a Law had once been engrossed, he advised him to turn it
only, that being not forbidden at all; and Plu^arch commends Philopoemen, that
being born to Command, he knew how to do it, not only according to the Laws,
but also to overruled even the Laws themselves, when the public Necessity so
required.

CHAP. XXIII.
Various Events from the same Counsel.
JAques Amiot, great Almoner of France, one day related to me this Story, much
to the Honor of a Prince of ours (and ours he is upon on several very good
Accounts, though originally of Foreign Extraction) that in the (...) of our
first Commotions at the Siege of Ro^^, this Prince, having been adverds'd by
the Queen Mother of a Conspiracy against his Life, and in her Letters
particular notice being given him of the Person who was to execute the Business
(who was a Gentleman of Anjo^, or else of Main, and who to this Effect did
frequently haunt this Prince's House) discovered not a Syllable of this
Intelligence to any one whatever, but going the next day to St. K^tharine's
Mount, from whence our Battery played against the Town (for it was during the
time of a Siege) and having in Company with him the said Lord Almoner, and
another Bishop, he was presently aware of this Gentleman, who had been denoted
to him, and presently caused him to be called to his Presence; to whom being
come before him, seeing him pale, and trembling with the Conscience of his
Guilt, he thus said, Mons^eur such a one, You already guess what I have to say
to you, your Counte^ance discover's it, and therefore it is in vain to disguise
your Practice; for I am so well informed of your Business, that it will but
make worse for you, to go about to conceal or to deny it: you know very well
such and such Passages, (which were the most secret Circumstances of his
Conspiracy) and therefore be sure, as you tender your own Life, to confess to
me the whole Truth of your Design. The poor Man seeing himself thus trap'd, and
convinced (for the whole Business had been discovered to the Queen by one of
the Accomplices) was in such a Taking, he knew not what to do; but joining his
Hands to beg and sue for Mercy, he meant to throw himself at this Prince's
Feet, who taking him up, proceeded to say, Come on Sir, and tell me, have I at
any time heretofore done you any Injury? or have I, through my particular
Hatred or private Malice, offended any Kinsman or Friend of yours? It is not
above three Weeks that I have known you; What inducement then could move you to
attempt my Death? To which the Gentleman, with a trembling Voice, replied, That
it was no particular Grudge he had to his Person, but the general Interest and
Concern of his Party, and that he had been put upon it by some who had
persuaded him it would be a meritorious Act, by any means to extirpate so great
and so powerful an Enemy of their Religion. Well, said the Prince, I will now
let you see, how much more charitable the Religion is that I maintain, than
that which you profess; Yours has persuaded you to kill me, without hearing me
to speak, and without ever having given you any cause of Offense; and mine
commands me to forgive you, convict as you are, by your own Confession, of a
Design to murder me without Reason. Get you gone, that I see you no more; and
if you are wise, choose henceforward honester Men for your Counselors in your
Designs. The Emperor Augustus, being in Gaul, had certain information of a
Conspiracy L. Cinna was contriving against him, who thereupon resolved to make
him an Example; and to that end sent to summon his Friends to meet the next
morning in Counsel; but the night between he past over, with unquietness of
Mind, considering that he was to put to death a young man, of an illustrious
Family, and Nephew to the great Pompey; which made him break out into several
ejaculations of Passion: What then, said he, Shall it be said, that I shall
live in perpetual Anxiety, and continual Alarm, and suffer my Assassinates in
the mean time to walk abroad at Liberty? shall he go unpunished after having
conspired against my Life, a Life that I have hitherto defended in so many
Civil Wars, and so many Battles both by Land and Sea? And after having settled
the Universal Peace of the whole World, shall this man be pardoned, who has
conspired not only to Murder, but to Sacrifice me? For the Conspiracy was to
kill him at Sacrifice. After which, remaining for some time silent, he re-begun
louder, and straining his Voice more than before to exclaim against himself,
and say, Why liv'st thou? If it be for the good of many that thou should
Die? must there be no end of thy Revenges and Cruelties? Is thy Life of so
great value, that so many Mischiefs must be done to preserve it? His Wife
Livia, seeing him in this perplexity; Will you take a Woman's Counsel, said
she? Do as the Physicians do, who when the ordinary Recipe's will do no good,
make Trial of the contrary. By severity you have hitherto prevailed nothing;
Lepidus has followed Savidienus, Murena Lepidus, Caepi^ Murena, and Egnatius
Caepio. Begin now and try how Sweetness and Clemency will succeed. Cinna is
convict, forgive him, he will never henceforth have the Heart to hurt thee, and
it will be an Act of Glory. Augustus was glad that he had met with an Advocate
of his own Humor; wherefore, having thanked his Wife, and in the Morning
countermanded his Friends he had before summoned to Council, he commanded Cinna
all alone to be brought to him; who being accordingly come, and a Chair by his
Appointment set him, having commanded every one out of the Room, he spoke to
him after this manner: In the first place, Cinna, I demand of thee patient
Audience; do not interrupt me in what I am about to say, and I will afterward
give thee Time and Leisure to answer. Thou know, Cina, that having taken
thee Prisoner in the Enemies Camp, and that an Enemy not only made, but born
so, I gave thee thy Life, restored thee all thy Goods, and finally put thee in
so good a posture, by my Bounty of living well and at thy ease, that the
Victorious envied the Conquered. The Sacerdotal Office which thou made Suit
to me for, I conferred upon thee, after having denied it to others, whose
Fathers have ever born Arms in my Service: and after so many Obligations thou
have undertaken to kill me. At which Cinna crying out, that he was very far
from entertaining any so wicked a Thought; Thou do not keep thy Promise,
Cinna, (continued Augustus) that thou would st not interrupt me. Yes, thou have
undertaken to murder me in such a Place, such a Day, in such and such Company,
and in such a Manner. At which Words seeing Cinna astonished and silent, not
upon the Account of his Promise so to be, but interdict with the Conscience of
his Crime; Why, proceeded Augustus, to what end would thou do it? Is it to
be Emperor? Believe me, the Republic is in a very ill Condition, if I am the
only Man betwixt thee and the Empire. Thou art not able so much as to defend
thy own House, and but the other day wast baffled in a Suit, by the opposed
Interest of a mean manumitted Slave. What, have thou neither Means nor Power in
any other thing, but only to attempt against Caesar? I quit claim to the
Empire, if there is no other but I to obstruct thy Hopes. Can thou believe,
that Paulus, that Fabius, that the Cassians and Servilians, and so many Noble
Romans, not only so in Title, but who by their Virtue honor their Nobility,
would suffer or endure thee? After this, and a great deal more that he said to
him, (for he was two long Hours in speaking) Well, Cinna, go thy way, said he,
I again give thee that Life in the Quality of a Traitor and a Parricide, which
I once before gave thee in the Quality of an Enemy. Let Friendship from this
time forward begin betwixt us, and let us try to make it appear whether I have
given, or thou have received thy Life with the better Faith; and so departed
from him. Some time after, he preferred him to the Consular Dignity,
complaining, that he had not the Confidence to demand it; had him ever after
for his very great Friend, and was at last made by him sole Heir to all his
Estate. Now from the time of this Accident, which befell Augustus in the
fortieth Year of his Age, he never had any Conspiracy or Attempt against him,
and therein reaped the due Reward of this his so generous and exemplary
Clemency. But it did not so well succeed with our Prince in the former Story,
his Moderation and Mercy not being sufficient so to secure him, that he did not
afterward fall into the toils of the like Treason, so vain and frivolous a
thing is Humane Prudence; and in spite of all our Projects, Counsels, and
Precautions, Fortune will still be Mistress of Events. We repute Physicians
fortunate when they hit upon a lucky Cure, as if there was no other Art but
theirs that could not stand upon its own Legs, and whose Foundations are too
weak to support its self upon its own Basis, and as if no other Art stood in
need of Fortunes Hand to assist in its Operations. For my part, I think of
Physic as much good or ill as any one would have me: for, Thanks be to God, we
have no great Traffic together. I am of a quite contrary Humor to other men,
for I always despise it; but when I am sick, instead of recanting, or entering
into Composition with it, I begin yet more to hate, nauseate, and fear it,
telling them who importune me to enter into a course of Physic, that they must
give me time to recover my Strength and Health, that I may be the better able
to support and encounter the violence and danger of the Potion: so that I still
let Nature work, supposing her to be sufficiently armed with Teeth and Claw^ to
defend her self from the Assaults of Infirmity, and to uphold that Contexture,
the Dissolution of which she flies and abhors: for I am afraid, least instead
of Assisting her when grappled, and struggling with the Disease, I should Assist
her Adversary, and procure new Work, and new Accidents to encounter. Now I say,
that not in Physic only, but in other more certain Arts, Fortune has a very
great interest and share. The Poetic Raptures, and those prodigious flights of
Fancy, that ravish and transport the Author out of himself, why should we not
atrribute them to his good Fortune, since the Poet himself confesses they
exceed his Sufficiency and Force, and acknowledges them to proceed from
something else than himself, and has them no more in his Power than the Orators
say they have those extraordinary Motions and Agitations that sometimes push
them beyond their Design. It is the same in Painting, where Touches shall
sometimes slip from the hand of the Painter, so surpassing both his Fancy and
his Art, as to beget his own Admiration. But Fortune does yet more accidentally
manifest the share she has in all things of this kind, by the Graces and
Elegancies are found out in them, not only beyond the Intention, but even
without the Knowledge of the Artist. A judicious Reader does often find out in
other Men's Writings, other kind of Perfections, and finds in them a better
Sense and more queint Expression than the Author himself either intended or
perceived. And, as to military Enterprises and Executions, every one sees how
great a hand Fortune has in all those Affairs; even in our very Counsels and
Deliberations there must certainly be something of Chance and good Luck mixed
with Humane Prudence, for all that our Wisdom can do alone is no great matter;
the more piercing, quick, and apprehensive it is, the weaker ii finds it self,
and is by so much more apt to mistrust its own Virtue. I am of Sylla's Opinion,
and when I most strictly and nearer hand examine the most glorious Exploits of
War, I perceive, me thinks, that those who carry them on, make use of Counsel
and Debate only for Customs sake, and leave the best part of the Enterprise to
Fortune, and relying upon her Favor and Assistance, transgress at every turn
the Bounds of Military Conduct, and the Rules of War. There happen sometimes
accidental Alacrities and strange Furies in their Deliberations, that for the
most part prompt them to follow the worst, and worst grounded Counsels, and
that swell their Courag^s beyond the Limits of Reason: from whence it falls
out, that many great Captains, Monluc in his Commentarisse.
to justify those temerarious Deliberations, have been forced to tell their
Soldiers, that they were by some Inspiration and good Omen encouraged and
invited to such Attempts. Wherefore, in this Doubt and Uncertainty that the
short-sightedness of Humane Wisdom to see and choose the best, (by reason of
the Difficulties that the various Accidents and Circumstances of things bring
along with them) does perplex us withal, the surest way in my Opinion, did no
other Consideration invite us to it, were to pitch upon that wherein is the
greatest Appearance of Honesty and Justice, and not being certain of the
shortest, to go the straightest and most direct way; as in these two Examples I
have before laid down; there is no question to be made but it was more noble
and generous in him who had received the Offense, to pardon it, as they both
did, than to do otherwise, and if the former miscarried in it, he is not
nevertheless to be blamed for his good Intention: neither does any one know if
he had proceeded otherwise, whether by that means he had avoided the end his
Destiny had appointed for him; and he had however lost the Glory of so generous
an Act. You will find in History, many who have been in this apprehension, that
the most part have taken the course to meet, and prevent Conspiracies by
Punishment and Revenge; but I find but very few who have reaped any Advantage
by this proceeding; witness so many Roman Emperors: and whoever finds himself
in this danger, ought not to expect much either from his Vigilance or Power;
for how hard a thing is it for a man to secure himself from an Enemy, who lies
concealed under the countenance of the most officious Friend we have, and to
discover and know the Wills and inward Thoughts of those who are continually
doing us service? It Is to much purpose to have a Guard of Strangers about a
man's Person, and to be always senced about with a Pale of armed men; whosoever
despises his own Life, is always Master of that of another man. And moreover,
this continual suspicion, that makes a Prince jealous of all the World, must of
necessity be a strange Torment to him, and therefore it was, that Dion, being
advertised that Calippus watched all opportunities to take away his Life, had
never the Heart to enquire more particularly into it, saying, That he had
rather die, than live in that misery that he must continually stand upon his
Guard, not only against his Enemies, but his Friends also; which Alexander much
more lively manifested in effect, when having notice by a Letter from Parmenio,
that Philip, his most beloved Physician, was by Darius his money corrupted to
poison him, at the same time that he gave the Letter to Philip to read, supped
of the Potion he had brought him. Was not this by such a Resolution to express,
that if his Friends had a mind to dispatch him out of the World, he was willing
to give them opportunity to do it? This Prince is indeed the Sovereign
President of all hazardous Actions; but I do not know whether there be another
passage in his Life wherein there is so much steadiness and constancy as in
this, nor so illustrious an Image of the greatness of his Mind. Those who
preach to Prices so circumspect and vigilant a jealousy and distrust, under
color of Security, preach to them ruin and dishonor. Nothing Noble can ever
be performed without Danger. I know a Person, naturally of a very great daring
and enterprizing Courage, whose good fortune is continually prevented, and
forestalled by such persuasions, that he must retire into the gross of his own
Body, and keep those he knows are his Friends continually about him, that he
must not hearken to any Reconciliation with his ancient Enemies, that he must
stand off, and not trust his Person in hands stronger than his own, what
promises or offers soever they may make him, or what advantages soever he may
see before him. And I know another, who has unexpectedly made his Fortune by
following a contrary Advice. Courage, the Reputation and Glory of which men
seek with so greedy an Appetite, represents and sets it self out when need
requires, as magnificently in Querpo, as in the neatest Arms, in a Closet, as
Well as a Camp; and this overcircumspect and wary Prudence is a mortal Enemy to
all high and generous Exploits. Scipio, to sound Syphax his intention, leaving
his Army, and abandoning Spain, not yet secure, nor well settled in his new
Conquest, could pass over into Africa in two contemptible Bottoms, to commit
himself, in an Enemies Country, to the power of a Barbarian King, to a Faith
untry^d and unknown, without Precaution, without Hostage, under the sole
security of the greatness of his own Courage, his good Fortune, and the promise
of his elevated Hopes. Habita fides ipsam plerumque fidem obligat. Livius.
Trust oftentimes obliges Fidelity. On the contrary, Fear and Diffidence invite
and draw on injury and offense. The most mistrustful of all our Kings settled
his Affairs principally by voluntarily giving up his Life and Liberty into his
Enemies hands, by that action manifesting that he had an absolute confidence in
them, to the end they might repose as great an assurance in him. Caesar did
only oppose the Authority of his Countenance, and the sharpness of his Rebukes
to his mutinous Legions, and rebellious Army.

Lucan. l. 5.
-- stetit aggere fulti
Cespitis, intrepidus vultu, meruitque timeri
Nil metuens.
Upon a Parapet of Turf he stood,
His manly face with Resolution shone,
And froze the Mutineers rebellious blood,
Challenging fear from all by fearing none.
But it is true withal, that this undaunted assurance is not to be represented
in its true and lively form, but by such whom the apprehension of Death, and
the worst that can happen, does no way terrify and affright; for to represent
a pretended Resolution with a pale and doubtful Countenance, and trembling
Limbs for the forc^d Service of an important Reconciliation, will effect
nothing to purpose. It Is an excellent way to gain the Heart, and conquer the
Will of another, to go submit, and entrust a man's Person to him, provided it
appear to be frankly done, and without the constraint of necessity, and in such
a condition, that a man manifestly does it out of a pure and entire confidence
in the Party, at least with a Countenance clear from any Cloud of suspicion. I
saw, when I was a Boy, a Gentleman, who was Governor of a great City, upon
occasion of a Popular Commotion and Fury, not knowing what other course to
take, go out of a Place of very great Strength and Security, and commit himself
to the mercy of the seditious Rabble, in hopes by that means to appease the
Tumult before it grew to a more formidable Head: but it was ill for him that he
did so, for he was there miserably slain. But I am not nevertheless of opion,
that he committed so great an Error in going out, as Men commonly reproach
this Memory withal, as he did in choosing a gentle and submissive way for the
effecting his purpose, and in endeavoring to quiet this storm, rather by
obeying than commanding, and by Entreaty rather than Remonstrance; and am
inclined to believe, that a gracious Severity, with a Souldier-like way of
commanding, full of Security, and confidence suitable to the Quality of his
Person; and the Dignity of his Command, would have succeeded better with him;
at least, he had perished with greater Decency and Reputation. There is nothing
so little to be expected, or hoped for from this many-headed Monster, when so
incensed, as Humanity and good Nature; it is much more capable of Reverence and
Fear. I should also reproach him, that having taken a Resolution (in my
Judgment rather brave than rash) to expose himself weak and naked in this
tempestuous Sea of enraged Franticks; he ought boldly to have stem'd the
Current, and to have born himself bravely aloft; whereas coming to discover his
Danger nearer hand, and his Nose thereupon happning to bleed, he again changed
that demiss and fawning Countenance he had at first put on, into another of
Fear and Amazement, and filling both his Voice and Eyes with Entreaties and
Tears, and in that Posture endeavoring to withdraw and secure his Person, that
Carriage more enflamed their Fury, and soon brought the Effects of it upon him.
It was upon a time in a certain Place ordered by some, who had no very good
Meaning in it, that there should be a general Muster of several Troops in Arms
(for that is the most proper Scene of scecret Revenges, and there is no Place
where they can be executed with greater Safety) and there were public and
manifest Appearances, that there was no safe coming for some, whose principal
and necessary Office it was to view them. Whereupon a Consultation was called,
and several Counsels were proposed, as in a case that was very nice, and of
great Difficulty; and moreover, of important consequence. Mine, amongst the
rest, was, that they should by all means avoid giving any sign of Suspicion,
but that the Officers who were most in danger should boldly go, and with
cheerful and erect Countenances ride boldly and confidently thorough the Files
and Divisions, and that instead of sparing Fire (which the Counsels of the
major part tended to) they should entreat the Captains to command the Soldiers
to give round and full Volleys in Honor of the Spectators, and not to spare
their Powder: which was accordingly done, and served to so good use, as to
please and gratify the suspected Troops, and thenceforward to beget a mutual
and wholesome Confidence and Intelligence amongst them. I look upon Julius
Caesar's way of winning Men to him as the best, and most plausible, that can
possibly be put in practice. First, he tried by Clemency to make himself
beloved even by his very Enemies, contenting himself in detected Conspiracies,
only publicly to declare, that he was pre-acquainted with them; which being
done, he took a noble Resolution to expect, without Solicitude or Fear,
whatever might be the Event, wholly resigning up himself to the Protection of
the Gods and Fortune: for questionless in this very Estate he was at the time
when he was killed. A Stranger having publicly said, that he could teach
Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracusa an infallible way to find out and discover all
the Conspiracies his Subjects should contrive against him, if he would give him
a good Sum of Money for his Pains: Dionysius, hearing of it, caused the Man to
be brought to him, that he might learn an Art so necessary to his Preservation;
and having asked him by what Art he might make such Discoveries, the Fellow
made Answer, That all the Art he knew, was, That he should give him a Talent,
and afterward boast that he had obtained a singular Secret from him. Dionysius
liked the Invention, and accordingly caused fix hundred Crowns to be counted
out to him. It was not likely he should give so great a Sum to a Person
unknown, but upon the account of some extraordinary Discovery, the belief of
which served to keep his Enemies in awe. Princes however do very wisely, to
publish the Informations they receive of all the Practices against their Lives,
to possess men with an opinion they have so good Intelligence, and so many
Spies abroad, that nothing can be plotted against them, but they have present
notice of it. The Duke of Athens did a great many ridiculous things to
establish his new Tyranny over Florence: but this especially was most
remarkable, that having received the first intimation of the Conspiracies the
People were hatching against him, by Mattheo di Moroso, one of the
Conspirators, he presently put him to death, to suppress that Rumor, that it
might not be thought any of the City disliked his Government. I remember I have
formerly read a Story of some Roman of great Quality, who, flying the Tyranny
of the Triumvirate, had a thousand times, by the subtilty of as many
Inventions, escaped from falling into the hands of those that pursued him. It
happened one day, that a Troop of Horse which was sent out to take him, passed /
close by a Brake where he was sguat, and miss^d very narrowly of spying him:
but he considering, upon the instant, the Pains and Difficulties wherein he had
so long continued, to evade the strict and continual Searches were every day
made for him, the little Pleasure he could hope for in such a kind of Life, and
how much better it was for him to die once for all, than to be perpetually at
this pass, he started from his Seat himself, called them back, showed them his
Form, and voluntarily delivered himself up to their Cruelty, by that means to
free both himself and them from further Trouble. To invite a man's Enemies to
come and cut his Throat, was a Resolution that appears a little extravagant and
odd; and yet I think he did better to take that course, than to live in a
Quotidian Ague; and for which there was no Cure. But seeing all the Remedies a
Man can apply to such a Disease, are full of Unquietness, and uncertain, it is
better with a manly Courage to prepare ones self for the worst that can happen,
and to extract some Consolation from this, That we are not certain the thing we
fear will ever come to pass:

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Pedantry.
I Was often, when a Boy, wonderfully concerned to see in the Italian Farces a
Pedant always brought in for the Fool of the Play, and that the Title of
Magister was in no greater Reverence amongst us, for being delivered up to
their Tuition, what could I do less than be jealous of their Honor and
Reputation? I sought, I confess, to excuse them by the natural incompatibility
betwixt the Vulgar fort, and men of a finer thread, both in Judgment and
Knowledge, for as much as they go a quite contrary way to one another: But in
this, the thing I most stumbled at was, that the bravest men were those who
most despised them; witness our famous Poet du Bellay, Da Bellay.
Mais je hay par sur tout un scavoir pedantesque. But of all sorts of Learning,
that
Of the Pedant I most do hate.
And they used to do so in former times; for Plutarch says, that Grecian, and
Scholar, were names of reproach and contempt amongst the Romans. But since,
with the better experience of Age, I find they had very great reason so to do,
and that magis magnos Clericos non sunt magis magnos sapientes. Rabelais.
The greatest Clerks are not the wisest men. But whence it should come to pass,
that a Mind enriched with the knowledge of so many things, should not. become
more quick and spritely, and that a gross and vulgar understanding should yet
inhabit there without correcting and improving it self, where all the
Discourses, and Judgments of the greatest Wits the World ever had, are
collected, and stored up, I am yet to seek. To admit so many strange
Conceptions, so great and so high Fancies, it is necessary, (as a young Lady,
and one of the greatest Princesses of the Kingdom, said to me once) that a
man's own be crowded, and squeezed together into a less compass, to make room
for the other. I should be apt to conclude, that as Plants are suffocated, and
drowned with too much nourishment, and Lamps with too much Oil, so is the
active part of the Understanding with too much study and Matter, which being
embarass'd, and confounded with the diversity of things, is deprived of the
Force and Power to disengage it self; and that by the pressure of this weight,
it is bowed, subjected, and rendered of no use. But it is quite otherwise, for a
Soul stretches and dilates it self proportionably as it fills. And in the
Examples of elder times, we see quite contrary, men very proper for public
Business, great Captains, and great Statesmen, very Learned withal; whereas
the Philosophers, a sort of men retired from all Public Affairs, have been,
sometimes also despised, and rendered contemptible by the Comical liberty of
their own Times; their Opinions, and singularity of Manners, making them appear
to men of another method of living, ridiculous and absurd. Would you make them
Judges of a Controversy of common Right, or of the Actions of Men? they are
ready to take it upon them, and straight begin to examine, if he has Life, if
he has Motion, if Man be any other than an Ox? What it is to do, and to
suffer? and what Animals Law and Justice are? Do they speak of the Magistrates,
it is with a rude, irreverent, and indecent liberty. Do they hear a Prince, or a
King commended for his Virtue, they make no more of him, than of a Shepherd,
Goatherd, or Neat-herd; a lazy Corydon, that busies himself only about milking,
and shearing his Herds and Flocks, and that after the rudest manner. Do you
repute any man the greater for being Lord of two thousand Acres of Land? they
laugh at such a pitiful Pittance, as laying claim themselves to the whole World
for their possession. Do you boast of your Nobility and Blood, for being
descended from seven rich successive Ancestors? they will look upon you with an
eye of Contempt, as men who have not a right Idea of the Universal Image of
Nature, and that do not consider how many Predecessors every one of us has had,
Rich, Poor, Kings, Slaves, Greeks, and Barbarians. And though you were the
fiftieth descent from Hercules, they look upon it as a great vanity, so highly
to value this, which is only a gift of Fortune. And even so did the Vulgar sort
of men nauseare them, as men ignorant of the beginning of things, where all
things were common, accusing them of Presumption and Insolence. But this
Platonic Picture is far different from that these Pedants are presented by:
For those were envied for raising themselves above the common sort of men, for
despising the ordinary Actions and Offices of Life, for having assumed a
particular and inimitable way of living, and for using a certain Method of
Bumbaste and obsolete Language, quite different from the ordinary way of
speaking: but these are contemned for being as much below the usual form, as
incapable of Public Employment, for leading a Life, and conforming themselves
to the mean and vile manners of the Vulgar. Pacuvius.
Odi homines, ignava opera, Philosophica Sententia. I hate men who talk like
Philosophers, but do worse than the most slothful of men. For what concerns
those true Philosophers, I must needs say, that if they were great in Science,
they were yet much greater in Action. And, as it is said of the Geometrician of
Syracusa, Archimedes.
who having been disturbed from his Contemplation, to put some of his Skill in
Practice for the Defense of his Country, that he suddenly set on foot dreadful
and prodigious Engines, and that wrought Effects beyond all humane expectation;
himself notwithstanding disdained his own handiwork, thinking in this he had
played the Mechanic, and violated the Dignity of his Art, of which these
Performances of his, (though so highly cried up by the Public Voice) he
accounted but trivial Experiments, and inferior Models: so they, whenever they
have been put upon the Proof of Action, have been seen to fly to so high a
Pitch, as made it very well appear, their Souls were strangely elevated, and
enriched with the Knowledge of Things. But some of them, seeing the Reins of
Government in the hands of ignorant and unskilful Men, have avoided all Places
and Interest in the Management of Affairs; and he who demanded of Crates, How
long it was necessary to Philosophize, received this Answer, Till our Armies
(said he) are no more commanded by Fools and Coxcombs. Heraclitus resigned the
Royalty to his Brother; and to the Ephesians, who reproached him that he spent
his time in playing with Boys before the Temple; Is it not better, said he, to
do so, than to sit at the Helm of Affairs in your Company? Others having their
Imagination advanced above the thoughts of the World and Fortune, have looked
upon the Tribunals of Justice, and even the Thrones of Kings, with an Eye of
Contempt and Scorn; insomuch, that Empedocles refused the Royalty that the
Agrigentines offered to him. Thales, once inveighing in Discourse against the
Pains and Care Men put themselves to, to become rich; was answered by one in
the Company, that he did like the Fox, who found fault with what he could not
obtain. Whereupon, he had a mind, for the Jest's sake, to show them to the
contrary; and having upon this Occasion for once made a muster of all his Wits,
wholly to employ them in the Service of profit, he set a Traffic on foot,
which in one Year brought him in so great Riches, that the most experienced in
that Trade could hardly in their whole Lives, with all their Industry, have
raked so much together. That which Aristotle reports of some who said of him,
Anaxagoras, and others of their Profession, that they were wise but not
prudent, in not applying their Study to more profitable things (though I do not
well digest this nice Distinction) that will not however serve to excuse my
Pedantick sort of Men, for to see the low and necessitous Fortune wherewith
they are content, we have rather Reason to pronounce that they are neither
wise, nor prudent. But letting this first Reason alone, I think it better to
say, that this Inconvenience proceeds from their applying themselves the wrong
way to the Study of Sciences; and that after the manner we are instructed, it
is no wonder if neither the Scholars nor the Masters become, though more
learned, ever the wiser, or more fit for Business. In plain Truth, the Cares
and Expense our Parents are at in out Education, point at nothing, but to
furnish our Heads with Knowledge; but not a Word of Judgment and Virtue. Cry
out of one that passes by, to the People, O, what a Learned! and of another, O
what a good man goes there! they will not fail to turn their Eyes, and address
their Respect to the former. There should then be a third Crier, O the Puppies
and Coxcombs! Men are ap^ presently to enquire, Does such a one understand
Greek? Is he a Critic in Latin? Is he a Poet? or does he only pretend to
Prose? But whether he be grown better or more discreet, which are Qualities of
greater Value and Concern, those are never inquired into; whereas, we should
rather examine, who is better learned, than who is more learned. We only toil
and Labor to stuff the Memory, and in the mean time leave the Conscience and
the Understanding unfurnished and void. And, like Birds who fly abroad to
forage for Grain, bring it home in the Beak, without tasting it themselves, to
feed their Young; so our Pedants go picking Knowledge here and there, out of
several Authors, and hold it at the Tongues end, only to spit it out, and
distribute it amongst their Pupils. And here I cannot but smile to think how I
have paid my self in showing the Foppery of this kind of Learning, who my self
am so manifest an Example; for, do I not the same thing throughout almost this
whole Treatise? I go here and there, culling out of several Books the Sentences
that best please me, not to keep them (for I have no Memory to retain them in)
but to transplant them into this; where, to say the Truth, they are no more
mine than in their first Places. We are, I conceive, knowing only in present
Knowledge, and not at all in what is past, no more than in that which is to
come. But the worst on it is, their Scholars and Pupils are no better nourished
by this kind of Inspiration, nor it makes no deeper Impression upon them, than
the other, but passes from hand to hand, only to make a show, to be tolerable
Company, and to tell pretty Stories, like a counterfeit Coin in Counters, of no
other use nor value, but to reckon with, or to set up at Cards. Seneca Epist.
105.
Apud alios loqui didicerunt, non ipsi secum. Non est loquendum, sed
gubernandum; They have learned to speak from others, not from themselves.
Speaking is not so necessary as Governing. Nature, to show that there is
nothing barbarous where she has the sole Command, does ostentimes, in Nations,
where Art has the least to do, cause productions of Wit, such as may rival the
greatest Effects of Art whatever. As in relation to what I am now speaking of,
the Gascon Proverb, derived from a Corn-pipe, is very quaint and subtle. Bouha
prou bouha, mas a remuda lous dits qu'em. You may blow till your Eyes start
out; but if once you offer to stir your Fingers, you will be at the end of your
Lesson. We can say, Cicero says thus; that these were the Manners of Plato, and
that these are the very Words of Aristotle: but what do we say our selves that
is our own? What do we do? What do we judge? A Parrot would say as much as
that. And this kind of Talking puts me in mind of that rich Gentleman of Rome,
who had been sollicitous, with very great Expense, to procure Men that were
excellent in all sorts of Science, which he had always attending his Person, to
the end, that when amongst his Friends any occasion fell out of speaking of any
Subject whatsoever, they might supply his Place, and be ready to prompt him,
one with a Sentence of Seneca, another with a Verse of Homer, and so forth,
every one according to his Talent; and he fansied this Knowledge to be his own,
because in the Heads of those who lived upon his Bounty. As they also do whose
Learning consists in having noble Libraries. I know one, who, when I question
him about his Reading, he presently calls for a Book to show me, and dare not
venture to tell me so much, as that he has Piles in his Posteriours, till first
he has consulted his Dictionary, what Piles and what Posteriours are. We take
other Men's Knowledge and Opinions upon Trust; which is an idle and superficial
Learning: we must make it our own. We are in this very like him, who having
need of Fire, went to a Neighbors House to fetch it, and finding a very good
one there, sat down to warm himself without remembering to carry any with him
home. What good does it do us to have the Stomach full of Meat, if it do not
digest, and be not incorporated with us, if it does not nourish and support us?
Can we imagine that Lucullus, whom Letters, without any manner of Experience
made so great and so exact a Leader, learnt to be so after this perfunctory
manner? We suffer our selves to lean and rely so over-strongly upon the Arm of
another, that by so doing we prejudice our own Strength and Vigor. Would I
fortify my self against the fear of Death? It must be at the Expense of
Seneca: Would I extract Consolation for my self, or my Friend? I borrow it from
him, or Cicero; whereas I might have found it in my self, had I been trained up
to make use of my own Reason. I do not fancy this relative, mendicant, and
precarious Understanding; for though we could become learned by other Men's
Reading, I am sure a Man can never be wise but by his own Wisdom.

Proverb. I^mb.
(...).
Who in his own Concern's not wise,
I that Man's Wisdom do despise.
From whence Ennius, Cicero Epist. 6. l. 7. ex Ennio.
Nequidquam sapere sapientem, qui ipsi sibi prodesse non quiret; That wisfe man
knows nothing, who cannot profit himself by his Wisdom. Non enim paranda nobis
solum, sed fruenda sapientia est; Cicero de Finib. l. 1.
For Wisdom is not only to be acquired, but enjoyed. Dionysius laughed at the
Grammarians, who cudgelled their Brains to enquire into the Miseries of
Ulysses, and were ignorant of their own; at Musicians, who were so exact in
tuning their Instruments, and never tuned their Manners; and at Orators, who
studied to declare what was Justice, but never took care to do it. If the Mind
be not better disposed, if the Judgment be on better settled, I had much rather
my Scholar had spent his time at Tennis, for at least his Body would by that
Means be in better Exercise and Breath. Do but observe him when he comes back
from School, after fifteen or sixteen Years that he has been there, there is
nothing so awkward and maladroit, so unfit for Company or Employment; and all
that you shall find he has got, is, that his Latin and Greek have only made
him a greater and more conceited Coxcomb than when he went from home. He should
bring his Soul repleat with good Literature, and he brings it only swelled, and
puffed up with vain and empty Shreds and Snatches of Learning, and has really
nothing more in him than he had before. These Pedants of ours, as Plato says of
the Sophists, their Cousin-Germans, are, of all Men living, they who most
pretend to be useful to Mankind, and who alone, of all Men, not only do not
better and improve that is committed to them, as a Carpenter or a Mason would
do, but make them much worse, and make them pay for being made so to boot. If
the Rule which Protagoras proposed to his Pupils were followed, either that
they should give him his own Demand, or make Affidavit upon Oath in the Temple
how much they valued the Profit they had received under his Tuition, and
accordingly satisfy him, our Pedagogues would find themselves basely
gravelled, especially if they were to be judged by the Testimony of my
Experience. Our vulgar Perigordin Patois does pleasantly call them Pretenders
to Learning, Lettre-ferits, as a Man should say, Lettermark'd; a man on whom
Letters have been stamped by the Blow of a Mallet; and in truth for the most
part, they appear to have a soft place in their Skulls, and to be deprived even
of common Sense. For you see the Husbandman, and the Cobbler, go simply and
honestly about their Business, speaking only of what they know and understand;
whereas these Fellows, to make perade, and to get opinion, mustering this
ridiculous knowledge of theirs that swims and floats in the Superficies of the
Brain, are perpetually perplexing and entangling themselves in their own
Nonsense.

They speak fine words sometimes, it is true, but let some body that is wiser
apply them. They are wonderfully well acquainted with Galen, but not at all
with the Disease of the Patient; they have already deas'd you with a long
ribble-row of Laws, but understand nothing of the case in hand; They have the
Theories of all things, let who will put it in practice. I have sat by, when a
Friend of mine, in my own House, for sport sake, has with one of these Fellows
counterfeited a canting Galimatias, patcht up of several Expressions without
head or foot, saving that he now and then interlarded here and there some terms
that had relation to their Dispute, and held the Coxcomb in play a whole
Afternoon together, who all the while thought he had answered pertinently, and
learnedly to all his Objections. And yet this was a man of Letters, and
Reputation, and no worse than one of the long Robe.

Persus, Sat. 1.
Vos O patricius sanguis quos vivere par est
Occipiti caeco, posticae occurrite sannae.
O you Patrician bloods, whose Laws commend
To have your Heads from retrospection blind,
Take this poor counsel of a faithful Friend,
Beware of having a Caldese behind.
Whosoever shall narrowly pry into, and thoroughly sist this sort of People,
wherewith the World is so pestered, will, as I have done, find, that for the
most part, they neither understand others, nor themselves; and that their
Memories are full enough, it is true, but the Judgment totally void and empty;
some excepted, whose own Nature has of it self formed them into better fashion.
As I have observed for Example in Adrianus Turnebus, Testimony of Adrianus
Turnebus.
who having never made other profession, than that of mere Learning only, and
in that, in my opinion, the greatest man that has been these thousand years,
had nothing at all in him of the Pedant, but the wearing of his Gown, and a
little exterior fashion, that could not be civilized to the Garb, which are
nothing; and I hate our People, who can worse endure a Pedantick Mode, than an
ill contrived Mind, and take their measures by the Leg a man makes, by his
behavior and so much as the very fashion of his Boots, what a kind of man he
is. For within all this, there was not a more illustrious and polite Soul
living upon Earth. I have often purposely put him upon Arguments quite wide of
his Profession, wherein I found he had so clear an insight, so quick an
apprehension, and so solid a Judgment: that a man would have thought he had
never practiced any other thing but Arms, and been all his life enploy'd in
Affairs of State. And these are great and vigorous Natures.

Juven Sat. 14.
-- Queis art benigna,
Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan.
-- With greater Art whose mind
The Sun has made of Clay much more refined. that can keep themselves upright
in defiance of a Pedantick Education. But it is not enough that our Education
does not spoil us; it must moreover alter us for the better. Some of our
Parliaments, when they are to admit Officers, examine only their Talent of
Learning; to which some of the others also add the trial of Understanding, by
asking their Judgment of some Case in Law, of which the latter methinks proceed
with the better Method: for although both are necessary, and that it is very
requisite they should be defective in neither, yet in truth, Knowledge is not
so absolutely necessary as Judgment, and the last may make shift without the
other, but the other never without this. For as the Greek Verse says.

Menander in Gnom.
(...).
Learning is nothing worth, if Wit
And Understanding be not joined with it.
To what Use serves Learning, if the Understanding be away? Would to God, that,
for the good of our Judicature, those Societies were as well furnished with
Understanding and Conscience, as they are with Knowledge. Non Vitae, Sen.
Epist. ^06.
sed Scholae discimus; We do not study for the service of our future Life, but
only for the present use of the School. Whereas we are not to ^ie Learning to
the Soul, but to work and incorporate them together; not to tincture it only,
but to give it a thorough and perfect dye; which, if it will not take color,
and meliorare its imperfect state, it were without question better to let it
alone. It Is a dangerous weapon, and that will endanger to wound its master, if
put into an aukard, and unskilful hand: Ut fuerit melius non didicisse. So that
it were better never to have learned at all. And this peradventure is the
reason, why neither we, nor indeed Christian Religion, require much Learning in
Women; and that Francis Duke of Britany, Son of John the Fifth (one being
talking with him about his Marriage with Isabelle the Daughter of Scotland, and
adding that she was homely bred, and without any manner of Learning) made
answer, That he liked her the better, and that a Woman was wise enough, if she
could distinguish her Husband's Shirt and his Doublet. So that it is no so
great wonder, as they make of it, that our Ancestors had Letters in no greater
Esteem, and that even to this day, they are but rarely met with in the Privy
Councils of Princes; and if this End and Design of acquiring Riches (which is
the only thing we propose to our selves, by the means of Law, Physic,
Pedantry, and even Divinity it self) did not uphold, and keep them in credit,
you would without doubt see them as poor and unregarded as ever. And what loss
would it be if they neither instruct us to think well, nor to do well? Postquam
docti prodierunt, boni desinunt; After once they become Learned, they cease to
be good. All other knowledge is hurtful to him, who has not the Science of
Honesty and good Nature. But the reason I glanced upon but now, may it not also
proceed from hence, that our Study, having almost no other Aim, but Profit,
fewer of those, who by Nature are born to Offices and Employments, rather of
Glory than Gain, addict themselves to Letters; or for so little a while (being
taken from their Studies before they can come to have any taste of them, to a
Prosession that has nothing to do with Books) that there ordinarily remain no
other to apply themselves wholly to Learning, but People of mean Condition, who
in that only study to live, and have Preferment only in their Prospect; and by
such People, whose Souls are both by Nature, and Education, and domestic
Example, of the basest Metal and Allay, the Fruits of Knowledge are both
immaturely gathered, ill-digested, and delivered to their Pupils quite another
thing. For it is not for Knowledge to enlighten a Soul that is dark of it self;
nor to make a blind man to see. Her Business is not to find a man Eyes, but to
guide, govern, and direct his steps, provided he have sound Feet, and straight
Legs to go upon. Knowledge is an excellent Drug, but no Drug has virtue enough
to preserve it self from Corruption and Decay, if the Vessel be tainted and
impure wherein it is put to keep. Such a one may have a Sight clear and good
enough, who looks a squint, and consequently sees what is good, but does not
follow it, and sees Knowledge, but makes no use of it. Plato's principal
Institution in his Republic is to fit his Citizens with Employments suitable
to their Nature. Nature can do all, and does all. Cripples are very unfit for
Exercises of the Body, and lame Souls for Exercises of the Mind. Degenerate and
vulgar Souls are unworthy of Philosophy. If we see a Shoemaker with his
Shoes out at the Toes, we say, it is no wonder; for, commonly, none go worse
shod than their Wives and they. In like manner, Experience does often present
us a Physician worse physick'd, a Divine worse reformed, and frequently, a
Scholar of less Sufficiency than another. Ariosto of Chios had anciently Reason
to say, That Philosophers did their Auditories harm, forasmuch as most of the
Souls of those that heard them were not capable of making benefit of their
Instructions, and if they did not apply them to good, would certainly apply
them to ill: (...) ex Aristippi, acerbos ex Zenonis Schola exire. Cicero de
Natu. Deo^ l. 2.
They proceeded effeminate prodigals from the School of Aristippus, and Churls
and Cynicks from that of Zeno. In that excellent Institution that Xenophon
attributes to the Persians, we find, that they taught their Children Virtue, as
other Nations do Letters. Plato tells us, that the eldest Son in their Royal
Succession, was thus brought up; so soon as he was born he was delivered, not
to Women, but to Eunuchs of the greatest Authority about their Kings for their
Virtue, whose Charge it was to keep his Body healthful, and in good plight; and
after he came to seven Years of Age, to teach him to ride, and to go a Hunting:
when he arrived at fourteen he was transferred into the hands of four, the
wisest, the most just, the most temperate, and most valiant of the Nation; of
which, the first was to instruct him in Religion, the second to be always
upright and sincere, the third to conquer his Appetites and Desires, and the
fourth to despise all Danger. It Is a thing worthy of very great Consideration,
that in that excellent, and, in truth, for its Perfection, prodigious form, and
civil Regiment set down by Lycurgus, though sollicitous of the Education of
Children, as a thing of the greatest Concern, and even in the very Seat of the
Muses, he should make so little mention of Learning; as if their generous
Youth, disdaining all other Subjection, but that of Virtue only, ought to be
supplied, instead of Tutors to read to them Arts and Sciences, with such
Masters, as should only instruct them in Valor, Prudence, and Justice. An
Example that Plato has followed in his Laws; the manner of whose Discipline was
to propound to them Questions upon the Judgment of Men, and of their Actions;
and if they commended or condemned this or that Person, or Fact, they were to
give a Reason for so doing: by which means they at once sharp'ned their
Understanding, and became skillful in the Laws. Mandane, in Xenophon, asking
her Son Cyrus how he would do to learn Justice, and the other Virtues amongst
the Medes, having left all his Masters behind him in Persia? He made Answer,
That he had learned those things long since; that his Master had often made him
a Judge of the Differences amongst his School-Fellows, and had one day whipped
him for giving a wrong Sentence; and thus it was. A great Boy in the School,
having a little short. Cassock, by force took a longer from another that was
not so tall as he, and gave him his own in exchange: whereupon, I being
appointed Judge of the Controversy, gave Judgment, That I thought it best
either of them should keep the Coat he had, for that they both of them were
better fitted with that of one another than with their own: upon which, my
Master told me, I had done ill, in that I had only considered the Fitness and
Decency of the Garments, whereas I ought to have considered the Justice of the
thing, which requires that no one should have any thing forcibly taken from him
that is his own. But it seems poor Cyrus was whipped for his Pains, as we are in
our Villages, for forgetting the first Aorist of (...): my Pedant must make me
a very learned Oration, in genere demonstrativo, before he can persuade me,
that his School is like unto that. They knew how to go the readiest way to
work; and seeing that Science, when most rightly applied, and best understood,
can do no more but teach us Prudence, moral Honesty, and Resolution they
thought fit to initiate their Children with the knowledge of Effects, and to
instruct them, not by Hearsay, and by Rote, but by the Experiment of Action,
in lively forming and moulding them; not only by Words and Precepts, but
chiefly Works and Examples; to the end it might not be a Knowledge of the Mind
only, but a Complexion and a Habit: and not an Acquisition, but a natural
Possession. One asking to this Purpose, Agesilaus, what he thought most proper
for Boys to learn? What they ought to do when they come to be Men, said he. It
is therefore no wonder, if such an Institution have produced so admirable
Effects. They used to go, it is said, in the other Cities of Greece, to enquire
out Rhetoricians, Painters, and Musick-Masters; but in Lacedaemon Legislators,
Magistrates, and Generals of Armies; at Athens they learnt to speak well, and
here to do well; there to disengage themselves from a sophistical Argument, and
to unravel Syllogisms, here to evade the Baits and Allurements of Pleasure, and
with a noble Courage and Resolution to confute and conquer the menaces of
Fortune and Death; those cudgelled their Brains about Words, these made it
their Business to enquire into things; there was an eternal Babble of the
Tongue, here a continual Exercise of the Soul. And therefore it is nothing
strange, if, when Antipater demanded of them fifty Children for Hostages, they
made Answer, quite contrary to what we should do, That they would rather give
him twice as many full grown Men, so much did they value the loss of their
Country's Education. When Agesilaus courted Xenophon to send his Children to
Sparta to be bred, It is not, said he, there to learn Logic or Rhetoric, but
to be instructed in the noblest of all Sciences, namely, the Science to Obey,
and to Command. It is very pleasant to see Socrates, after his manner, rallying
Hippias, who recounts to him what a World of Money he has got, especially in
certain little Villages of Sicily, by teaching School, and that he got never a
Penny at Sparta. What a Sottish and stupid People (says Socrates) are they,
without Sense or Understanding, that make no Account either of Grammar, or
Poetry, and only busy themselves in studying the Genealogies and Successions
of their Kings, the Foundations, Rises, and Declensions of States, and such
Tales of a Tub! After which, having made Hippias particularly to acknowledge
the Excellency of their Form of Public Administration, and the Felicity and
Virtue of their Private Life, he leaves him to guess at the Conclusion he makes
of the Inutilities of his Pedantick Arts. Examples have Demonstrated to us,
that in Military Affairs, and all others of the like Active Nature, the Study
of Sciences does more soften and untemper the Courages of Men, that any way
fortify and incite them. The most Potent Empire, that at this Day appears to
be in the whole World, is that of the Turks, a People equally inclined to the
Estimation of Arms, and the Contempt of Letters. I find, Rome was more Valiant
before she grew so Learned; and the most Warlike Nations at this time in Being,
are the most ignorant: of which, the Scythians, Parthians; and the great
Tamerlane, may serve for sufficient Proof. When the Goths overran Greece, the
only thing that preserved all the Libraries from the Fire, was that some one
possessed them with an Opinion, that they were to leave this kind of Furniture
entire to the Enemy, as being most proper to divert them from the Exercise of
Arms, and to fix them to a lazy and sedentary Life. When our King Charles the
Eighth, almost without striking a Blow, saw himself possessed of the Kingdom of
Naples, and a considerable part of Tuscany, the Nobility about him attributed
this unexpected Facility of Conquest to this, that the Princes and Nobles of
Italy, more studied to render themselves ingenious and learned, than vigorous
and warlike.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Education of Children. To Madam Diana of Foix, Countess of Gurson.
I Never yet saw that Father, but let his Son be never so decrepid, or
deformed, would notwithstanding own him: nevertheless, if he were not totally
besotted, and blinded with this Paternal Affection, that he did not well enough
discern his Defects: but that all Defaults notwithstanding, he is still his.
Just so do I, I see better than any other, that all I write are but the idle
Whimsies of a Man that has only nibbled upon the outward Crust of Sciences in
his Nonage, and only retained a general and formless Image of them, who have
got a little snatch of every thing, and nothing of the whole a la mode de
France: For I know in general, that there is such a thing as Physic, a
knowledge in the Laws, four Parts in Mathematics, and, in part, what all these
aim and point at; and peradventure I yet know farther, what Sciences in general
pretend unto, in order to the Services of Humane Life: but to dive farther than
that, and to have cudgelled my Brains in the study of Aristotle, the Monarch of
all Modern Learning; or particularly addicted my self to any one Science, I
have never done it; neither is there any one Art of which I am able to draw the
first Lineaments and dead color; insomuch that there is not a Boy of the
lowest Form in a School, that may not pretend to be wiser than I, who am not
able to pose him in his first Lesson, which if I am at any time forced upon, I
am necessitated in my own defense, to ask him some Universal Questions, such as
may serve to try his natural Understanding; a Lesson as strange and unknown to
him, as his is to me. I never seriously settled my self to the reading any Book
of solid Learning, but Plutarch and Seneca; and there, like the Danaides, I
eternally fill, and it as constantly runs out; something of which drops upon
this Paper, but very little or nothing stays behind. History is my delight, as
to matter of Reading, or else Poetry, for which I have I confess, a particular
kindness and esteem: for, as Cleanthes said, as the Voice, forced through the
narrow passage of a Trumpet, comes out more forcible and shrill; so, methinks,
a Sentence couched in the Harmony of Verse, darts more briskly upon the
understanding, and strikes both my Ear and Apprehension with a smarter, and
more pleasing Power. As to the Natural Parts I have, of which this is the
Essay, I find them to how under the burden; my Fancy and Judgment do but grope
in the dark, trip and stumble in their way, and when I have gone as far as I
can, I discover still a new and greater extent of Land before me, but with a
troubled and imperfect sight, and wrapped up in Clouds, that I am not able to
penetrate. And taking upon me to write indifferently of whatever comes into my
Head, and therein making use of nothing but my own proper and natural Force and
Ammunition, if it befell me, as oft-times it does, accidentally to meet in any
good Author, the same Heads and Common-places upon which I have attempted to
write, (as I did but a little before in Plutarch's Discourse of the Force of
Imagination) to see myself so weak and so forlorn, so heavy, and so flat, in
comparis on of those better Writers, I at once pity and despise my self. Yet do
I flatter, and please my self with this, that my Opinions have often the honor
and good fortune to jump with theirs, and that I follow in the same Path,
though at a very great distance; I am farther satisfied to find, that I have a
Quality, which every one is not blessed withal, which is, to discern the vast
difference betwixt them and me; and notwithstanding all that, suffer my own
Inventions, low, and contemptible as they are, to run on in their Career,
without mending or plastering up the Defects that this Comparison has laid open
to my own View; and in plain Truth, a Man had need of a good strong Back to
keep Pace with these People. The indiscreet Scriblers of our Times, who amongst
their laborious Nothings, insert whole Sections, Paragraphs, and Pages, out of
Ancient Authors, with a Design by that means to illustrate their own Writings,
do quite contrary; for this infinite Dissimilitude of Ornaments renders the
Complexions of their own Compositions, so pale, sallow and deformed, that they
lose much more than they get. The Philosophers, Chrysippus and Epicurus, were,
in this, of too quite contrary Humors; for the first did not only in his Books
mix the Passages and Sayings of other Authors, but entire Pieces, and in one
the whole Medea of Euripides; which gave Apollodorus occasion to say, That
should a Man pick out of his Writings all that was none of his, he would leave
him nothing but blank Paper: whereas the latter, quite contrary, in three
hundred Volumes that he left behind him, has not so much as any one Quotation.
I happened the other day upon this Piece of Fortune; I was reading a French Book,
where after I had a long time run dreaming over a great many Words, so dull, so
insipid, so void of all Wit, or common Sense, that indeed they were only words;
after a long and tedious travel, I came at last to meet with a piece that was
lofty, rich, and elevated to the very Clouds: of which, had I found either the
Declivity easy, or the Ascent accessible, there had been some excuse; but it
was so perpendicular a Precipice, and so wholly cut off from the rest of the
Work, that by the six first words I found my self flying into the other World,
and from thence discovered the Vale from whence I came so deep and low, that I
had never since the Heart to descend into it any more. If I should set out my
Discourses with such rich Spoils as these, the Plagiary would be too manifest
in his own Defects, and I should too much discover the imperfection of my own
Writing. To reprehend the fault in others, that I am guilty of my self, appears
to me no more unreasonable, than to condemn, as I often do, those of others in
my self. They are to be every where reproved, and ought to have no Sanctuary
allowed them. I know very well how imprudently I my self at every turn attempt
to equal my self to my thefts, and to make my style go hand in hand with them,
not without a temerarious hope of deceiving the eyes of my Reader from
discerning the difference; but withal, it is as much by the benefit of my
Application, that I hope to do it, as by that of my Invention, or any Force of
my own. Besides, I do not offer to contend with the whole Body of these
Champions, nor hand to hand with any one of them, it is only by slights and
little light attempts that I engage them; I do not grapple with them, but try
their strength only, and never engage so far as I make a show to do; and if I
could hold them in play, I were a brave Fellow; for I never attaque them, but
where they are most sinewy and strong. To cover a man's self (as I have seen
some do) with another man's Arms, so as not to discover so much as their
fingers ends; to carry on a Design (as it is not hard for a Man that has any
thing of a Scholar in him, in an ordinary Subject to do) under old Inventions,
patcht up here and there with his own Trumpery: and then to endeavor to
conceal the theft, and to make it pass for his own, is first injustice, and
meanness of Spirit in whoever do it, who having nothing in them of their own
fit to procure them a Reputation, endeavor to do it by attempting to impose
things upon the World in their own Name, which they have really no manner of
title to; and then a ridiculous Folly to content themselves with acquiring the
ignorant approbation of the Vulgar by such a pitiful Cheat, at the Price at the
same time of discovering their insufficiency to men of Understanding, who will
soon smell out and trace them in those borrowed Allegories, and from whom alone
they are to expect a legitimate Applause. For my own part, there is nothing I
would not sooner do than that, neither have I said so much of others, but to
get a better Opportunity to excuse my self: neither in this do I in the least
glance at the Composers of Cento's, who declare themselves for such; of which
sort of Writers, I have in my time known many very ingenious, and have their
Rhapsodies in very great Esteem, and particularly one, under the Name of
Capilulus, besides the Ancients. These are really Men of Wit, and that make it
appear they are so, both by that and other ways of Writing; as for Example,
Lipsius, in that learned and laborious Contexture of his Politics. But, be it
how it will, and how inconsiderable soever these Essays of mine may be, I will
ingeniously confess, I never intended to conceal them, no more than my old bald
grizled Picture before them, where the graver has not presented you with a
perfect Face, but the Resemblance of mine. And these also are but my own
particular. Opinions and Fancies, and I deliver them for no other, but only,
what I my self believe, and not for what is really to be believed. Neither have
I any other end in this Writing, but only to discover my self, who also shall
peradventure be another thing tomorrow, if I chance to meet any Book, or
Friend, to convince me in the mean time. I have no Authority to be believed,
neither do I desire it being too conscious of my own inerudition to be able to
instruct others.

A Friend of mine then having read the precedent Chapter, the other day told
me, that I should a little longer have insisted upon the Education of Children;
and farther have extended my Discourse upon so necessary a point: which, how
fit I am to do, let my Friends slatter me if they please, I have in the mean
time no such Opinion of my own Talent, as to promise my self any very good
success from my endeavor; but (Madam) if I had any sufficiency in this
Subject, I could not possibly better employ it, than to present my best
Instructions to the little Gentleman that threatens you shortly with a happy
Birth; (for you are too generous to begin otherwise than with a male) for
having had so great a hand in the treaty of your Marriage, I have a certain
particular right and interest in the greatness and prosperity of the Issue that
shall spring from it; besides that, you having had the best of my Services so
long in possession, does sufficiently oblige me to desire the Honor and
Advantage of all wherein you shall be concerned. But, in truth, all I
understand as to that particular is only this, that the greatest and most
important difficulty of Humane Science is the Education of Children. For as in
Agriculture, the Husbandry that is to precede planting, as also Planting it
self, is certain, plain, easy, and very well known; but after that which is
planted comes to take root, to spread, and shoot up, there is a great deal more
to be done, more Art to be us^d, more care to be taken, and much more
difficulty to cultivate and bring them to Perfection: so it is with Men; it is
no hard matter to get Children; but after they are born, then begins the
Trouble, Solicitude, and Care, virtuously to train, principle, and bring them
up. The Symptoms of their Inclinations in that young and tender Age are so
obscure, and the Promises so uncertain and fallacious, that it is very hard to
establish any solid Judgment or Conjecture upon them. As Simon, for Example,
and Themistocles, and a thousand others, who have very much deceived the little
Expectation the World had of them: Cubs of Bears, and Bitches Puppies, do truly
and indeed discover their natural Inclination; but Men, so soon as ever grown
up, immediately applying themselves to certain Habits, engaging themselves in
certain Opinions, and conforming themselves to particular Laws and Customs, do
easily alter, or at least disguise their true and real Disposition. And yet it
is hard to force the Propension of Nature; whence it comes to pass, that for
not having chosen the right Course, a Man often takes very great Pains, and
consumes good part of his Age in training up Children to things, for which, by
their natural Aversion, they are totally unfit. In this Difficulty,
nevertheless, I am clearly of Opinion, that they ought to be elemented in the
best and most advantageous Studies, without taking too much notice of, or being
too superstitious in those light Prognostics they give of themselves in their
tender Years; to which Plato, in his Republic, gives, methinks, too much
Authority. But ( Madam) Science is doubtless a very great Ornament, and a thing
of mavelous use, especially in Persons raised to that degree of Fortune you
are; and in truth, in Persons of mean and low Condition, cannot perform its
true and genuine Office, being naturally more prompt to assist in the Conduct
of War, in the Government of Armies and Provinces, and in negotiating the
Leagues and Friendships of Princes and foreign Nations, than in forming a
Syllogism in Logic, in pleading a Process in Law, or in prescribing a Dose of
Pills in Physic. Wherefore, Madam, believing you will not omit this so
necessary Embellishment in the Education of your Posterity, who your self have
tasted the Fruits of it, and are of a Learned extraction (for we yet have the
Writings of the ancient Counts of Foix, from whom my Lord, your Husband and
your self are both of you descended, and Monsieur de Candale, your Uncle, does
every day oblige the World with others, which will extend the knowledge of this
Quality in your Family so many succeeding Ages) I will upon this occasion
presume to acquaint your Ladyship with one particular Fancy of my own, contrary
to the common Method, which also is all I am able to contribute to your Service
in this Affair. The charge of the Tutor or Governor you shall provide for your
Son, upon the choice of whom depends the whole Success of his Education, has
several other great and considerable Parts and Duties required in so important
a Trust, besides that of which I am about to speak, which however I shall not
mention, as being unable to add any thing of moment to the common Rules, that
every one who is qualified for a Governor is perfect in: and also in this
wherein I take upon me to advise, he may follow it so far only as it shall
appear rational and conducing to the end at which he does aim and intend.

For a Boy of Quality then, who pretend^ to Letters not upon the account of
Profit, (for so mean an Object as that is unworthy of the grace and favor of
the Muses; and moreover, in that a man directs his Service to and professes to
depend upon others) nor so much for outward ornament, as for his own proper and
peculiar use, and to furnish and enrich himself within, having rather a Desire
to go out an accomplished Cavalier, and a fine Gentleman, than a mere Scholar,
and a Learned Man; for such a one, I say, I would also have his Friends
sollicitous to find him out a Tutor, who has rather an Elegant than a Learned
Head, and both, if such a Person can be found; but however, to prefer his
Manners and his Judgment before his Reading, and that this Man should pursue
the Exercise of his Charge after a new method. It Is the Custom of
Schoolmasters, to be eternally thundering in their Pupils Ears, as they were
pouring into a Funnel, whilst their Business is only to repeat what the other
have said before: Now I would have a Tutor to correct this Error, and that at
the very first, he should according to the Capacity he has to deal with, put it
to the Test, permitting his Pupil himself to taste and relish things, and of
himself to choose and discern them sometimes opening the way to him, and
sometimes making him to break the Ice himself; that is, I would not have him
alone to invent and speak, but that he should also hear his Pupil speak in
turn. Socrates, and since him Arc^stlaus, made first their Scholars speak, Cic.
de. Not. Deor. l. 1.
and then they spoke to them. Obest plerumque iis qui discere volunt,
authoritas eorum qui docent; The Authority of those who teach, is very often an
impediment to those who desire to learn. It is good to make him, like a young
Horse, trot before him that he may judge of his going and how much he is to
abate of his own Speed, to accommodate himself to the Vigor and Capacity of
the other. For want of which due proportion, we spoil all; which also to know
how to adjust, and to keep within an exact and due measure is one of the
hardest things I know, and an effect of a judicious and well-tempered Soul, to
know how to condescend to his Puerile Motions, and to govern and direct them. I
walk firmer, and more secure up hill than down, and such as according to our
common way of Teaching undertake, with one and the same Lesson and the same
measure of direction, to instruct several Boys of so differing and unequal
Capacities, are infinitely mistaken in their Method; and at this rate, it is no
wonder, if in a multitude of Scholars, there are not found above two or three
who bring away any good account of their Time and Discipline. Let the Master
not only examine him about the Grammatical Construction of the bare words of
his Lesson, but of the sense and meaning of them, and let him judge of the
Profit he has made, not by the testimony of his Memory, but by that of his
Understand. Let him make him put what he has learned into an hundred several
Forms, and accommodate it to so many several Subjects, to see if he yet rightly
comprehend it, and have made it his own, taking instruction by his progress
from the Institutions of Plat^ It Is a sign of Crudity and Indigestion to vomit
up what we eat in the same condition it was swallowed down, and the Stomach has
not performed its office, unless it have altered the form and condition of what
was committed to it to concoct: so our minds work only upon trust, being bound
and compelled to follow the Appetite of another Fancy, enslaved and captivated
under the Authority of another's Instruction, we have been so subjected to the
Tramel, that we have no free, nor natural Pace of our own, our own Vigor and
Liberty is extinct and gone. Nunquam tutelae suae fiunt; Sen. Ep. 33.
They are ever in Wardship, and never left to their own Tuition. I was
privately at Pisa carried to see a very honest man; but so great an
Aristotelian, that his most usual Thesis was, That the Touchstone and Square
of all solid, Imagination, and of the Truth, was an absolute conformity to
Aristotle's Doctrine; and that all besides was nothing but Inanity and
Chimaera; for that he had seen all, and said all. A Position, that for having
been a little too injuriously, and maliciously interpreted, brought him first
into, and afterward long kept him in great trouble in the Inquisition at Rome.
Let him make him examine, and thoroughly sift every thing he reads, and lodge
nothing in his Fancy upon simple Authority, and upon trust. Aristotle's
Principles will then be no more Principles to him, than those of Epicurus and
the Stoics: only let this Diversity of Opinions be propounded to, and laid
before him, he will himself choose, if he be able; if not he will remain in
doubt.

Dante inferno, Canto 12.
Che non menche saper dubiar m' aggrada I love sometimes to doubt, as well as
know. For if he embrace the Opinions of Xenophon and Plato, by maintaining
them, they will no more be theirs, but become his own. Who follows another,
follows nothing, finds nothing, nay is inquisitive after nothing. Non sumus sub
Rege, sibi quisque se vindicet; Let him at least know, that he knows. It will
be necessary that he imbibe their knowledge, not that he be corrupted with
their Precepts; and no matter if he forget where he had his Learning, provided
he know how to apply it to his own Use; Truth and Reason are common to every
one, and are no more his who spoke them first, than his who speaks them after.
It Is no more according to Plato, than according to me, since both he and I
equally see and understand them. Bees cull their several Sweets from this
Flower, and that Blossom, here and there where they find them, but themselves
after make the Honey, which is all, and purely their own, and no more Time and
Marjoram: so the several Fragments he borrows from others, he will transform
and suffle together to compile a Work that shall be absolutely his own; that is
to say, his Judgment, his Instruction, Labor, and Study, tend to nothing else
but to incline, and make him capable so to do. He is not obliged to discover
whence he had his Ammunition, but only to produce what he has himself composed.
Men that live upon Rapine, and borrowing, expose their Purchases and Buildings
to every ones knowledge and view: but do not proclaim how they came by the
Money. We do not see the Fees, and Perquisites belonging to the Function and
Offices of a Gentleman of the long Robe; but we see the Noble Alliances
wherewith he fortifies himself and his Family, and the Titles and Honors he
has obtained for him and his. No man divulges his Revenue; or at least which
way it comes in: but every one publishes his Purchases, and is content the
World should know his good Condition. The Advantages of our Study are to become
better and more wise. It Is (says Epicharmus) the Understanding that sees and
hears, it is the Understanding that improves every thing, that orders every
thing, and that acts, rules, and reigns: all other Faculties are blind, and
deaf, and without Soul; and certainly, we render it timorous and servile, in
not allowing it the Liberty and P^^vilege to do any thing of it self. Who ever
asked his Pupil what he thought of Grammar and Rhetoric, or of such and such a
Sentence of Cicero? Our Masters dart and stick them full feathered in our
Memories, and there establish them like Oracles, of which the very Letters and
Syllables are of the substance of the thing. To know by rote, is no Knowledge,
and signifies no more but only to retain what one has instrusted to his Memory.
That which a man rightly knows and understands, he is the free Disposer of at
his own full Liberty, without any regard to the Author from whence he had it,
or fumbling over the Leaves of his Book. A mere Bookish Learning is both
troublesome and ungraceful; and though it may serve for some kind of Ornament,
What true Philosophy is, according to Plato.
there is yet no Foundation for any Superstructure to be built upon it,
according to the Opinion of Plato, who says, that Constancy, Faith, and
Sincerity, are the true Philosophy, and the other Sciences, that are directed
to other ends, to be adulterate and false. I could wish, that P^lu^l or Pompey,
the two famous Dancing Masters of my Time, could have taught us to cut Capers,
by only seeing them do it, without stirring from our Places, as these men
pretend to inform the Understanding, without ever setting them to work; or that
we could learn to Ride, handle a Pike, touch a Lute, or Sing, without the
trouble of Practice, as these attempt to make us Judge, and Speak well, without
exercising us in Judging and Speaking. Now in this Initiation of our Studies,
and in the Progress of them, whatsoever presents it self before us is Book
sufficient: a Roguy Trick of a Page, a sottish Mistake of a Servant, or a Jest
at the Table, are so many new Subjects. And for this very Reason, Conversation
with men is of very great use, and Travel into Foreign Countries of singular
Advantage; not to bring back (as most of our young Monsieurs do) an account
only of how many Paces Santa Rotonda is in Circuit; or of the Richness of
Signiora Livia's Attire; or, as some others, how much Nero's Face, in a Statue
in such an old Ruin, is longer and broader than that made for him at such
another Place: but to be able chiefly to give an Account of the Humors,
Manners, Customs, and Laws of those Nations where he has been. And, that we may
whet and sharpen our Wits by rubbing them upon those of others. I would that a
Boy should be sent abroad very young (and principally to kill two Birds with
one Stone) into those neighboring Nations whose Language is most differing from
our own, and to which, if it be not formed betimes, the Tongue will be grown
too stiff to bend. And also it is the general Opinion of all, that a Child
should not be brought up in his Mother's Lap. Mothers are too tender, and their
natural Affection is apt to make the most discreet of them all so over-fond,
that they can neither find in their Hearts to give them due Correction for the
Faults they commit, nor suffer them to be brought up in those Hardsh'ps and
Hazards they ought to be. They would not endure to see them return all Dust and
Sweat from their Exercise, Fondness of Mothers pernicious to Education.
to drink cold Drink when they are hot, nor see them mount'an un^uly Horse, nor
take a Foil in hand against a rude Fencer, or so much as to discharge a
Carbine. and yet there is no Remedy; whoever will breed a Boy to be good for
any thing when he comes to be a Man, must by no means spare him, even when so
young, and must very often transgress the Rules of Physic:

Horat. l. 1 Ode 2.
Vit amque sub dio, and trepidis agat
In rebus.
He must sharp Cold and scorching Heat despise,
And most tempt Danger where most Danger lies.
In is not enough to fortify his Soul, you are also to make his Sinews strong;
for the Soul will be oppressed, if not assisted by the Members, and would have
too hard a Task to discharge two Offices alone. I know very well, to my Cost,
how much mine groans under the Burden, for being accommodated with a Body so
tender and indisposed, as eternally leans and presses upon her; and often in my
Reading perceive, that our Masters, in their Writings, make Examples pass for
Magnanimity and Fortitude of Mind, which really is rather Toughness of Skin and
Hardness of Bones; for I have seen Men, Women, and Children, naturally born of
so hard and insensible a Constitution of Body, that a sound cudgelling has been
less to them, than a Flirt with a Finger would have been to me, and that would
neither cry out, wince, nor quitch for a good swinging Beating; and when
Wrestlers, counterfeit the Philosophers in patience, it is rather Strength of
Nerves than Stoutness of Heart. Now to be inured to undergo Labor, is to be
accustomed to endure Grief. Cicero Tase. l. 2.
Labor callum obducit dolori: Labor supplies Grief with a certain Callus, that
defen^^ it from the Blow. A Boy is to be inur^d to the Toil and Vehemence of
Exercise, to train him up to the Pain, and suffering of Dislocations, Cholicks,
Cauteries, and even Imprisonment, and the Rack it self, for he may come, by
Misfortune, to be reduced to the worst of these which (as this World goes) is
sometimes inflicted on the Good, as well as the Bad. As for Proof, in our
present Civil war, whoever draws his Sword against the Laws, threatens all
honest Men with the Whip and the Halter. And moreover, by living at home, the
Authority of this Governor, which ought to be sovereign over the Boy he has
received into his charge, is often checked, interrupted; and hindered by the
Presence of Parents; to which may also be added, that the Respect the whole
Family pay him, as their Master's Son, and the Knowledge he has of the Estate
and Greatness he is Heir to, are in my Opinion, no small Inconveniences in
these tender Years. And yet even in this conversing with Men I spoke of but
now, I have observed this Vice, That instead of gathering Observations from
others, we make it our whole Business to lay our selves open to them, and are
more concerned how to expose and set out our own Commodities, than how to
increase our Stock by acquiring new. Silence therefore, and Modesty, are very
advantageous. Qualities in Conversation: and one should therefore train up this
Boy to be sparing, (...) good Husband of his Talent of Understanding, when once
acquired; and to forbear taking Exceptions, at, or reproving every idle Saying,
or ridiculous Story, is spoke or told in his Presence; for it is a Rudeness to
controvert every thing that is not agreeable to our own Palate. Let him be
satisfied with correcting himself, and not seem to condemn every thing in
another he would not do himself, nor dispute against common Customs. Let him be
wise without Arrogance, without Envy. Let him avoid these vain and uncivil
Images of Authority, this childish Ambition of Coveting to appear better bred,
and more accomplished, than he really will by such Carriage discover himself to
be, and, as if Opportunities of interrupting and reprehending were not to be
omitted, to desire from thence to derive the Reputation of something more than
ordinary: for, as it becomes none but great Poets to make use of the Poetical
License, allowed only to those of celebrate Art; it is also intolerable, that
any but Men of great and illustrious Souls should be privileged above the
Authority of Custom; Si quid Socrates, Cic. de Offic. l. 1.
and Aristippus contra morem, and consuetudinem fecerunt, idem sibi ne
arbitratur licere: magis enim illi, and divinis bonis hanc licentiam
assequebantur, If Socrates and Aristippus have transgressed the Rules of
Custom, let him not imagine that he is licensed to do the same; for it was by
great and sovereign Virtues that they obtained this Privilege. Let him be
instructed not to engage in Discourse, or dispute but with a Champion worthy of
him, and even there not to make use of all the little Fallacies and Subtleties
that are pat for his Purpose; but only such as may best serve him upon that
Occasion. Let him be taught to be curious in the Election and Choice of his
Reasons, to abominate Impertinence, and consequently, to affect Brevity; but
above all, let him be lesson'd to acquiesce and submit to Truth so soon as ever
he shall discover it, whether in his Opponent's Argument, or upon better
Consideration of his own; for he shall never be preferred to the Chair for a
mere clatter of Words and Syllogisms, and is no further engaged to any Argument
whatever, than as he shall in his own Judgment approve it: nor yet is Arguing a
Trade, where the liberty of Recantation, and getting off upon better Thoughts,
Cic. Acad. l. 4.
are to be sold for ready Money. Neque ut omnia, quae praescripta and imperata
sint, defendat, necessitate ulla cogitur: Neither is there any Necessity or
Obligation upon him at all, that he should defend all things that are
recommended to and enjoined him. If his Governor be of my Humor, he will form
his Will to be a very good and Loyal Subject to his Prince, very affectionate
to his Person, and very stout in his Quarrel; but withal, he will cool in him
the desire of having any other tie to his Service, than merely a Public Duty;
because, besides several other Inconveniences, that are very inconsistent with
the honest Liberty every honest man ought to have, a man's Judgment being
bribed and prepossessed by these particular Obligations and Favors, is either
blinded, and less free to exercise its Function, Dependence upon Princes.
or shall be blemished either with Ingratitude or Indiscretion. A man that is
purely a Courtier, can neither have Power non Wit to speak or think otherwise
than favorably and well of a Master, who, amongst so many millions of other
Subjects has picked out him with his own hand to nourish and advance. This
Favor, and the Profit flowing from it, must needs, and not without some show
of Reason, corrupt his understanding and deprive him of the freedom of
speaking: and also we commonly see these People speak in another kind of Phrase
than is ordinarily spoken by others of the same Nation, though what they say in
that Courtly Language, is not much to be believed in such Cases. Let his
Conscience and Virtue be eminently manifest in his speaking, and have only
Reason for their guide. Make him understand, that to acknowledge the Error he
shall discover in his own Argument, though only found out by himself, is an
Effect of Judgment and Sincerity, which are the principal things he is to seek
after. That Obstinacy and contention are common qualities, most appearing in,
and best becoming, a mean and illiterate Soul. That to recollect, and to
correct himself, and to forsake an unjust Argument in the height and heat of
Dispute, are great, and philosophical Qualities. Let him be advised, being in
Company, to have his Eye and Ear in every corner of the Room; for I find that
the Places of greatest Honor are commonly possessed by Men that have least in
them, and that the greatest Fortunes are not always accompanied with the ablest
Parts. I have been present, when, whilst they at the upper end of the Chamber
have been only commending the Beauty of the Arras, or the Flavor of the Wine,
many things that have been very finely said, have been lost and thrown away at
the lower end of the Table. Let him examine every Man's Talent, a Peasant, a
Bricklayer, or a Passenger; a Man may learn something from every one of these
in their several Capacities, and something will be picked out of their
Discourse, whereof some use may be made at one time or another; nay even the
Folly and Impertinence of others will contribute to his Instruction.
Observation.
By observing the Graces and Fashions of all he sees, he will create to himself
an Emulation of the good, and a contempt of the bad. Let an honest curiosity be
suggested to his Fancy of being inquisitive after every thing, and whatever
there is of singular and rare near the Place where he shall reside, let him go
and see it; a fine House, a delicate Fountain, an eminent Man, the Place where
a Battle has been anciently fought, and the passages of Caesar and Charlemain.

Propert. l. 4. Eleg. 39.
Quae Tellus sit l^nta gelu, quae putris ab aestu,
Ventus in Italiam quis been vela ferat.
What Countries to the Bear objected lie,
What with the Dog Star Heats are parched and dry,
And what Wind fairest serves for Italy.
Let him enquire into the Manners, Revenues, and Alliances of Princes, things
in themselves very pleasant to learn, and very useful to know. In this
Conversing with Men, I mean, and principally those who only live in the Records
of History, he shall by reading those Books, Reading History.
converse with those great and heroic Souls of former and better Ages. It Is an
idle and vain Study I confess, to those who make it so, by doing it after a
negligent manner, but to those who do it with care and Observation, it is a
study of inestimable Fruit and value; and the only one, as Plato reports, the
Lacedaemonians. reserved to themselves. What profit shall he not reap as to the
Business of Men, by reading the Lives of Plutarch? But withal, let my
Governor remember to what end his Instructions are principally directed, and
that he do not so much imprint in his Pupils Memory, the date of the Ruin of
Carthage, as the manners of Hannibal and Scipio; nor so much where Marcellus
died, as why it was unworthy of his Duty that he di'd there. That he do not
teach him so much the Narrative part, as the Business of History. The reading
of which, in my Opinion, is a thing that of all others we apply our selves unto
with the most differing, and uncertain Measures. I have read an hundred things
in Livy that another has not, or not taken notice of at least, and Plutarch has
read an hundred more there than ever I could find, or than peradventure that.
Author ever Writ. To some it is merely a Grammar Study, to others the very
Anatomy of Philosophy, by which the most secret, and abstruse parts of our
humane Nature are penetrated into. There are in Plutarch many long Elegy of
Plutarch.
Discourses very worthy to be carefully read and observed, for he is, in my
Opinion, of all other, the greatest Master in that kind of Writing; but
withal, there are a thousand others which he has only touched, and glanced
upon, where he only points with his Finger to direct us which way we may go if
we will, and contents himself sometimes with giving only one brisk hit in the
nicest Article of the Question; from whence we are to grope out the rest: as
for Example, where he says, That the Inhabitants of Asia came to be Vassals to
one only, for not having been able to pronounce one Syllable, which is, No.
Which Saying of his, gave perhaps matter and occasion to Boethius to write his
Voluntary Servitude. Even this but to see him pick out a light Action in a
man's Life, or a Word, that does not seem to be of any such Importance, is it
self a whole Discourse. It Is to our Prejudice that men of Understanding should
so immoderately affect Brevity; no doubt but their Reputation is the better by
its but in the mean time we are the worse. Plutarch had rather we should
applaud his Judgment, than commend his Knowledge, and had rather leave us with
an Appetite to read more, than glutted with that we have already read. He knew
very well, that a Man may say too much even upon the best Subjects, and that
Alexandrides did justly reproach him who made very elegant, but two long
Speeches to the, Ephori, when he said. O Stranger! that speak the things
thou ought to speak; but not after the manner that thou^ should speak
them. Such as have lean and spare Bodies stuff themselves out with Clothes; so
they who are defective in Matter, endeavor to make amends with Words. Humane
understanding is marvellously enlightened by daily Conversation with men, for we
are otherwise of our selves so stupid as to have our Sight limited to the
length of our own Noses. One asking Socrates of what Country he was, he did not
make Answer of Athens, but of the World; he whose Imagination is better
levelled, could carry further, embraced the whole World for his Country, and
extended his society and Friendship to all Mankind; not as we do, who look no
further' than our Feet. When the Vines of our Village are nip'd with the Frost,
the Parish Priest presently concludes, that the indignation of God is gone out
against all Humane Race, and that the Cannihals have already got the Pip. Who
is it, that seeing the bloody Havoc of these Civil Wars of ours, does not cry
out, That the machine of the World is near Dissolution, and that the Day of
Judgment is at hand; without considering, that many worse Revolutions have been
seen, and that, in the mean time, People are very merry in a thousand other
Parts of the Earth for all this? For my Part, considering, the License and
Impunity that always attend such Commotions, I admire they are so moderate, and
that there is more Mischief done. To him that feels the Hailstones p^^ter
about his Ears, the whole Hermisphear o^pears to be in Storm and Tempest; like
the ridiculous Saveyard, who said very gravely. That if that simple King of
France could have marrag'd his Fortune as he should have done, he might in time
have come to have been Steward of the Household to the Duke his Master: the
Follow could not, in his shallow Imagination, conceive that there could be any
thing greater than a Duke of Savoy. And in truth we are all of us insensibly in
this Error, an Error of a very great Train, and very pernicion^ Consequence.
But whoever shall represent to his Fancy, as in a Picture, that great Image of
our Mother Nature, pourtrayed in her full Majesty and Luster, whoever in her
Face shall read so general and so constant a Variety, whoever shall observe
himself in that Figure, and not himself but a whole Kingdom, no bigger than the
least Touch or Prick of a Pendl in comparison of the whole, that man alone is
able to value things according to their true Estimate and Grandeur. This great
World which some do yet multiply as several Species under one Genus, is the
Mirror wherein we are to behold our selves, to be able to know our selves as we
ought to do. In short, I would have this to be the Book my young Gentleman
should study with the most Attention; for so many Humors, so many Sects, so
many Judgments, Opinions, Laws, and Customs, teach us to judge a right of our
own, and inform our Understandings to discover their Imperfection and natural
Infirnity, which is no trivial Speculation. So many Mutations of States and
Kingdoms, and so many Turns and Revolutions of public Fortune, will make us
wise enough to make no great wonder of our own. So many great Names, so many
famous Victories and Conquests drowned and swallowed in Oblivion, render our
Hopes ridiculous of eternizing our Names by the taking of half a score light
Horse, or a paltry Turret, which only derives its Memory from its Ruin. The
Pride and Arrogance of so many foreign Pomps and Ceremonies, the tumorous
Majesty of so many Courts and Grandeurs, accustom and fortify our Sight
without Astonishment to behold and endure the luster of our own. So many
millions of men buried before us, encourage us not to fear to go seek so good
Company in the other World: and so of all the rest. Pythagoras was wont to say,
That our Life retires to the great and Populous Assembly of the Olympic Games,
wherein some exercise the Body, that they may carry away the Glory of the Prize
in those Contentions, and others carry Merchandise to sell for profit. There
are also some (and those none of the worst sort) who pursue no other Advantage
than only to look on, and consider how, and why every thing is done, and to be
unactive Spectators of the Lives of other men, thereby the better to judge of,
and to regulate their own; and indeed, from Examples, all the Instruction
cou^^'d in Philosophical Discourses; may naturally flow, to which all humane
Actions, as to their best Rule, ought to be especially directed: where a Man
shall be taught to know. Persius, Sat. 3.
-- Quid fas optare, quid asper
Utile nummus habet, patriae charisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri deceat, quem te Deus esse
Jussit, and humana qua part locatus es in re,
Quid sumus, aut quidnam victuri gignimu^.
What he may wish, what is Money's natural use,
What to be liberal is, and what profuse,
What God commands an honest Man should be,
And here on Earth to know in what Degree
That God has placed thee, what we are, and why,
He gave us Being, and Humanity.
What it is to know, and what to be ignorant, what ought to be the End and
Design of Study, what Valor, Temperance, and Justice are, the difference
betwixt Ambition and Avarice, Servitude and Subjection, License and Liberty, by
what token a Man may know the true and solid Contentation, how far Death,
Affliction, and Disgrace, are to be apprehended. (...). Aen. l. 6.
Et quo quemque modo fugiatque feratque laborem. And which way every one may know
Labor to avoid or undergo.
By what secret Springs we move, and the Reason of our various Agitations and
Irresolutions: for methinks the first Doctrine with which one should season his
Understanding, ought to be that which regulates his Manners and his Sense; that
teaches him to know himself, and how both well to die, and well to live.
Amongst the Liberal Sciences, let us begin with that that makes us free; not
that they do not all serve in some measure to the Instruction and Use of Life,
as all other things in some sort also do; but let us make choice of that which
directly and profess'dly serves to that end. If we are once able to restrain
the Offices of Humane Life within their just and natural Limits, we shall find
that most of the Sciences in use are of no great use to us, and even in those
that are, that there are many very unnecessary. Cavities and Dilatations which
we were better to let alone, and following Socrates his Direction, limit the
Course of our Studies to those things only where a true and real Utility and
Advantage are to be expected and found.

Horat. l. 1. Epist. 2.
-- Sapere aude,
Incipe vivendi, qui recte prorogat horam,
Rusticus expectat dum defluat ammis, at ille
Labitur, and labetur in omne volubilis aevum.
Dare to be wise; begin, who to their wrong,
The Hour of living well deferr too long,
Like Rustic Fools, sit with a patient Eye
Expecting when the murmuring Brook runs dry,
Whose Springs can, never fail, 'till the last Fire
Lick up the Ocean, and the World expire.
It Is a great foolery to teach our Children Propert. l. 4. Eleg. 1.
Quid moveant Piscis, animosaque signa Leonis,
Lotus, and Hesperia quid Capricornus aqua.
What influence Pisces have, over what the ray,
Of angery Leo bears the greatest sway,
Or Capricornus province, who still laves
His threatening Forehead in the Hesperian Waves.
the Knowledge of the Stars and the Motion of the eighth Sphere, before their
own.

Anacreon Ode 17.
(...)
(...).
How swift the seven Sisters Motions are,
Or the dull Churls how flow, what need I care.
Anaximenes writing to Pythagoras, To what purpose, said he, should I trouble
my self in searching out the Secrets of the Stars having Death or Slavery
continually before my Eyes? For the Kings of Persia were at that time preparing
to invade his Country. Every one ought to say the same, Being assaulted, as I
am by Ambition, Avarice, Temerity, and Superstition, and having within so many
other Enemies of Life, shall I go cudgel my Brains about the World's
Revolutions? After having taught him what will make him more wise and good, you
may then entertain him with the Elements of Logic, Physic, Geometry, and
Rhetoric, and the Science which he shall then himself most incline to, his
Judgment being beforehand formed and fit to choose, he will quickly make his
own. The Way of instructing him ought to be sometimes by Discourse, and
sometimes by reading, sometimes his Governor shall put the Author himself,
which he shall think most proper for him, into his Hands, and sometimes only
the Marrow and Substance of it; and if himself be not conversant enough in
Books to turn to all the fine Discourses the Book contains, there may some Man
of Learning be joined to him, that upon every occasion shall supply him with
what he desires, and stands in need of, to recommend to his Pupil. And who can
doubt, but that this way of teaching is much more easy and natural, than that
of Gaza? In which thy precepts are so intricate, and so hash, and the Words so
vain, lean, and insignificant, that there is no hold to be taken of them,
nothing that quickens and elevates the Wit and Fancy, whereas here the Mind has
what to feed upon and to digest: this Fruit therefore is not only without
comparison, much more fair and beautiful; but will also be much more early, and
ripe. It Is a thousand pities, that Masters should be at such a pass in this Age
of ours, that Philosophy, even with Men of Understanding, should be looked upon
as a vain, and fantastic Name, a thing of no use, no value, either in Opinion
or Effect, of which I think these lousy Ergotisms, and little Sophistry, by
prepossessing the Avenues unto it, are the cause. And People are much to blame
to represent it to Children for a thing of so difficult access, and with such a
frowning, grim, and formidable aspect: who has disguised it thus, with this
false, pale, and ghostly Countenance? There is nothing more airy, more gay,
more frolic, and I had like to have said, more wanton. She preaches nothing
but Feasting and Jollity; a melancholic thoughtful look shows that she does
not inhabit there. Demetrius the Grammarian finding in the Temple of Delphos a
Knot of Philosophers set chatting together, said to them, Either I am much
deceived, or by your cheerful and pleasant Countenances, you are engaged in no
very deep Discourse. To which one of them, Heracleon the Magician, replied,
It Is for such as are puzzled about enquiring whether the future Tense of the
Verb (...), be spelt with a double (...) or that hunt after the Derivation of
the Comparatives (...), and the Superlatives (...), to knit their Brows whilst
discoursing of their Science: but as to Philosophical Discourses, they always
divert and cheer up those they entertain, and never deject them or make them
sad.

Juven. Stat 9.
Deprendas animi tormenta latentis in aegro
Corpore, deprendas, and gaudia, sumit utrumque
Inde habitum facies.
The internal Anguish of a sick Man's mind
Your Eye may soon discern, and also find
The Joys of those in better Health that are,
For still the Face does the Minds Livery wear.
The Soul that entertains Philosophy, ought to be of such a Constitution of
Health, as to render the Body in like manner healthful too; she ought to make
her Tranquillity and Satisfaction shine so as to appear without, and her
Contentment ought to fashion the outward Behavior to her own Mould, and
consequently to fortify it with a graceful Confidence, an active Carriage, and
with a serene and contented Countenance. Cheerfulness a sign of Wisdom.
The most manifest sign of Wisdom is a continual Cheerfulness; her Estate is
like that of things in the Regions above the Moon, always clear and serene.
It Is Baraco and Baralipton that render their Disciples so dirty and ill
favored, and not she; they do not so much as know her but by Hearsay. It is
she that calms and appeases the Storms and Tempests of the Soul, and who
teaches Famine and Fevers to laugh and sing; and that, not by certain imaginary
Epicycles, but by natural and manifest Reasons. She has Virtue for her end;
which is not, as the Schoolmen say, situate upon the summity of a
perpendicular Rock, and an inaccessible Precipice. Such as have approached her,
find it quite contrary, to be seated in a fair, fruitful, and flourishing
Plain, from whence she easily discovers all things subjected to her; to which
Place any one may however arrive, if he know but the easiest and the nearest
way, thorough shady, green, and sweetly flourishing Walks and Avenues, by a
pleasant, easy, and smooth Descent, like that of the Celestial Arches. It Is
for not having frequented this supreme, this beautiful, triumphant, and
amiable, this equally delicious and courageous Virtue, this so professed and
implacable Enemy to Anxiety, Sorrow, Fear and Constraint, who, having Nature
for her Guide, has Fortune and Pleasure for her Companions, that they have gone
according to their own weak Imagination, and created this ridiculous, this
sorrowful, querulous, despiteful, threatening, terrible Image of it to
themselves and others, and placed it upon a solitary Rock amongst Thorns and
Brambles, and made of it a Hobgoblin to fright people from daring to approach
it. But the Governor that I would have, that is such a one as knows it to be
his Duty to possess his Pupil with as much or more Affection than Reverence to
Virtue, will be able to inform him, that the Poets have evermore accommodated
themselves to the Public Humor, and make him sensible, that the Gods have
planted more Toil and Sweat in the Avenues of the Cabinets of Venus, than those
of Minerva, which, when he shall once find him begin to apprehend, and shall
represent to him a Bradamanta or an Angelica for a Mistress, a natural, active,
generous, and not a mankind, but a manly Beauty, in comparison of a soft,
delicate, artificial, simpring, and affected form; the one disguised in the
Habit of an Heroic Youth, with her beautiful face set out in a glittering
Helmet, the other tricked up in Curls and Ribbons like a wanton Minx; he will
then look upon his own affection as brave and Masculine, when he shall choose
quite contrary to that Effeminate Shepherd of Phrygia. Such a Tutor will make a
Pupil to digest this new Doctrine, that the height and value of true Virtue
consists in the Facility, Utility, and Pleasure of its Exercise; so far from
Difficulty, that Boys, as well as Men, and the innocent as well as the subtle,
may make it their own; and it is by Order and good Conduct, and not by Force,
that it is to be acquired. Socrates, her first Minion, is so averse to all
manner of Violence, as totally to throw it aside, to slip into the more natural
Facility of her own Progress: It Is the Nursing-Mother of all humane Pleasures,
who in rendering them just, renders them also pure and permanent; in moderating
them, keeps them in Breath and Appetite; in interdicting those which she her
self refuses, whets our Desire to those that she allows; and, like a kind and
liberal Mother, abundantly allows all that Nature requires, even to Satiety, if
not to Lassitude; unless we will declaim, That the Regiment of Health stops the
Toper's Hand before he has drank himself Drunk, the Gluttons before he has
eaten to a Surfeit, and the Whore-masters Career before he have got the Pox, is
an Enemy to Pleasure. If the ordinary Fortune fail, and that she meet with an
indocile Disposition, she passes that Disciple by, and takes another, not so
fickle and unsteady as the other, which she forms wholly her own. She can be
Rich, be Potent and Wise, and knows how to lie upon soft Down, and perfumed
Quilts too: she loves Life, Beauty, Glory, and Health; but her proper and
peculiar Office is to know regularly how to make use of all these good things,
and how to part with them without Concern: an Office much more noble than
troublesome, and without which the whole Course of Life is unnatural,
turbulent, and deformed; and there it is indeed, that Men may justly represent
those Monsters upon Rocks and Precipices. If this Pupil shall happen to be of
so cross and contrary a Disposition that he had rather hear a Tale of a Tub
than the true Narrative of some noble Expedition, or some wise and learned
Discourse; who at the Beat of Drum, that excites the youthful Ardour of his
Companions, leaves that to follow another that calls to a Morris or the Beats,
and who would not wish, and find it more delightful, and more pleasing, to
return all Dust and Sweat victorious from (...) Battle, than from Tennis, or
from a Ball, with the Prize of those Exercises; I see no other Remedy, but that
he be bound Prentice in some good Town to learn to make mine'd Pyes, though he
were the Son of a Duke, according to Plato's Precept, That Children are to be
placed out, and disposed of, not according to the Wealth, Qualities, or
Condition of the Father, but according to the Faculties and the Capacity of
their own Soul. But since Philosophy is that which instructs us to live, and
that Infancy has there its Lessons as well as other Ages, why is it not
communicated to Children betimes? And why are they not more early initiated in
it?

Pers. Sat. 3.
Udum, and molle lutum est, nunc, nunc properandus, and acri
Fingendus sine fine rota.
The Clay is moist and soft, now, now make haste,
And form the Pitcher, for the Wheel turns fast.
They begin to teach us to live when we have almost done living. A hundred
Students have got the Poxbefore they have come to read Aristotle's Lecture of
Temperance. Cicero said, that though he should live two Men's Ages, he should
never find leisure to study the Lyrick Poets; and I find these Sophisters yet
more deplorably unprofitable. The Boy we would breed has a great deal less time
to spare; he owes but the first fifteen or sixteen Years of his Life to
Discipline, the Remainder is due to Action: let us therefore employ that short
time in necessary instruction. Away with the Logical Subtilties, they are
Abuses, things by which our Lives can never be amended: take me the plain
Philosophical Discourses, learn first how rightly to choose, and then rightly
to apply them, they are more easy to be understood than one of Bocace his
Novels; a Child from Nurse is much more capable of them, Aristotle's method of
Instructing Alexander the Great.
than of learning to read or to write. Philosophy has Discourses equally proper
for Childhood, as for the decrepid Age of Men; and I am of Plutarch's mind,
that Aristotle did not so much trouble his great Disciple with the Knack of
forming Syllogisms, or with the Elements of Geometry, as with infusing into him
good Precepts concerning Valor, Prowess, Magnanimity, Temperance, and the
Contempt of Fear; and with this Ammunition, sent him, whilst yet a Boy, with no
more than 30000 Foot, 4000 Horse, and but 42000 Crowns to subjugate the empire
of the whole Earth. For the other Arts and Sciences, Alexander says, he highly
indeed commended their Excellency and Quaintness, and had them in very great
Honor and Esteem, but not ravished with them to that degree, as to be tempted
to affect the Practice of them in his own Person.

Verse. Sat. 5.
-- Petite hinc juvenesque, senesque
Finem animo certum, miserique viatica canis.
Young men, and old, from hence your selves befriend,
For both your Minds, with some sure aim and end;
And both therein against the time to come,
Wretched old Age, get a Viaticum.
Epicurus, in the beginning of his Letter to Meniceus, says, that neither the
youngest should refuse to Philosophize, nor the eldest grow weary of it: and
who does otherwise, seem tacitly to imply, that either the time of living
happily is not yet come, or that it is already past: and yet for all that, I
would not have this Pupil of ours imprisoned, and made a Slave to his Book; nor
would I have him given up to the Morosity, and melancholic Humor, of a sour,
ill-natured Pedant. I would not have his Spirit cowed and subdued, by applying
him to the Rack, and tormenting him as some do, 14 or 15 Hours a day, and so
make a Pack-Horse of him. Neither should I think it good, when, by reason of a
solitary and melancholic Complexion, he is discovered to be much addicted to
his Book, to nourish that Humor in him, for that renders them unfit for Civil
Conversation, and diverts them from better Employments. And how many have I
seen in my time totally brutified by an immoderate Thirst after Knowledge?
Carneades was so besotted with it, that he would not find time so much as to
comb his Head, or to pare his Nails; neither would I have his generous Manners
spoiled and corruptted by the Incivility and Barbarity of those of another. The
French Wisdom has anciently been turned into Proverb, Early, but of no
Continuance; and in truth, we yet see, that nothing can be more ingenious and
pretty than the Children of France; but they ordinarily deceive the Hope and
Expectation has been conceived of them; and grown up to be men, have nothing
extraordinary, or worth taking notice of. I have heard men of good
Understanding say, these Colleges of ours to which we send our young People
(and of which we have but too many) make them such Animals as they are. But to
our little Monsieur, a Closet, a Garden, the Table, his Bed, Solitude and
Company, Morning and Evening, all Hours shall be the same, and all Places to
him a Study; for philosophy, who as the Formatrix of Judgment and Manners,
shall be his principal Lesson, has that privilege to have a hand in every
thing. The orator Isocrates, being at a Feast entreated to speak of his Art,
All the Company were satisfied with, and commended his Answer; It is not now a
time, said he, to do what I can do; and that which it is now time to do, I
cannot do, For to make Orations and Rhetorical Disputes in a Company met
together to laugh and make good cheer, had been very unseasonable and improper,
and as much might have been said of all the other Sciences: But as to what
concerns Philosophy, that part of it at least that treats of Man, and of his
Offices and Duties, it has been the joint Opinion of all wise men, that, out of
respect to the sweetness of her Conversation, she is ever to be admitted in all
Sports and Entertainments. And Plato, having invited her to his Feast, we shall
see after how gentle and obliging a manner, accommodated both to Time and
Place, she entertained the Company, though in a Discourse of the highest and
most important nature. Horat. l. 1. Epist. 1.
Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque,
Et neglecta aeque pueris, senibusque nocebit.
It profits poor and rich alike, but when
Neglected, to old and young as hurtful then.
By which method of Instruction, my young Pupil will be much more, and better
employ^d than those of the College are: but as the steps we take in walking to
and fro in a Gallery, tho three times as many, do not tire a man so much as
those we employ in a formal Journey, so our Lesson, as it were accidentally
occurring, without any set obligation of Time or Place, and falling naturally
into every action, will insensibly insinuate it self. By which means our very
Exercises and Recreations, Running, Wrestling, Music, Dancing, Hunting,
Riding, and Fencing, will prove to be a good part of our study. Behavior.
I would have his outward fashion and mien, and the disposition of his Limbs
formed at the same time with his Mind. It Is not a Soul, it is not a Body that we
are training up, but a man, and we ought not to divide him. And, as Plato says,
we are not to fashion one without the other, but make them draw together like
two Horses harnessed to a Coach. By which Saying of his, does he not seem to
allow more time for, and to take more care of Exercises for the Body, Exercises.
and to believe that the Mind in a good Proportion does her Business at the
same time too? As to the rest, this Method of Education ought to be carried on
with a severe sweetness quite contrary to the Practice of our Pedants, who,
Severity an Enemy to Education.
instead of tempting and alluring Children to Letters by apt and gentle ways,
do in truth present nothing before them but Rods and Ferula's, Horror and
Cruelty. Away with this Violence! away with this Compulsion! than which, I
certainly believe nothing more dulls and degenerates a well-descended Nature.
If you would have him apprehend shame and chastisement, do not harden him to
them. Inure him to Heat and Cold, to Wind and Sun, and to Dangers that he ought
to despise. Wean him from all effeminacy, and delicacy in Clothes and Lodging,
Eating and Drinking; accustom him to every thing, that he may not be a Sir
Paris, a Carpet-Knight, but a sinewy, hardy, and vigorous young man. I have
ever from a Child to the age wherein I now am, been of this opinion, and am
still constant to it. But amongst other things, the strict Government of most
of our Colleges has evermore displeased me, and peradventure they might have
erred less perniciously on the indulgent side. It Is the true House of
Correction of Imprisoned youth. They are taught to be debauched, by being
punished before they are so. Do but come in when they are about their Lesson,
and you shall hear nothing but the outcries of Boys under execution, with the
thund ring noise of their Pedagogues, drunk with Fury, to make up the Consort.
A very pretty way this! to tempt these tender and timorous Souls to love their
Book, with a furious Countenance, and a Rod in hand! A cursed and pernicious
way of Proceeding! Besides what Quintilian has very well observed, that this
insolent Authority is often attended by very dangerous Consequences, and
particularly our way of Chastising. How much more decent would it be to see
their Classes strewn with green Leaves and fine flowers, than with the bloody
Stumps of Birch and Willows? Were it left to my ordering, I should paint the
School with the Pictures of Joy and Gladness; Flora, and the Graces, as the
Philosopher Speusippus did his; that where their Profit is, they might there
have their Pleasure too. Such Viands as are proper and wholesome for Children,
should be seasoned with Sugar, and such as are dangerous to to them, with Gall.
A Man should admire to see how sollicitous Plato is in his Laws concerning the
Gayety and Diversion of the Youth of his City, and how much he enlarges himself
upon their Races, Sports, Songs, Leaps, and Dances; of which, he says, that
Antiquity has given the ordering and Patronage particularly to Apollo, Minerva,
and the Muses. He insists long upon, and is very particular in giving
innumerable Precepts for Exercises; but as to the Lettered Sciences, says very
little, and only seems particularly to recommend Poesy upon the Account of
Music. All Singularity in our Manners and Conditions, is by all means to be
avoided as inconsistent with civil Society. Who would not be astonished at so
strange a Constitution as that of Demophon, Steward to Alexander the Great, who
sweat in the Shade, and shivered in the Sun? I have seen those who have run
from the smell of a mellow Apple with greater Precipitation than from a
Harquebuze Shot; others run away from a Mouse; others vomit at the sight of
Cream; others ready to swoon at the sight of a Cat, as Germanicus, who could
neither endure the Sight nor the Crowing of a Cock. I will not deny, but that
there may peradventure be some occult Cause and natural Aversion in these
Cases; but certainly a Man might conquer it, if he took it in time. Precept has
in this wrought so effectually upon me, though not without some Endeavor on my
part, I consess, that Beer accepted, my Appetite accommodates its self
indifferently to all sorts of Diet. Young Bodies are supple, one should
therefore in that Age bend and ply them to all Fashions and Customs: and
provided a Man can contain the Appetite and the Will within their due limits,
let a Young Man, a Gods Name, be rendered fit for all Nations and all Companies,
even to Debauchery and Excess if occasion be; that is, where he shall do it out
of Complacency to the Customs of the Place. Let him be able to do every thing,
but love to do nothing but what is good. The Philosophers themselves do not
justify Callisthenes for forfeiting the Favor of his Master Alexander the
Great, by refusing to pledge him a Cup of Wine. Let him laugh, play and drink
with his Prince: nay I would have him, even in his Debauches, too hard for the
rest of the Company, and to excel his Companions in Ability and Vigor, and
that he may not give over doing it, either thorought Defect of Power or
Knowledge how to do it, but for want of Will. Multum interest, Seneca. Epist.
60.
utrum peccare quis nolit, aut nesciat; There is a vast Difference betwixt
forbearing to sin, and not knowing how to sin. I thought I past a Complement
upon a Lord, as free from those Excesles as any man whatever in France, by
asking him before a great deal of very good Company, how many times in his Life
he had been drunk in Germany, in the time of his being there about his
Majesty's Affairs; which he also took as it was intended, and made Answer,
Three times. and withal, told us the whole Story of his Debauches. I know
some; who for want of this Faculty, have found a great Inconvenience by it in
negotiating, with that Nation. I have often with great Admiration reflected
upon the wonderful Constitution of Alcibiades, who so easily could transfrom
himself to so various Fashions without any Prejudice to his Health; one while
out-doing the Persian Pemp and Luxury, and another, the Lacedaemonian Austerity
and Frugality, as reformed in Sparta, as voluptuous in Ionia.

Horat. l. 1. Epist. 17.
Omnis Aristippum decuit color, and status, and res. All Shapes and Colors you
can Name
Aristippus well became.
I would have my Pupil to be such a one,
Id. Ibid.
-- Quem duplici panno patientia velat,
Mirabor vitae via si conversa decebit,
Personamque feret non inconcinnus utramque.
Whom Patience in patched Clothes does meanly shade,
Where a new Fortune a new Suit has made,
I shall admire if gracefully he can
The old Beggar hide in the new Gentleman.
These are my Lessons, and he who puts them in Practice shall reap more
advantage than he who has had them read to him only, and only knows them. If
you see him, you hear him: if you hear him, you see him. God forbid, says one
in Plato, that to Philosophize were only to read a great many Books, and to
learn the Arts. Cic. Tusc. 4.
Hanc amplissimam omnium artium been vivendi disciplinam, vita magis quam
literis persequuti sunt. They have more illustrated and improved this
Discipline of living well, which of all Arts is the greatest, by their Lives,
than by their Reading. Leo, Prince of the Phliasians, asking Heraclides
Ponticus of what Art or Science he made Profession; I know, said he, neither
Art nor Science, but I am a Philosopher. One reproaching Diogenes, that being
ignorant, he should pretend to Philosophy; I therefore, answered he, pretend to
it with so much the more reason. Hegesias entreated that he would read a
certain Book to him; you are pleasant, said he, you choose those Figs that are
true and natural, and not those that are painted; why do you not also choose
Exercises which are naturally true, rather than those written and prescribed? A
Man cannot so soon get his Lesson by Heart, as he may practice it: he will
repeat it in his Actions. We shall discover if there be Prudence in his
Exercises, if there be Sincerity and Justice in his Deportments, if there be
Grace and Judgment in his Speaking, if there be constancy in his Sickness, if
there be Modesty in his Mirth, Temperance in his Pleasures, Order in his
Economy, and Indifferency in his Palate, whether what he eats or drinks be
Flesh or Fish, Wine or Water. Qui disciplinam suam non ostentationem scientiae,
Cic. Ibid.
sed legem vitae putet, quique obtemperet ipse sibi, and decretis pareat; who
considers his own Discipline, not as a vain Ostentation of Science, but as a
Law and Rule of Life; and who obeys his own Decrees, and observes that Regiment
he has prescribed to himself. The Conduct of our Lives is the true mirror of
our Doctrine. Zeupidamus, to one who asked him, Why the Lacedaemonians did not
commit their Constitutions of Chivalry to Writing, and deliver them to their
Young Men to read, made Answer, That it was because they would inure them to
Action, and not amuse them with Words: with such a one, after fifteen or
sixteen Years study, compare one of our College Latinists, who has thrown away
so much time in nothing but learning to speak. The World is nothing but Babble;
and I hardly ever yet saw that Man who did not rather prate too much, than
speak too little; and yet half of our Age is embezled this way. We are kept
four or five Years to learn Words only, and to tack them together into Clauses;
as many more to make Exercises, and to divide a continued Discourse into so
many Parts; and other five Years at least to learn succinctly to mix and
interweave them after a subtle and intricate manner. Let us leave it to the
learned Professors. Going one Day to Orleans, I met in the Plain on this side
Clery, two Pedants traveling toward Bourdeaux, about fifty Paces distant from
one another, and a good way further behind them, I discovered a Troop of Horse,
with a Gentleman in the Head of them, which was the late Monsteur le Compte de
la Rochefoucaut; one of my People inquired of the foremost of these Domines,
who that Gentleman was that came after him, who having not seen the Train that
followed after, and I thinking he meant his Companion, pleasantly answered, A
pleasant Answer of a Pedant.
He is not a Gentleman, Sir, he is a Grammarian, and I am a Logician. Now we
who quite contrary, do not here pretend to breed a Grammarian, or a Logician,
but a complete Gentleman, let us leave them to throw away their Time at their
own Fancy: our Business lies elsewhere. Let but our Pupil be well furnished
with Things, Words will follow but too fast; he will pull them after him if
they do not voluntarily follow. I have observed some to make Excuses, that they
cannot express themselves, and pretend to have their Fancies full of a great
many very fine things, which yet, for want of Elocution, they cannot utter; a
mere Shift, and nothing else. Will you know what I think of it? I think they
are nothing but shadows of some imperfect Images and Conceptions that they know
not what to make of within, nor consequently bring them out: they do not yet
themselves understand what they would be at, and if you but observe how they
haggle, and stammer upon the point of Parturition, you will soon conclude, that
their Labor is not to Delivery, but about Conception, and that they are but
licking their formless Embryo. For my part, I hold, and Socrates is positive in
it, That whoever has in his Mind a spritely and clear Imagination, he will
express it well enough in one kind or another, and, though he were Dumb, by
Signs.

Hor. de Art Poetic.
Verbaque praevisant rem non invita sequentur. When once a thing conceived is in
the Wit,
Words soon present themselves to utter it.
And as another as poetically says in Prose, cum Res Animum occupavere, Seneca.
Verba ambiunt. When things are once formed in the Fancy, Words offer
themselves in muster: and this other, ipsae res Verba rapiunt. The things
themselves force Words to express them. Cicero de fin. l. 3.
He knows nothing of Ablative, Conjunctive, Substantive, or Grammar, no more
than his Lacquey, or a Fish-Wife of the Petit-Pont; and yet these will give you
a Belly full of talk, if you will hear them, and peradventure shall trip as
little in their Language as the best Masters of Art in France. He knows no
Rhetoric, nor how in a Preface to bribe the Benevolence of the courteous
Reader; neither does he care, nor is it very necessary he should know it.
Indeed all this Decoration of Painting is easily obscured and put down by the
Luster of a simple and blunt Truth; these fine Flourishes serve only to amuze
the Vulgar of themselves incapable of more solid and nutritive Diet, as Afer
does very evidently demonstrate in Tacitus. The Ambassadors of Samos, prepared
with a long and Elegant Oration, came to Cleomenes King of Sparta, to incite
him to a War against the Tyrant Polycrates, who after he had heard their
Harangue with great Gravity and Patience, gave them this short Answer; As to
the Exordium, I remember it not, nor consequently the middle of your Speech,
but for what concerns your Conclusion, I will not do what you desire; A very
pretty Answer this, methinks, and a pack of learned Orators no doubt most
sweetly confounded. And what did this other say? The Athenians were to choose
one of two Architects for a Surveyor to a very great Building they had
designed, of which, the first, a pert affected Fellow, offered his Service in a
long premeditated Discourse upon the Subject, and by his Oratory inclined the
Voices of the People in his Favor; but the other in three Words, Lords of
Athens, All that this Man has said I Will do. When Cicero was in the height
and heat of his Eloquence, many were struck with Admiration; but Cato did only
laugh at it, saying, We have a pleasant Ridiculum Consulem.
Consul. Let it go before, or come after, a good Sentence, or a thing well
said, is always in Season, if it neither suit well with what went before nor
has any very good Coherence with what follows after, it is however good in it
self. I am none of those who think that good Rhyme makes a good Poem. Let him
make short long, and long short if it will, it is no great matter; if there be
invention, and that the Wit and Judgment have well performed their Offices, I
will say here is a good Poet, but an ill Rhymer. Hor. ser. lib. sat. 4.
Emunctae naris, durus componere versus. His Fancy's rich, his Sense is clear
In Verse, though he has no good Ear.
Let a Man, says Horace, divest his work of all Ornaments and Measure. Tempora
certa, modosque, and quod prius ordine verbum est,
Posterius faciat, praeponens ultima primis,
Invenias etiam disjecti membra Poetae:
Let Tense, and Mood, and Words be all misplaced,
Those last that should be first, those first the last,
Tho all things be thus shuffled out of Frame,
You Will yet a Poem find in According to that of Doctor Done, D. of S. Paul's.
Anagram.
He will never the more forfeit his Praise for that the very Pieces will be
fine by themselves. Menander's Answer had this meaning, who being reproved by a
Friend, the time drawing on at which he had precisely promised a Comedy that he
had not yet fallen in Hand with it, it is made, and ready, said he, all to the
Verses. Having contrived the Subject, and disposed the Scenes in his Fancy, he
took little care for the rest. Since Ronsard and du Bellay have given
Reputation to our French Poesy, every little Dabler, for ought I see, swells
his Words as high, and makes his Cadences very near as harmonious as they. Plus
sonat, Seneca, Epist. 40.
quam valet; There were never so many Poetasters as now, but though they find
it no hard matter to Rhyme as musically as they, they yet fall infinitely short
of imitating the brave Descriptions of the one, and the curious Invention of
the other. But what will become of our young Gentleman, if he be attacked with
the Sophistick Subtilty of some Syllogism? A Westphalia Ham makes a Man drink,
drink quenches Thirst; therefore a Westphalia Ham quenches Thirst. Why let him
laugh at it, and it will be more Discretion to do so, than to go about to
answer it, or let him borrow this pleasant Evasion from Aristippus, Why should
I trouble my self to untye that, which, bound as it is, gives me so much
trouble? One offering at this dialectick Juggling against Cleanthes, Chrysippus
took him short, saying, Reserve these Baubles to play with Children, and do not
by such Fooleries, divert the serious Thoughts of a man of Years. If these
ridiculous Subtilties, contorta, and aculeata Sophismata, as Cicero calls them,
Cicero Acad. l. 4.
are designed to possess him with an Untruth, they are then dangerous, but if
they signify no more than only to make him laugh, I do not see why they should
be so considerable, that a Man need to be fortified against them. There are
some so ridiculous, as to go a Mile out of their way to hook in a fine Word:
^uin. l. 8.
Aut qui non verba rebus aptant, sed res arcessunt, quibus verba conveniant;
who do not fit Words to the Subject, but seek out for things quite from the
Purpose, Sen. Ep. 59.
to fit those Words they are so enamored of. And as another says, Qui alicujus
verbi decore placentis vocentur ad id, quod non proposuerant scribere; Who by
their fondness of some fine sounding Word, are tempted to something they had no
Intention to treat of. I for my part rather bring in a fine Sentence by Head
and Shoulders to fit my Purpose, than divert my Designs to hunt after a
Sentence. On the contrary, words are to serve, and to follow a Man's Purpose;
and let Gascon come in play where French will not do. I would have things so
exceed, and wholly possess the Imagination of him that hears, that he should
have something else to do, than to think of Words. The way of speaking that I
love, is natural and plain, as well in Writing as Speaking, and a sinewy and
significant way of expressing a Man's self, short and pithy, and not so elegant
and artificial as prompt and vehement. Epist. Lucani.
Haec demum sapiet dictio, quae feriet. Most Weight and Wisdom does that
Language bear,
Does pierce and captivate the Hearers Ear.
Rather hard than harsh, free from Affectation; irregular, incontiguous, and
bold, where every Piece makes up an entire Body; not like a Pedant, a Preacher,
or a Pleader, but rather a Souldier-like Style, as Suetonius calls that of
Julius Caesar; and yet I see no reason why he should call it so. I have never
yet been apt to imitate the negligent Garb, which is yet observable among the
Young Men of our time, to wear my Cloak on one Shoulder, my Bonnet on one side,
and one Stocking in something more Disorder than the other, which seems to
express a kind of manly Disdain of those exotic Ornaments, and a Contempt of
Art; but I find that negligence of much better use in the form of Speaking.
Affectation unbecoming a Courtier.
All Affectation, particularly in the French Gayety and Freedom, is ungraceful
in a Courtier, and in a Monarchy every Gentleman ought to be fashioned
according to the Court Model; for which reason, an easy and natural Negligence
does well. I no more like a Web where the Knots and Seems are to be seen, than
a fine Proportion, so delicate, Seneca, Epist. 40.
that a man may tell all the Bones and Veins. Quae veritati operam dat oration,
incomposita sit, and simplex. Quis accurate loquitur, nisi qui vult putide
loqui? Let the Language that is dedicated to Truth be plain and unaffected. For
who studies to speak quaintly and accurately, that does not at the same time
design to perplex his Auditory? That Eloquence prejudices the Subject it would
advance, that wholly attracts us to it self. And as in our outward Habit, it is
a ridiculous Effeminacy to distinguish our selves by a particular and
unpracticed Garb or Fashion; so in Language, to study new Phrases, and to
affect Words that are not of current use, proceeds from a Childish and
Scholastic Ambition. Shall I be bound to speak no other Language than what is
spoken in the Courts of Paris? Aristophanes the Grammarian was a little out,
when he reprehended Epicurus for this plain way of delivering himself, the End
and Design of his Oratory being only Perspicuity of Speech, and to be
understood. The Imitation of Words by its own Facility, immediately disperses
it self thorough a whole People: but the imitation of inventing, and fitly
applying those Words, is of a slower Progress. The Generality of Readers, for
having found a like Robe, very mistakingly imagine they have the same Body and
inside too, whereas Force and Sinews are never to be borrowed, the Gloss and
outward Ornament, that is, Words and Elocution, may. Most of those I converse
with, speak the same Language I here write; but whether they think the same
Thoughts I cannot say. The Athenians (says Plato) are observed to study length
and elegancy of Speaking; the Lacedaemonians to affect Brevity; and those of
Creet to aim more at the Fecundity of Conception than the Fertility of Speech;
and these are the best. Zenon used to say, that he had two sorts of Disciples,
one that he called (...), curious to learn things, and these were his
Favorites; the other, (...), that cared for nothing but Words: not that fine
Speaking is not a very good and commendable Quality; but not so excellent and
so necessary as some would make it; and I am scandalized that our whole Life
should be spent in nothing else. I would first understand my own Language, and
that of my Neighbors with whom most of my Business and Conversation lies. No
doubt but Greek and Latin are very great Ornaments, and of very great use, but
we buy them too dear: I will here discover one way, which also has been
experimented in my own Person, by which they are to be had better cheap, and
such may make use of it as will. My Father having made the most precise Enquiry
that any man could possibly make amongst Men of the greatest Learning and
Judgment, of an exact method of Education, was by them cautioned of the
Inconvenience then in use, and made to believe, that the tedious time we
applied to the learning of the Tongues of them who had them for nothing, was
the sole cause we could not arrive to that Grandeur of Soul, and Perfection of
Knowledge with the ancient Greeks and Romans: I do not however believe that to
be the only Cause: but the Expedient my Father found out for this, was, that in
my Infancy, and before I began to speak, he committed me to the care of a
German, The Author's Education.
who since died a famous Physician in France, totally ignorant of our Language,
but very fluent, and a great Critic in Latin. This Man, whom he had fetched
out of his own Country, and whom he entertained with a very great Salary for
this only end, had me continually in his Arms: to whom there were also joined
two others of the same Nation, but of inferior Learning, to attend me, and
sometimes to relieve him; who all of them entertained me with no other Language
but Latin. As to the rest of his Family, it was an inviolable Rule, that
neither Himself, nor my Mother, Man nor Maid, should speak any thing in my
Company, but such Latin Words as every one had learnt only to gabble with me.
It is not to be imagined how great an advantage this proved to the whole
Family, my Father, and my Mother, by this means learning Latin enough to
understand it perfectly well, and to speak it to such a Degree, as was
sufficient for any necessary Use; as also those of the Servants did, who were
most frequent with me. To be short, we did Latin it at such a Rate, that it
overflowed to all the Neighboring Villages, where there yet remain, that have
established themselves by Custom, several Latin Appellations of Artizans and
their Tools. As for what concerns my self, I was above six years of Age before
I understood either French or Perigordin, any more than Arabic, and without
Art, Book, Grammar, or Precept, Whipping, or the expense of a Tear, had by that
time learned to speak as pure Latin as my Master himself. If (for Example) they
were to give me a Theme after the College fashion, they gave it to others in
French, but to me they were of necessity to give it in the worst Latin, to turn
it into that which was pure and good; and Nicholas Grouchi, who writ a Book de
Comitiis Romanorum; William Guirentes, who has writ a Comment upon Aristotle;
George Bucanan, that great Scotch Poet, and Marcus Antonius Muretus (whom both
France and Italy have acknowledged for the best Orator of his time) my
domestic Tutors, have all of them often told me, that I had in my Infancy that
Language so very fluent and ready, that they were afraid to enter into
Discourse with me; and particularly Bucanan, whom I since saw attending the
late Marshall de Brissac, then told me, that he was about to write a Treatise
of Education, the Example of which, he intended to take from mine, for he was
then Tutor to that Count de Brissac, who afterward proved so valiant and so
brave a Gentleman. As to Greek, of which I have but a very little Smattering,
my Father also designed to have it taught me by a Trick; but a new one, and by
way of sport; tossing our Declensions to and fro, after the manner of those,
who by certain Games at Tables and Chess, learn Geometry and Arithmetic: for
he, amongst other Rules, had been advised to make me relish Science and Duty by
an unforced Will, and of my own voluntary motion, and to educate my Soul in all
Liberty and Delight, without any Severity or Constraint. Which also he was an
Observer of to such a degree even of Superstition, if I may say so, that some
being of Opinion, it did trouble and disturb the Brains of Children suddenly to
wake them in the Morning, and to snatch them violently and over hastily from
Sleep, (wherein they are much more profoundly envolv'd than we) he only caused
me to be waked by the Sound of some musical Instrument, and was never
unprovided of a Musician for that purpose: by which Example you may judge of
the rest, this alone being sufficient to recommend both the Prudence and the
Affection of so good a Father; who therefore is not to be blamed if he did not
reap Fruits answerable to so exquisite a Culture: of which, two things were the
cause. First, a steril and improper Soil: for, tho I was of a strong and
healthful Constitution, and of a Disposition tolerably sweet and tractable; yet
I was withal so heavy, idle, and indisposed, that they could not rouse me from
this Stupidity to any Exercise of Recreation, nor get me out to play. What I
saw, I saw clearly enough, and under this lazy Complexion nourished a bold
Imagination, and Opinions above my Age. I had a slothful Wit, that would go no
faster than it was led, a slow Understanding, a languishing Invention, and
after all, incredible defect of Memory, so that it is no wonder, if from all
these nothing considerable can be extracted. Secondly, (like those, who,
impatient of a long and steady cure, submit to all sorts of Prescriptions and
Receipts) the good Man being extremely timorous of any way failing in a thing
he had so wholly set his Heart upon, suffered himself at last to be overruled
by the common Opinion, and complying with the method of the time, having no
more those Persons he had brought out of Italy, and who had given him the first
Model of Education, about him, he sent me at six Years of Age to the College of
Guienne, at that time the best and most flourishing in France. And there it was
not possible to add any thing to the care he had to provide me the most able
Tutors, with all other Circumstances of Education, reserving also several
particular Rules contrary to the College Practice; but so it was, that wit^ all
these Precautions, it was a College still. My Latin immediately grew corrupt,
of which also by Discontinuance I have since lost all manner of use: so that
this new way of Institution served me to no other end, than only at my first
coming to prefer me to the first Forms: for at thirteen Years old, that I came
out of the College, I had run thorough my whole Course (as they call it) and in
truth without any manner of Improvement, that I can honestly brag of, in all
this time. The first thing that gave me any Taste of Books, was the Pleasure I
took in reading the Fables of Ovid's Metamorphoses, and with them I was so
taken, that being but Seven or Eight Years old, I would steal from all other
Divertisements to read them, both by reason that this was my own natural
Language, the easiest Book that I was acquainted with, and for the Subject, the
most accommodated to the Capacity of my Age: for as for Lancelot du Lake,
Amadis de Gaul, Huon of Bourdeaux, and such Trumpery, which Children are most
delighted with, I had never so much as heard their Names, no more than I yet
know what they contain; so exact was the Discipline wherein I was brought up.
But this was enough to make me neglect the other Lessons were prescribed me;
and here it was infinitely to my advantage, to have to do with an understanding
Tutor, who very well knew discreetly to connive at this and other Truantries of
the same nature; for by this means I ran thorough Virgil's Aeneids, Terence,
Plautus, and some Italian Comedies, allured by the Softness and Pleasure of the
Subject; whereas had he been so foolish as to have taken me off this Diversion,
I do really believe, I had brought nothing away from the College but a Hatred
of Books, as almost all our young Gentlemen do: but he carried himself very
discreetly in that Business, seeming to take no notice, and allowing me only
such time as I could steal from my other regular, and yet moderate Studies,
which whetted my Appetite to devour those Books I was naturally so much in love
with before. For the chief things my Father expected from their Endeavor to
whom he had delivered me for Education, was Affability of Manners, and good
Humor; and, to say the truth, mine had no other Vice but Sloth and want of
Mettle. There was no fear that I would no ill, but that I would do nothing; no
body suspected that I would be wicked, but useless; they foresaw an Idleness,
but no Malice in my Nature; and I find it falls out accordingly. The Complaints
I hear of my self are these, He is idle, cold in the Offices of Friendship and
Relation, and remiss in those of the Public; he is too particular, he is too
proud: but the most Injurious do not say, Why has he taken such a thing? Why
has he not paid such a one? But why does he part with nothing? Why does he not
give? And I should take it for a Favor that Men would expect from me no
greater Effects of Supererogation than these. But they are unjust to exact from
me what I do not owe; and in condemning me to it, they Efface the Gratification
of the Act, and deprive me of the Gratitude that would be due to me upon such a
Bounty; whereas the active Benefit ought to be of so much the greater Value
from my hands, by how much I am not passive that way at all I can the more
freely dispose of my Fortune the more it is mine, and of my self, the more I am
my own. Nevertheless, if I were good at setting out my own Actions, I could
peradventure very well repel these Reproaches, and could give some to
understand, that they are not so much offended, that I do not enough, as that I
am able to do a great deal more than I do. Yet for all this heavy Disposition
of mine, my Mind, when retired into it self, was not altogether idle, nor
wholly deprived of solid Inquisition, nor of certain and infallible Results
about those Objects it could comprehend, and could also without any Helps
digest them; but amongst other things, I do really believe, it had been totally
impossible to have made it to submit by Violence and Force. Shall I here
acquaint you with on^ Faculty of my youth? I had great Boldness and Assurance
of Countenance, and to that a Flexibility of Voice and Gesture to any Part I
undertook to act. Vir^. Bu^ol. 8.
Alter ab undecimo tum me vix ceperat annus. For the next Year to my eleventh had
Me but a very few days older made.
When I played the chiefest Parts in the Latin Tragedies of Bucanan, Guerente,
and Muretus, that were presented in our College of Guienne, with very great
Applause: wherein Andreas Goveanus, our Principal, as in all other Parts of his
Undertaking, was without Comparison, the best of that Employment in France; and
I was looked upon as one of the chief Actors. It Is an Exercise that I do not
disapprove in young People of Condition, and have since seen our Princes, by
the Example of the Ancients, in Person handsomely and commendably perform these
Exercises; and it was moreover allowed to persons of the greatest Quality to
profess, and make a Trade of it in Greece. Aristoni Tragico actori rem aperit:
Lib. l. 6. 26.
huic and genus, and fortuna honesta erant: nec Ars, quia nihil tale apud
Graecos pudori est ea deformabat. He imparted this Affair to Aristo the
Tragedian, a man of a good Family and Fortune, which nevertheless, did neither
of them receive any Blemish by that Profession; nothing of that kind being
reputed a Disparagement in Greece. Nay, I have always taxed those with
Impertinence who condemn these Entertainments, and with Injustice those who
refuse to admit such Comedians as are worth seeing into the good Towns, and
grudge the People that public Diversion. Well-governed Corporations take care
to assemble their Citizens, not only to the solemn Duties of Devotion, but also
to Sports and Spectacles. They find Society and Friendship augmented by it; and
besides, can there possibly be allowed a more orderly and regular Diversion
than what is performed in the Sight of every one, and very often in the
Presence of the Supreme Magistrate himself? And I, for my part, should think it
reasonable, that the Prince should sometimes gratify his People at his own
Expense; and that in great and populous Cities there might be Theaters crected
for such Entertaiments, if but to divert them from worse and more private
Actions. But, to return to my Subject, there is nothing like alluring the
Appetite and Affection, otherwise you make nothing but so many Asses laden
with Books, and by virtue of the Lash, give them their Pocket full of Learning
to keep; whereas, to do well, you should not only lodge it with them, but make
them to espouse it.

CHAP. XXVI.
That it is Folly to measure Truth and Error by our own Capacity.
It Is not perhaps without Reason, that we attribute Facility of Belief, and
easiness of Persuasion, to Simplicity and Ignorance, and I have heard the
Belief compared to the Impression of a Seal stamped upon the Soul, which by how
much softer and of less resistance it is, is the more easy to be imposed upon.
Ut necesse est lancem in libra ponderibus impositis, de primis sic animum
perspicuis ^edere; As the Scale of the Balance must give way to the Weight that
presses it down, so the mind must of necessity yield to Demonstration; and by
how much the Soul is more empty, and without Counterpoise, with so much greater
Facility it dips under the weight of the first Persuasion. And this is the
reason that Children, the common People, Women, and sick Folks, are most apt to
be led by the Ears. But then on the other side, it is a very great Presumption,
to slight and condemn all things for false that do not appear to us likely to
be true; which is the ordinary Vice of such as fancy themselves wiser than
their Neighbors. I was my self once one of those; and if I heard talk of dead
Folks walking, of Prophecies, Enchantments, Witchcrafts, or any other Story, I
had no mind to believe, Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque Thessala;
Dreams, Magic Terrors, Wonders, Sorceries,
Hob-goblins, or Thessalian Prodigies.
I presently pitied the poor People that were abused by these Follies; whereas
I now find, that I my self was to be pitied as much at least as they; not that
Experience has taught me any thing to convince my former Opinion, though my
Curiosity has endeavored that way; but Reason has instructed me, that thus
Resolutely to condemn any thing for false and impossible, is arrogantly and
impiously to circumscribe and limit the Will of God, and the Power of Nature,
within the Bounds of my own Capacity, than which no folly can be greater. If we
give the Names of Monster and Miracle to every thing our Reason cannot
comprehend, how many are continually presented before our Eyes? Let us but
consider through what Clouds, and as it were groping in the Dark, our Teachers
lead us to the Knowledge of most of the things we apply our Studies to, and we
shall find that it is rather Custom than Knowledge that takes away the Wonder,
and renders them easy and familiar to us. Lucret. l. 2.
Jam nemo cessus, saturusque videndi,
Suspicere in Caeli dignatur lucide Templa.
Already glutted with the Sight, now none
Heaven's lucid Temples deigns to look upon.
And that if those things were now newly presented to us, we should think them
as strange and incredible, if not more than any others.

Id. ibid.
-- Si nunc primum mortalibus adsint
Ex improviso, seu sint objecta repent,
Nil magis his rebus poterat mirabile dici,
Aut minus ante quod auderent fore credere gentes.
Where things are suddenly, and by surprise
Just now objected new to mortal Eyes,
At nothing could they be astonished more,
Nor less than what they so admired before.
He that had never seen a River, imagined the first he met with to be the Sea,
and the greatest things that have fallen within our Knowledge, we conclude the
Extremes that Nature makes of the kind. Id. ibid.
Scilicet and fluvius qui non est maximus, ei est
Qui non ante aliquem majorem vidit, and ingens;
Atbor, homoque videtur, and omnia de genere omni,
Maxim quae vidit quisque, haec ingentia fingit.
A little River unto him does seem,
That bigger never saw, a mighty Stream:
A Tree, a Man, any thing seems to his view
O'th kind the greatest, that never greater knew.
Consuetudine Oculorum, Cicero de Not. Deora lib. 2.
assuescunt Animi, nequ^ admirantur, neque requirunt rations earum rerum, quas
semper vident. Things grow familiar to Men's Minds by being often seen; so that
they neither admire, nor are inquisitive into things they daily see. The
Novelty, rather than the greatness of things, tempts us to enquire into their
Causes. But we are to judge with more reverence, and with greater
Acknowledgment of our own Ignorance and Infirmity of this infinite Power of
Nature. How many unlikely things are there testified by People of very good
Repute, which if we cannot persuade our selves absolutely to believe we ought
at least to leave them in Suspense; for to conclude them impossible, is by a
temerarious Presumption to pretend to know the utmost Bounds of Possibility.
Did we rightly understand the difference betwixt impossible, betwixt
extraordinary, and what is contrary to the common Opinion of Men, in believing
rashly, and on the other side, in being not too incredulous, we should then
observe the Rule of Ne quid nimis, enjoined by Chilo. When we find in
Froissard, that the Count de Foix knew in Bearn the defeat of John King of
Castile at Juberoth the next day after, and the means by which he tells us he
came to do so we may be allowed to be a little merry at it, as also at what our
Annals report, that Pope Honorius, the same day that King Philip Augustus died
at Mant -- performed his public Obsequies at Rome, and commanded the like
throughout all Italy; the Testimony of these Authors not being perhaps of
Authority enough to restrain us. But what if Plutarch, besides several Examples
that he produces out of Antiquity, tells us, he is assured by certain
Knowledge, that in the time of Domitian, the News of the Battle lost by
Antonius in Germany, was published at Rome, many days Journey from thence, and
dispersed throughout the whole World, the same day it was fought: and if Caesar
was of Opinion, that it has often happened, that the report has preceeded the
accident; shall we not say, that these simple People have suffered themselves
to be deceived with the Vulgar, for not having been so clear sighted as we? Is
there any thing more delicate, more clear, more spritely, than Pliny's
Judgment, when he is pleased to set it to work? Any thing more remote from
vanity? Setting aside h^s Learning, of which I make less account, in which of
these do any of us excel him? And yet there is scarce a Puisne Sophister that
does not convince him of untruth, and that pretends not to instruct him in the
Progress of the Works of Nature: When we read in Bouchet the Miracles of St.
Hilary's Relics; away with it, his Authority is not sufficient to bear us the
liberty of contradicting him: but generally to condemn all such like Stories,
seems to me an impudence of the worst Character. The great St. Augustine,
professes himself to have seen a blind Child recover sight upon the Relick of
St. Gervase, and St. Protasius at Milan, a Woman at Carthage cured of a Cancer,
by the sign of the Cross made upon her by a Woman newly Baptized. Hesperius, a
familiar Friend of his, to have driven away the Spirits that haunted his House,
with a little Earth of the Sepulcher of our Lord; which Earth being also
transported thence into the Church, a Paralytick to have there been suddenly
cured by it. A Woman in Procession, having touched St. Stephen's Shrine with a
Nosegay, and after rubbing her Eyes with it, to have recovered her Sight lost
many Years: before; with several other Miracles, of which he professes himself
to have been an Eyewitness. Of what shall we accuse him and the two Holy
Bishops, Aurelius and Maximinus, both which he attests to the Truth of these
things? Shall it be of Ignarance, Simplicity, and Facility; or of Malice, and
imposture? Is any Man now living so impudent, as to think himself comparable to
them, Ciciro 2. de Div. l. 2.
either in Virtue, Piety, Learning, Judgment, or any kind of Perfection? Qui ut
Rationem nullam afferent, ipsa Authoritate me frangerent. Who though they
should give me no Reason for what they affirm, would yet convince me with their
Authority. It Is a Presumption of great Danger and Consequence, besides the
absurd Temerity it draws after it, to contemn what we do not comprehend. For
after that, according to your fine Understanding, you have established the
Limits of Truth and Error, and that afterward there appears a Necessity upon
you of believing stranger things than those you have contradicted, you are
already obliged to quit your hold, and to aquiesce. That which seems to me so
much to disorder our Consciences in the Commotions we are now in concerning
Religion, is the Catholics dispensing so much with their Belief; they fancy
they appear Moderate, and Wise, when they grant to the Huguenots some of the
Articles in Question; but besides that, they do not discern what advantage it
is to those with whom we contend, to begin to give Ground, and to retire, and
how much this animates our Enemy to follow his blow: these Articles which they
insist upon as things indifferent, are sometimes of very great importance, and
dangerous Consequence. We are either wholly and absolutely to submit our selves
to the Authority of our Ecclesiastical Polity, or totally throw off all
Obedience to it. It Is not for us to determine what and how much Obedience we
owe to it, and this I can say, as having my self made trial of it, that having
formerly taken the liberty of my own Swing and Fancy, and omitted or neglected
certain Rules of the Discipline of our Church, which seemed to me vain, and of
no Foundation: coming afterward to discourse it with learned Men, I have found
those very things to be built upon very good and solid Ground, and strong
Foundation; and that nothing but Brutality and Ignorance make us Receive them
with less Reverence than the rest: Why do we not consider what Contradictions
we find in our own Judgments, how many things were yesterday Articles of our
Faith, that to day appear no other than Fables? Glory and Curiosity are the
Scourges of the Soul; of which the last prompts us to thrust our Noses into
every thing, and the other forbids us to leave any thing doubtful and undecided.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Friendship.
HAving considered the Fancy of a Painter, I have that serves me, I had a mind
to imitate his way; For he chooses the fairest Place, and middle of any Wall,
or panel of Wainscote, wherein to draw a Picture which he finishes with his
utmost Care and Art, and the vacuity about it he fills with Gratesque; which
are odd Fantastic Figures, without, any Grace, but what they derive from their
variety, and the extravagancy of their Shapes. And in truth, what are these
things I scribble, other than Grotesques, and monstrous Bodies, made of
dissenting parts, without any certain Figure, or any other than accidental
Order, Coherence or Proportion?

Hor. de Art. Poetica.
Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne. That a fair Woman's Face above does
show;
But in a Fishes Tail does end below.
In the second part I go Hand in Hand with my Painter, but fall very short of
him in the first, and the better, my power of handling not being such, that I
dare to offer at a brave piece, finely painted, and set off according to Art. I
have therefore thought fit to borrow one of Estienno de Boitic, and such a one
as shall honor and adorn all the rest of my work; namely, a Discourse that he
called, The Voluntary Servitude, a piece writ in his younger Years, by way of
Essay, in honor of Liberty against Tyrants, and which has since run through
the hands of several Men of great Learning and Judgment, not without singular,
and merited commendation, for it is finely writ, and as full, as any thing can
possibly be: Though a Man may confidently say it is far short of what he was
able to do; and if in that more mature Age, wherein I had the happiness to know
him, he had taken a design like this of mine, to commit his thoughts to
writing, we should have seen a great many rare things, and such as would have
gone very near to have rivaled the best Writings of Antiquity: For in Natural
parts especially, I know no man comparable to him. But he has left nothing
behind him, save this Treatise only, (and that too by chance, for I believe he
never saw it after it first went out of his hands,) and some Observations upon
that Edict of January made Famous by our Civil Wars, which also shall elsewhere
peradventure find a place. These were all I could recover of his Remains, I to
whom, with so affectionate a remembrance, upon his Deathbed, he by his last
Will bequeathed his Library, and Papers, the little Book of his Works only
excepted, which I committed to the press. And this particular obligation I have
to this Treatise of his, that it was the occasion of my first coming acquainted
with him; for it was showed to me long before I had the good fortune to know
him; and gave me the first knowledge of his name; proving so the first cause
and foundation of a Friendship, which we afterward improved, and maintained, so
long as God was pleased to continue us together, so perfect, inviolate, and
entire, that certainly the like is hardly to be found in Story, and amongst the
Men of this Age, there is no sign nor trace of any such thing in use; so much
concurrence is required to the building of such a one, that it is much, if
Fortune bring it but once to pass in three Ages. There is nothing to which
Nature seems so much to have inclined us as to Society; and Aristotle says,
that the good Legislators had more respect to Friendship, than to Justice. Now
the most supreme point of its perfection is this: Perfect Friendship, what.
for generally all those that Pleasure, Profit, Public or Private Interest,
Create and Nourish, are so much the less Generous, and so much the less
Friendships, by how much they mix another cause, and design, than simple, and
pure Friendship it self. Neither do the four Ancient Kinds, Natural, Sociable,
Hospitable and Venerean, either separately, or jointly, make up a true and
perfect Friendship. That of Children to Parents is rather respect: Friendship
being nourisht by Communication, which cannot, by reason of the great
disparity, be betwixt them: but would rather perhaps violate the Duties of
Nature; for neither are all the secret thoughts of Fathers fit to be
communicated to Children, lest it beget an indecent familiarity betwixt them;
neither can the advices, and reproofs, which is one of the principal offices of
Friendship, be properly performed by the Son to the Father. There are some
Countries, where it is the Custom for Children, to kill their Fathers; and
others, where the Fathers killed their Children, to avoid being sometimes an
impediment to one another in their designs; and moreover the Expectation of the
one does naturally depend upon the ruin of the other. There have been great
Philosophers who have made nothing of this tie of Nature, as Aristippus for
one, who being pressed home about the affection he owed to his Children, as being
come out of him, presently fell to spit, saying, that that also came out of
him, and that he did also breed Worms, and Lice; and that other, that Plutarch
endeavored to reconcile to his Brother, I make never the more account of him
said he, for coming out of the same hole. This name of Brother does indeed
carry with it an amicable and affectionate sound, and for that reason, he and I
called Brothers: but the complication of interest, the division of Estates, and
that the raising of the one, should be the undoing of the other, does strangely
unnerve and slacken this fraternal tie: And Brothers pursuing their Fortune and
Advancement by the same Path, it is hardly possible, but they must of necessity
often justle, and hinder one another. Besides, why is it necessary that the
correspondence of Manners Parts and Inclinations, which beget these true and
perfect Friendships, should always meet and concur in these relations. The
Father and the Son may be of quite contrary humors, and Brothers without any
manner of Sympathy in their Natures. He is my Son, he is my Brother, or he and
I are Cousin-germans; but he is Passionate, ill Natured, or a Fool. And
moreover, by how much these are Friendships, that the Law, and Natural
Obligation, impose upon us; so much less is there of our own choice, and
voluntary freedom. Whereas that voluntary liberty of ours, has nothing but that
of Affection and Friendship, properly its own. Not that I have not in my own
person experimented all can possibly be expected of that kind, having had the
best, and most indulgent Father, even to an extreme old Age, that ever was, and
who was himself descended from a Family, for many Generations Famous, and
Exemplary for Brotherly Concord: Horat. l. 2. Ode 2.
-- Et ipse
Notus in fratres animi Paterni.
And he himself noted the rest above,
Toward his Brothers for paternal Love.


We are not here to bring the Love we beat to Women, though it be an Act of our
own Choice, into comparison; nor rank it with the others; the Fire of which I
confess, Catullus.
(Neque enim est Dea nescia nostri
Quae dulcem curis miscet amaritiem.)
(Nor is my Goddess ign'rant what I am,
Who pleasing Sorrows mixes with my Flame.)
is more active, more eager, and more sharp; but withal, it is more precipitous,
fickle, moving and inconstant: a Fever subject to Intermission, and Paroxisms,
that has seized but on one part, one corner of the Building; whereas in
Frindship, it is a general and universal Fire, but temperate, and equal, a
constant established heat, all easy, and smooth, without poynancy or
roughness. Moreover, in Love, it is no other than Frantic Desire, to that which
flies from us.

Ariosto, Canto. 10.
Com segue la lepre ill cacciatore
Al freddo, al caldo, alla montagna, al litto:
Ne piu l'estima poi, che presa vede,
Et sol dietro a chi fugge affretta il piede:
Like Hunters, that the flying Hare pursue
Over Hill, and dale, through Heat, and Morning Dew,
Which being taken, the Quarry they despise,
Being only pleased in following that which flies.
So soon as ever they enter into terms of Friendship, that is to say, into a
concurrence of Desires, it vanishes, and i^ gone, fruition destroys it, as
having only a fleshly end, and such a one as is subject to Satiety. Friendship
on the contrary, is enjoyed proportionably, as it is desi^'d, and only grows
up, is nourisht and improves by enjoyment, as being of it self Spiritual, and
the Soul growing still more perfect by practice. Under, and subsellious to this
perfect Friendship, I cannot deny, but that the other vain Affections, have in
my younger Years found some place in my thoughts that I may say nothing of him,
who himself confesses but too much in his Verses: So that I had both these
Passions, but always so, that I could my self well enough distinguish them, and
never in any degree of comparison with one another. The first maintaining its
flight in so lofty and so brave a place, as with disdain to look down, and see
the other flying at a far humbler pitch below. As concerning Marriage, besides,
that it is a Covenant, the entrance into which, is only free, but the
continuance in it, forced and compelled, having another dependence, than that
of our own Free will, and a Bargain commonly contracted to other ends, there
almost always happens a Thousand Intricacies in it, to unravel enough to break
the Thread, and to divert the Current of a lively Affection: whereas Friendship
has no manner of Business or Traffic with any but it self. Moreover, to say
truth, the ordinary Talent of Women, is not such, as is sufficient to maintain
the Conference and Communication required, to the support of this Conjugal Tie;
nor do they appear to be endu'd with Constancy of Mind, to endure the pinch of
so hard and durable a Knot. And doubtless if without this, there could be such
a free and voluntary familiarity contracted, where not only the Souls might
have this entire fruition, but the Bodies also might share in the Alliance, and
a Man be engaged throughout, the Friendship would certainly be more full and
perfect; but it is without example, that this Sex could ever arrive at such
perfection, and by the Ancient Schools, is wholly rejected; as also that other
Grecian License is justly abhorred by our manners; which also for having,
according to their practice, a so necessary disparity of Age, and difference of
Offices betwixt the Lovers, hold no more proportion with the perfect Union and
Harmony that we here require, than the other. Quis est enim iste amor amicitiae
(...) neque deformem adolescentem, Cicero Tus. lib. 4.
quisquam (...) formosam senem? For what is that Love of Fri^ndship? why does
no one Love a deformed Youth, or a comely Old Man? Neither will that very
Picture that the Academy presents of it, as I conceive, contradict me, when I
say, that the first fury inspired by the Son of Venus into the heart of the
Lover, upon the sight of the Flower, and prime of a Springing and blossoming
Youth, to whom they allow all the Insolences, and Passionate Attempts, that an
immoderate Ardour can produce, was simply founded upon an external Beauty, the
false image of Corporal Generation; for upon the Soul it could not ground this
Love, the sight of which, as yet lay concealed, was but now springing, and not
of maturity to Blossom. Which fury, if it seized upon a mean Courage, the means
by which he p^eferr'd his suit, were rich Presents, favor in advancement to
Dignities, and such Trumpery, which they by no means approve: If on a more
generous Soul, the pursuit was suitably generous, by Philosophical
Instructions, Precepts to revere Religion, to obey the Laws, to die for the
good of his Country; by examples of Valor, Prudence and Justice, the Lover
studying to render himself acceptable by the Grace and Beauty of his Soul, that
of his Body being long since faded and decayed, hoping by this mutual Society
to establish a more firm and lasting Contract. When this Courtship came to
affect in due season, (for that which they do not require in the Lover, namely,
Leisure, and Discretion in his pursuit, they strictly require in the person
Loved; forasmuch as he is to judge of an internal Beauty, of difficult
Knowledge, and obsc^re Discovery,) then there sprung in the Person Loved the
desire of a spiritual Conception, by the mediation of a spiritual Beauty. This
was the Principal, the Corporeal, Accidental, and Second Causes, are all the
wrong side of the Lover. For this reason they prefer the Person Beloved,
maintaining, that the Gods in like manner prefer him too, and very much blame
the Poet Aeschylus, for having, in the Loves of Achilles, and Patroclus, given
the Lovers part to Achilles, who was in the first flower and pubescency of his
Youth, and the handsomest of all the Greeks. After this general Familiarity,
and mutual Community of Thoughts, is once settled, supposing the sovereign and
most worthy Part to preside and govern, and to perform its proper Offices, they
say, that from thence great Utility derived, both to private and public
Concerns, that the force and power of Countries received their beginning from
thence, and that it was the chiefest security of Liberty and Justice. Of which,
the Salutiferous Loves of Harmonius and Aristogiton is a good instance; and
therefore it is, that they called it Sacred and Divine, and do conceive, that
nothing but the Violence of Tyrants, and the Baseness of the common People, is
mimical to it: finally, all that can be said in favor of the Academy, is, that
it was a Love which ended in Friendship; which also well enough agrees with the
Stoical definition of Love. Amorem conatum esse amicitiae faciendae ex
pulchritudinis specie. Cicero. Ibid.
That Love is a desire of contracting Friendship by the Beauty of the Object. I
return to my own more just and true description. Omnino amicitiae, Cicero. Amic.
corroboratis jam confirmatis ingeniis, and aetatibus, judicandae sunt. Those
are only to be reputed Friendships, that are fortified and confirmed by
Judgment, and length of time. For the rest, which we commonly call Friends, and
Friendships, are nothing but Acquaintance, and Familiarities, either
occasionally contracted, or upon some design, by means of which, there happens
some little intercourse betwixt our Souls: but in the Friendship I speak of,
they mix and work themselves into one piece, with so universal a mixture, that
there is no more sign of the Seam by which they were first conjoined. If a Man
should importune me to give a reason why I Loved him; I find it could no
otherwise be expressed, than by making answer, because it was he, because it was
I. There is beyond I am able to say, I know not what inexplicable and fatal
power that brought on this Union. We sought one another long before we met, and
by the Characters we heard of one another, which wrought more upon our
Affections, than in reason, mere reports should do, I think by some secret
appointment of Heaven, we embraced in our Names; and at our first meeting,
which was accidentally at a great City entertainment, we found our selves so
mutually taken with one another, so acquainted, and so endeared betwixt our
selves, that from thenceforward nothing was so near to us as one another. He
writ an excellent Latin Satyr, which I since Printed, wherein he excuses the
precipitation of our Intelligence, so suddenly come to perfection, saying, that
being to have so short continuance, as being begun so late, (for we were both
full grown Men, and he some Years the older,) there was no time to lose; nor
was ti'd to conform it self to the example of those slow and regular
Friendships, that require so many precautions of a long praeliminary
Conversation. This has no other Idea, than that of its self: this is no one
particular consideration, nor two, nor three, nor four, nor a thousand: it is I
know not what quintessence of all this mixture, which, seizing my whole Will,
carried it to plunge and lose it self in his, and that having seized his whole
Will; brought it back with equal concurrence and appetite, to plunge and lose
it self in mine. I may truly say, lose, reserving nothing to our selves, that
was either his or mine. When Laelius, in the presence of the Roman Consuls,
(who after they had sentenced Tiberius Gracchus, prosecuted all those who had
had any familiarity with him also,) came to ask Cajus Blosius, (who was his
chiefest Friend and Confident,) how much he would have done for him? And that
he made Answer, All things. How! All things! said Laelius, And what if he had
commanded you to Fire our Temples? he would never have commanded me that,
replied Blosius, But what if he had? said Laelius. Why, if he had, I would have
Obeyed him, said the other. If he was so perfect a Friend to Gracchus, as the
Histories report him to have been, there was yet no necessity of offending the
Consuls by such a bold confession, though he might still have retained the
assurance he had of Gracchus his disposition. However, those who accuse this
Answer as Seditious, do not well understand the Mystery; nor presuppose, as it
was true, that he had Gracchus his Will in his sleeve, both by the power of a
Friend, and the perfect knowledge he had of the Man. They were more Friends,
than Citizens, and more Friends to one another, than either Friends or Enemies
to their Country, or than Friends to Ambition and Innovation. Having absolutely
given up themselves to one another, either held absolutely the reins of the
others Inclination, which also they governed by Virtue, and guided by the
conduct of Reason, (which also without these, it had not been possible to do,)
and therefore Blosius his Answer was such as it ought to be. If either of their
Actions flew out of the handle, they were neither (according to my measure of
Friendship,) Friends to one another; nor to themselves. As to the rest, this
Answer carries no worse sound, than mine would do to one that should ask me, If
your Will should command you to Kill your Daughter, would you do it? And that I
should make Answer, that I would, for this expresses no consent to such an Act,
forasmuch as I do not in the least suspect my own Will, and as little that of
such a Friend. It Is not in the power of all the Eloquence in the World, to
dispossess me of the certainty I have of the intensions and resolutions of
mine; nay, no one Action of his, what face soever it might bear, could be
presented to me, of which I could not presently, and at first sight, find out
the moving cause: Our Souls have drawn so unanimously together, and we have
with so mutual a confidence laid open the very bottom of our hearts to one
another view, that I not only know his as well as my own; but should certainly
in any concern of mine, have trusted my interest much more willingly with him,
than with my self. Let no one therefore rank other common Friendships with such
a one as this. I have had as much experience of these, as another, and of the
most perfect of their kind: but I do not advise, that any should confound the
Rules of the one, and the other; for they would then find themselves much
deceived. In those other ordinary Friendships, you are to walk with a Bridle in
your hand, with Prudence and Circumspection, for in them the Knot is not so
sure, that a Man may not half suspect it will slip: Love him (said ^^ilo) so,
as if you were one Day to Hate him; and Hate him so, as you were one Day to
Love him. A Precept, that though abominable in the Sovereign and perfect
Friendship which I intend, is nevertheless very sound, as to the practice of
the ordinary ones, now in fashion, and to which the saying that Aristotle had
so frequent in his Mouth, O my Friends, there is no Friend; may very fitly be
applied. And this glorious Commerce of good Offices, Presents and Benefits, by
which other Friendships are supported and maintain^d, do not deserve so much as
to be mentioned here; and is by this concurrence and consent of Wills, totally
taken away, and rendered of no use; as the kindness I have for my self, receives
no increase, for any thing I relieve my self withal in time of need, (whatever
the Stoics say,) and as I do not find my Self obliged to my Self, for any
Service I do my Self: So the Union of such Friends, being really perfect,
deprives them of all acknowledgment of such Duties, and makes them loath and
banish from their Conversation, these words of Diversion, Distinction, Benefit,
Obligation, Acknowledgment, Entreaty, Thanks, and the like: All Things, Wills,
Thoughts, Opinions, Goods, Wives, Children, Honors and Lives, being in effect,
common betwixt them, and that absolute concurrence of Affections being no other
than one Soul in two Bodies, (according to that very proper definition of
Aristotle) they can neither lend, nor give any thing to one another. This is
the reason why the Lawgivers, to honor Marriage with some imaginary
resemblance of this divine Alliance, interdict all Gifts betwixt Man and Wife;
inferring by that, that all should belong to each of them, and that they have
nothing to divide; or to give. If, in the Friendship of which I speak, one
could give to the other, the receiver of the Benefit would be the Man that
obliged his Friend; for each of them contending, and above all things, studying
how to be useful to one another, he that administers the occasion, is the
liberal Man, in giving his Friend the Satisfaction of doing that toward him,
which above all things he does most desire. When the Philosopher Diogenes
wanted Money, he used to say, that he redemanded it of his Friends, not that he
demanded it; and to let you see the effectual practice of this, I will here
produce an ancient and a rare Example; Eudamidas a Corinthian, had two Friends,
Charixenus a Sycionian, and Aretheus a Corinthian; this Man coming to Die,
being Poor, and his two Friends Rich, he made his Will after this manner, I
bequeath to Aretheus the Maintenance of my Mother, to support and provide for
her in her old Age, and to Charixenus I bequeath the care of marrying my
Daughter, and to give her as good a Portion as he is able; and in case that one
of these chance to Die, I hereby substitute the Surviver in his Place. They who
first saw this Will, made themselves very merry at the Contents; but the
Executors being made acquainted with it, accepted the Legacies with very great
Content; and one of them, Charixenus, dying within five Days after, and
Aretheus by that means having the Charge of both devolved solely to him, he
nourisht that old Woman with very great Care and Tenderness, and of five
Talents he had in Estate, he gave two and a half in Marriage with an only
Daughter he had of his own, and two and a half in Marriage with the Daughter of
Eudamidas, and in one and the same day solemnized both their Nuptials. This
Example is very full, if one thing were not to be objected, namely the
multitude of Friends: for the perfect Friendship I speak of, is indivisible,
every one gives himself so entirely to his Friend, that he has nothing left to
distribute to others: But on the Contrary, is sorry, that he is not double,
treble, or quadruple, and that he has not many Souls, and many Wills, to
conferr them all upon this one Subject. Common Friendships will admit of
Division, one may love the Beauty of this, the good humor of that Person, the
liberty of a third, the paternal Affection of the fourth, the fraternal Love of
a fifth, and so of the rest. But this Friendship that possesses the whole Soul,
and there Rules and sways with an absolute Sovereignty, can possibly admit of
no Rival. If two at the same time should call to you for succor, to which of
them would you run? Should they require of you contrary Offices; how could you
serve them both? Should one commit a thing to your Secrecy, that it were of
importance to the other to know, how would you disingage your self? A singular
and particular Friendship disunites and dissolves all other Obligations
whatsoever. The secret I have sworn not to reveal to any other, I may withour
Perjury communicate to him who is not another, but my self. It Is Miracle enough
certainly, for a Man to double himself, and those that talk of tripling, talk
they know not of what. Nothing is extreme, that has its like; and who shall
presuppose, that of two, I love one as much as the other, that they Love one
another too, and love me as much as I love them, does multiply in Friendship,
the most single and united of all things, and wherein moreover, one alone, is
the hardest thing in the World to find. The remaining part of this Story suits
very well with what I said before; for Eudamidas as a Bounty and Favor,
Bequeaths to his Friends a Legacy of employing themselves in his Necessity; he
leaves them Heirs to this Liberality of his, which consists, in giving them the
Opportunity of conferring a Benefit upon him, and doubtless the force of
Friendship is more eminently apparent in this act of his, than in that of
Aretheus. In short, these are effects not to be imagined nor comprehended by
such as have not experience of them, and which makes me infinitely honor and
admire the Answer of that young Soldier to Cyrus, by whom being asked how much
he would take for a Horse, with which he had won the prize of a Course, and
whether he would exchange him for a Kingdom? No, truly Sir, said he, but I
would give him with all my Heart, to find a true Friend, could I find, out any
Man worthy of that Relation. He did not say ill in saying, could I find, for
though a Man may almost every where meet with Men sufficiently qualified for a
superficial acquaintance; yet in this, where a Man is to deal from the very
bottom of his Heart, without any manner of reservation, it will be requisite,
that all the Wards and Springs be neatly and truly wrought, and perfectly sure.
In Leagues that hold but by one end, we are only to provide against the
imperfections, that particularly concern that end. It can be of no importance
to me, of what Religion my Physician or my Lawyer is, provided the one be a
good Lawyer, and the other a good Physician; this consideration has nothing in
common with the Offices of Friendship, and I am of the same indifferency in the
domestic acquaintance, my Servants must necessarily contract with me; I never
enquire, when I am to take a Footman, if he be Chaste, but if he be Diligent;
and am not sollicitous, if my Chairman be given to Gaming, as if he be strong
and able, or if my Cook be a Swearer, or a good Cook. I do not however take
upon me to direct what other Men should do in the Government of their Families,
there are enough that meddle enough with that; but only give an account of my
method in my own.

Terence Hea. Act. 1. Sec. 1.
Mihi sic usus est: tibi, ut opus est facto, face. This has my Practice been;
but thou may do,
What thy Affairs or Fancy prompt thee to.
In Table talk, I prefer the pleasant and Witty, before the Learned and the
Grave: In Bed, Beauty before Modesty, and in common Discourse, Eloquence,
whether or no there be sincerity in that Case. And, as he that was found stride
upon a Hobbyhorse, playing with his Children, entreated the Person who had
surprised him in that posture, to say nothing of it, till himself came to be a
Father, supposing, that the fondness that would then possess his own Soul,
would render him a more equal Judge of such an Action: So I also could wish to
speak to such as have had experience of what I say; though, knowing how remote
a thing such a Friendship is from the common Practice, and how rarely such are
to be found, I despair of meeting with any one qualified to such a degree of
competency. For even these Discourses left us by Antiquity upon this Subject,
seem to me flat and low, in comparison of the Sense I have of it, and in this
particular, the Effects surpass the very Precepts of Philosophy.

Horat. l. 1. Sat. 5.
Nil ego contulerim jucundo sanus amico. I nothing to my self can recommend,
Like the delight of a facetious Friend.
The ancient Menander declared him to be happy, that had the good Fortune to
meet with but the shadow of a Friend; and doubtless he had good Reason to say
so, especially, if he spoke by experience; for in good earnest, if I compare
all the rest of my Life, though thanks be to God, I have always passed my time
pleasantly enough, and at my ease, and the loss of such a Friend excepted, free
from any grievous Affliction, and in great tranquillity of Mind, having been
contented with my natural and original Conveniences, without being sollicitous
after others; if I should compare it all, I say, with the four years I had the
Happiness to enjoy the sweet Society of this excellent Man; it is nothing but
smoke, but an obscure and tedious Night, from the Day that I lost him. Virg.
Aene. 1. 5.
-- Quem semper acerbum,
Semper honoratum (sic Dii voluistis) habebo.
Which ever till I step into my grave,
I shall in sad, but kind remembrance have.
I have only led a sorrowful and languishing Life; and the very Pleasures that
present themselves to me, instead of administering any thing of Consolation,
double my affliction for his loss. We were halves throughout, and to that
degree, that methinks, by out-living him, I defraud him of his Part.

Terence Heau. ct A. 1. Sc. 1.
Nec jus esse ulla me voluptate hic frui
Decrevi, tantisper dum ille abest meus particeps.
And this against my self I have decreed,
Nothing of Pleasure shall my fancy feed,
Since he is gone, for ever gone alas!
Who in all Joys my dear Co-partner was.
I was so accustomed to be always his second in all places, and in all
interests too, that methinks, I am no more than half a Man, and have but half a
being. Horat. l. 12. Ode. 4.
Illam meae si partem animae tulit
Maturior vis, quid moror altera,
Nec charius aeque nec superstes
Integer? Ille dies utramque
Duxit ruinam.
Since that half of my soul was snatched away
By riper Age, why does the other stay?
Which now is not dear, nor truly does survive
That day our double Ruin did contrive.
There is no Action or Imagination of mine, wherein I do not want him; I know
that his Advice and Assistance would be useful to me: for as he surpast me by
infinite degrees in Virtue, and all other Accomplishments; so he also did in
all Offices of Friendship.

Horat. l. 1. Ode 1.
Quis desiderio sit pudor, aut modus
Tam chari capitis.
A moderate Mourning were a scandal here,
Where I lament a Friend so truly dear.
(...)
O misero, frater adempte, mihi!
Omnia tecum una perierunt gaudia nostra,
Quae tuus in vita, dulcis alebat amor,
Tu mea, tu moriens fregisti commoda, fraeter,
Tecum una tota est nostra sepulta anima.
Cujus ego interitu tota de mente fugavi
Haec studia, atque omnes delicias animi.
Alloquar? andiero nunquam tua verba loquentem?
Nunquam ego te vita, frater amabilior,
Aspiciam posthac? at certe semper amabo.
Ah! Brother, what a Life did I commence,
From that sad Day that thou were ravished hence!
Those Joys are gone, that whilst thou tarried'st here,
By thy sweet Conversation nourished were.
With thee, when dying, my good Fortune fled,
And in thy Grave my Soul was buried.
The Muses at thy Funerals I forsook,
And of thy Joy my leave forever took.
Dearer than Life, am I so wretched then,
Never to see, nor speak to thee again,
Nor hear thy Voice, now frozen up by Death?
Yet will I Love thee to my latest Breadth.
But let us hear a little Boy of Sixteen speak.

In this place I did once intend to have inserted those Memoirs upon that
famous Edict of January: But being I since find that they are already Printed,
and with a malicious design, by some who make it their business to molest, and
endeavor to subvert the state of our Government, not caring whether they mend
and reform it, or no; and that they have confounded this Writing of his with
others of their own Leven, Apology for Estienne de Boetie.
I desisted from that purpose: But that the Memory of the Father may not be
interested, nor suffer with such, as could not come near hand to be acquainted
with his Principles; I here give them truly to understand, that it was writ by
him in his very green Years, and that by way of Exercise only, as a common
Theme that has been tumbled and tossed by a Thousand Writers. I make no question,
but that he himself believed what he writ, being so Conscientious that way,
that he would not so much as lie in jest: and do moreover know, that could it
have been in his own Choice, he had rather have been Born at Venice, than at
Soarlac, and he had reason: But he had another Maxim Soveraignly imprinted in
his Soul, very Religiously to Obey, and submit to the Laws under which he was
Born. There never was a better Citizen, more affectionate to his Country; nor a
greater Enemy to all the Commotions and Innovations of his time: So that he
would doubtless much rather have employed his Talent to the extinguishing of
those Civil Flames, than have added any Fuel to them: For he had a Mind
fashioned to the Model of better Ages. But in exchange of this Serious Piece, I
will present you with another of a more Gay and Frolic Air, from the same
Hand, and Writ at the same Age.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Nine and Twenty Sonnets of Estienne de la Boetie, to Madam de Grammont
Countess of Guisson.
MAdam, I offer to your Ladyship nothing of mine, either because it is already
yours, or because I find nothing in my Writings worthy of you: But I have a
great desire that these Verses, into what part of the World soever they may
travel may carry your Name in the Front, for the Honor will accrue to them, by
having the great Corisanda de Andonis for their safe Conduct: I conceive this
present, Madam, so much the more proper for you, both by reason there are few
Ladies in France who are so good Judges of Poetry, and make so good use of it
as you do; as also, that there is none who can give it that Spirit and Life
your Ladyship does, by that incomparable Voice Nature has added to your other
perfections; you will find, Madam, that these Verses deserve your esteem, and
will, I dare say, concur with me in this, that Gascony never yielded more
invention, finer Expression, or that more evidence themselves to flow from a
Masters hand. And be not Jealous, that you have but the remainder of what I
Published some Years since, under the Name of Monsieur de Foix, your brave
Kinsman; for certainly these have something in them more spritely, and
luxuriant, as being Writ in a greener Youth, and enflamed with the Noble Ardour
that I will tell your Ladyship in your Ear. The other were Writ since, when he
was a Suitor in the honor of his Wife, already ^elishing of I know not what
Matrimonial Coldness: And for my part, I am of the same opinion with those, who
hold, that Poesy appears no where so Gay, as in a wanton and irregular Subject.

These Nine and Twenty Sonnets that were inserted here, are since Printed with
his other Works.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Moderation.
AS if we had an infectious Touch, we by our manner of handling corrupt things,
that in themselves are laudable and good: We may grasp Virtue so hard, till it
become Vicious, if we embrace it too straight, and with too violent a desire.
Those who say, there is never any excess in Virtue, for as much as it is no
Virtue, when it once becomes excess, only play upon words.

Horace l. 1. Epist. 6.
Insani sapiens nomen ferat, aequus iniqui,
Ultra quam satis est, virtutem si petat ipsam.
The Wise for Mad, the Just for Unjust pass,
When more than needs, even Virtue they embrace.
This is a subtle consideration in Philosophy. A Man may both be too much in
Love with Virtue, and be excessive in a just Action. Holy Writ agrees with
this, Be not Wiser than you should; but be soberly Wise. It Is like he means
Henry the 3d. of France.
I have known a great Man prejudice the Opinion Men had of his Devotion, by
pretending to be devout beyond all Examples of others of his condition. I Love
temperate and moderate Natures. An immoderate Zeal, even to that which is good,
though it does not offend, does astonish me; and puts me to study what Name to
give it. Neither the Mother of Pausanias, who was the first instructor of her
Son's process, and threw the first stone toward his Death: Nor Posthumus the
Dictator, who put his Son to Death, whom the Ardour of Youth had fortunately
pusht upon the Enemy a little more advanced than the rest of his Squadron, do
appear to me so just as strange; and I should neither advise, nor like to
follow so Savage a Virtue, and that costs so dear. The Archer that shoots over,
misses as well as he that falls short, and it is equally troublesome to my
sight, to look up at a great Light, and to look down into a dark Abyss.
Callicles in Plato, says, That the extremity of Philosophy is hurtful, and
advises not to dive into it beyond the limits of Profit: that taken moderately,
it is pleasant and useful; but that in the end, it renders a Man Brutish and
Vicious: A Contemner of Religion, and the common Laws, an Enemy to civil
Conversation, and all Humane Pleasures, incapable of all Public
Administration, unfit either to assist others, or to relieve himself, and a fit
Object for all sorts of Injuries and Affronts, without remedy, or satisfaction:
He says true, for in its Excess, it enslaves our Natural Freedom, and by an
impertinent subtilty, leads us out of the fair and beaten way that Nature has
plained out for us. The Love we bear to our Wives is very lawful, and yet
Theology thinks fit to curb and restrain it. As I remember, I have read in one
place of St. Thomas of Aquin, where he condemns Marriages within any of the
forbidden degrees, for this reason, amongst others, that there is some danger,
lest the Friendship a Man bears to such a Woman, should be immoderate; for if
the Conjugal Affection be full and perfect betwixt them, as it ought to be, and
that it be over and above surcharged with that of Kindred too, there is no
doubt, but such an addition will carry the Husband beyond the bounds of reason.
Those Sciences that regulate the manners of Men, Divinity and Philosophy, will
have a saying to every thing. There is no Action so private that can escape
their Inspection and Jurisdiction, but they are best taught, who are best able
to censure and curb their own Liberty. It Is the Women that expose their
Nudities over freely upon the account of Pleasure, though in the Necessities of
Physic and Surgery, they are more shy, and more reserved. I will therefore
in their behalf teach the Husbands, that is, such as are too extravagant and
sensual in the exercise of the Matrimonial Duty, this Lesson, that the very
Pleasures they enjoy in the Society of their Wives, are Reproachable, if
immoderate, and that a Licentious and Riotous abuse of them, are Faults, as
reproveable here, as illegitimate and adulterous Practices. Those immodest and
Debauched Tricks and Postures, that the first Ardour suggests to us in this
Affair, are not only indecently, but inconveniently practiced upon our Wives.
Let them at least learn impudency from another hand; they are always ready
enough for our Business, and I for my part always went the plain way to work.
Marriage is a Solemn and Religious Tie, and therefore the pleasure we extract
from thence, should be a sober and serious delight, and mix with a certain kind
of Gravity; it should be a kind of discreet and conscientious pleasure. And
being that the chief end of it is Generation, some make a Question, whether
when Men are out of hopes of that fruit, as when they are superannuated, or
already with Child, it be lawful to lie with our Wives. It Is Homicide,
according to Plato, and certain Nations, (the Mohammedan, a among others,)
Abominate all Conjunction with Women with Child, and others also, with those
who are Unclean. Zenobia would never admit her Husband for more than one
Encounter, after which, she left him to his own swing for the whole time of her
Conception, and not till after that, would any more receive him: A brave
Example of Conjugal Continency. It was doubtless from some Lascivious Poet, and
one that himself was in great distress for a little of this sport, that Plato
borrowed this Story; that Jupiter was one Day so hot upon his Wife, that not
having so much patience, as till she could get to the Couch, he threw her upon
the Floor, where the vehemence of pleasure made him forget the great and
important Resolutions he had but newly taken with the rest of the Gods, in his
Celestial Council; and to brag, that he had had as good a Bout, as when he got
her Maidenhead unknown to their Parents. The Kings of Persia were wont to
invite their Wives to the beginning of their Festivals; but when the Wine began
to work in good earnest, and that they were to give the Reins to pleasure, they
sent them back to their private Apartments, that they might not participate of
their immoderate Lust, sending for other Women in their stead, with whom they
were not obliged to so great a decorum of respect. All Pleasures, and all sorts
of Gratifications, are not properly and fitly conferred upon all sorts of
Persons. Epaminondas had Committed a young Man for certain Debauches; for whom
Pelopidas mediated, that at his request he might be set at liberty, which,
notwithstanding the great intelligence betwixt them, Epaminondas resolutely
denied to him, but granted it at the first word to a Wench of his, that made
the same intercession; saying, that it was a Gratification fit for such a one
as she, but not for a Captain. Sophocles being joint Praetor with Pericles,
seeing accidentally a fine Boy pass by: O what a delicate Boy is that said he;
I, that were a Prize, answered Pericles, for any other than a Praetor, who
ought not only to have his Hands, but his Eyes Chaste too. Elius Verus the
Emperor, answered his Wife, who Reproached him with his Love to other Women,
That he did it upon a Conscientious account, forasmuch as Marriage was a Name
of Honor, and Dignity, not of Wanton and Lascivious Desire. And our
Ecclesiastical History preserves the Memory of that Woman in great Veneration,
who parted from her Husband, because she would not comply with his indecent and
inordinate Desire. In fine, there is no so just and lawful pleasure, wherein
the Intemperance and Excess, is not to be Condemned. But, to speak the truth,
is not Man a most miserable Creature the while? It is scarce, by his Natural
Condition, in his power to taste one Pleasure pure and entire; and yet must he
be contriving Doctrines and Precepts, to Curtail that little he has; he is not
yet Wretched enough, unless by Art and Study, he Augment his own Misery.

Propert. lib. 3. Ele. 6.
Fortunae miseras auximus Art vias. We with Misfortune against our selves take
part,
And our own Miseries increase by Art.
Humane Wisdom makes as ill use of her Talent, when she exercises it in
rescinding from the number and sweetness of those Pleasures, that are naturally
our due, as she employs it favorably, and well, in Artifically disguising and
tricking out the ills of Life, to alleviate the Sense of them. Had I ruled the
Roast, I should have taken another, and more natural course, which, to say the
truth, is both Commodious and Sacred, and should peradventure have been able to
have limited it too. Notwithstanding that both our Spiritual and corporal
Physicians, as by compact betwixt themselves, can find no other way to cure,
nor other Remedy for the Infirmities of the Body, and the Soul, than what is
often times worse than the Disease, by tormenting us more and by adding to our
Misery and Pain. To this end Watchings, Fastings, Hair-shirts, remote and
solitary Banishments, perpetual Imprisonments, Whips, and other Afflictions,
have been introduced amongst Men: But so, that they should carry a sting with
them, and be real Afflictions indeed; and not fall out so, as it once did to
one Gallio, who having been sent an Exile into the Isle of Lesbos, news was not
long after brought to Rome, that he there Lived as Merry, as the Day was long;
and that what had been enjoined him for a Penance, turned to his greatest
Pleasure and Satisfaction: Whereupon the Senate thought fit to recall him home
to his Wife and Family, and confine him to his own House, to accommodate their
Punishment to his feeling and apprehension. For to him whom Fasting would make
more Heathful and more Spritely, and to him to whose Palate Fish were more
acceptable than Flesh, it would be no proper, nor sanative Receipt; no more
than in the other sort of Physic, where the Drugs have no effect upon him who
swallows them with Appetite and Pleasure. The Bitterness of the Portion, and
the Abhorrency of the Patient, are necessary Circumstances to the Operation.
The Nature that would eat Rheubarb like Buttered Turnips, would frustrate the
use and virtue of it; it must be something to trouble and disturb the Stomach,
that must Purge and Cure it: and here the common Rule, that things are Cured by
their contraries, fails; for in this, one ill is Cured by another. This Belief
a little resembles that other so Ancient one, of thinking to gratify the Gods
and Nature, by Self-murder; an Opinion universally once received in all
Religions, and to this day retained in some. For in these latter times wherein
our Fathers Lived, Amurath at the taking of Isthmus, Immolated Six Hundred
Young Greeks to his Father's Soul, in the nature of a propitiatoy Sacrifice for
the Sins of the Deceased. And in those new Countries discovered in this Age of
ours, which are pure, and Virgins yet, in comparison of ours, this practice is
in some measure every where received. All their Idols reek with humane Blood,
not without various Examples of Horrid Cruelty. Some they burn alive, and half
Broiled take them off the Coals to tear out their Hearts and Entrails; others,
even Women, they fley alive, and with their Bloody Skins Cloth and Disguise
others. Neither are we without great Examples of Constancy and Resolution in
this Affair: The poor Souls that are to be Sacrificed, Old Men, Women and
Children, going some Days before to beg Alms for the Offering of their
Sacrifice, and so singing and dancing, present themselves to the Slaughter. The
Ambassadors of the King of Mexico, setting out to Fernando Cortez the Power and
Greatness of their Master, after having told him, that he had Thirty Vassals,
of which each was able to Raise an Hundred Thousand Fighting Men, and that he
kept his Court in the fairest and best Fortified City under the Sun, added at
last, that he was obliged Yearly to offer the Gods Fifty Thousand Men. And it
is confidently affirmed, that he maintained a continual War, with some Potent
Neighboring Nations, not only to keep the Young Men in Exercise, but
principally, to have wherewithal to furnish his Sacrifices with his Prisoners
of War. At a certain Town in another place, for the welcome of the said Cortez,
they Sacrificed Fifty Men at once. I will tell you this one Tale more, and I
have done; Some of these People being Beaten by him, sent to Complement him,
and to Treat with him of a Peace, whose Messengers carried him Three sorts of
Presents, which they presented in these terms: Behold, Lord, here are Five
Slaves, if thou be a furious God that feedest upon Flesh and Blood, eat
these, and we will bring thee more; if thou be an Affable God, behold here
Incense and Feathers; but if thou be a Man, take these Fowls and these
Fruits, that we have brought thee.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Cannibals.
WHen Pyrrhus King of Epire invaded Italy, having viewed and considered the
Order of the Army, the Romans sent out to meet him; I know not, said he, what
kind of Barbarians (for so the Greeks called all other Nations) these may be;
but the Discipline of this Army that I see, has nothing of Barbarity in it. As
much said the Greeks of that Flaminius brought into their Country; and Philip
beholding from an Eminence, the Order and the distribution of the Roman Camp,
led into his Kingdom by Publius Sulpitius Galba, spoke to the same effect. By
which it appears, how Cautious Men ought to be, of taking things upon trust
from Vulgar Opinion, and that we are to judge by the Eye of Reason, and not
from common report. I have long had a Man in my House, that Lived ten or Twelve
Years in the new World discovered in these latter Days, and in that part of it
where Velegaignon Landed, which he called Antartick France. This Discovery of
so vast a Country seems to be of very great Consideration; and we are not sure,
that hereafter there may not be another, so many wiser Men than we have been
deceived in this. I am afraid our Eyes are bigger than our Bellies, and that we
have more Curiosity than Capacity: for we grasp at all, but catch nothing but
Air. Plato brings in Solon, telling a Story, that he had heard from the Priests
of Sais in Egypt, that of Old, and before the Deluge, there was a great Island
called Atlantis, situate directly at the Mouth of the Straight of Gibralter,
which contained more Ground, than both Africa and Asia put together; and that
the Kings of that Country, who not only possessed that Isle, but extended their
Dominion so far into the Continent, that they had a Country, as large as Africa
to Egypt, and as long as Europe to Tuscany, attempted to Encroach even upon
Asia, and to subjugate all the Nations that Border upon the Mediterranean Sea,
as far as the Gulf, of Mare Maggiore; and to that effect, overran all Spain,
the Gauls, and Italy, so far, as to penetrate into Greece, where the Athenians
stopped the Torrent of their Arms: but sometimes after, both the Athenians, they,
and their Island, were swallowed by the Flood.

It is very likely, that this Violent Irruption and Inundation of Water, made a
wonderful Change, and strange Alteration, in the Habitations of the Earth: As
it is said that the Sea then divided Sicily from Italy: Virg. Aen. l. 3.
Haec locavi quondam, and vasta convulsa ruina,
Dissiluisse ferunt: cum pro^inus utraque tellus,
Una foret.
It Is said, those places by the o'erbearing Flood,
Too Great and Violent to be withstood,
Split, and was thus from one another rent,
Which were before one Solid Continent.
Cyprus from Suria, the Isle of Negrepont from the firm Land of Beacia; and
elsewhere, united Lands that were separate before, by filling up the Channel
betwixt them, with Sand and Mud; Horat. in Art. Poet.
-- Sterilisquediu palus, aptaque remis
Vicinas urbes alit, and grave sentit aratrum.
Where steril remigable Marshes, now
Feed Neighboring Cities, and admit the Plough.
But there is no great appearance, that this Isle was this new World so lately
discovered: for that almost touched upon Spain, and it were an incredible effect
of an Inundation, to have tumbled so prodigious a Mass, above Twelve Hundred
Leagues: Besides that our Modern Navigators have already almost discovered it
to be no Island, but firm Land, and Continent, with the East Indies on the one
side, and with the Land under the two Poles on two others; or if it be separate
from them, it is by so narrow a Straight, and so inconsiderable a Channel, that
it never the more deserves the Name of an Island for that. It should seem, that
in this great Body, there are two sorts of Motions, the one Natural, and the
other Febrifick, as there are in ours. When I consider the Impression that our
River of Dordoigne has made in my time, on the right Bank of its descent, and
that in Twenty Years it has gained so much, and undermined the Foundations of
so many Houses, I perceive it to be an extraordinary Agitation: for had it
always followed this Course, or were hereafter to do it, the prospect of the
World would be totally changed. But Rivers alter their Course, sometimes
beating against the one side, and sometimes the other, and sometimes quietly
keeping the Channel. I do not speak of sudden Inundations, the causes of which
every Body understands. In Medoc, by the Seashore, the Sieur d' Arsac my
Brother, sees an Estate, he had there, Buried under the Sands which the Sea
Vomits before it: where the tops of some Houses are yet to be seen, and where
his Rents and Revenues are converted into pitiful Barren Pasturage. The
Inhabitants of which place affirm, That of late Years the Sea has driven so
vehemently upon them, that they have lost above Four Leagues of Land. These
Sands are her Harbingers. And we now see great heaps of moving Sand, that march
half a League before her.

The other Testimony from Antiquity, to which some would apply this discovery
of the new World, is in Aristotle; at least, if that little Book of unheard of
Miracles be his. He there tells us, That certain Carthaginians, having crossed
the Atlantic Sea without the Straight of Gibralter, and Sailed a very long
time, discovered at last a great and fruitful Island, all covered over with
Wood, and Watered with several broad and deep Rivers; far remote from all firm
Land, and that they, and others after them, allured by the pleasantness and
fertility of the Soil, went thither with their Wives and Children, and began to
Plant a Colony: But the Senate of Carthage visibly perceiving their People by
little and little, to grow thin, Issued out an express Prohibition, That no
one, upon pain of Death, should Transport themselves thither; and also drove
out these new Inhabitants; fearing, it is said, least in process of time, they
should so multiply, as to supplant them themselves, and Ruin their State: But
this Relation of Aristotle's, does no more agree with our new found Lands, than
the other. This Man that I have is a plain ignorant Fellow, and therefore the
more likely to tell Truth: For your better bred sort of Men, are much more
Curious in their Observation, it is true, and discover a great deal more, but
then they gloss upon it, and to give the greater weight to what they deliver,
and allure your Belief, they cannot forbear a little to alter the Story: they
never represent things to you simply as they are, but rather as they appeared
to them, or as they would have them appear to you, and to gain the reputation
of Men of Judgment, and the better to induce your Faith, are willing to help
out the Business with something more than is really true, of their own
Invention. Now in this Case, we should either have a Man of Irreproachable
Veracity: or so Simple, that he has not wherewithal to Contrive, and to give a
Color of Truth to False Relations, and that can have no Ends in Forging an
Untruth. Such a one is mine; and besides, the little suspicion the Man lies
under, he has diverse times showed me several Sea men, and Merchants, that at
the same time went the same Voyage. I shall therefore content my self with his
Information, without enquiring what the Cosmographers say to the Buiness. We
should have Maps to trace out to us the particular places where they have been;
but for having had this advantage over us, to have seen the Holy Land, they
would have the privilege forsooth, to tell us Stories of all the other parts of
the World besides. I would have every one Write what he knows, and as much as
he knows, but no more; and that not in this only, but in all other Subjects:
For such a Person may have some particular Knowledge and Experience of the
nature of such a River; or such a Fountain, that as to other things, knows no
more, than what every Body ders, and yet to keep a clutter with this Little
Pittance of his, will undertake to Write the whole Body of Physics: a Vice
from whence great Inconveniences derive their Original.

Now, to return to my Subject, I find, that there is nothing Barbarous and
Savage in this Nation, by any thing that I can gather, excepting, That every
one gives the Title of Barbarity to every thing that is not in use in his own
Country: As indeed we have no other level of Truth and Reason, than the Example
and Idea of the Opinions and Customs of the place wherein we Live. There is
always the true Religion, there the perfect Government, and the most exact and
accomplished Usance of all things. They are Savages at the same rate, that we
say Fruits are wild, which Nature produces of her self, and by her own ordinary
progress; whereas in truth, we ought rather to call those wild, whose Natures
we have changed by our Artifice, and diverted from the common Order. In those,
the Genuine, most useful and natural Virtues and Properties, are Vigorous and
Spritely, which we have helped to Degenerate in these, by accommodating them to
the pleasure of our own Corrupted Palate. And yet for all this, our Taste
confesses a flavor and delicacy, excellent even to Emulation of the best of
ours, in several Fruits those Countries abound with, without Art or Culture;
neither is it reasonable, that Art should gain the Prehemence of our great and
powerful Mother Nature. We have so oppressed her with the additional Ornaments
and Graces, we have added to the Beauty and Riches of her own Works, by our
Inventions, that we have almost Smothered and Choked her; and yet in other
places, where she shines in her own purity, and proper luster, she strangely
baffles and disgraces all our vain and frivolous Attempts.

Propert. l. 1. Ele. 2.
Et veniunt hederae sponte suae melius,
Surgit and in solis formosion arbutus antris,
Et volucres nulla dulcius art canunt.
The Ivy best spontaneously does thrive,
The Arbutus best in shady Caves does live,
And Birds in their wild Notes, their Throats do stretch
With greater Art, than Art it self can teach.
Our utmost endeavors cannot arrive at so much as to imitate the Nest of the
least of Birds, its Contexture, Queintness and Convenience: Not so much as the
Web of a Contemptible Spider. All things, says Plato, are produced either by
Nature, by Fortune, or by Art; the greatest and most beautiful by the one, or
the other of the former, the least and the most imperfect by the last. These
Nations then seem to me to be so far Barbarous; as having received but very
little form and fashion from Art and Humane Invention, and consequently, not
much remote from their Original Simplicity. The Laws of Nature however govern
them still, not as yet much vitiated with any mixture of ours: But in such
Purity, that I am sometimes troubled we were no sooner acquainted with these
People, and that they were not discovered in those better times, when there
were Men much more able to judge of them, than we are. I am sorry that Lycurgus
and Plato had no knowledge of them; for to my apprehension, what we now see in
those Natives, does not only surpass all the Images with which the Poets have
adorned the Golden Age, and all their Inventions in seigning a Happy Estate of
Man; but moreover, the Fancy, and even the Wish and Desire of Philosophy it
self; so Native, and so pure a Simplicity, as we by Experience see to be in
them, could never enter into their Imagination, nor could they ever believe
that Humane Society could have been maintained with so little Artifice; should
I tell Plato that it is a Nation wherein there is no manner of Traffic, no
knowledge of Letters, no science of Numbers, no name of Magistrate, nor
Politic Superiority; no use of Service, Riches or Poverty, no Contracts, no
Successions, no Dividends, no proprieties, no Employments, but those of
Leisure, no respect of Kindred, but common, no Clothing, no Agriculture, no
Metal, no use of Corn or Wine, and where so much as the very words that
signify, Lying, Treachery, Dissimulation, Avarice, Envy, Detraction and
Pardon, were never heard of: How much would he find his Imaginary Republic
short of his Perfection?

Virg. Georg. 2.
Hos natura modos primum dedit. These were the Manners first by Nature taught.

As to the rest, they Live in a Country, beautiful and pleasant to a Miracle,
and so Temperate withal, as my intelligence informs me, that it is very rare to
hear of a sick Person, and they moreover assure me, that they never saw any of
the Natives, either Paralytick, Bleareyed, Toothless, or Crooked with Age. The
situation of their Country is all along by the Sea shore, and enclosed on the
other side toward the Lands, with great and high Mountains, having about a
Hundred Leagues in breadth between. They have great store of Fish and Flesh,
that have no resemblance to those of ours: which they Eat without any other
Cookery, than plain Boiling, Roasting, and Broiling. The first that carried a
Horse thither, though in several other Voyages he had contracted an
acquaintance and familiarity with them, put them into so terrible a Fright,
that they Killed him with their Arrows before they could come to discover who
he was. Their Buildings are very long, and of Capacity to hold Two or Three
hundred People, made of the Barks of tall Trees, reared with one end upon the
ground, and leaning to, and supporting one another, at the top, like some of
our Barns, of which the Covering hangs down to the very ground, and serves for
the side Walls, They have Wood so hard, that they cleave it into Swords, and
make Grills of it to Broil their Meat. Their Beds are of Cotton, hung swinging
in the Roof, like our Seamens Hammocks, for every one one, for the Wives lie
apart from their Husbands. They rise with the Sun, and so soon as they are up,
Eat for all Day, for they have no more Meals but that: They do not then Drink,
(as Suidas reports of some other People of the East, that never Drink at their
Meals,) but Drink very often all Day after, and sometimes to a rousing pitch.
Their Drink is made of a certain Root, and is of the Color of our Claret;
which they never Drink but Lukewarm. It will keep above two or three Days, has
a quick Taste, is nothing Heady, but very comfortable to the Stomach, loosning
to Strangers, and a very pleasant Beverage to such as are used to it. They make
use instead of Bread, of a certain White Matter, like Coriander Comfits; I have
tasted of it, the taste is sweet, and a little flat. All the whole Day is spent
in Dancing. Their Young Men go a Hunting after Wild Beasts with Bows and
Arrows, and one part of their Women are employed in preparing their Drink the
while, which is their chief Employment. There are some of their Old Men, who in
the Morning before they fall to Eating, Preach to the whole Family, as they
walk to and again from the one end of the House to the other, several times
repeating the same Sentence, till they have finish^d their turn, (for their
Houses are at least a Hundred Yards long,) Valor toward: their Enemies, and
Love toward their Wives, being the two heads of his Discourse, never failing
in the close, to put them in mind, that they have so much the greater
obligation to it; because they provide them their Drink warm, and well ordered.
The fashion of their Beds, Ropes, Swords, and Wooden Bracelets, they tie about
their Wrists, when they go to Fight and great Canes, boar'd hollow at one end,
by the sound of which they keep the Cadence of their Dances, are to be seen in
several places, and amongst others, at my House. They shave all their hairy
parts, and much more nearly than we, without other Razor, than one of Wood, or
of Stone. They believe the Immortality of the Soul, and that those who have
Merited well of the Gods, are Lodged in that part of Heaven where the Sun
rises; and the Accursed in the West. They have I know not what kind of Priests,
and Prophets, that very rarely present themselves to the People, having their
abode in the Mountains. At their arrival there is a great Feast, and solemn
Assembly of many Villages made: that is all the Neighboring Families, for
every House, as I have described it, makes a Village, and are about a French
League distant from one another. This Prophet declaims to them in public,
exhorting them to Virtue, and their Duty: But all their Ethics are terminated
in these two Articles, of Resolution in War, and Affection to their Wives. This
also Prophecies to them Events to come, and the Issues they are to expect from
their Enterprises, prompts them to, or diverts them from War: But let him look
to it; for if he fail in his Divination, and any thing happen otherwise, than he
has foretold, he is cut into a thousand pieces, if he be caught, and Condemned
for a false Prophet; and for that reason, if any of them finds himself
mistaken, he is no more to be heard of. Divination is a gift of God, and
therefore to abuse it, ought to be a Punishable Imposture. Amongst the
Scythians, where their Diviners failed in the promised Effect, they were laid,
Bound Hand and Foot, upon Carts laden with Furs and Bavins, and drawn with
Oxen, on which they were Burnt to Death. Such as only meddle with things
subject to the Conduct of Humane Capacity, are excusable in doing the best they
can: But those other sort of People that come to delude us, with Assurances of
an extraordinary Faculty, beyond our understanding, ought they not to be
Punished, when they do not make good the effect of their Promise, and for the
temerity of their Imposture? They have continual War with the Nations that Live
further within the main Land, beyond their Mountains, to which they go Naked,
and without other Arms, than their Bows, and Wooden-Swords, fashioned at one
end like the head of a Javelin. The Obstinacy of their Battles is wonderful,
and never end without great effusion of Blood: For as to running away, they
know not what it is. Every one for a Trophy brings home the head of an Enemy he
has Killed, which he fixes over the Door of his House. After having a long time
treated their Prisoners very well, and given them all the Regalia's they can
think of, he to whom the Prisoner belongs, invites a great Assembly of his
Kindred and Friends, who being come, he ties a Rope to one of the Arms of the
Prisoner, of which, at a distance, out of his reach, he holds the one end
himself and gives to the Friend he Loves best, the other Arm to hold after the
same manner; which being done, they two in the presence of all the Assembly,
dispatch him with their Swords. After that, they Roast him, Eat him amongst
them, and send some Chops to their absent Friends, which nevertheless they do
not do, as some think, for Nourishment, as the Scythians, anciently did, but as
a representation of an extreme Revenge; as will appear by this, That having
observed the Portugals, who were in League with their Enemies, to inflict
another sort of Death upon any of them they took Prisoners: Which was, to set
them up to the Girdle in the Earth, to shoot at the remaining part till it was
stuck full of Arrows, and then to hang them: They that thought those People of
the other World, (as those who had sown the knowledge of a great many Vices
amongst their Neighbors, and who were much greater Masters in all sorts of
Mischief than they,) did not exercise this sort of Revenge without Mystery, and
that it must needs be more painful than theirs; and so began to leave their old
way, and to follow this. I am not sorry that we should here take notice of the
Barbarous Horror of so Cruel an Action, but that seeing so clearly into their
faults, we should be so blind in our own: For I conceive, there is more
Barbarity in Eating a Man Alive. than when he is Dead; in tearing a Body Limb
from Limb, by Racks and Torments, that is yet in perfect Sense, in Roasting it
by degrees, causing it to be bit and worried by Dogs and Swine, (as we have not
only read, but lately seen; not amongst inveterate and mortal Enemies, but
Neighbors, and fellow Citizens, and which is worse, under color of Piety and
Religion,) than to Roast, and Eat him after he is Dead. Chrysippus, and Zeno,
the Two Heads of the Stoical Sect, were of Opinion, That there was no hurt in
making use of our Dead Carcasses, in what kind soever, for our necessity, and
in feeding upon them too; as our Ancestors, who being Besieged by Caesar in the
City Alexia, resolved to sustain the Famine of the Siege with the Bodies of
their Old Men, Women, and other Persons, who were incapable of bearing Arms.

Javenal. Sat. 15.
Vascones (fama est) alimentis talibus usi,
Produxere animas.
It Is said, the Gascons with such Meats as these,
In time of Siege their Hunger did appease.
And the Physicians make no Bones of employing it to all sorts of use, that is
either to apply it outwardly, or to give it inwardly for the health of the
Patient: but there never was any Opinion so irregular, as to excuse, Treachery,
Disloyalty, Tyranny and Cruelty which are our familiar Vices. We may then call
these People Barbarous, in respect to the Rules of Reason: but not in respect
to our selves, who in all sorts of Barbarity exceed them. Their Wars are
throughout Noble and Generous, and carry as much Excuse and fair Pretense, as
their Humane Disease is capable of; having with them no other foundation, than
the sole Jealousy of Virtue. Their Disputes are not for the Conquest of new
Lands, those they already possess, being so fruitful by Nature, as to supply
them without Labor or Concern, with all things necessary, in such abundance,
that they have no need to enlarge their Borders. And they are moreover happy in
this, that they only covet so much as their natural necessities require: all
beyond that is superfluous to them: Men of the same Age generally call one
another Brothers, those who are younger, Sons and Daughters, and the old Men
are Fathers to all. These leave to their Heirs in common this full possession
of Goods, without any manner of Division, or other Title, than what Nature
bestows upon her Creatures, in bringing them into the World. If their
Neighbors pass over the Mountains, and come to assault them, and obtain a
Victory, all the Victors gain by it is Glory only, and the advantage of having
proved themselves the better in Valor and Virtue: for they never meddle with
the Goods of the Conquered, but presently return into their own Country, where
they have no want of any thing necessary; nor of this greatest of all Goods, to
know happily how to enjoy their Condition, and to be Content. And these in turn
do the same. They demand of their Prisoners soners no other Ransom, than
acknowledgment that they are overcome: but there is not one found in an Age,
who will rather not choose to die, than make such a Confession, or either by
Word or Look, recede from the entire Grandeur of an invincible Courage. There
is not a Man amongst them, who had not rather be Killed and Eaten, than so much
as to open his mouth to entreat he may not. They use them with all Liberality
and Freedom, to the end their Lives may be so much the dearer to them: but
frequently entertain them withal with Menaces of their approaching Death, of
the Torments they are to suffer, of the preparations are making in order to it,
of the mangling their Limbs, and of the Feast is to be made, where their
Carcasses is to be the only Dish. All which they do, to no other end, but only
to extort some gentle or submissive word from them, or to Fright them so as to
make them run away; to obtain this advantage, that they were terrified, and
that their Constancy was shaken; and indeed, if rightly taken, it is in this
point only, that a true Victory does consist.

Claud. in Panegyr.
-- Victoria nulla est,
Quam quae confessos animo quoque subjugat hosts.
No Victory can be entire, and true;
But what does Minds, as well as Limbs subdue.
The Hungarians, a very Warlike People, never pretended further than to reduce
the Enemy to their Discretion; for having forced this Confession from them,
they let them go without Injury, or Ransom, excepting, at the most, to make
them engage their word, never to bear Arms against them again. We have several
advantages over our Enemies that are borrowed, and not truly our own; it is the
quality of a Porter, and no effect of Virtue to have stronger Arms and Legs,
it is a Dead and Corporeal quality to be Active, it is an Exploit of fortune to
make our Enemy stumble, or to dazzle him with the light of the Sun; it is a trick
of Science and Art, and that may happen in a mean base Fellow, to be a good
Fencer. The Estimate and Valor of a Man consist in the Heart, and in the Will,
there his true Honor Lives. Valor is Stability, not of Legs, and Arms, but of
the Courage, and the Soul; it does not lie in the Valor of our Horse, or our
Arms, but in our own. He that falls obstinate in his Courage, Si succiderit de
genu pugnat. Seneca Epist.
If his Legs fail him, Fight upon his Knees. He who for any danger of apparent
Death, abates nothing of his assurance, who Dying, does yet dart at his Enemy a
fierce and disdainful Look, is overcome not by us, but by Fortune, he is
Killed, not Conquered; the most Valiant, and sometimes the most Unfortunate.
There are also Defeats Triumphant to Emulation of Victories. Neither durst
those Four Sister-Victories, the fairest the Sun ever beheld, of Salamis,
Platea, Mical and Sicily, ever oppose all their united Glories, to the single
Glory of the Discomfiture of King Leonidas, and his Army at the Pass of
Thermopylae. Who ever ran with a more glorious Desire, and greater Ambition, to
the wining, than the Captain Ischola^ to the certain loss of a Battle? Who
could have found out a more subtle Invention to secure his safety, than he did
to assure his Ruin? He was set to defend a certain Pass of Peloponnesus
against the Arcadians, which considering the nature of the place, and the
inequality of Forces, finding it utterly impossible for him to do, and
concluding that all who were presented to the Enemy, must certainly be left
upon the place; and on the other side reputing it unworthy of his own Virtue,
and Magnanimity, and of the Lacedaemonian name, to fail in any part of his
Duty, he chose a mean betwixt these two Extremes, after this manner; The
Youngest and most Active of his Men, he would preserve for the Service and
Defense of their Country, and therefore sent them back; and with the rest,
whose loss would be of less consideration, he resolved to make good the Pass,
and with the Death of them, to make the Enemy buy their Entry as dear as
possibly he could: as it also fell: out, for being presently Environed on all
sides by the Aroadians, after having made a great Slaughter of the Enemy, he,
and his, were all cut in pieces. Is there any Trophy dedicated to the
Conquerours, which is not much more due to these who were overcome? The part
that true Conquering is to play, lies in the Encounter, not in the coming off;
and the Honor of Virtue consists in Fighting, not in Subduing.

But to return to my Story, these Prisoners are so far from discovering the
least Weakness, for all the Terrors can be represented to them, that, on the
contrary, during the two or three Months, that they are kept, they always
appear with a cheerful Countenance; importune their Masters to make haste to
bring them to the Test, Defy, Rail at them, and Reproach them with Cowardice,
and the number of Battles they have lost against those of their Country. I have
a Song made by one of these Prisoners, wherein he bids them come all, and Dine
upon him, and welcome, for they shall withal Eat their own Fathers, and
Grandfathers, whose Flesh has served to feed and nourish him. Those Muscles,
says he, this Flesh, and these Veins, are your own: Poor silly Souls as you
are, you little think that the substance of your Ancestors Limbs is here yet:
but mind as you Eat, and you will find in it the Taste of your own Flesh: In
which Song there is to be observed, an Invention that does nothing relish of
the Barbarian. Those that paint these People Dying after this manner, represent
the Prisoner spitting in the faces of his Executioners, and making at them a
wry Mouth. And it is most certain, that to the very last gasp, they never cease
to Brave and Defy them both in Word and Gesture. In plain truth, these Men are
very Savage in comparison of us, and of necessity, they must either be
absolutely so, or else we are Savager: for there is a vast difference betwixt
their Manners, and ours.

The Men there have several Wives, and so much the greater number, by how much
they have the greater Reputation and Valor, and it is one very remarkable
Virtue their Women have, that the same Endeavor our Wives have to hinder and
divert us from the Friendship and Familiarity of other Women, those employ to
promote their Husbands Desires, and to procure them many Spouses; for being
above all things sollicitous of their Husbands Honor, it is their chiefest care
to seek out, and to bring in the most Companions they can, forasmuch as it is a
Testimony of their Husbands Virtue. I know most of ours will cry out, that it is
Monstrous; whereas in truth, it is not so; but a truly Matrimonial Virtue;
though of the highest form. In the Bible, Sarah, Leah and Rachel, gave the most
Beautiful of their Maids to their Husbands, Livia preferred the Passion of
Augustus to her own interest, and the Wife of King Dejotarus of Stratonica, did
not only give up a fair young Maid that served her, to her Husband's Embraces,
but moreover carefully brought up the Children he had by her, and assisted them
in the Succession to their Father's Crown. And that it may not be supposed,
that all this is done by a simple and servile Observation to their common
Practice, or by any Authoritative Impression of their Ancient Custom, without
Judgment, or Examination; and for having a Soul so stupid, that it cannot
contrive what else to do, I must here give you some touches of their
sufficiency, in point of Understanding; besides what I repeated to you before,
which was one of their Songs of War, I have another, and a Love Song, that
begins thus; Stay, Adder, stay, that by thy Pattern my Sister may draw the
Fashion, and work of a Noble Wreath, that I may present to my Beloved, by which
means thy Beauty, and the excellent Order of thy Scales shall for ever be
preferred before all other Serpents. Wherein the first Couplet, Stay, Adder,
etc. makes the Burden of the Song. Now I have conversed enough with Poetry to
judge thus much: that not only, there is nothing of Barbarous in this
Invention: But moreover, that it is perfectly Anacreontick: to which their
Language is soft, of a pleasing Accent, and something bordering upon the Greek
Terminations. Three of these People, not foreseeing how dear their knowledge of
the Corruptions of this part of the World, would one Day cost their Happiness
and Repose, and that the effect of this Commerce would be their Ruin, as I
presuppose it is in a very fair way, (Miserable Men to suffer themselves to be
deluded with desire of Novelty, and to have left the Serenity of their own
Heaven, to come so far to gaze at ours,) came to Roan, at the time that the
late King Charles the Ninth was there: where the King himself talked to them a
good white, and they were made to see our Fashions, our Pomp, and the form of a
great City; after which, some one asked their opinion, and would know of them,
what of all the things they had seen, they found most to be admired? To which
they made Answer, Three things, of which I have forgot the Third, and am
troubled at it; but two I yet, remember. They said, that in the first place
they thought it very strange, that so many tall Men wearing Beards, strong and
well Armed, who were about the King, ('it is like they meant the Swiss of the
Guard,) should submit to Obey a Child, and that they did not choose out one
amongst themselves to Command: Secondly, (they have a way of speaking in their
Language, to call Men the half of one another,) that they had Observed, that
there were amongst us, Men full, and crammed with all manner of Conveniences,
whilst in the mean time, their halves were Begging at their Doors, Lean, and
half starved with Hunger and Poverty; and thought it strange, that these
Necessitous halves, were able to suffer so great an Inequality and Injustice,
and that they did not take the others by the Throats, or set Fire to their
Houses. I talked to one of them a great while together, but I had so ill an
Interpreter, and that was so perplexed by his own Ignorance, to apprehend my
meaning, that I could get nothing out of him, of any moment; Asking him, what
advantage he reapt from the Superiority he had amongst his own People? (For he
was a Captain, and our Mariners called him King,) he told me, to March in the
Head of them to War: and demanding of him further, how many Men he had to
follow him? He showed me a space of Ground, to signify, as many as could March
in such a compass: which might be Four or Five Thousand Men; and putting the
question to him, whether or no his Authority expired with the War; He told me
this remained; that when he went to Visit the Village of his dependence, they
plained him Paths through the thick of their Woods, through which he might pass
at his ease. All this does not sound very ill, and the last was not much amiss;
for they wear no Breeches.

CHAP. XXXI.
That a Man is soberly to judge of Divine Ordinances.
THings unknown are the principal and true subject of Imposture, forasmuch as
in the first place, their very Strangeness lends them Credit, and moreover, by
not being subjected to our ordinary Discourse, they deprive us of the means to
question, and dispute them. For which reason, says Plato, it is much more easy
to satisfy the hearers, when speaking of the Nature of the Gods, than of the
Nature of Men, because the Ignorance of the Auditory affords a fair and large
Career, and all manner of Liberty, in the handling of profane and abstruse
things; and then it comes to pass, that nothing is so firmly believed, as what
we least know: nor any People so confident, as those who entertain us with
Fabulous Stories, such as your Alchymists, Judicial Astrologers,
Fortune Tellers, and Physicians, Id genus omne; to which I could willingly if I
durst, join a sort of People, that take upon them to interpret and Control the
Designs of God himself, making no question of finding out the cause of every
Accident, and to pry into the secrets of the Divine Will, there to discover the
Incomprehensible Motives of his Works. And although the variety, and the
continual discordance of Events, throw them from Corner to Corner, and toss
them from East to West, yet do they still persist in their vain Inquisition,
and with the same Pencil to Paint Black and White. In a Nation of the Indies,
there is this commendable Custom, that when any thing befalls them amiss in any
Rencounter or Battle, they publicly ask Pardon of the Sun, who is their God,
as having committed an unjust Action, always imputing their Good or Evil
Fortune to the Divine Justice, and to that, submitting their own Judgment and
Reason. It Is enough for a Christian to believe, that all things come from God,
to receive them with acknowledgement of his divine and instructable Wisdom, and
also thankfully to accept and receive them, with what Face soever they may
present themselves: But I do not approve of what I see in use, that is, to seek
to continue and support our Religion by the Prosperity of our Enterprises. Our
Belief has other Foundation enough, without going about to Authorize it by
Events: For the People accustomed to such Arguments as these, and so proper to
their own Taste, it is to be feared, lest when they fail of Success, they
should also stagger in their Faith: As in the War wherein we are now Engaged,
upon the account of Religion, those who had the better in the Business of
Rochelabeille; making great Brags of that success, as an infallible approbation
of their Cause, when they came afterward to excuse their Misfortunes of
Jarnac, and Moncontour, 'twas by saying, they were Fatherly Scourges and
Corrections; if they have not a People wholly at their Mercy, they make it
manifestly enough to appear, what it is to take two sorts of Grist out of the
same Sack, and with the same Mouth to blow Hot and Cold. It were better to
possess the Vulgar with the solid and real Foundations of Truth. 'Twas a brave
Naval-Battel that was gained a few Months since, against the Turks, under the
command of Don John of Austria; but it has also pleased God at other times to
let us see as great Victories at our own Expense. In fine, it is a hard matter
to reduce Divine things to our Balance, without waste, and losing a great deal
of the weight. And who would take upon him to give a reason, that Arius, and
his Pope Leo, the principal Heads of the Arian Heresy, should Die at several
times of so like and strange Deaths, (for being withdrawn from the Disputation,
by the Griping in the Guts, they both of them suddenly gave up the Ghost upon
the Stool,) and would aggravate this Divine Vengeance by the Circumstance of
the place; might as well add the Death of Heliogabalus, who was also slain in a
House of Office. But what? Irenaeus was involved in the same Fortune; God being
pleased to show us, that the Good have something, else to hope for; and the
Wicked something else to fear, than the Fortunes, or Misfortunes, of this
World: He manages, and applies them, according to his own secret Will and
Pleasure, and deprives us of the means, foolishly to make our own profit. And
those People both abuse themselves, and us, who will pretend to dive into these
Mysteries by the strength of Humane Reason. They never give one hit, that they
do not receive two for it; of which, St. Augustine gives a very great proof
upon his Adversaries. It Is a Conflict, that is more decided by strength of
Memory, than the force of Reason. We are to content our selves with the Light
it pleases the Sun to communicate to us, by Virtue of his Rays, and who will
lift up his Eyes to take in a greater, let him not think it strange, if for the
reward of his presumption, he there lose his sight. Sapien. Cap. 9. v. 13.
Quis hominum potest scire consilium Dei? aut quis poterit cogitare, quid velit
Dominus? Who amongst Men can know the Counsil of God? or Who can think what the
Will of the Lord is?

CHAP. XXXII.
That we are to avoid Pleasures, even at the expense of Life.
I Had long ago Observed most of the Opinions of the Ancients to concur in
this, That i^ is happy to Die, when there is more ill than good in Living, and
that to preserve Life to our own Torment and Inconvenience, is contrary to the
very Rules of Nature, as these old Laws instruct us.

(...),
(...),
(...).
Happy is Death, whenever it shall come
To him, to whom to Live is troublesome,
Whom Life does persecute with restless Spite,
May Honorably bid the World good Night,
And infinitely better it is to Die,
Than to prolong a Life of Misery.
But to push this Contempt of Death so far as to employ it to the removing our
selves from the danger of Coveting Honors, Riches, Dignities, and other
Favors, and Goods, as we call them, of Fortune, as if Reason were not
sufficient to persuade us to avoid them, without adding this new Injunction, I
had never seen it either enjoined, or practiced, till this passage of Seneca
fell into my hands; who advising Lucilius, a Man of great Power and Authority
about the Emperor, to alter his Voluptuous and Magnificent way of Living, and
to retire himself from this Worldly Vanity and Ambition, to some Solitary,
Quiet and Philosophical Life, and the other alleging some Difficulties; I am
of Opinion, says he, either that thou leave that Life, or Life it self. I would
indeed advise thee to the gentle way, and to untie, rather than to break, the
Knot thou have undiscreetly Knit, prov^ded, that if it be not otherwise to be
unti'd, then resolutely break it. There is no man so great a Coward, that had
nor rather once fall, than to be always falling. I should have found this
Counsel conformable enough to the Stoic^l Roughness: But it appears the more
strange, for being borrowed from Epicurus, who writes the same thing upon the
like occasion to Idominius. And I think I have Observed something like it, but
with Christian Moderation, a among our own People. St. Hilary, Bishop of
Poictiers, that famous Enemy of the Arian Heresy, being in Syria, had
intelligence thither sent him, that Abra his only Daughter, whom he left at
home under the Eye and Tuition of her Mother, was sought in Marriage by the
greatest Noblemen of the Country, as being a Virgin Virtuously brought up,
Fair, Rich, and in the Flower of her Age: whereupon he writ to her, (as it
appears upon Record,) that she should remove her Affection from all those
Pleasures and Advantages were proposed unto her; for he had in his Travels
found out a much greater and more worthy Fortune for her, a Husband of much
greater Power and Magnificence, that would present her with Robes, and Jewels
of inestimable value; wherein his design was, to dispossess her of the
Appetite, and use of Worldly delights, to join her wholly to God: But the
nearest and most certain way to this, being, as he conceived, the Death of his
Daughter; he never ceased, by Vows, Prayers and O^aisons, to Beg of the
Almighty, that he would please to call her out of this World, and to take her
to himself; as accordingly it came to pass; for soon after his return, she
Died, at which he expressed a singular Joy. This seems to out do the other,
forasmuch as the applies himself to this means at the first sight, which they
only take subsidiarily, and besides, it was toward his only Daughter. But I
will not omit the latter end of this Story, though it be from my purpose; St.
Hilary's Wife having understood from him, how the Death of their Daughter was
brought about, by his desires and design, and how much happier she was, to he
removed out of this World, than to have stayed in it, conceived so Lively an
Apprehension of the Eternal and Heavenly Beatitude, that she Begged of her
Husband with the extremest Importunity, to do as much for her; and God, at
their joint Request, shortly after calling her to him, it was a Death embraced
on both sides, with singular Content.

CHAP. XXXIII.
That Fortune is oftentimes Observed to Act by the Rule of Reason.
THe Inconstancy, and various Motions of Fortune, may reasonably make us
expect, she should present us with all sorts of Faces. Can there be a more
express Act of Justice, than this? The Duke of Valentenois, having resolved to
Poison Adrian Cardinal of Cornetto, with whom Pope Alexander the Sixth, his
Father and himself, were to go to Supper in the Vatican: he sent before a
Bottle of Poisoned Wine, and withal, strict Order to the Butler to keep it very
safe. The Pope being come before his Son, and calling for Drink, the Butler
supposing this Wine had not been so strictly recommended to his Care, but only
upon the account of its Excellency, presented it presently to the Pope, and the
Duke himself coming in presently after, and being confident they had not
meddled with his Bottle, took also his Cup; so that the Father Died immediately
upon the place, and the Son, after having been long tormented with Sickness,
was reserved to another, and a worse Fortune: Sometimes she seems to play upon
us, just in the nick of an Affair; Monsieur d' Estree at that time Guidon to
Monsieur de Vendosme; and Monsieur de Liques Lieutenant to the Company of the
Duke of Ascot, being both pertenders to the Sieur de Foungueselles his Sister,
though of several Parties, (as it often falls out amongst Frontier Neighbors,)
the Sieur de Liques carried her, but on the same Day he was Married, and which
was worse before he went to Bed to his Wife, the Bridegroom having a mind to
break a Lance in honor of his new Bride, went out to Skirmish, near to St.
Omers, where the Sieur d' Estree proving the stronger, took him Prisoner, and
the more to illustrate his Victory, the Lady her self was fain Catullus.
Conjugis ante coacta novi dimittere collum,
Quam veniens una, atque altera rursus hyems,
Noctibus in longis avidum saturasset amorem.
Of her fair Arms, the Amorous Ring to break,
Which clung so fast to her new Spouse's Neck,
E're of two Winters many a friendly Night
Had sated her Loves greedy Appetite.
to request him of Courtesy, to deliver up his Prisoner to her, as he
accordingly did, the Gentlemen of France never denying any thing to Ladies.
Does she not seem to be an Artist here? Constantine the Son of Hellen, founded
the Empire of Constantinople, and so many Ages after, Constantine the Son of
Hellen put an end to it. Sometimes she is pleased to Emulate our Miracles. We
are told, that King Clouis Besieging Angolesme, the Walls fell down of
themselves by Divine Favor. And Bouchet has it from some Author, that King
Robert having sat down before a City, and being stole away from the Siege, to
go keep the Feast of St. Aignan at Orleans; as he was in Devotion, at a certain
place of the Mass, the Walls of the beleagured City, without any manner of
Violence, fell down with a sudden Ruin. But she did quite contrary in our
Milan War; for Captain Rense laying Siege to the City Verona, and having
carried a Mine under a great part of the Wall, the Mine being sprung, the Wall
was lifted from its base, but dropped down again nevertheless, whole and entire,
and so exactly upon its foundation, that the Besieged suffered no Inconvenience
by that Attempt. Sometimes she plays the Physician. Jason Phereus being given
over by the Physicians, by reason of a desperate Imposthumation in his Breast,
having a mind to rid himself of his Pain, by Death at least, in a Battle, threw
himself desperately into the thickest of the Enemy, where he was so fortunately
wounded quite through the Body, that the Imposthume brake, and he was perfectly
cured. Did she not also excel the painter Protogenes in his Art? Who having
finished the Picture of a Dog quite tired, and out of breath, in all the other
parts excellently well to his own liking, but not being able to express, as he
would, the slaver and foam that should come out of his Mouth, vexed, and angry
at his work, he took his Sponge, which by cleaning his Pencils, had imbibed
several sorts of Colors, and threw it in a rage against the Picture, with an
intent utterly to deface it; when Fortune guiding the Sponge to hit just upon
the Mouth of the Dog, it there performed what all his Art was not able to do.
Does she not sometimes direct our Counsels, and correct them? Isabel Queen of
England, being to Sail from Zealand into her own Kingdom, with an Army in
favor of her Son, against her Husband, had been lost, had she come into the
Port she intended, being there laid wait for by the Enemy; but fortune against
her will, threw her into another Haven, where she Landed in safety. And he who
throwing a Stone at a Dog, hit, and killed, his Mother in Law, had he not
reason to pronounce this Verse, Menander^
(...); -- By this I see,
Fortune does better aim than we.
Fortune has more Judgment than we. Icetes had contracted with two Soldiers to
Kill Timoleon, at Adranon in Sicily. These Villains took their time to do it,
when he was assisting at a Sacrifice, who thrusting into the Crowd, as they
were making signs to one another, that now was a fit time to do their business,
in steps a third, who with a Sword takes one of them full drive over the Pate,
lays him dead upon the place, and away he runs. Which the other seeing, and
concluding himself discovered, and lost, he runs to the Altar, and begs for
Mercy, promising to discover the whole truth, which as he was doing, and laying
open the whole Conspiracy, behold the third Man, who being Apprehended, was, as
a Murderer thrust and haled by the People through the Press, toward Timoleon,
and other the most Eminent Persons of the Assembly, before whom being brought,
he Cried out for Pardon, pleading that he had justly Slain his Fathers
Murderer; which he also proving upon the place, by sufficient Witnesses, which
his good Fortune very opportunely supplied him withal, that his Father was
really Killed in the City of the Leomins, by that very Man on whom he had taken
his Revenge, he was presently Awarded Ten Attick The old Attick Mine was 75
Drach.
Mines, for having had the good Fortune, by designing to revenge the Death of
his Father, to preserve the Life of the common Father of Sicily. This Fortune
in her Conduct, surpasses all the Rules of Humane Prudence. But, to conclude,
is there not a direct Application, of her Favor, Bounty and Piety, manifestly
discovered in this Action? Ignatius the Father, and Ignatius the Son, being
proscribed by the Triumvity of Rome, resolved upon this generous Act of mutual
kindness, to fall by the hands of one another, and by that means, to frustrate
and defeat the Cruelty of the Tyrants; and accordingly, with their Swords
drawn, ran full drive upon one another, where Fortune so guided the points,
that they made two equally Mortal Wounds, affording withal so much Honor to so
brave a Friendship, as to leave them just strength enough to draw out their
Bloody Swords, that they might have liberty to embrace one another in this
Dying Condition, with so close and hearty an Embrace, that the Executioners cut
off both their Heads at once, leaving the Bodies still fast linked together in
this Noble Knot, and their Wounds joined Mouth to Mouth, affectionately sucking
in the last Blood, and remainder of the Lives of one another.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of one Defect in one Government.
MY Father, who for a Man, that had no other advantages, than Experience only,
and his own Natural Parts, was nevertheless of a very clear Judgment, The
project of an Office of Enquiry.
has formerly told me that he once had thoughts of endeavoring to introduce
this Practice; that, there might be in every City a certain place assigned, to
which, such as stood in need of any thing might repair, and have their Business
entered by an Officer appointed for that purpose: as for Example, I enquire for
a Chapman to Buy my Pearls: I enquire for one that has Pearls to Sell: Such a
one wants Company to go to Paris, such a one enquires for a Servant of such a
Quality, such a one for a Master, such a one enquires for such an Artificer,
some for one thing, some for another, every one according to what he wants. And
doubtless, these mutual Advertisements would be of no contemptible, Advantage
to the Public Correspondency and Intelligence: For there are ever more
Conditions that hunt after one another, and for want of knowing one another
occasions, leave Men in very great necessity. I have heard, to the great shame
of the Age we Live in, that in our very sight, two most excellent Men for
Learning, Died so Poor, that they had scarce Bread to put in their Mouths,
Lilius Gregorius Giraldus in Italy, and Sebastianus Castalio in Germany: And do
believe, there are a Thousand Men would have invited them into their Families,
with very advantageous Conditions, or have relieved them where they were, had
they known their wants. The World is not so generally Corrupted but that I know
a Man, that would heartily wish the Estate his Ancestors have left him, might
be employed, so long as it shall please Fortune to give him leave to enjoy it,
to secure rare and remarkable Persons of any kind, whom Misfortune sometimes
persecutes to the last degree, from the danger of Necessity; and at least,
place them in such a condition, that they must be very hard to please, if they
were not contented. My Father in his Oeconomical Government, had this Order,
(which I know how to commend, but by no means imitate,) which was, that besides
the Day-book, or Memorial of the Household Affairs, where the small Accounts,
Payments and Disbursements, which do not require a Secretaries hand, were
entered, and which a Bailiff always had in Custody; he Ordered him whom he kept
to write for him, to keep a Paper Journal, and in it to set down all the
remarkable Occurrences, and Day by Day the Memoirs of the Histories of his
House: very pleasant to look over, when time begins to wear things out of
Memory, and very useful sometimes to put us out of doubt, when such a thing was
begun, when ended, what courses were debated on, what concluded; our Voyages,
Absences, Marriages, and Deaths, the reception of good, or ill news; the change
of Principal Servants, and the like. An Ancient Custom, which I think it would
not be amiss for every one to revive in his own House; and I find I did very
foolishly in neglecting the same.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Custom of Wearing Clothes.
WHatever I shall say upon this Subject, I am of necessity to invade some of
the bounds of Custom, so careful has she been to shut up all the Avenues. I was
disputing with my self in this shivering season, whether the fashion of going
Naked in those Nations lately discovered, is imposed upon them, by the hot
temperature of the Air, as we say of the Moors and Indians, or whether it be
the Original fashion of Mankind; Men of Understanding, forasmuch as all things
under the Sun, as the Holy Writ declares, are subject to the same Laws, were
wont in such Considerations as these, where we are to distinguish the Natural
Laws from those have been imposed by Man's Invention, to have recourse to the
general Polity of the World, where there can be nothing Counterfeited. Now all
other Creatures being sufficiently furnished with all things necessary for the
support of their being, it is not to be imagined, that we only should be
brought into the World in a defective and indigent Condition, and in such an
estate as cannot subsist without Foreign assistance; and therefore it is, that
I believe, that as Plants, Trees, and Animals, and all things that have Life,
are seen to be by Nature sufficiently Clothed and Covered, to defend them from
the Injuries of Weather; Lucret. l. 4.
Proptereaque fere res omnes, aut corio sunt,
Aut seta, aut conchis, aut callo, aut cortice tectae.
Moreover all things, or with Skin, or Hair,
Or Shell, or Bark, or Callus clothed are.
so were we: But as those who by Artificial Light put out that of the Day, so
we by borrowed Forms and Fashions have destroyed our own. And it is plain enough
to be seen, that it is Custom only which renders that impossible, that otherwise
is nothing so; for of those Nations who have no manner of knowledge of
Clothing, some are situated under the same Temperature that we are, and some
in much Colder Climates. And besides, our most tender Parts are always exposed
to the Air, as the Eyes, Mouth, Nose, and Ears; and our Country Laborers, like
our Ancestors in former times, go with their Breasts and Bellies open. Had we
been Born with a necessity upon us of wearing Petticoats and Breeches, there is
no doubt, but Nature would have Fortified those Parts she intended should be
exposed to the Fury of the Seasons, with a thicker Skin, as she has done the
Finger ends, and the Soles of the Feet. And why should this seem hard to
believe? I Observe much greater distance betwixt my Habit, and that of one of
our Country Boors, than betwixt his, and a Man that has no other Covering but
his Skin. How many Men, especially in Turkey, go naked upon the account of
Devotion? I know not who would ask a Beggar, whom he should see in his Shirt in
the depth of Winter, as Brisk and Frolic, as he who goes Muffled up to the
Ears in Furs, how he is able to endure to go so? Why Sir, he might Answer, you
go with your Face bare, and I am all Face. The Italians have a Story of the
Duke of Florence his Fool, whom his Master Asking, How being so thin Clad, he
was able to support the Cold, when he himself, warm wrapped as he was, was hardly
able to do it? Why, replied the Fool, use my Receipt, to put on all your Cloths
you have at once, and you will feel no more Cold, than I. King Massinissa to an
extreme Old Age, could never be prevailed upon to go with his Head covered, how
Cold, Stormy, or Rainy, soever the Weather might be: Which also is reported of
the Emperor Severus. Herodotus tells us, that in the Battles fought betwixt
the Egyptians, and the Persians, it was Observed both by himself, and others,
that of those who were left Dead upon the place, the Heads of the Aegytians
were found to be without comparison harder, than those of the Persians, by
reason that the last had gone with their Heads always covered from their
Infancy, first, with Biggins, and then with Turbans, and the others always
shaved, and open. And King Agesilaus observed to a decrepit Age, to wear always
the same Clothes in Winter, that he did in Summer. Caesar, says Suetonius,
Marched always at the Head of his Army, for the most part on foot, with his
Head bare, whether it was Rain, or Sunshine, and as much is said of Hannibal.

Silius It. li. 6. 1.
-- Tum vertice nudo,
Excipere insanos imbres, Coelique ruinam.
Bare Head to March in Snow, and when it pours
Whole Cataracts of cold unwholesome showers.
A Venetian who has long Lived in Pegu, and is lately returned from thence,
writes, that the Men and Women of that Kingdom, though they cover all their
other Parts, go always Barefoot, and Ride so too. And Plato does very earnestly
advise, for the health of the whole Body, to give the Head and the Feet no
other Clothing, than what Nature has bestowed. He whom the Polacks have
Elected for their King, since ours came thence, who is indeed one of the
greatest Princes of this Age, never wears any Gloves, and for Winter, or
whatever Weather can come, never wears other Cap abroad, than the same he wears
at home. Whereas I cannot endure to go unbutton'd, or unti'd; our Neighboring
Laborers would think themselves in Chains, if they were so braced. Varro is of
Opinion, that when it was Ordained, we should be bare in the presence of the
Gods, and before the Magistrate, it was rather so Ordered, upon the score of
health, and to Inure us to the Injuries of Weather, than upon the account of
Reverence. And since we are now talking of Cold, and French men used to wear
variety of Colors, (not I my self, for I seldom wear other than Black, or
White, in Imitation of my Father,) let us add another Story of Captain Martin
du Bellay, who affirms, that in the Voyage of Luxemburg, he saw so great
Frosts, that the Ammunition Wine was cut with Hatchets, and Wedges; was
delivered out to the Soldiers by Weight, and that they carried it away in
Baskets: and Ovid,

Ovid. Trist. l. 3. El. 12.
Nudaque consistunt formam servantia testae
Vina, nec hausta meri, sed data frusta bibunt.
-- The Wine
Stripped of its Cask, retains the Figure still,
Nor do they Draughts, but Crusts of Bacchus swill.
At the Mouth of the Lake Moeotis, the Frosts are so very sharp, that in the
very same place where Mithridates his Lieutenant had Fought the Enemy dry-foot,
and given them a notable Defeat, the Summer following he obtained over them a
Famous Naval Victory. The Romans Fought at a very great disadvantage, in the
Engagement they had with the Carthaginians near Placentia, by reason, that they
went on to Charge with their Blood fixed, and their Limbs Numbed with Cold,
whereas Hannihal had caused great Fires to be dispersed quite through his Camp
to warm his Soldiers, and Oil to be distributed amongst them; to the end, that
Anointing themselves, they might render their Nerves more Supple and Active,
and sortifie the Pores against the violence of the Air, and Freezing Wind, that
Raged in that Season. The Retreat the Greeks made from Babylon into their own
Country, is Famous, for the Difficulties and Calamities they had to overcome.
Of which, this was one, that being Encountered in the Mountains of Armenia,
with a horrible Storm of Snow, they lost all knowledge of the Country, and of
the ways, and being driven up, were a Day and a Night without Eating or
Drinking; most of their Cattle died, many of themselves Starved Dead, several
struck Blind with the driving, and the glittering of the Snow, many of them
Maimed in their Fingers and Toes, and many Stiff and Motionless with the
extremity of the Cold, who had yet their Understanding entire. Alexander saw a
Nation, where they Bury the Fruit Trees is Winter, to defend them from being
destroyed by the Frost, and we also may see the same. But concerning Clothes,
the King of Mexico changed four times a Day his Apparel, and never put them on
more, employing those he left off, in his continual Liberalities and Rewards,
as also, neither Pot, Dish, nor other Utensil of his Kitchen, or Table, was
ever served in Twice.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Cato the Younger.
I Am not guilty of the Common Error of judging another by my self I easily
believe that in another Humor that is contrary to my own: and though I find
my self engaged to one certain Form, I do not oblige others to it as many do;
but believe and apprehend a Thousand ways of Living, and contrary to most Men,
more easily admit of Differences than Uniformity amongst us. I as frankly, as
any one would have me, discharge a Man from my Humors and Principles, and
consider him according to his own particular Model. Though I am not continent
my self, I nevertheless sincerely Love, and approve the Continency of the
Capuchins, and other Religious Orders, and highly commend their way of Living.
I insinuate my self by imagination into their Place and Love, and Honor them
the more, for being other than I am. I very much desire, that we may be
Censured every Man by himself, and would not be drawn in to the consequence of
common Examples. My Weakness does nothing alter the Esteem I ought to have of
the force and vigor of those who deserve it. Sunt qui nihil suadent, quam quod
se imitari posse confidunt. Cicero de Or. ad.
There are who persuade nothing but what they believe they can imitate
themselves. Crawling upon the Slime of the Earth, I do not for all that cease
to Observe up in the Clouds the inimitable height of some Heroic Souls: it is a
great deal for me to have my Judgment regular and right, if the effects cannot
be so, and to maintain this Sovereign part at least free from Corruption: it is
something to have my Will right and good, where my Legs fail me. This Age
wherein we Live in our part of the World at least, is grown so stupid, that not
only Exercise, but the very Imagination of Virtue is defective, and seems to be
no other but College-Fashion.

H^race Ep. 6. l. 1.
-- Virtutem verba putant, ut
Lucum ligna:
Words finely couched, these Men for Virtue take;
As if each Wood a Sacred Grove could make.
Quam vereri deberent, etiam si percipere non possent. Which they ought to
Reverence, Cicero Tus. 1.
though they cannot Comprehend. It Is a Gew-gaw to hang in a Cabinet, or at the
end of the Tongue, as on the tip of the Ear, for Ornament only. There is no
more Virtuous Actions exstant, and those Actions that carry a show of Virtue,
have yet nothing of its Essence; by reason, that Profit, Glory, Fear and
Custom, and other such like foreign Causes, put us in the way to produce them.
Our Justice also, Valor, and good Offices, may then be called so too, in
respect to others, and according to the face they appear with to the Public;
but in the doer it can by no means be Virtue, because there is another end
proposed, another moving cause. Now virtue owns nothing to be hers, but what is
done by her self, and for her self alone. In that great Battle of Potidaea,
that the Greeks under the Command of Pausanias obtained against Mardonius, and
the Persians, the Conquerours, according to their Custom, coming to divide
amongst them the Glory of the Exploit, they attributed to the Spartan Nation
the Pre-eminence of Valor in this Engagement. The Spartans, great Judges of
Virtue, when they came to determine, to what particular Man of their Nation the
Honor was due, of having the best Behaved himself upon this occasion, found,
that Aristodemus had of all others hazarded his Person with the greatest
Bravery: but did not however allow him any Prize, or Reward; by reason that his
Virtue had been incited by a desire, to clear his Reputation from the Reproach
of his Miscarriage at the Business of Thermopylae, and with a desire to Die
Bravely, to wipe off that former Blemish. Our Judgments are yet sick, and Obey
the Humor of our depraved Manners. I Observe most of the Wits of these Times
pretend to Ingenuity, by endeavoring to blemish and to darken the Glory of the
Bravest and most Generous Actions of former Ages, putting one Vile
Interpretation or another upon them, and forging and supposing vain Causes and
Motives for those Noble things they did. A mighty subtilty indeed? Give me the
greatest and most unblemished Action that ever the Day beheld, and I will
contrive a Hundred plausible Drifts and Ends to obscure it: God knows, whoever
will stretch them out to the full, what diversity of Images our internal Wills
do suffer under; they do not so Maliciously play the Censurers, as they do it
Ignorantly and Rudely in all their Detractions. The same pains and license that
others take to Blemish and Bespatter these illustrious Names, I would willingly
undergo to lend them a shoulder to raise them higher. These rare Images, and
that are culled out by the consent of the wisest Men of all Ages, for the
Worlds Example, I should endeavor to Honor anew, as far as my Invention would
permit, in all the Circumstances of favorable Interpretation. And we are to
believe, that the force of our Invention is infinitely short of their Merit.
It Is the Duty of good Men to Pourtray Virtues as Beautiful as they can, and
there would be no Indecency in the Case, should our Passion a little Transport
us in favor of so Sacred a Form. What these People do to the contrary, they
either do out of Malice, or by the Vice of confining their Belief to their own
Capacity; or, which I am more inclined to think, for not having their sight
strong, clear and elevated enough, to conceive the splendor of Virtue in her
Native Purity: As Plutarch complains, that in his time some Attributed the
cause of the Younger Cato's Death, to his Fear of Caesar, at which he seems
very Angry, and with good reason: and by that a Man may guess how much more he
would have been offended with those, who have Attributed it to Ambitious
Senceless People! He would rather have performed a handsome, just and generous
Action, and to have had Ignominy for his Reward, than for Glory. That Man was
in truth a Pattern, that Nature chose out to show to what height Humane Virtue
and Constancy could arrive: but I am not capable of handling so Noble an
Argument, and shall therefore only set five Latin Poets together by the Ears,
who has done best in the praise of Cato; and inclusively for their own too. Now
a Man well Read in Poetry, will think the two first, in comparison of the
others, a little Flat and Languishing; the Third more Vigorous, but overthrown
by the Extravagancy of his own force. He will then think, that there will be
yet room for one or two Gradations of Invention to come to the Fourth; but
coming to mount the pitch of that, he will lift up his Hands for admiration;
the last, the first by some space, (but a space that he will swear is not to be
filled up by any Humane Wit,) he will be astonished, he will not know where he
is. These are Wonders. We have more Poets, than Judges and Interpreters of
Poetry. It is easier to Write an indifferent Poem, than to understand a good
one. There is indeed a certain low and moderate sort of Poetry, that a Man may
well enough judge by certain Rules of Art; but the true, supreme and divine
Poesy, is equally above all Rules and Reason. And whoever discerns the Beauty
of it, with the most assured and most steady sight, sees no more than the quick
reflection of a Flash of Lightning. This is a sort of Poesy, that does not
exercise, but ravishes and overwhelms our Judgment. The Fury that possesses him
who is able to penetrate into it, wounds yet a Third Man by hearing him repeat
it. Like a Loadstone, that not only attracts the Needle, but also infuses into
it the Virtue to attract others. And it is more evidently Eminent upon our
Theaters, that the Sacred Inspiration of the Muses, having first stirred up the
Poet to Anger, Sorrow, Hatred, and out of himself, to whatever they will, does
moreover by the Poet possess the Actor, and by the Actor consecutively all the
Spectators. So much do our Passions hang and depend upon one another. Poetry
has ever had that power over me from a Child, to Transpierce and Transport me:
But this quick resentment that is Natural to me, has been variously handled by
Variety of Forms, not so much higher and lower, (for they were ever the highest
of every kind,) as differing in Color. First, a Gay and Spritely Fluency,
afterward a Lofty and Penetrating Subtilty; and lastly, a Mature and Constant
Force. Their Names will better express them; Ovid, Lucan, Virgil. But our Poets
are beginning their Career.

Mart. lib. 6. Epig. 32.
Sit Cato dum vivit fama vel Caesare Major. -- Let Cato's Fame,
Whilst he shall Live, Eclipse great Caesar's Name.
Says one.
Manil,
-- Et invictum devicta Morte Catonem. And Cato fell,
Death being overcome, invincible.
Says the Second. And the Third speaking of the Civil Wars betwixt Caesar and
Pompey.

Lucan. l. 1.
Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed Victa Catoni. -- Heaven approves,
The Conquering Cause, the Conquered Cato loves.
And the Fourth upon the Praises of Caesar,
Hor. Car. lib. 2. Od. 1.
Et cuncta terrarum subjecta,
Praeter atrocem animum Catonis.
And Conquered all where e're his Eagle flew,
But Cato's Mind, that nothing could subdue.
And the Master of the Quire, after having set forth all the great Names of the
greatest Romans, ends thus.

Aeneid. l. 8
-- His dantem jura Catonem. Great Cato giving Laws to all the rest. CHAP.
XXXVII.
That we Laugh and Cry for the same thing.
WHen we Read in History, that Antigonus was very much displeased with his Son,
for presenting him the Head of King Pyrrhus his Enemy, but newly Slain,
Fighting against him, and that seeing it, he wept: That Rene Duke of Lorraine
also Lamented the Death of Charles Duke of Burgundy, whom he had himself
Defeated, and appeared in Mourning at his Funeral: And that in the Battle of
Auroy, (which Count Monfort obtained over Charles de Blois, his Concurrent for
the Duchy of Brittany,) the Conqueror meeting the Dead Body of his Enemy, was
very much Afflicted at his Death, we must not presently Cry out,

Petrarcha.
Et cosi auen che l' animo ciascuna,
Sua Passion sotto el contrario manto,
Ricopre, con la vista hor' chiara, hor' bruna.
That every one, whether of Joy or Woe,
The Passion of their Mind can palliate so,
As when most Grieved, to show a Countenance clear
And Melancholic when best pleased t'appear.
When Pompey's Head was presented to Caesar, the Histories tell us, that he
turned away his Face, as from a sad and unpleasing Object. There had been so
long an intelligence and Society betwixt them, in the management of the Public
Affairs, so great a Community of Fortunes, so many mutual Offices, and so near
an Alliance, that this Countenance of his ought not to suffer under any
Misinterpretation; or to be suspected for either False or Counterfeit, as this
other seems to believe:

Lucret. lib. 9.
Tutumque putavit
Iam bonus esse socer, lacrymas non sonte cadentes
Effudit, gemitusque expressit pectore laeto,
Non aliter manifesta putans abscondere mentis
Gaudia, quam Lacrymas.
And now he saw
'Twas safe to be a Pious Father-in-Law,
He shed forced Tears, and from a Joyful Breast,
Fetched Sighs and Groans; conceiving Tears would best
Conceal his inward Joy.
For though it be true, that the greatest part of our Actions, are no other
than Vizor and Disguise, and yet may sometimes be Real and True: that,

Aulus Gelli. Noct.
Haeredis fletus sub persona risus est.
The Heirs dissembled Tears, behind the Skreen
Could one but peep, would Joyful smiles be seen.
so is it, that in judging of these Accidents, we are to consider how much our
souls are oft-times agitated with diverse Passions. And as they say, that in our
Bodies there is a Congregation of diverse Humors, of which, that is the
Sovereign, which according to the Complexion we are of, is commonly most
predominant in us: So, though the Soul have in it diverse motions to give it
Agitation; yet must there of necessity be one to overruled all the rest, though
not with so necessary and absolute a Dominion, but that through the Flexibility
and Inconstancy of the Soul, those of less Authority, may upon occasion,
reassume their place, and make a little Sally in turn. Thence it is, that we
see not only Children, who Innocently Obey, and follow Nature, often Laugh and
Cry at the same thing: but not one of us can boast, what Journey soever he may
have in hand, that he has the most set his Heart upon, but when he comes to
part with his Family and Friends, he will find something that troubles him
within; and though he refrain his Tears, yet he puts Foot in the Stirrup, with a
Sad and Cloudy Countenance, and what gentle Flame soever may have warmed the
Heart of Modest, and Well-Born Virgins, yet are they fain to be forced from
about their Mothers Necks, to be put to Bed to their Husbands, whatever this
Boon Companion is pleased to say:

Catul. Number. 67.
Estne novis nuptis odio Venus, anne parentum
Frustrantur falsis gaudia lachrymulis,
Ubertim Thalami quas intra limina fundunt?
Non, ita me Divi, vera gemunt, juverint.
Does the Fair Bride the Sport so mainly Dread,
That she takes on so, when she is put to Bed,
Her Parents Joys to allay with a feigned Tear
She does not Cry in Earnest, I dare Swear.
Neither is it strange to lament a person, whom a man would by no means should
be alive: When I rattle my man, I do it with all the mettle I have, and load
him with no feigned, but downright real Curses; but the heat being over, if he
should stand in need of me, I should be very ready to do him good: for I
instantly turn the leaf. When I call him Calf and Coxcomb, I do not pretend to
entail those titles upon him for ever; neither do I think I give my self the
lie in calling him an honest man presently after. Were it not the sign of a
fool to talk to ones self, there would hardly be a day or hour wherein I might
not be heard to grumble, and mutter to my self and against my self; Turd in the
fools teeth, and yet I do not think that to be my Character. Who for seeing me
one while cold, and presently very kind to my Wife, believes the one or the
other to be counterfeited, is an Ass. Nero taking leave of his Mother, whom he
sent to be drowned, was nevertheless sensible of some emotion at this farewell,
and was struck with horror, and Pity. It Is said, that the light of the Sun is
not one continuous thing, but that he darts new rays so thick one upon another,
that we cannot perceive the intermission.

Lucret. l. 5.
Largus enim liquidi fons luminis aethereus Sol
Irrigat assidue coelum candore recenti,
Suppetit atque novo confestim lumine lumen.
For the ethereal Sun that shines so bright,
Being a fountain large of liquid light,
With fresh Rays sprinkles still the cheerful Sky,
And with new light, the light does still supply.
Just so the Soul variously and interceptibly darts out her Passions. Artabarus
surprising once his Nephew Xerxes, Chid him for the sudden alteration of his
Countenance. As he was considering the immeasurable Greatness of his Forces
passing over the Hellespont, for the Grecian Expedition, he was first seized
with a palpitation of Joy, to see so many Millions of Men under his Command,
which also appeared in the gayety of his Looks: But his Thoughts at the same
instant suggesting to him, that of so many Lives, once in an Age at most, there
would not be one left, he presently Knit his Brows, and grew Sad, even to
Tears. We have resolutely pursued the Revenge of an Injury received, and been
sensible of a singular Contenement for the Victory: But we shall Weep
notwithstanding: it is not for the Victory, though that we shall Weep: there is
nothing altered by that: but the Soul looks upon things with another Eye, and
represents them to it self with another kind of Face; for every thing has many
Faces, and several Aspects. Relations, old Acquaintance, and Friendships,
possess our Imaginations, and make them tender for the time: but the
Counterturn is so quick, that it is gone in a Moment.

Lucret. l. 3.
Nil a Deo fieri celeri ratione videtur,
Quam si men's fieri proponit, and inchoat ipsa.
Ocius ergo animus quam res se perciet ulla,
Ante oculos quarum in promptu natura videtur.
No Motions seem so brisk, and quick as those
The working mind does to be done propose.
Which once proposed, her violent motions are
Swifter than any thing we know by far.
And therefore, while we would make one continued thing of all this succession
of passion, we deceive our selves. When Timoleon laments the murder he had
committed upon so mature, and generous deliberation, he does not lament the
liberty restored to his Country, he does not lament the Tyrant, but he laments
his Brother: One part of his duty is performed, let us give him leave to
perform the other.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Solitude.
LEt us pretermit that old comparison betwixt the active, and the solitary
life, and as for the fine saying, with which Ambition and Avarice palliate
their vices, That we are not born for our selves, but for the public, let, us
boldly appeal to those who are most interested in public affairs, let them lay
their hand upon their Hearts, and then say, whether on the contrary, they do
not rather aspire to Titles and Offices, and that tumult of the World to make
their private advantage at the public expense. But we need not ask them the
question; for the corrupt ways by which they arrive at the height to which
their ambitions aspire, does manifestly enough declare that their ends cannot
be very good. Let us then tell Ambition, that it is she her self who gives us a
taste of Solitude; for what does she so much avoid as Society? What does she so
much seek as Elbow-room? A man may do well, or ill every where: but if what
Bias says be true, that the greatest part is the worse, or what the Preacher
says, that there is not one good of a thousand:

Iuven. Sat. 13.
Rari quippe boni numero vix sunt totidem quot
Thebarum portae vel divit is ostia Nili.
Because the number of the Good's as few
As Thebes fair Gates; or rich Nile mouths do spew.
the contagion is very dangerous in the Crown. A man must either imitate the
vicious, or hate them: Both are dangerous, either to resemble them, because
they are many, or to hare many, because they are unresembling. And Merchants
that go to Sea are in the right when they are cautious that those who embark
with them in the same bottom, be neither dissolute Blasphemers, nor vicious
otherways; looking upon such society as unfortunate. And therefore it was, that
Bias pleasantly said to some, who being with him in adangerous storm, implored
the assistance of the Gods, Peace, speak softly, said he, that they may not
know you are here in my company: And of more pressing example. Albuquerque Vice
Roy in the Indies, for Emanuel King of Portugal, in an extreme peril of
Shipwreck, took a young Boy upon his Shoulders, for this only end, that in the
Society of their common danger, his innocence might serve to protect him, and
to recommend him to the Divine favor, that they might get safe to Shore: It Is
not that a Wise Man may not live every where content, either alone, or in the
crowd of a Palace: But if it be left to his one choice, he will tell you, that
he would fly the very sight of the latter; he can endure it if need be; but if
it be referred to him, he will choose the first. He cannot think himself
sufficiently rid of Vice, if he must yet contend with it in other Men:
Charondas Punished those for ill Men, who were Convict of keeping of ill
Company. There is nothing so Unsociable, and Sociable, as Man, the one by his
Vice, the other by his Nature. And Antisthenes in my opinion, did not give him
a satisfactory Answer, who Reproached him with frequenting ill Company, by
saying, That the Physicians Lived well enough amongst the Sick: for if they
contribute to the health of the Sick, no doubt, but by the Contagion, continual
sight of, and familiarity with Diseases, they must of necessity impair their
own. Now the end I suppose is all one, to Live at more leisure, and at greater
ease: but Men do not always take the right way; for they often think they have
totally taken leave of all Business, when they have only exchanged one
Employment for another. There is little less trouble in Governing a private
Family, than a whole Kingdom: wherever the Mind is perplexed, it is in an
entire disorder, and Domestic Employments are not less troublesome, for being
less important. Moreover, for having shak'd off the Court, and Public
Employments, we have not taken leave of the principal Vexations of Life.

Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 11.
-- Ratio, and prudentia curas,
Non locus effusi late maris arbiter aufert.
Reason and Prudence, our Affections ease,
Not remote Voyages, on unknown Seas.
Our Ambition, our Avarice, Irresolution, Fears, and Inordinate Desires, do not
leave us when we forsake our Native Country:

Hor. lib. 3. Ode 1.
Et post equitem sedet atra cura. And who does mount his horse to this, will
find,
He carries Black-brow'd Madam Care behind.
She often follows us even to Cloisters, and Philosophical Schools; nor Deserts,
nor Caves, Hair-shirts, nor Fasts, can disengage us from her:

-- Haeret lateri lethalis arundo. Virg. Ae. l. 4.

The fatal Shaft sticks to the wounded Side.
One telling Socrates, that such a one was nothing Improved by his Travels. I
very well believe it, said he, for he took himself along with him.

Hor. lib. 2. Ode 16.
Quid terras alio calentes
Sole mutamus? patria quis exul
Se quoque fugit?
To change our Native Soil, why should we Run
To seek out one warmed by another Sun?
For yet what Banished Man could ever find,
When furthest sent, he left himself behind?
If a Man do not first discharge both himself, and his Mind, of the Burden
with which he finds himself Oppressed, Motion will but make it press the
harder, and sit the heavier, as the Lading of a Ship is of less Encumbrance,
when fast, and bestowed in a settled posture; you do a Sick Man more harm, than
good, in removing him from place to place; you fix and establish the Disease by
motion, as Stoops dive deeper into the Earth, by being moved up and down in the
place where they are designed to stand. And therefore it is not enough to get
remote from the Public; it is not enough to shift the Soil only, a Man must
fly from the Popular Dispositions that have taken possession, of his Soul, he
must Sequester and ravish himself from himself.

Perseus. Sat. 5.
-- Rupi jam vincula, dicas,
Nam luctata canis nodum arripit, attamen illa
Cum fugit, a collo trahitur pars longa catenae.
Thou Wilt say perhaps, that thou have broke the Chain,
Why, so the Dog has gnawed the Knot in 'twain
That ti'd him there, but as he flies, he feels
The ponderous Chain still rattling at his heels.
We still carry our Fetters along with us; it is not an absolute Liberty, we yet
cast back a kind Look upon what we have left behind us; the Fancy is still full
of our old way of Living.

Lucret. l. 5.
-- Nisi purgatum est pectus, quae praelia nobis,
Atque pericula tunc ingratis insinuandum?
Quantae conscindunt hominum cupidinis acres
Sollicitum curae, quantique perinde timores?
Quidve superbia, spurcitia, ac petulantia, quantas
Efficient clades, quid luxus, desidiesque?
Unless the Mind be Purged, what Conflicts straight,
And Dangers will it not insinuate?
The Lustful Man, how many bitter Cares,
Do gall, and fret, and then how many Fears?
What Horrid Mischiefs, what Dire Slaughters too
Will not Pride, Lust, and Petulancy do?
And what from Luxury can we expect,
And Sloth; but all the ill ill can effect?
The Mind it self is the Disease, and cannot escape from it self;

Hor. l. 1. Ep. 14.
In culpa est animus, qui se non effugit unquam. Still in the Mind the Fault
does lie,
That never from it self can fly.
and therefore is to be called home, and confined within it self; that is the
true Solitude, and that may be enjoyed even in Populous Cities, and the Courts
of Kings, though more commodiously a part.

Now since we will attempt to Live alone, and to wave all manner of
Conversation amongst Men, let us so Order it, that our Contentation may depend
wholly upon our selves, and dissolve all Obligations that Ally us to others:
Let us obtain this from our selves that we may Live alone in good earnest, and
Live at our ease too. Stilpo having escaped from the Fire that Consumed the
City where he Lived, and where he had his Wife, Children, Goods, and all that
ever he was Master of, destroyed by the Flame; Demetrius Poliorcetes seeing him
in so great a Ruin of his Country, appear with so Serene and Undisturbed a
Countenance, asked him, if he had received no Loss? To which he made Answer,
No; and that, thanks be to God, nothing was lost of his; which also was the
meaning of the Philosopher Antisthenes, when he pleasantly said, That Men
should only furnish themselves with such things as would Swim, and might with
the Owner escape the Storm; and certainly, a Wise Man never loses any thing, if
he have himself. When the City of Nola was Ruined by the Barbarians, Paulinus,
who was Bishop of that place, having there lost all he had, and himself a
Prisoner, Prayed after this manner, O Lord, defend me from being sensible of
this Loss; for thou know, they have yet touched nothing of that which is
mine; The Riches that made him Rich, and the Goods that made him Good, were
still kept entire. This it is to make choice of Treasures, that can secure
themselves from Plunder and Violence, and to hide them in such a place, into
which no one can enter, and that are not to be betrayed by any but our selves.
Wives, Children and Goods, must be had, and especially Health, by him that can
get it; but we are not so to set our Hearts upon them, that our Happiness must
have its dependence upon any of these; we must reserve a Back-shop, a
Withdrawing Room, wholly our own, and entirely free wherein to settle our true
Liberty, our principal Solitude and Retreat. And in this, we must for the most
part entertain our selves with our selves, and so privately, that no Knowledge,
or Communication, of any Exotic Concern, be admitted there, there to Laugh and
to Talk, as if without Wife, Children, Goods, Train, or Attendance, to the end,
that when it shall so fall out, that we must lose any, or all of these, it may
be no new thing to be without them. We have a Mind pliable of it self, that
will be Company, has wherewithal to attack, and to defend, to receive, and to
give: Let us not then fear in this Solitude, to Languish under an uncomfortable
Vacancy.

In solis sis tibi turba locis. In Solitary places be
Unto thy self good Company.
Virtue is satisfied with her self, without Discipline, without Words, without
Effects. In our ordinary actions, there is not one of a thousand that concerns
our selves: He that thou see Scambling up the Ruins of that Wall, Furious,
and Transported, against whom so many Harquebuze Shot are levelled; and that
other all over Scars, Pale, and Fainting with Hunger, and yet resolved rather
to Die, than to open his Gate to HIm, do thou think that these Men are there
upon their own account? No, peradventure in the behalf of one whom they never
saw, and that never concerns himself for their Pains, and Danger, but lies
Wallowing the while in Sloth, and Pleasure: This other Slavering, Blear-eyed,
Slovenly Fellow, that thou see come out of his Study after Midnight, do
thou think he has been Tumbling over Books, to Learn how to become a better
Man, Wiser, and more Content: No such matter, he will there end his Days, but
he will teach Posterity the measure of Plautus his Verses, and the Orthography
of a Latin Word: Who is it that does not Voluntarily exchange his Health, his
Repose, and his very Life for Reputation, and Glory? The most Useless,
Frivolous, and false Coin that passes current amongst us: Our own Death does
not sufficiently terrify, and trouble us, let us moreover charge our selves,
with those of our Wives, Children, and Family: Our own affairs do not afford us
anxiety enough, let us undertake those of our Neighbors, and Friends, still
more to break our Brains, and torment us.

Ter. Adel. Act. 1. Sc. 1.
Vah quemquamne hominem in animum instituere aut
Parare, quod sit charius, qu^m ipse est sibi?
Alas? what mortal will be so unwise
Any thing dearer, than himself to prize?
Solitude seems to me to have the best pretense, in such as have already
employed their most active and flourishing age in the World's service; by the
example of Thales. We have lived enough for others, let us at least Live out
the small Remnant of Life for our Selves; let us now call in our Thoughts, and
Intentions to our Selves, and to our own Ease, and Repose: It Is no light thing
to make a sure Retreat, it will be enough to do without mixing other
Enterprises, and Designs, since God gives us leisure to prepare for, and to
order our Remove, let us make Ready, Truss our Baggage, take leave betimes of
the Company, let us disentangle our selves from those violent importunities
that engage us elsewhere, and separate us from our Selves: We must break the
Knot of our Obligations, how strong soever, and hereafter Love this, or that;
but espouse nothing, but our Selves: That is to say, let the remainder be our
own, but not so joined and so close, as not to be forced away without slaying
us, or tearing part of the whole piece. The greatest thing in the World is for
a Man to know that he is his own: It Is time to wean our Selves from Society,
when we can no more add any thing to it; and who is not in a Condition to Lend,
must forbid himself to Borrow. Our Forces begin to fail us, and are of no more
use for Foreign Offices; let us call them in, and Lock them up at Home; He that
can within himself cast off, and Disband the Offices of so many Friendships,
and that tumult of Conversation he has contracted in the busy World, let him
do it: In this decay of nature, which renders him Useless, Burdensome, and
importunate to others, let him have a care of being Useless, Burdensome, and
Importunate to himself: Let him Sooth, and Caress himself, and above all things
be sure to Govern himself with Reverence to his Reason, and Conscience to that
Degree, as to be ashamed to make a false step in their Presence. Rarum est
enim, Pythag.
ut satis se quisque vereatur. For it is rarely seen that Men have Respect, and
Reverence enough for themselves. Socrates says, that Boys are to cause
themselves to be instructed, Men to Exercise themselves in well doing, and Old
Men to retire from all Civil, and Military employments, living at their own
Discretion, without the Obligation to any certain Office. There are some
Complexions more proper for these Precepts of Retirement, than others, such as
are of a Soft and Faint apprehension, and of a tender Will, and Affection, as I
am, will sooner incline to this Advice, than Active and Busy Souls; which
embrace all, engage in all, and are hot upon every thing, who offer, present,
and give themselves up to every occasion. We are to serve ourselves with these
accidental and extraneous things; so far as they are pleasant to us, but by no
means to lay our principal Foundation there. This is no true one, neither
Nature, nor Reason, can allow it so to be, and why therefore should we contrary
to their Laws, enslave our own contentment, by giving it into the power of
another: To anticipate also the accidents of Fortune, and to deprive ourselves
of those things we have in our own power, as several have done upon the account
of Devotion, and some Philosophers by discourse; to serve a Man's self, to lie
hard, to put out our own Eyes, throw Wealth into the River, and to seek our
Grief, (the one by the uneasiness, and misery of this Life, to pretend to bliss
in another; the other by laying themselves low to avoid the Danger of falling)
are acts of an excessive Nature. The Stoutest, and most obstinate Natures,
render even their most abstruse retirements Glorious, and Exemplary.

Hor. l. 1. Epist. 15.
-- tuta, and parvula laudo,
Cum res deficiunt, satis inter vilia fortis:
Verum ubi quid melius contigit, and unctius idem
Hos sapere, and solos aio been vivere, quorum
Conspicitur nitidis fundata pecunia villis.
Where plenty fails,
A secure competency I like well,
And love the Man disaster cannot quell:
But when good Fortune with a liberal hand
Her gifts bestows; those Men I understand
Alone happy to live, and to be Wise,
Whose Money does in neat built Villa's rise.
A great deal less would serve my turn well enough. It Is enough for me under
Fortunes favor to prepare my self for her Disgrace, and being at my ease to
represent to my self, as far as my imagination can Stretch, the ill to come; as
we do at Justs, and Tiltings, where we counterfeit War in the greatest Calm of
Peace. I do not think Arcesilaus the Philosopher the less Temperate, and
Reformed, for knowing that he made use of Gold, and Silver Vessels, when the
condition of his Fortune allowed him so to do: But have a better Opinion of
him, than if he had denied himself what he used with Liberality, and
Moderation. I see the utmost Limits of Natural necessity, and considering a
Poor Man Begging at my Door, of-times more Jocund, and more Healthy than I my
self am, I put my self into his place, and attempt to dress my Mind after his
Mode, and running in like manner over other examples, though I fancy Death,
Poverty, Contempt, and Sickness treading on my Heels, I easily resolve not to
be affrighted, forasmuch as a less than I takes them with so much Patience, and
am not willing to believe that a less understanding can do more than a greater;
or that the effects of precept cannot arrive to as great a height, as those of
Custom: And knowing of how uncertain duration these accidental conveniences
are, I never forget, in the height of all my enjoyments, to make it my chiefest
Prayer to Almighty God, that he will please to render me content with my self;
and the Condition wherein I am. I see several Young Men very Gay, and Frolic;
who nevertheless keep a Mass of Pills in their Trunk at home, to take when the
Rheum shall fall, which they fear so much the less, because they think they
have Remedy at hand: Every one should do the same, and moreover if they find
themselves subject to some more violent Disease, should furnish themselves with
such Medicines as may Numb and Stupisie the part: The employment a Man should
choose for a Sedentary Life, ought neither to be a Laborious, nor an unpleasing
one, otherwise it is to no purpose at all to be retired, and this depends upon
every ones liking, and humor; mine has no manner of complacency for Husbandry,
and such as Love it, ought to apply themselves to it with Moderation.

Hor. Ep. 1.
Conantur sibi res, non se submittere rebus. A Man should to himself his
Business fit,
But should not to Affairs himself submit.
Husbandry is otherwise a very Servile Employment, as Sallust tells us; though
some parts of it are more excusable than the rest, as the Care of Gardens,
which Zenophon attributes to Cyrus and a mean may be found out betwixt Sordid
and Homely Affection, so full of perpetual Solitude, which is seen in Men who
make it their entire Business and Study, and that stupid and extreme
Negligence, letting all things go at Random, we see in others.

Hor. Ep. 12.
-- Democriti pecus edit agellos,
Cultaque, dum peregre est animus sine corpore velox.
Democritus his Cattle spoils his Corn,
Whilst he from thence on Fancy's Wings is born.
But let us hear what Advice the Younger Pliny gives his Friend Caninius Rufus.
Cornelius Rufus, upon the Subject of Solitude; I advise thee, in the plentiful
Retirement wherein thou art, to leave to thy Hinds, and inferior Servants, the
Care of thy Husbandry, and to addict thy self to the Study of Letters, to
extract from thence something that may be entirely and absolutely thine own. By
which, he means Reputation; like Cicero, who says, that he would employ his
Solitude and Retirement, from Public Affairs, to acquire by his Writings an
Immortal Life.

Per. Sat. 1.
-- Usque adeo ne
Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter?
Is all thy Learning nothing, unless thou,
That thou art Knowing, make all others know?
It appears to be reason, when a Man talks of Retiring from the World, that he
should look quite out of himself. These do it but by halves. They design well
enough for themselves, it is true, when they shall be no more in it; but still
they pretend to extract the fruits of that Design from the World, when absented
from it, by a Ridiculous Contradiction. The Imagination of those who seek
Solitude, upon the account of Devotion, filling their Hopes with certainty of
Divine Promises in the other Life, is much more rationally founded. They
propose to themselves Gods, an infinite Object in Goodness and Power. The Soul
has there wherewithal, at full liberty, to satiate her Desires. Afflictions and
Sufferings turn to their advantage, being undergone for the acquisition of an
eternal Health, and everlasting Joys. Death is to be wished and longed for,
where it is the passage to so perfect a Condition. And the Tartness of these
severe Rules they impose upon themselves, is immediately taken away by Custom,
and all their Carnal Appetites baffled and subdued, by refusing to humor and
feed them; they being only supported by use and exercise. This sole end
therefore, of another happy and immortal Life, is that which really merits,
that we should abandon the Pleasures and conveniences of this. And who can
really and constantly inflame his Soul with the Ardour of this Lively Faith and
Hope, does erect for himself in this Solitude, a more Voluptuous and Delicious
Life, than any other sort of Living whatever. Neither the end then, nor the
means of this Advice, of Pliny pleases me, for we often fall out of the
Drying Pan into the Fire. This Book Employment is as painful as any other, and
as great an Enemy to Health, which ought to be the first thing in every Man's
prospect; neither ought a Man to be allured with the pleasure of it, which is
the same that destroys the Wary, Avaritious, Voluptuous and Ambitious Men. The
Wise give us Caution enough, to beware the Treachery of our Desires, and to
distinguish true and entire Pleasures, from such as are mixed and complicated
with greater Pain. For the greatest part of Pleasures, (say they,) Wheedle and
Caress, only to strangle us, like those Thieves the Egyptians called Philiste;
and if the Headache should come before Drunkenness, we should have a care of
Drinking too much: but Pleasure to deceive us, Marches before, and conceals her
Train. Books are pleasant, but if by being over Studious, we impair our Health,
and spoil our good Humor, two of the best pieces we have, let us give it over;
for I for my part am one of those who think, that no Fruit derived from them,
can recompense so great a Loss. As Men who feel themselves weakened by a long
Series of Indisposition, give themselves up at last to the Mercy of Medicine,
and submit to certain Rules of Living, which they are for the future never to
Transgress; so he who Retires, weary of, and disgusted, with the common way of
Living, ought to model this new One he enters into, by the Rules of Reason, and
to Institute and Establish it by Premeditation, and after the best Method he
can contrive. He ought to have taken leave of all sorts of Labor, what
advantage soever he may propose to himself by it, and generally to have shaken
off all those Passions which disturb the Tranquillity of Body and Soul, and then
choose the Way that best suits with his own Humor:

Propert. lib. Eleg. 25.
Unusquisque sua noverit ire via: Every one best does know,
In his own Way to go.
In Menagery, Study, Hunting, and all other Exercises, Men are to proceed to
the utmost limits of Pleasure, but must take heed of engaging further, where
Solitude and Trouble begin to mix. We are to reserve so much Employment only,
as is necessary to keep us in Breath, and to defend us from the Inconveniences,
that the other Extreme, of a Dull and Stupid Laziness brings along with it.
There are some Steril, Knotty Sciences, and chiefly Hammered out for the Crowd;
let such be left to them who are Engaged in the Public Service: I for my part
care for no other Books, but either such, as are pleasant and easy, to delight
me, or those, that comfort and instruct me, how to Regulate my Life and Death.

Hor. Ep. 44. lib. 1.
Tacitum sylvas inter reptare salubres,
Curantem quidquid dignum sapiente bonoque est.
Silently Meditating in the Groves,
What best, a Wise and Honest Man behooves.
Wiser Men propose to themselves a Repose wholly Spiritual, as having great
force and vigor of Mind; but for me, who have a very ordinary Soul, I find it
very necessary, to support my self with Bodily Conveniences; and Age having of
late deprived me of those Pleasures that were most acceptable to me, I instruct
and whet my Appetite to those that remain, and are more suitable to this other
season. We ought to hold with all our force, both of Hands and Teeth, the use
of the Pleasures of Life, that our Years, one after another, snatch away from
us.

Persius, Sat. 5.
Carpamus dulcia, nostrum est,
Quod vivis, cinis, and manes, and fabula fies.
Let us enjoy Life's Sweets, for shortly we,
Ashes, Pale Ghost's, and Fables, all shall be.
Now as to the End, that Pliny and Cicero propose to us, of Glory; it is
infinitely wide of my account; for Ambition, is of all other, the most contrary
Humor to Solitude; and Glory and Repose are so inconsistent, that they cannot
possibly Inhabit in one and the same place; and for so much as I understand,
those have only their Arms and Legs disengaged from the Crowd, their Mind and
Intention remain engaged behind more than ever.

Perseus, Sat. 1.
Tun', vetule, auriculis alienis colligis escas? Do thou, Old Dotard, at these
Years,
Gather fine Tales for others Ears?
They are only Retired to take a better Leap, and by a stronger Motion, to give
a brisker Charge into the Crowd. Will you see how they shoot short? Let us put
into the Counterpoise the Advice of two Philosophers, of two very different
Sects, Writing, the one to Idomeneus, the other to Lucilius, their Friends, to
Retire into Solitude from Worldly Honors, and the Administration of Public
Affairs. You have, say they, hitherto Lived Swimming and Floating, come now,
and Die in the Harbor: You have given the first part of your Life to the
Light, give what remains to the Shade. It is impossible to give over Business,
if you do not also quit the Fruit, and therefore disengage your selves from all
the Concerns of Name and Glory. It Is to be feared, the Luster of your former
Actions will give you but too much Light, and follow you into your most
private, and most obscure Retreat: Quit with other Pleasures, that which
proceeds from the Approbation of another: And as to your Knowledge and Parts,
never concern your selves, they will not lose their effect, if your selves be
ever the better for them. Remember him, who being asked, why he took so much
Pains in an Art, that could come to the Knowledge of but few Persons? A few are
enough for me, replied he, I have enough of one, I have enough of never a one.
He said true, you, and a Companion, are Theater enough to one another, or you
to your self. Let us be to you the whole People, and the whole People to you
but one: It Is an unworthy Ambition, to think to derive Glory from a Man's
Sloth and Privacy: You are to do like the Beasts of Chase, who put out the
Track at the entrance into their Den. You are no more to concern your self, how
the World talks of you, but how you are to talk to your self: Retire your self
into your self, but first prepare your self there to receive your self: It were
a folly to trust your self in your own Hands, if you cannot Govern your self, a
Man may as well miscarry alone, as in Company, till you have rendered your self
as such, as before whom you dare not Trip and till you have a Bashfulness and
Respect for your self, Observantur species honestae animo, Cicero Tusc. Quaest.
1, 2.
Let just and honest things be still Represented to the Mind. Present
continually to you Imagination, Cato, Phocion and Aristides, in whose presence,
the Fools themselves will hide their Faults; and make them Controulers of all
your Intentions. Should they deviate from Virtue, your Respect to them will
again set you right; they will keep you in the way of being Contented with your
self, to Borrow nothing of any other but your self; to restrain and fix your
Soul in certain and limited Thoughts, wherein she may please her self, and
having understood the true and real Goods, which Men the more enjoy, the more
they understand, to rest satisfied, without desire of prolongation of Life or
Memory. This is the Precept of the True and Natural Philosophy, not of a
Boasting and Prating Philosophy, such as that of the two former.

CHAP. XXXIX.
A Consideration upon Cicero.
ONe Word more by way of Comparison, betwixt these two. There are to be
gathered out of the Writings of Cicero, and this Younger Pliny, (but little in
my opinion, resembling his Uncle in his Humor,) infinite Testimonies of a
beyond measure, Ambitious Nature; and amongst others, this for one, that they
both, in the sight of all the World, solicit the Historians of their time, not
to forget them in their Memoirs; and Fortune, as if in spite, has made the
Vacancy of those Requests Live upon Record down to this Age of ours, when she
has long since Damned the Histories themselves to Oblivion. But this exceeds
all meanness of Spirit in Persons of such Quality, as they were, to think to
derive any great and living Renown from Babbling and Prating; even to the
Publishing of their private Letters to their Friends, and so withal, that
though some of them were never sent, the opportunity being lost, they
nevertheless expose them to the light, with this worthy excuse, that they were
hereafter unwilling to lose their Labors, and have their Lucubrations thrown
away. Was it not very well becoming two Consuls of Rome, Sovereign Magistrates
of the Republic that Commanded the World, to spend their time in contriving
Quaint and Elegant Missives, thence to gain the Reputation of being Critics,
in their own Mother Tongues: What could a pitiful Schoolmaster have done
worse, whose trade it was to get his Living? If the Acts of Xenophon, and
Caesar, had not far enough transcended their Eloquence, I scarce believe they
would ever have taken the pains to have writ them. They made it their business
to recommend not their Speaking, but their doing. And could the perfection of
eloquence have added any luster proportionable to the merit of a great Person,
certainly Scipio, and Laelius, had never resigned the honor of their Comedies,
with all the luxuriances, and delicacies of the Latin Tongue, to an African
Slave; for that, that work was theirs, the Beauty and Excellency of it do
sufficiently declare; besides, Terence himself confesses as much, and I should
take it ill from any one, that would dispossess me of that belief. It Is a kind
of injurious Mockery, and Offense, to extol a Man for Qualities, misbecoming
his Merit, and Condition, though otherwise commendable in themselves, but such
as ought not however to be his chiefest Talent: As if a Man should commend a
King, for being a good Painter, a good Architect, a good Marks-man, or a good
Runner at the Ring; commendations that add no Honor, unless mentioned
altogether, and in the train of those that are more properly applicable to him,
namely, his Justice, and the Science of governing, and conducting his People
both in Peace, and War. At this rate agriculture was an Honor to Cyrus, and
Eloquence, and the knowledge of good Letters to Charlemaigne. I have in my time
known some, who by that Knack of Writing, have got both their Titles, and
Fortune, disown their Apprenticeage, purposely corrupt their Style, and affect
ignorance in so vulgar a quality, (which also our Nation observes, to be rarely
seen in very intelligent hands) to seek a reputation by better qualities.
Demosthenes his Companions in the Embassy to Philip, extolling that Prince for
Handsome, Eloquent, and a Stout Drinker, Demosthenes replied, that those were
commendations more proper for a Woman, an Advocate, or a Sponge, than for a
King.

Hor. Carm.
Imperet bellante prior jucentem
Lenis in hostem.
First let his Empire from his valor flow,
And then, by mercy on a prostrate foe.
It Is not his profession to know either how to Hunt, or to Dance well.

Virg. Aen. l. 6.
Orabunt Causas alii, coelique meatus
Describent radio, and fulgentia sydera dicent,
Hic regere imperio populos sciat.
Let others plead at the litigious Bar,
Describe the Spears, point out each twinkling Star,
Let this Man rule, a greater art by far.
Plutarch says moreover, that to appear so excellent in these less necessary
Qualities, is to produce Witness against a Man's self, that he has spent his
time, and applied his Study ill, which ought to have been employed in the
acquisition of more necessary, and more useful things, so that Philip King of
Macedon, having heard that Great Alexander his Son, Sing once at a Feast to the
Wonder, and Envy of the best Musicians there: Art not thou ashamed said he to
him, to Sing so well? And to the same Philip a Musician, with whom he was
disputing about some things concerning his Art: Heaven forbid! Sir, said he,
that so great a misfortune should ever befall you, as to understand these things
better than I. A King should be able to answer as Iphicrates did the Orator,
who pressed upon him in his invective after this manner: And what art thou, that
thou brav'st it at this rate? art thou a Man at Arms, art thou an Archer, art
thou a Pike? I am none of all this; but I know how to Command all these. And
Antisthenes took it for an argument of little Valor, in Ismenas, that he was
commended for Playing excellently well upon a Flute. I know very well, that
when I hear any one insist upon the Language of Essays, I had rather a great
deal he would say nothing. It Is not so much to elevate the Style as to depress
the Sense, and so much the more offensively, as they do it Disgracefully, and
out of the Way. I am much deceived if many other Essayists, deliver more worth
nothing as to the matter, and how well, or ill soever, if any other Writer has
strewed them either much more Material, or thicker upon his Paper than my self.
To bring the more in, I only Muster up the Heads, should I annex the sequel, I
should strangely Multiply this Volume: And how many Stories have I Seattered up
and down, in this Book, that I only touch upon, which should any one more
curiously search into, they would find matter enough to produce infinite
Essays: Neither those Stories, nor my allegations do always serve simply for
Example, Authority, or Ornament, I do not only regard them for the use I make
of them: They carry sometimes besides what I apply them to, the seed of a more
Rich, and a Bolder matter, and sometimes collaterally a more delicate Sound
both to me my self, who will express no more in this Place, and to others who
shall happen to be of my Ear.

But returning to the speaking virtue; I find no great choice betwixt, not
knowing to speak any thing but very ill, and not knowing to speak any thing but
very well. Non est ornamentum virile concinnitas. Sen. Ep. 6.
Neatness of Style, is no Manly Ornament. The Sages tell us, that as to what
concerns Knowledge, there is nothing but Philosophy; and to what concerns
effects, nothing but virtue, that is generally proper to all Degrees, and to
all orders. There is something like this in these two other Philosophers, for
they also promise Eternity, to the Letters they Write to their Friends; but
it is after another manner, and by accommodating themselves, for a good end, to
the vanity of another; for they Write to them, that if the concern of making
themselves known to future Ages, and the Thirst of Glory, do yet detain them in
the management of public affairs, and make them fear the Solitude, and
Retirement to which they would persuade them; let them never trouble themselves
more about it, forasmuch as they shall have Credit enough with Posterity to
assure them, that were there nothing else but the very Letters thus Writ to
them, those Letters will render their names as known, and famous as their own
public actions themselves could do. And besides this difference, these are not
Idle, and empty Letters, that contain nothing but a fine Gingle of well chosen
Words, and fine Couched Phrases, but rather repleat, and abounding with Grave,
and Learned Discourses, by which a Man may render himself not more Eloquent but
more Wise, and that instruct us not to speak, but to do well: A way with that
Eloquence that so enchants us with its Harmony, that we should more Study it
than things. Unless you will allow that of Cicero, to be of so Supreme a
perfection, as to form a complete Body of it self: And of him I shall further
add one Story, we read of him to this purpose, wherein his nature will much
more manifestly be laid open to us: He was to make an Oration in public, and
found himself a little straightened in time, to fit his Words to his Mouth, as he
had a mind to do; when Eros one of his Slaves brought him word, that the
audience was deferred till the next Day, at which he was so ravished with Joy,
that he enfranchised him for the good news.

Upon this Subject of Letters, I will add this more to what has been already
said, that it is a kind of Writing, wherein my Friends think I can do
something; and I am willing to confess, I should rather have chose to publish
my Whimsies that way, than any other, had I had to whom to Write; but I wanted
such a settled Corrsepondency, as I once had to attract me to it, to raise my
Fancy, and maintain the rest against me. For to Traffic with the Wind, as some
others have done, and to Forge vain Names to direct my Letters to, in a serious
subject, I could never do it but in a Dream, being a sworn Enemy to all manner
of falsification: I should have been more diligent, and more confidently
secure, had I had a Judicious and Indulgent Friend, to whom to address, than
thus to expose my self to various judgments of a whole People, and I am
deceived if I had not succeeded better: I have naturally a Comic, and familiar
Style; but it is a peculiar one, and not proper for Public business, but like
the Language I speak, too Compact, Irregular, Abrupt, and Singular; and as to
Letters of Ceremony, that have no other substance, than a fine contexture of
courteous, and obliging Words, I am wholly to seek, I have neither faculty, nor
relish, for those tedious offers of Service, and Affection; I am not good
natured to that degree, and should not forgive my self, should I offer more,
than I intend, which is very remote from the present practice; for there never
was so abject, and servile prostitution of tenders of Life, Soul, Devotion,
Adoration, Vassal, Slave, and I cannot tell what, as now; all which expressions
are so commonly, and so indifferently Posted to and fro by every one, and to
every one, that when they would profess a greater, and more respective
inclination upon more just occasions, they have not where-withal to express it:
I hate all air of Flattery to Death, which is the cause that I naturally fall
into a Shy, Rough, and Crude way of speaking, that to such as do not know me,
may seem a little to relish of disdain: I Honor those most to whom I show the
least Honor, and Respect, and where my Soul moves with the greatest
Cheerfulness, I easily forget the Ceremonies of Look, and Gesture; I offer my
self Faintly, and Bluntly, to them whose I effectually am, and tender my self
the least to him, to whom I am the most devoted: Methinks they should read it
in my Heart, and that my expression would but injure the Love I have conceived
within. To Welcome, take Leave, give Thanks, Accost, offer my Service, and such
verbal Formalities, as the Laws of our modern civility enjoin. I know no Man so
stupidly unprovided of Language as my self: And have never been employed in
Writing Letters of Favor, and Recommendation, that he, in whose behalf it was,
did not think my mediation Cold, and Imperfect. The Italians are great Printers
of Letters. I do believe I have at least an hundred several Volumes of them; of
all which, those of Hannibal Caro, seem to me to be the best: If all the Paper
I have Scribled to the Ladies all the time, when my Hand was really prompted by
my Passion, were now in being, there might Peradventure be found a Page worthy
to be communicated to our young enamorato's, that are Besotted with that Fury.
I always Write my Letters Post, and so precipitously, that though I Write an
intolerable ill Hand, I rather choose to do it my self, than to employ another;
for I can find none able to follow me, and never transcribe any; but have
accustomed the great ones that know me to endure my Blots, and Dashes, and upon
Paper without Fold, or Margent. Those that cost me the most Pains, are the
worst of mine; when I once begin to draw it in by Head and Shoulders, it is a
sign that I am not there. I fall too without premeditation, or design, the
first word begets the second, and so to the end of the Chapter. The Letters of
this Age consist more in fine Foldings, and Prefaces, than matter; whereas I
had rather Write two Letters, than Close, and Fold up one, and always assign
that employment to some other; as also when the business of my Letter is
dispatched, I would with all my heart transferr it to another Hand, to add
those long Harangues, Offers, and Prayers, that we place at the Bottom, and
should be glad that some new custom would discharge us, of that unnecessary
trouble; as also of superscribing them with a long Ribble-row of Qualities, and
Titles, which for fear of mistakes, I have several times given over Writing,
and especially to Men of the long Robe. There are so many innovations of
Offices, that it is hard to place so many Titles of Honor in their proper, and
due order, which also being so dearly bought, they are neither to be mistaken,
nor omitted without offense. I find the same fault likewise with charging the
fronts, and Title Pages of the Books we commit to the Press, with such a
clutter of Titles.

CHAP. XL.
That the Relish of Goods, and Evils, does in a great measure depend upon the
opinion we have of them.
MEN (says an ancient Greek Sentence) are tormented with the Opinions they have
of things, and not by the things themselves. It were a great Victory obtained
for the relief of our miserable Humane Condition, could this proposition be
established for certain, and true throughout. For if evils have no admission
into us; but by the judgment we our selves make of them, it should seem that it
is then in our own power to despise them, or to turn them to good. If things
surrender themselves to our mercy, why do we not convert, and accommodate them
to our advantage? If what we call Evil, and Torment, is neither Evil, nor
Torment, of it self, but only that our Fancy gives it that Quality, and makes
it so, it is in us to change, and alter it, and it being in our own choice, if
there be no constraint upon us, we must certainly be very strange Fools, to
take Arms for that side which is most offensive to us, and to give Sickness,
Want, and Contempt, a nauseous taste, if it be in our power to give them a more
grateful Relish, and if Fortune simply provide the matter, it is for us to give
it the form. Now that which we call Evil, is not so of it self, or at least to
that degree that we make it; and that it depends upon us, to give it another
taste or complexion, (for all comes to one) let us examine how that can be
maintained. If the original being of those things we fear, had power to lodge
themselves in us, by their own authority, it would then lodge it self alike,
and in like manner in all; for Men are all of the same kind, and saving in
greater, and less proportions, are all provided with the same untensils and
instruments to conceive and to judge; but the diversity of opinions we have or
those things, does clearly evidence, that they only enter us by composition*
One particular Person, peradventure admits them in their true being; but a
thousand others give them a new, and contrary being in them. We hold Death,
Poverty, and Grief, for our principal Enemies, but this Death which some repute
the most dreadful of all dreadful things, who does not know that others call it
the only secure Harbor, from the Storms, and Tempests of Life? The Sovereign
good of Nature? The sole Support of Liberty, and the common, and sudden Remedy
of all Evils? And as the one expect it with Fear, and Trembling, the other
support it with greater Ease than Life. That Blade complains of its facility,

Luc. l. 4.
Mors utinam pavidos vitae subducere nolles,
Sed virtus te sola daret!
O Death, I would thou would the Coward spare,
That but the daring none might thee conferr.
But let us leave these Glorious Courages. Theodorus answered Lysimachus, who
threatened to Kill him, Thou will do a brave thing, said he, to arrive at the
force of a Cantharides. The greatest part of Philosophers, are observed to have
either purposely prevented, or hastened, and assisted their own Death. How many
ordinary people do we see led to Execution, and that not to a simple Death, but
mixed with Shame, and sometimes with grievous Torments, appear with such
assurance, what through obstinacy, or natural simplicity, that a Man can
discover no change from their ordinary condition; Settling their Domestic
Affairs, recommending them to their Friends, Singing, Preaching, and Diverting
the People so much, as sometimes to Sally into Jests, and to Drink to their
Companions, as well as Socrates. One that they were leading to the Gallows,
told them they must not carry him through such a Street, lest a Merchant that
lived there, should arrest him by the way, for an old Debt. Another told the
Hangman, he must not touch his Neck, for fear of making him Laugh he was so
Ticklish. Another answered his Confessor, who promised him he should that day
Sup with our Lord. Do you go then, said he, in my Room; for I for my part keep
fast to day. Another having called for Drink, and the Hangman having Dran^
first, said he would not Drink after him, for fear of catching the Pox. Every
body has heard the Tale of the Picard, to whom being upon the Ladder they
presented a Whore, telling him (as our I aw does sometimes permit!) that if he
would Marry her, they would save his Life, he having a while considered her,
and perceiving that she Halted, Come tie up, tie up, said he, she limps. And
they tell another Story of the same kind, of a fellow in Denmark, who being
condemned to lose his Head, and the like condition being proposed to him upon
the Scaffold, refused it, by reason the Maid they offered him, had hollow
Cheeks, and too sharp a Nose. A Servant at Toulouse being accused of Heresy,
for the sum of his Belief, referred himself to that of his Master, a young
Student Prisoner with him, choosing rather to die, than suffer himself to be
persuaded, that his Master could err. We read that of the Inhabitants of
Arras, when Lewis the eleventh took that City, a great many let themselves be
Hanged, rather than they would say, God save the King. And amongst that
mean-soul'd race of Men, the Buffoons, there having been some, who would not
leave their Fooling at the very moment of Death. He that the Hangman turned off
the Ladder cried, Launch the Galley, an ordinary foolish saying of his; and the
other, whom at the point of Death his Friends having laid upon a Pallet before
the Fire, the Physician asking him where his Pain lay, betwixt the Bench and
the Fire, said he, and the Priest, to give him the extreme Unction, Groping for
his Feet, which his Pain had made him pull up to him, you will find them, said
he, at the end of my Legs. To one that being present exhorted him to recommend
himself to God, why, who goes thither? said he, and the other replying, it will
presently be your self, if it be his good pleasure; would I were sure to be
there by to Morrow Night, said he; do but recommend your self to him said the
other, and you will soon be there: I were best then, said he, to carry my
recommendations my self. In the Kingdom of Narsingua to this day, the Wives of
their Priests, are buried alive with the Bodies of their Husbands; all other
Wives are burnt at their Husbands Funerals, which also they do not only
constantly, but cheerfully undergo: At the death of their King, his Wives, and
Concubines, his Favorites, all his Officers, and Domestic servants, which
make up a great number of people, present themselves so cheerfully to the Fire,
where his Body is burnt, that they seem to take it for a singular honor, to
accompany their Master in Death. During our late War of Milan, where there
happened so many takings, and retakings of Towns, the people impatient of so many
various changes of Fortune, took such a resolution to die, that I have heard my
Father say, he there saw a List taken of five and twenty masters of Families,
that made themselves away in one weeks time: An accident somewhat resembling
that of the Zanthians, who being besieged by Brutus, precipitated themselves,
Men, Women, and Children, into such a furious appetite of dying, that nothing
can be done to evade death, they did not put in practice to avoid life;
insomuch, that Brutus had much ado to save but a very small number. Every
opinion is of force enough, to make it self to be espoused at the expense of
life. The first Article of that valiant Oath, that Greece took, and observ^d in
the Median War, was that every one should sooner exchange life for death, than
their own Laws for those of Persia. What a World of people do we see in the
Wars betwixt the Turks, and the Greeks, rather embrace a cruel death, than to
uncircumcise themselves to admit of Baptism? An example, of which no sort of
Religion is incapable. The Kings of Castile, having Banish^d the Jews out of
their Dominions, John King of Portugal in consideration of eight Crowns a Head,
sold them a retirement into his, for a certain limited time; upon condition,
that the time prefixed coming to expire, they should be gone; and he to furnish
them with Shipping, to transport them into Africa. The limited day came, which
once lapsed, they were given to understand, that such as were afterward found
in the Kingdom should re^a^n Slaves: Vessels were very slenderly provided, and
those who embarked in them were rudely and villainously used by the Seamen, who
besides other indignities, kept them cruising upon the Sea, one while forwards
and another backwards, till they had spent all their provisions, and were
constrained to buy of them at so dear rates, and so long withal, that they set
them not on Shore, till they were all stripped to their very Shirts. The news of
this inhumane usage, being brought to those who remained behind, the greater
part of them resolved upon Slavery, and some made a show of changing Religion.
Emanuel the successor of John, being come to the Crown, first set them at
liberty; and afterward altering his mind, ordered them to depart his Country,
assigning three Ports for their Passage. Hoping (says the Bishop Osorius, no
contemtible Latin Historian of these later times) that the favor of the
liberty he had given them, having f^il'd of converting them to Christianity;
yet the difficulty of committing themselves to the mercy of the Mariners, and
of abandoning a Country they were now habituated to, and were grown very rich
in, to go, and expose themselves in strange and unknown Regions, would
certainly do it: But finding himself deceived in his expectation, and that they
were all resolved upon the Voyage; he cut off two of the three Ports he had
promised them, to the end, that the length and incommodity of the passage,
might reduce some; or that he might have opportunity, by crouding them all into
one place, the more conveniently to execute what he had designed; which was to
force all the Children under fourteen years of Age, from the Arms of their
Fathers and Mothers, to transport them from their sight and conversation, into
a place where they might be instructed, and broug^^ up in our Religion. He says
that this produced a most horrid Spectacle: The natural affection betwixt the
Parents and their Children, and moreover their Zeal to their ancien^ Belief,
contending against this violent De^ree Fathers and Mothers were commonly seen
making themselves away, and by a yet much more Rigorous Example, precipitating
out of Love and Compassion, their young Children into Wells and Pits, to avoid
the Severity of this Law. As to the remainder of then, the time that had been
prefix^d being expird, for want of means to transport them, they again returned
into Slavery. Some also turned Christians, upon whose Faith, as also that of
their Posterity even to this Day, which is a Hundred Years since, few
Portuguese can yet re^ie or believe them to be real Converts; though Custom,
and length of time, are much more powerful Counselors in such Changes, than
all other Constraints whatever. In the Town of Castlenau-Darry, Fifty
Heretics, Albeg ^is, at one time suffered themselves to be Burnt alive in one
Fire, rather than they would renounce their Opinions. Quoties n^^ modo ductores
nostri, dicit Cicero, sed universi ^tiam exercitus, ad non dubiam mortem
concurrerut? How often, have not only our Leaders, but whole Armies, run to a
certain and apparent Death. I have seen an intimate Friend of mine, run
headlong upon Death with a real affection, and that was rooted in his heart by
diverse plausible Arguments, which he would never permit me to dispossess him
off, upon the first Honorable occasion that offered it self to him, to
precipitate himself into it, without any manner of visible reason, with an
obstinate and ardent desire of Dying. We have several Examples of our own times
of those, even so much as to little Children, who for fear of a Whipping, or
some such little thing, have dispatched themselves. And, what shall we not fear
(says one of the Ancients to that purpose,) if we dread that, which Cowardice
it self has chosen for its refuge? Should I here produce a tedious Catalogue of
those of all Sexes and Conditions, and of all sorts, even in the most happy
Ages, who have either with great Constancy looked Death in the Face, or
voluntarily sought it; and sought it not only to avoid the Evils of this Life
but some, purely to avoid the Satiety of Living; and others, for the hope of a
better Condition elsewhere, I should never have done. Nay, the number is so
infinite, that in truth, I should have a better Bargain on it, to reckon up
those who have feared it. This one therefore shall serve for all; Pyrrho the
Philosopher, being one Day in a Boat, in a very great Tempest, showed to those
he saw the most affrighted about him, and encouraged them by the Example of a
Hog, that was there, nothing at all concerned at the Storm. Shall we then dare
to say, that this advantage of Reason, of which we so much Boast, and upon the
account of which, we think our selves Masters and Emperors, over the rest of
the Creatures, was given us for a Torment? To what end serves the Knowledge of
things, if it renders us more Unmanly? If we lose the Tranquillity and Repose we
should enjoy without it? And if it put us into a worse Condition, than Pyrrho's
Hog? Shall we employ the Understanding, that was conferred upon us for our
greatest Good, to our own Ruin? Setting our selves against the design of
Nature, and the universal Order of things, which intend, that every one should
make use of the Faculties, Members and Means, he has, to his own best
Advantage? But it may peradventure be Objected against me; Your Rule is true
enough, as to what concerns Death: But what will you say of Necessity? What
will you moreover say of Pain, that Aristippus, Hieronymus, and almost all the
Wise Men, have reputed the worst of Evils? And those who have deny d it by Word
of Mouth, did however confess it in Effects? Possidonius being extremely
Tormented with a Sharp and painful Disease, Pompeius came to Visit him,
excusing himself, that he had taken so unseasonable a time to come to hear him
discourse of Philosophy; God forbid, said Possidonius to him again, that Pain
should ever have the power to hinder me from talking, and thereupon fell
immediately upon a discourse of the Contempt of Pain: But in the mean time, his
own Infirmity was playing its part, and plagued him to the purpose; to which he
Cried out, thou may work thy Will Pain, and Torment me with all the power
thou have, but thou shall never make me say, that thou art an Evil. This Story
that they make such a Clutter withal, what is there in it, I fain would know,
to the Contempt of Pain? It only Fights it with Words, and in the mean time, if
the Shootings and Dolours he felt, did not move him, why did he interrupt his
Discourse? Why did he fancy, he did so great a thing, in forbearing to confess
it an Evil? All does not here consist in the Imagination, our Fancies may work
upon other things: But this here is a certain Science that is playing its part,
of which our Senses themselves are judge.

Luc. l. 4.
Qui nisi sunt very, ratio quoque falsa sit omnis.
Which if it be not here most true;
Reason it self must be false too.
Shall we persuade our Skins, that the Jerks of a Whip tickle us? Or our Taste,
that a Potion of Aloes is Graves Wine. Pyrrho's Hog is here in the same
Predicament with us; he is not a^raid of Death, it is true, but if you Beat him,
he will Cry out to some purpose: Shall we force the general Law of Nature,
which in every Living Creature under Heaven, is seen to Tremble under Pain? The
very Trees seem to Groan under the Blows they receive. Death is only felt by
Discourse, forasmuch as it is the motion of an instant.

Ovid. Epist. Ariad.
Aut suit, aut veniet, nihil est praesentis in illa,
Morsque minus poenae, quam mora mortis habet,
Death's always past, or coming on, in this
There never any thing of present is:
And the delays of Death more painful are,
Than Death it self, and Dying is by far.
A Thousand Beasts, a Thousand Men, are sooner Dead than Threatened. That also
which we principally pretend to Fear in Death is Pain, the ordinary forerunner
of it: Yet, if we may believe a Holy Father, Malam mortem non facit, nisi quod
sequitur mortem. Nothing makes Death Evil, but what follows it. And I should
yet say more probably, that neither that which goes before, nor that which
follows after, are at all the appendants of Death: We excuse our selves safely.
And I find by experience, that it is rather the impatience of the Imagination
of Death, that makes us impatient of Pain; and that we find it doubly grievous,
as it Threatens us with Death. But reason accusing our Cowardice, for fearing a
thing so sudden, so inevitable, and so insensible, we take the other as the
more excusable pretense. All ills that carry no other danger along with them,
but simply the Evils themselves, we despise as things of no danger. The
Toothache, or the Gout, as painful as they are, being yet not reputed Mortal,
who reckons them in the Catalogue of Diseases? But let us presuppose, that in
Death we principally regard the Pain, as also, there is nothing to be feared in
Poverty, but the Miseries it brings along with it, of Thrist, Hunger, Cold,
Heat, Watching, and the other Inconveniences it makes us suffer, yet still we
have nothing to do with any thing but Pain. I will grant, and very willingly,
that it is the worst Accident of our Being, (for I am the Man upon Earth, that
the most Hates, and avoids it, considering, that hitherto I thank God I have
had so little Traffic with it,) but still it is in us, if not to annihilate,
at least, to lessen it by Patience, and though the Body should Mutiny, to
Maintain the Soul nevertheless in a good Temper. And were it not so, who had
ever given Reputation to Virtue, Valor, Force, Magnanimity, and Resolution?
where were their parts to be played, if there were no pain to be Defied? Seneca.
Avida est periculi virtus. Virtue is greedy of danger. Were there no lying
upon the hard ground, no enduring, armed at all pieces, the Meridional Heats,
no feeding upon the flesh of Horses, and Asses, no seeing a Man's self hacked
and hewed to pieces, no suffering a Bullet to be pulled out from amongst the
shattered Bones, the stitching up, cauterising, and searching of Wounds, by
what means were the advantage we covet to have over the Vulgar to be acquired?
It Is far from flying Evil and Pain, what the Sages say, that of Actions equally
good, a Man should most covet to perform that wherein there is greater Labor
and Pain. Non est enim hilaritate, Cicero de fin. l. 2.
neck lascivia, nec risu, aut joco comite levitatis, sed saepe etiam tristes
firmitate, and constantia sunt beati. For Men are not only happy by Mirth and
Wantonness, neither by Laughter and Jesting, the Companion of Levity: But
oft-times, the Graver and more Melancholic sort of Men, reap Felicity from
their Steadiness and Constancy. And for this reason, it has ever been
impossible to persuade our Forefathers, but that the Victories obtained by
dint of Force, and the hazard of War, were still more Honorable, than those
performed in great Security, by Stratagem or Practice.

Luc. lib. 9.
Laetius est, quoties magno sibi constat honestum. A handsome Act more handsome
does appear.
By how much more it cost the doer dear.
Besides, this ought to be our comfort, that naturally, if the Pain be violent,
it is but short, and if long, nothing violent, Si gravis, Cicero.
brevis: si longus, levis. Thou will not feel it long, if thou feel'st it too
much, it will either put an end to it self, or to thee; if thou can not
support it, it will export thee. Memineris maximos morte finiri; Cloero de fin.
parvos multa habere intervalla requietis: mediocrium nos esse dominos: ut si
tolerabiles sint, feramus; sin minus, e vita, quum ea non placeat tanquam e
theatro exeamus. Remember, that great ones are terminated by Death, that small,
have long Intermissions of Repose, and that we are Masters of the moderate
sort: so that, if tolerable, we may bear them, if not, we can go out of Life,
as from a Theater, where the Entertainment does not please us; that which makes
us suffer Pain with so much Impatience, is the not being accustomed to repose
our chiefest Contentment in the Soul, that we do not enough rely upon her who
is the sole and sovereign Mistress of our Condition. The Body, saving in
greater or less proportion, has but one and the same Bent and Biass; whereas
the Soul is variable into all sorts of forms; and subjects to her self, and to
her own Empire, all things whatsoever; both the Senses of the Body, and all
other Accidents: and therefore it is, that we ought to study her, to enquire
into her, and to rowse up all her powerful Faculties. There is neither Reason,
Form, nor Prescription, that can any thing prevail against her Inclination and
Choice; of so many Thousands of Biasses that she has at her disposal, let us
give her one proper to our repose and conservation, and then we shall not only
be sheltered and secured from all manner of Injury and Offense, but moreover
gratified and obliged, if we will, with Evils and Offenses. She makes her
profit indifferently of all things. Error and Dreams serve her to good use, as
a Loyal matter to Lodge us in Safety and Contentment. It Is plain enough to be
seen, that it is the sharpness of our Conceit, that gives the Edge to our Pains
and Pleasures. Beasts that have no such thing, leave to their Bodies their own
free and natural Sentiments, and consequently, in every kind very near the
same, as appears by the resembling Application of their Motions. If we would
not disturb, in our Members, the Jurisdiction that appertains to them in this,
it is to be believed, it would be the better for us, and that Nature has given
them a just and moderate Temper, both to Pleasure and Pain; neither can it fail
of being Just, being Equal, and Common. But seeing we have Enfranchised our
selves from these Rules, to give our selves up to the rambling Liberty of our
own Fancies, let us at least help to incline them to the most agreeable side*
Plato fears our too vehemently engaging our selves with Grief and Pleasure,
forasmuch as these too much Knit and Ally the Soul to the Body: whereas I
rather, quite contrary, by reason it too much separates and disunites them. As
an Enemy is made more Fierce by our Flight, so Pain grows Proud to see us
Truckle under it. She will surrender upon much better Terms to them who make
Head against her: A Man must oppose, and stoutly set himself against it. In
retiring and giving ground, we invite, and pull upon our selves the Ruin that
Threatens us. As the Body is more firm in an Encounter, the more stiffly and
obstinately it applys it self to it; so is it with the Soul. But let us come to
Examples, which are the proper Commodity for Fellows of such feeble Reins as my
self; where we shall find, that it is with Pain, as with Stones, that receive a
more spritely, or a more languishing Luster, according to the Foil they are set
upon, that it has no more room in us, than we are pleased to allow it. Tantum
doluerunt, Aug. de Civit. Dei.
quantum doloribus se inseruerunt. They Grieved so much the more, by how much
they set themselves to Grieve. We are more sensible of one little touch of a
Chirurgeon's Lancet, than of Twenty Wounds with a Sword in the heat of Fight.
The Pains of Childbearing, said by the Physician, and by God himself, to be
very great, and which our Women keep so great a Clutter about, there are whole
Nations that make nothing of it. To say nothing of the Lacedaemonian Women,
what alteration can you see in our Switzers Wives of the Guard, saving, as they
trot after their Husbands, you see them to Day with the Child hanging at their
Backs, that they carried yesterday in their Bellies? And the counterfeit
Gypsies we have amongst us, go themselves to Wash their's so soon as they come
into the World, in the first River they meet. Besides so many Where Is as Daily
steal their Children out of their Womb, as before they stole them in; that fair
and noble Wife of Sabinus, a Patrician of Rome, for another interest alone,
without help, without crying out, or so much as a Groan, endured the Bearing of
Two Twins. a poor simple Boy of Lacedaemon having stole a Fox, (for they more
fear the Shame of their Knavery in stealing, than we do the Punishment of our
Knavery,) and having got him under his Coat, did rather endure the tearing out
of his Bowels, than he would discover his Theft. And another Cursing at a
Sacrifice, suffered himself to be Burnt to the Bone, by a Coal that fell into
his Sleeve, rather than disturb the Ceremony. And there have been a great
Number, for a sole Trial of Virtue, following their instruction, who have at
Seven Years old endured to be Whipped to Death, without changing their
Countenance. And Cicero has seen them Fight in Parties, with Fists, Feet and
Teeth, till they have fainted and sunk down, rather than confess themselves
overcome. Custom would never Conquer Nature, for she is ever invincible, but we
have infected the Mind with Shadows, Delights, Wantonness, Negligence and
Sloth; and with vain Opinions, and corrupt Manners, rendered it Effeminate and
Mean. Every one knows the Story of Scaevola, that being slipped into the Enemies
Camp to Kill their General, and having missed his Blow, to repair his fault, by
a more strange Invention, and to deliver his Country, he boldly confessed to
Porsenna, (who was the King he had a purpose to Kill,) not only his design, but
moreover added, That there were then in his Camp a great Number of Romans, his
Accomplices in the Enterprise, as good Men as he, and to show what a one he
himself was, having caused a Pan of Burning Coals to be brought, he saw, and
endured his Arm to Broil and Roast, till the King himself, conceiving Horror
at the sight, commanded the Pan to be taken away. What would you say of him,
that would not vouchsafe to respite his Reading in a Book, whilst he was under
Incision? And of the other that persisted to Mock and Laugh, in Contempt of the
Pains inflicted upon him; so that the provoked Cruelty of the Executioners that
had him in handling, and all the Inventions of Tortures redoubled upon him one
after another, spent in vain, gave him the Bucklers? But he was a Philosopher.
What! a Fencer of Caesar's, Endured and Laughing all the while, Cicero Tusc. l.
2.
his Wounds to be searched, Launc'd and laid open. Quis mediocris gladiator
ingemuit? Quis vultum mutavit unquam? Quis non modo stetit, verum etiam
decubuit turpiter? Quis cum decubuisset, ferrum recipere jussus, collum
contraxit? What mean Fencer ever so much as gave a Groan? Which of them ever so
much as changed his Countenance? Which of them standing or falling did either
with Shame? Which of them, when he was down, and commanded to receive the Blow
of the Sword, ever shrunk in his Neck? Let us bring in the Women too. Who has
not heard at Paris of her that caused her Face to be flayed, only for the
fresher Complexion of a new Skin? There are who have drawn good and sound
Teeth, to make their Voices more soft and sweet, or to place them in better
Order. How many Examples of the contempt of Pain have we in that Sex? What can
they not do? What do they fear to do, for never so little hopes of an Addition
to their Beauty?

Vellere queis cura est albos a stirpe capillos, Tib. lib. 1. Eleg. 9.

Et faciem dempta pelle refer novam.
Who pluck their Gray Hairs by the Roots, and try,
An old Head, Face, with young Skin to supply.
I have seen some of them swallow Sand, Ashes, and do their utmost to destroy
their Stomachs, to get Pale Complexions. To make a fine Spanish Boy, what Racks
will they not endure of Tweaking and Braceing, till they have Noches in their
sides, cut into the very quick Flesh, and sometimes to Death? It is an ordinary
thing with several Nations at this Day, to hurt themselves in good earnest, to
gain credit to what they profess, of which, our King relates notable Examples
of what he has seen in Poland, and done toward himself. But besides this,
which I know to have been imitated by some in France, when I came from that
famous Assembly of the Estates at Blois, I had a little before seen a Maid in
Picardy, who to manifest the Ardour of her Promises, as also her Constancy,
give her self, with a Bodkin she wore in her Hair, Four or Five good lusty
Stabs into the Arm, till the Blood gushed out to some purpose. The Turks make
themselves great Scars in Honor of their Mistresses, and to the end they may
the longer remain, they presently clap Fire to the Wound, where they hold it an
uncredible time to stop the Blood, and form the Cicatrice; People that have
been Eyewitness of it, have both Writ and Sworn it to me. But for Ten Aspers,
there are there every day Fellows to be found, that will give themselves a good
deep slash in the Arms or Thighs. I am willing, though to have the Testimonies
nearest to us, when we have most need of them; for Christendom does furnish us
with enough. And after the Example of our Blessed Guide, there have been many who
would bear the Cross. We Learn by Testimony, very worthy of belief, that the
King St. Lewis wore a Hair-shirt, till in his old Age his Confessor gave him a
Dispensation to leave it off; and that every Friday he caused his Shoulders to
be drubb'd by his Priest with Six smalls Chains of Iron, which were always
carried about amongst his Night Accoutrements for that purpose. William our
last Duke of Guienne, the Father of this Eleanor who has Transmitted this
Duchy into the Houses of France and England, continually for Ten or Twelve
Years before he Died, wore a Suit of Arms under a Religious Habit, by way of
Penance. Fulkee Count of Anjou, went as far as Jerusalem, there to cause
himself to be Whipped by Two of his Servants, with a Rope about his Neck, before
the Sepulcher of our Lord: But do we not moreover every Good Friday, in several
places, see great numbers of Men and Women, Beat and Whip themselves till they
Lacerate and Cut the Flesh to the very Bones; I have often seen this, and
without Enchantment, when it was said, there were some amongst them, (for they
go disguised,) who for Money undertook by this means to save harmless the
Religion of others, by a contempt of Pain, so much the greater, as the
Incentives of Devotion are more effectual, than those of Avarice. Q. Maximus
Buried his Son, when he was a Consul, and M. ^ate his, when Praetor Elect; and
L. Paulus both his, within a few Days one after another, with such a
Countenance as expressed no manner of Grief. I said once Merrily of a certain
Person, that he had disappointed the Divine Justice: for the Violent Death of
Three grown up Children of his, being one Day sent him, for a severe Scourge,
as it is to be supposed, he was so far from being Afflicted at the Accident,
that he rather took it for a particular Grace and Favor of Heaven. I do not
follow these Monstrous Humors, though I lost Two or Three at Nurse, if not
without Grief, at least, without Repining, and yet there is hardly any
Accident, that pierces nearer to the quick. I see a great many other occasions
of Sorrow, that should they happen to me, I should hardly feel; and have
despised some when they have befallen me, to which the World has give so
Terrible a Figure, that I should Blush to Boast of my Constancy. Ex quo
intelligitur, non in Natura, sed in opinione esse aegritudinem. By which it is
understood, Cicero.
that the Grief is not in Nature, but Opinion. Opinion is a Powerful Party,
bold, and without Measure, who ever so greedily hunted after Security and
Repose, as Alexander and Caesar did after Disturbances and Difficulties? Terez
the Father of Sitalces, was wont to say, that when he had no Wars, he fansied
there was no difference betwixt him and his Groom. Cato the Consul, to secure
some Cities of Spain from Revolt, only interdicting the Inhabitants from
wearing Arms, a great many Killed themselves: Ferox gens, nullam vitam rati
sine Armis esse. A Fierce People, who thought there was no Life without Arms.
How many do we know, who have forsaken the Calms and Sweetness of a Quiet Life,
at Home amongst their Acquaintance, to seek out the Horror of uninhabitable
Deserts; and having precipitated themselves into so Abject a Condition, as to
become the Scorn and Contempt of the World, have hugged themselves with the
Conceit, even to Affectation. Cardinal Barromeus, who Died lately at Milan, in
the midst of all the Jollity that the Air of Italy, his Youth, Birth and great
Riches invited him to, kept himself in so Austere a way of Living, that the
same Robe he wore in Summer, served him for Winter too? Had only Straw for his
Bed, and his Hours of vacancy from the Affairs of his Employment, he
continually spent in Study, upon his Knees, having a little Bread and a Glass
of Water set by his Book, which was all the Provision of his Repast, and all
the time he spent in Eating. I know some who consentingly have Acquired both
Profit and Advancement from Cuckoldry, of which the bare Name only affrights so
many People. If the Sight be not the most necessary of all our Senses, it is at
least the most pleasant: But the most pleasant and most useful of all our
Members, seem to be those of Generation, and yet a great many have conceived a
Mortal Hatred against them, only for this, that they were too Amiable; and have
deprived themselves of them, only for their Value. As much thought lie of his
Eyes, that put them out. The generality, and more solid sort of Men, look upon
abundance of Children as a great Blessing, I, and some others, think it as a
great Benefit to be without them. And when you ask Thales, why he does not
Marry, he tells you, because he has no mind to leave any Posterity behind him.
That our Opinion gives the value to things, is very manifest in a great many of
these which we do not so much regard to prize them, but our selves; and never
consider, either their Virtues, or their Use; but only how dear they cost us:
As though that were a part of their substance: And we only repute for value in
them, not what they bring to us, but what we add to them. By which I
understand, that we are great managers of our Expense. As it weighs, it serves
for so much as it weighs; our Opinion will never suffer it to want of its
value. The Price gives value to the Diamond* Difficulty to Virtue, Suffering to
Devotion, and Griping to Physic. A certain Person, to be Poor, threw his
Crowns into the same Sea, to which so many came from all parts of the World to
Fish and Rifle for Riches. Epicurus says, That to be Rich, is no Advantage, but
only an alteration of Affairs. In plain truth, it is not Want, but rather
abundance, that Creates Avarice. Neither will I stick to deliver my own
Experience concerning this Affair.

I have since my Childhood Lived in Three sorts of Conditions; the First,
which continued for some Twenty Years, I past over without any other means, but
what were Accidental, and depending upon the allowance and assistance of
others, without Stint, or certain Revenue. I then spent my Money so much the
more cheerfully, and with so much the less care how it went, as it wholly
depended upon my over-confidence of Fortune; and never Lived more at my ease, I
never had the repulse^ of finding the Purse of any of my Friends shur^ against
me, having enjoined my self this Necessity above all other Necessities
whatever, by no means to fail of Payment at the appointed time, which also they
have a Thousand times respited, seeing how careful I was to satisfy them; so
that I practiced at once a Thrifty, and withal, a kind of alluring Honesty. I
naturally feel a kind of pleasure in Paying, as if I eased my Shoulders of a
troublesome Weight, and in freeing my self from that Image of Slavery; as also,
that I had a ravishing kind of satisfaction, in pleasing another by doing a
Just Action. Those kind of payments excepted, where the trouble of reckoning
and dodging are required, and in such cases, where I can meet with no Body to
ease me of that hateful Torment, I avoid them, how scandalously and injuriously
soever, all I possibly can, for fear of those little wrangling Disputes, for
which, both my humor, and way of speaking, are so totally improper and unfit.
There is nothing I hate so much, as driving on a Bargain; it is a mere Traffic
of Cozenage and Impudence: where after an Hours cheapning and dodging, both
Parties abandon their Word and Oath for Five Sols profit, or abatement. And yet
I always borrowed at great disadvantage, for wanting the confidence to speak to
the person my self, I committed my Request to the persuasion of a Ticket, which
usually is no very successful Advocate, and is of very great advantage to him
who has a mind to deny. I in those Days more jocundly and freely referred the
Conduct of my Affairs to the Stars, than I have since done to my own Providence
and Judgment. Most good Husbands look upon it as a horrible thing to Live
always thus in uncertainty, and are not angry in the first place, that the
greatest part of the World Live so. How many Worthy Men have wholly slighted
and abandoned the certainty of their own Estates, and yet Daily do it, to trust
to the inconstant Favor of Princes, and fickle Fortune? Caesar ran above a
Million of Gold, more than he was worth, in Debt, to become Caesar. And how
many Merchants have begun their Traffic by the Sale of their Farms, which they
sent into the Indies.

Cat. Epig. 4.
Tot per impetentia freta? In so great a Siccity of Devotion, as we see in these
Days, we have a Thousand and a Thousand Colleges, that pass it over
commodiously enough, expecting every Day their Dinner from the Liberality of
Heaven. Secondly, They do not take notice, that this Certitude upon which they
so much rely, is not much less uncertain and hazardous, than Hazard it self. I
see Misery as near beyond Two Thousand Crowns a Year, as if it stood close by
me; for besides, that it is in the power of Chance to make a Hundred Breaches
to Poverty, through the greatest strength of our Riches, (there being very
often no Mean, betwixt the highest and the lowest Fortune.)

Sen. Provid.
Fortuna vitrea est: tum, quum splendet, frangitur. Fortune is Glass, the
brighter it does shine
More frail, and soonest broken when most fine.
And to turn all our Barricado's and Bulworks Topsie Turvey, I find that by
diverse Causes, Indigence is as frequently seen to Inhabit with those who have
Estates, as with those that have none; and peradventure, it is then far less
Grievous, when alone, than when accompanied with Riches; which flow more from
good Managery, than Income. Sen. Ep. 4.
Faber est suae quisque Fortunae. Every one is the Hammerer of his own Fortune,
and an uneasy, necessitous, busy Man, seems to me more Miserable, than he
that is simply Poor. In divitiis inopes, quod genus egestatis gravissimum est.
Poor in the midst of Riches, which is the most insupportable kind of Poverty.
The greatest and most wealthy Princes, are by Poverty and Want driven to the
most extreme Necessity: for can there be any more Extreme, than to become
Tyrants, and unjust Usurpers, of their Subjects Goods and Estates?

My Second Condition of Life was, to have Money of my own; wherein I so ordered
the matter, that I had soon laid up a very notable Sum out of so mean a
Fortune; considering with my self, that that only was to be reputed having,
which a Man reserved from his ordinary Expense, and that a Man could not
absolutely rely upon Revenue to receive, how clear soever his Estate might be.
For what, said I, if I should be surpised by such or such an Accident; And
after such like vain and vicious Imaginations, would very Learnedly, by this
hoarding of Money, provide against all Inconveniences; and could moreover
answer, such as objected to me, that the number of them was too infinite, that
I could not lay up for all, I could however do it at least for some, and for
many. Yet was not this done without a great deal of Solicitude and Anxiety of
Mind. I kept it very close, and though I dare talk so boldly of my self, never
spoke of my Money, but falsely, as others do, who being Rich, pretend to be
Poor, and being Poor, pretend to be Rich, dispensing with their Consciences for
ever telling sincerely what they have. A ridiculous and shameful Prudence. Was
I to go a Journey? methoug^t I was never enough provided: and the more I loaded
my self with Money, the more also was I loaded with Fear, one while of the
danger of the Roads, another of the Fidelity of him who had the charge of my
Sumpters, of whom, as some others that I know, I was never sufficiently Secure,
if I had him not always in my Eye. If I chanced to leave the Key of my Cabinet
behind me, what strange Jealousies, and Anxiety of Mind did I enter into? And
which was worse, without daring to acquaint any Body with it. My Mind was
eternally taken up with such things as these, so that all things considered,
there is more trouble in keeping Money, than in getting it. And if I did not
altogether so much as I say, or was not effectually so scandalously solicitous
of my Money, as I have made my self; yet it cost me something at least to
govern my self from being so. I reapt little or no advantage by what I had, and
my Expenses seemed nothing less to me, for having the more to spend: For, as
Rion said, The Hairy Men are as angry as the Bald to be pulled; and after you
are once accustomed to it, and have once set your heart upon your heap, it is
no more at your Service, you cannot find in your heart to break it: It Is a
Building that you will fancy, must of necessity all tumble down to Ruin, if
you stir but the least Pibble. Necessity must first take you by the Throat,
before you can prevail upon your self to touch it: And I would sooner have
pawned any thing I had, or sold a House, and with much less constraint upon my
self, than have made the least breach in that beloved Purse, I had so cunningly
laid by. But the danger was, that a Man cannot easily prescribe certain limits
to this desire, (for they are hard to find in things that a Man conceives to be
good,) and to stint this good Husbandry so, that it may not degenerate into
Avarice: Men still being intent upon adding to the heap, and increasing the
stock, from Sum to Sum, till at last they vilely deprive themselves of the
enjoyment of their own proper Goods, and throw all into reserve, without making
any use of them at all. According to this Rule, they are the Richest People in
the World, who are set to guard the Goals, and to defend the Walls of a Wealthy
City. All Mony'd Men I conclude to be Convetous. Plato places Corporal or
Humane Riches in this Order; Health, Beauty, Strength and Riches; and Riches,
says he, is not blind, but very clear sighted, when illuminated by Prudence.
Dionysius the Son, did a very handsome Act upon this subject. He was informed,
that one of the Syracusans had hid a Treasure in the Earth, and thereupon sent
to the Man to bring it to him, which he accordingly did, privately reserving a
small part of it only to himself, with which he went to another City, where
being cured of his Appetite of Hoarding, he began to Live at a more liberal
Rate. Which Dionysius hearing, caused the rest of his Treasure to be restored
to him, saying, that since he had learnt how to use it, he very willingly
returned it back unto him.

I continued some Years in this hoarding Humor, when I know not what good
Demon fortunately put me out of it, as he did the Syracusan, and made me throw
abroad all my reserve at random; the pleasure of a certain Voyage I took of
very great Expense, having made me spurn this fond Love of Money under foot, by
which means I am now fallen into a third way of living, (I speak what I think
of it) doubtless much more pleasant and moderate, which is, that I live at the
height of my Revenue, sometimes the one, sometimes the other may perhaps
exceed, but it is very little, and but rarely that they differ at all; I live
from Hand to Mouth, and content my self in having sufficient for my present,
and ordinary Expense; for as to extraordinary occasions, all the laying up in
the World would never suffice; and it is the greatest folly imaginable to
expect, that Fortune should ever sufficiently arm us against her self. It Is
with our own Arms that we are to fight her, accidental ones will betray us in
the pinch of the business. If I lay up, it is for some near and designed
Expense, and not to purchase Lands, of which I have no need, but to purchase
pleasure. Non esse cupidum, pecunia est: Cicero. Perad. Vlt.
non esse emacem, vectigal est. Not to be Covetous, ^is Money, not to be a
Purchaser, is a Tribute. I neither am in any great apprehension of wanting, nor
in any desire of any more; Divittarum fructus est in copia; Ibid.
copiam declarat satietas. The fruits of Riches lie in abundance, sat^ety
declares abundance. And I am very well pleased with my self, that this
Reformation in me, has fallen out in an Age naturally inclined to Avarice, and
that I see my self cleared of a Folly so common to Old Men, and the most
ridiculous of all humane Follies. Feraulez a Man that had run through both
Fortunes, and found that the increase of substance, was no increase of
appetite, either to Eating, or Drinking, Sleeping, or the enjoyment of his
Wife, and who on the other side, felt the care of his Economy lie heavy upon
his Shoulders, as it does on mine; was resolved to please a poor Young Man his
faithful Friend, who panted after Riches, by making him a gift of all his,
which was excessively great, and moreover of all he was in the daily way of
getting by the liberality of Cyrus, his good Master, and by the War;
conditionally that he should take care handsomely to maintain, and plentifully
to entertain him, as his Host, and his Friend; which being accordingly
embraced, and performed, they afterward lived very happily together, both of
them equally content with the change of their condition. An example that I
could imitate with all my heart. And very much approve the Fortune of an
Ancient Prelate, whom I see to have so absolutely stripped himself of his Purse,
his Revenue, and Care; of his Expense; committing them one while to one trusty
Servant, and another while to another, that he has spun out a long succession
of Years, as ignorant by this means of his Domestic Affairs, as a mere
stranger. The confidence of another Man's virtue, is no light evidence of a Man's
own; besides God is pleased to favor such a confidence, as to what concerns
him of whom I am speaking, I see no where a better governed Family, nor a House
more nobly, and constantly maintained than his, happy in this to have stated
his affairs to so just a proportion, that his Estate is sufficient to do it
without his care, or trouble, and without any hinderance, either in the
spending, or laying it up; to his other more decent, and quiet employments, and
that are more suitable both to his place, and liking. Plenty then and indigence
depend upon the opinion every one has of them; and Riches no more than Glory,
or Health, have no more either Beauty, or Pleasure, than he is pleased to lend
them, by whom they are possessed. Every one is well, or ill at ease, according as
he finds himself: Not he whom the World believes, but he who believes himself
to be so, is content; and in him alone belief gives it self being, and reality.
Fortune does us neither good, nor hurt; she only presents us the matter, and
the seed, which our Soul, more powerfully than she, turns and applies as she
best pleases; being the sole cause, and Sovereign Mistress of her own happy, or
unhappy condition. All external accessions receive taste and Color, from the
internal constitution, as Clothes warm us, not with their Heat, but our own,
which they are fit to cover and keep in; and who would cover a cold body, would
do the same service for the Cold, for so Snow and Ice are preserved. And after
the same manner that Study is a torment to a Truant, abstinence from Wine to a
good Fellow, frugality to the Spend-thrift, and exercise to a Lazy tender bred
Fellow; so it is of all the rest. The things are not so painful, and difficult
of themselves, but our weakness or cowardice makes them so. To judge of great,
and high matters, requires a suitable Soul, otherwise we attribute the Vice to
them, which is really our own. A straight Oar seems crooked in the Water: It
does not only import that we see the thing, but how, and after what manner we
see it. But after all this, why amongst so many discourses, that by so many
arguments persuade Men to despise Death, and to endure pain, can we not find
out one that makes for us? And of so many sorts of imaginations as have so
prevailed upon others, as to persuade them to do so, why does not every one
apply some one to himself, the most suitable to his own humor? If he cannot
away with a strong working Apozem to eradicate the Evil, let him at least take
a Lenitive to ease it. Opinio est quaedam effeminata, ac levis: Cicero. Tus^.
lib. 2.
nec in dolor magis, quam eadem in voluptate: qua quam liquescimus fluimusque
mollitia, apis aculeum sine clamore far non possumus. Totum in eo est, ut
tibi imperes. There is a certain light, and effeminate opinion, and that not
more in pain, than it is even in pleasure it self; by which, whilst we rest and
wallow in ease, and wantonness, we cannot endure so much as the stinging of a
Be, without roaring. All that lies in it is only this, to command thy self. As
to the rest, a Man does not transgress Philosophy, by permitting the acrimony
of pains, and humane frailty to prevail so much above measure; for they will at
last be reduced to these invincible replies. If it be ill to live in necessity,
at least there is no necessity upon a Man to live in necessity. No Man
continues ill long but by his own fault. And who has neither the Courage to
Die; nor the Heart to Live: who will neither resist nor fly, what should a Man
do to him?

CHAP. XLI.
Not to Communicate a Man's Honor.
OF all the Follies of the World, that which is most universally received, is
the solicitude of Reputation and Glory, which we are fond of to that degree, as
to abandon Riches, Peace, Life, and Health, which are effectual, and
substantial Goods, to pursue this vain Phantome, and empty word, that has
neither Body; nor hold to be taken of it.

Tasso. Canto 10.
La fama ch' invaghisce a un dolce suono
Gli superbi mortali, and par' si bella
Eun echo, un Sogno, andzi d'un Sogno un' ombra
Cb' ad ogni vento si dilegua, and sgombra.
Honor, that with such an alluring sound,
Proud Mortals Charms, and does appear so fair,
An Echo, Dream, shade of a Dream is found,
Dispersed abroad by every breath of Air.
And of all the irrational humors of Men, it should seem that even the
Philosophers themselves have the most ado, and do the latest disengage
themselves from this, as the most resty and obstinate of all humane Follies.
Quia etiam been proficientes animos tentare non cessat. Aug. de Civit. Dei.
Because it ceases not to attack even the wisest, and best lettered minds.
There is not any one Vice, of which reason does so clearly accuse the Vanity,
as of that; but it is so deeply rcoted in us, that I dare not determine,
whether any one ever clearly sequestered himself from it or no. After you have
said all, and believed all has been said to its prejudice, it creates so
intestine an inclination in opposition to your best Arguments, that you have
little power, and constancy to resist it: for (as Cicero says) even those who
most controvert it, would yet that the Books they write should visit the light
under their own Names, and seek to derive Glory from seeming to despise it. All
other things are communicable, and fall into Commerce; we lend our Goods, and
stake our Lives for the necessity, and service of our Friends; but to
Communicate a Man's Honor, and to Robe another with a Man's own Glory, is very
rarely seen. And yet we have some examples of that kind. Catulus Luctatius in
the Cymbrian War, having done all that in him lay to make his flying Soldiers
face about upon the Enemy, ran himself at last away with the rest, and
counterfeited the Coward, to the end his Men might rather seem to follow their
Captain, than to fly from the Enemy; which was to abandon his own reputation,
to palliate the shame of others. When Charles the Fifth came into Provence in
the Year 1537, it is said, that Antonio de Leva seeing the Emperor positively
resolved upon this Expedition, and believing it would redound very much to his
honor, did nevertheless very stiffly oppose it in the Council, to the end that
the entire glory of that Resolution should be attributed to his Master; and
that it might be said, his own Wisdom and foresight had been such, as that
contrary to the opinion of all, he had brought about so great, and so generous
an Enterprise; which was to do him Honor at his own Expense. The Thracian
Ambassadors, coming to comfort Archileonida the Mother of Brasidas upon the
death of her Son, and commending his to that height, as to say he had not left
his like behind him; she rejected this private, and particular commendation to
attribute it to the public: Tell me not that, (said she) I know the City of
Sparta has several Citizens both greater, and of greater Valor than he. In the
Battle of Cressy, the Prince of Wales, being then very young, had the Vantguard
committed to him, and the main stress of the Battle happened to be in that place,
which made the Lords that were with him, finding themselves overmatcht, to send
to King Edward, that he would please to advance to their Relief; who thereupon
enquiring of the condition his Son was in, and being answered, that he was yet
living, and on Horseback: I should then do him wrong (said the King) now to
go, and deprive him of the honor of winning this Battle he has so long, and so
bravely disputed* what hazard soever he runs, it shall be entirely his own: and
accordingly would neither go nor send, knowing that if he went, it would be
said all had been lost without his succor, and that the honor of the Victory
would be wholly attributed to him. Semper enim quod postremum adjectum est, id
rem totam videtur traxisse. For the last st roak to a business seems to draw
along with it the performance of the whole action. Many at Rome thought, and
would usually say, that the greatest of Scipio's Acts, were in part due to
Lelius, whose constant practice it was still to advance, and Shoulder Scipio's
Grandeur and Renown, without any care of his own. And Theopompus King of Sparta
to him who told him the Republic could not miscarry since he knew so well how
to Command. It Is rather (answered he) because the people know so well how to
Obey. As Women succeeding to Peerages, had notwithstanding their Sex the
privilege to assist, and give in their Votes in the Causes that appertained to
the Jurisdiction of Peers: So the Ecclesiastical Peers notwithstanding their
prosession, were obliged to assist our Kings in their Wars, not only with their
Friends and Servants, but in their own Persons. As the Bishop of Beauvais did,
who being with Philip Augustus at the Battle of Bouvines, had a notable share
in that action; but he did not think it fit for him to participate in the Fruit
and Glory of that Violent and Bloody Trade. He with his own Hand reduced
several of the Enemy that Day to his Mercy, whom he delivered to the first
Gentleman he met either to Kill, or receive them to Quarter, referring the
execution to another hand. As also did William Earl of Salisbury to Messire
Jean de Nesle, with a like subtlety of Conscience to the other we named before,
he would Kill, but not wound him, and for that reason never Fought with a Mace.
And a certain person of my time, being reproacht by the King, that he had laid
hands on a Priest, stiffly and positively denied he had done any such thing:
the meaning of which was, he had Cudgelled and Kicked him.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the Inequality amongst us.
PLutarch says somewhere, that he does not find so great a difference betwixt
Beast and Beast, as he does betwixt Man and Man. Which is said in reference to
the internal Qualities and Perfections of the Soul. And, in truth, I find,
(according to my poor Judgment,) so vast a distance betwixt Epaminondas, and
some that I know, (who are yet Men of common sense,) that I could willingly
enhance upon Plutarch, and say, that there is more difference betwixt such and
such a Man, than there is betwixt such ^ Man and such a Beast:

Ter. For. Act. 5. Sc. 3.
Hem vir viro quid praestat! -- How much alas,
One man another does surpass!
And that there are as many and innumerable degrees of Wits, as there are
Cubits betwixt this and Heaven. But as touching the Estimate of Men, it is
strange, that, our selves excepted, no other Creature is esteemed beyond its
proper Qualities. We commend a Horse for his Strength, and sureness of Foot,
Juvenal Sat. 8.
-- Volucrem
Sic laudamus equum, facili cui plurima palma
Fervet, and exultat rauco victoria circo.
So we commend the Horse for being fleet,
Who many Palms by Breath and Speed does get,
And which the Trumpets in the Circle grace,
With their hoarse Levets for his well run Race.
and not for his Rich Comparisons; a Greyhound for his share of Heels, not for
his fine Collar; a Hawk for her Wing, not for her Gesses and Bells. Why, in
like manner, do we not value a Man for what is properly his own? He has a great
Train, a beautiful Palace, so much Credit, so many Thousand Pounds a Year, and
all these are about him, but not in him. You will not buy a Pig in a Poke: if
you cheapen a Horse, you will see him stripped of his Housing-cloaths, you will
see him naked and open to your Eye; or if he be Clothed, as they anciently
were wont to present them to Princes to Sell, it is only on the less important
parts, that you may not so much consider the beauty of his Color, or the
breadth of his Crupper, as principally to examine his Limbs, Eyes and Feet,
which are the Members of greatest use:

Hor. lib. 1. Sat. 2.
Regibus hic mos est, ubi equos mercantur, opertos
Suspiciunt, ne si facies, ut saepe, decora
Molli fulta pede est, emptorem inducat hiantem,
Quod pulchrae clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix.
When Kings Steeds Clothed, as it is their manner, Buy,
They straight examine very Curiously,
Lest a short Head, a thin and well raised Crest,
A broad spread Buttock, and an ample Chest,
Should all be propt with an old beaten Hoof,
To gull the Buyer, when they come to proof.
Why, in giving your Estimate of a Man, do you Prize him wrapped and muffled up
in Clothes? He then discovers nothing to you, but such parts as are not in the
least his own; and conceals those, by which alone one may rightly judge of his
Value. It Is the price of the Blade that you enquire into, and not of the
Scabbard: You would not peradventure bid a Farthing for him, if you saw him
stripped. You are to judge him by himself, and not by what he wears. And as one
of the Ancients very pleasantly said, Do you know why you repute him Tall? You
reckon withal the height of his Chepines, whereas the Pedestal is no part of
the Statue. Measure him without his Stilts, let him lay aside his Revenues, and
his Titles, let him present himself in his Shirt, then examine if his Body be
sound and spritely, active and disposed to perform its Functions? What Soul has
he? Is it Beautiful, capable, and happily provided of all her Faculties? Is she
Rich of what is her own, or of what she has Borrowed? Has Fortune no hand in
the Affair? Can she, without winking, stand the lightning of Swords; is she
indifferent, whether her Life expire by the Mouth, or through the Throat? Is
she Settled, Even and Content? This is what is to be examined, and by that you
are to judge of the vast differences betwixt Man, and Man. Is he

H. Lib. 2. Sat. 7.
-- Sapiens, sibique imperiosus
Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula terrent,
Responsare cupidinibus, contemnere honores
Fortis, and in seipso totus teres atque rotundus,
Externi nequid valeat per laeve morari,
In quem manca ruit semper fortuna?
Wise, and commanding over his Appetite,
One whom, nor Want, nor Death, nor Bonds, can Fright,
To check his Lusts, and Honors scorn, so stout,
And in himself so round and clear throughout,
That no External thing can stop his course,
And on whom Fortune vainly tries her force.
such a Man is raised Five Hundred Fathoms
above Kingdoms and Dutchies, he is an Absolute
Monarch in and to himself.
Plaut. Tri. Act. 2. Sc. 2.
Sapiens Pol ipse fingit fortunam sibi. The Wife Man his own Fortune makes.
What remains for him to Covet, or Desire?
Luc. l. 2.
-- Nonne videmus
Nil aliud sibi naturam latrare, nisi ut quoi
Corpore sejunctus dolor absit, mente fruatur
Jucundo sensu, cura semotus metuque?
We see that Nature to no more aspires;
Nor to her self a greater good requires,
Than that, whose Body is from Dolours free,
He should his Mind with more Serenity,
And a more pleasing Sense enjoy, quite clear
From those two grand Disturbers, Grief and Fear
Compare with such a one the comman Rubble of Mankind, stupid and mean
Spirited, Servile, Instable, and continually floating with the Tempest of
various Passions, that tosses and tumbles them to and fro, and all depending
upon others, and you will find a greater distance, than betwixt Heaven and
Earth; and yet the blindness of common usage is such, that we make little or no
account of it. Whereas, if we consider a Peasant, and a King, a Nobleman, and
a Villain, a Magistrate, and a private Man, a Rich Man, and a Poor, there
appears a vast disparity, though they differ no more, (as a Man may say,) than
in their Breeches. In Thrace, the King was distinguished from his People, after
a very pleasant manner; He had a Religion by himself, a God of his own, and
which his Subjects were not to presume to Adore, which was Mercury, whilst, on
the other side, he disdained to have any thing to do with theirs, Mars, Bacchus
and Diana. And yet they are no other than Pictures, that make no Essential
Dissimilitude; for as you see Actors in a Play, representing the person of a
Duke, or an Emperor, upon the Stage, and immediately after, in the Tiring
Room, return to their true and original Condition; so the Emperor, whose Pomp
and Luster, does so dazzle you in Public, Luc. l. 4.
Silicet, and grandes viridi cum luce smaragdi
Auro includuntur, teriturque Thalassina vestis
Assidue, and veneris sudorem exercita petat.
Great Emeralds richly are in Gold enchast,
To dart Green Luster, and the Seagreen vest
Continually is worn and rubbed to Frets,
Whilst it Imbibes the Juice that Venus Sweats.
do but peep behind the Curtain, and you will see nothing more than an ordinary
Man, and peradventure, Senec. Ep. 115.
more Contemptible than the meanest of his Subjects. Ille beatus introrsum est,
istius bracteata felicitas est. True Happiness lies within, the other is but a
counterfeit Felicity. Cowardice, Irresolution, Ambition, Spite and Envy, are as
Predominant in him, as in another.

Horace lib. 2. Ode 16.
Non enim gazae, neque consularis
Summovet lictor, miseros tumultus
Mentis, and curas laqueata circum
Tecta volantes.
For neither Wealth, Honors, nor Offices,
Can the wild Tumults of the Mind appease,
Nor chase those Cares, that with unweari'd Wings
Hover about the Palaces of Kings.
Nay, Solitude and Fear, attack him even in the Center of his Battalions.
Lucret. l. 2.
Reveraque metus hominum, curaeque sequaces,
Nec metuunt sonitus armorum, nec fera tela,
Audacterque inter Reges, rerumque potentes
Versantur, neque fulgorem reverentur ab auro.
For Fears and Cares warring with Humane Hearts;
Fear not the clash of Arms, nor points of Darts;
But with great Kings and Potentates makes Bold,
Maugre their Purple, and their Glittering Gold.
Do Fevers, Gouts and Apoplexies, spare them any more, than one of us? When Old
Age hangs heavy upon a Princes Sholders, can the Yeomen of his Guard ease him
of the Burden? When he is Astonished with the apprehension of Death, can the
Gentlemen of his Bedchamber comfort and assure him? When Jealousy, or any
other Capricio swims in his Brain, can our Complements and Ceremonies restore
him to his good Humor? The Canopy Embroidered with Pearl and Gold, he ^ies
under, has no Virtue against a violent fit of the Stone or Cholick.

Idem.
Nec calidae citius decedunt corpore febres
Textilibus si in picturis, ostroque rubenti
Jacteris, quam si plebeia in vest cubandum est.
Nor sooner will a Calenture depart,
Although in figured Tissues lodged thou art,
Than if thy homely Couch were meanly spread
With poorest Blankets of the coursest thread.
The Flatterers of Alexander the Great, possessed him, that he was the Son of
Jupiter: But being one Day Wounded, and observing the Blood stream from his
Wound: What say you now, (my Masters,) said he, is not this Blood of a Crimson
Color, and purely Humane? This is not of the Complexion with that which Homer
makes to issue from the Wounded Gods. The Poet Hermedorus had Writ a Poem in
Honor of Antigonus, wherein he called him the Son of the Sun: But who has the
emptying of my Close-stool, (said Antigonus) will find to the contrary. He is
but a Man at best, and if he be Deformed, or ill Qualified from his Birth, the
Empire of the Universe, can neither mend his Shape, nor his Nature;

Persiu^. Sat. 2.
-- Puellae
Hunc rapiant, quidquid culcaverit hic, rosa fiat.
Though Maids should Ravish him, and where he goes,
In every step he takes, should spring a Rose.
what of all that, if he be a Fool and a Sot, even Pleasure and good Fortune,
are not relished without Vigor and Understanding.

Ter. Hea^^. Act. 1. S^^.
Haec perinde sunt, ut illius animus, qui ea possidet,
Qui uti scit, ei bona, illi, qui non utitur recte, mala.
Things to the Souls of their Possessors square,
Goods if well used, if ill, they Evils are.
Whatever the Benefits of Fortune are, they yet require a Palate fit to relish
and taste them: It Is Fruition, and not possession, that renders us Happy.

Horace lib. 1. Epist. 2.
Non domus, and fundus, non aeris acervus and auri,
Aegroto domini deduxit corpore f^bres,
Non animo curas, valeat possessor oportet,
Qui comportatis rebus been cogitat uti,
Qui cupit, aut metuit, juvat illum sic domus aut res,
Ut lippum pictae Tubulae, fomenta podagram.
Mannours, or heaps of Brass and Gold, afford No ease at all to their Febritick
Lord; For can they cure his Cares; it is requisite The Good's Possessor know the
use of it. Who Fears or Covets, these so help him out, As Pictures Blind Folks,
Cataplasms the Gout.

He is a Sot, his Taste is palled and flat; he no more enjoys what he has, than
one that has a Cold, relishes the flavor of Canary; or than a Horse is
sensible of his Rich Comparison. Plato is in the right, when he tells us, that
Health, Beauty, Vigor and Riches, and all the other things called Goods, are
equally Evil to the Unjust, as Good to the Just, and the Evil on the contrary
the same. And therefore, where either the Body or the Mind, are in disorder, to
what use serve these external Conveniences? Considering, that the least prick
with a Pin, or the least Passion of the Soul, is sufficient to deprive us of
the pleasure of being sole Monarch of the World. At the first twitch of the
Gout, it signifies much to be called Sir, and your Majesty; Hor. lib. 1. El. 2.
Totus, and argento conflatus, totus and auro. Although his Chests are crammed,
whilst they will hold, With immense Sums of Silver Coin and Gold. does he not
forget his Palaces and Grandeurs? If he be Angry, can his being a Prince, keep
him from looking Red, and looking Pale, and grinding his Teeth, like a Madman?
Now if he be a Man of parts, and well descended, Royalty adds very little to
his Happiness:

Hor. lib. 1 Ep. 12.
Si vent^i been, si lateri est pedibusque tuis, nil
Divitiae poterant regales addere majus.
If thou art right and sound from Head to Foot,
A King's Revenue can add nothing to it.
He discerns, it is nothing but Counterfeit and Gullery. Nay perhaps, he would
be of King Seleucus's opinion, That who knew the weight of a Scepter, would not
deign to stoop to take it up; which he said, in reference to the great and
painful Duty incumbent upon a good King. Doubtless it can be no easy task to
Rule others, when we find it so hard a matter to Govern our selves. And as to
the thing Dominion, that seems so sweet and charming, the frailty of Humane
Wisdom, and the difficulty of choice in things that are new and doubtful, to us
considered, I am very much of opinion, that it is much more pleasant to follow,
than to lead; and that it is a great settlement and satisfaction of Mind, to
have only one Path to walk in, and to have none to answer for, but for a Man's
self;

Lucret. lib. 5.
Ut satius multo jam sit, parere quietum,
Quam regere imperio res velle.
So that it is better Calmly to Obey,
Than in the Storms of State to Rule and Sway.
To which we may add that saying of Cyrus, That no Man was fit to Rule, but he
who in his own Worth was of greater Value, than all those he was to Govern: But
King Hiero in Xenophon, says further, That in the Fruition even of Pleasure it
self, they are in a worse condition, than private Men; forasmuch a^ the
opportunities and facility they have of commanding those things at Will, takes
off from the Delight:

Ovid. Amor. l. 2. Ele. 19.
Pinguis amor, nimiumque potens, in taedia nobis
Vertitur, and Stomacho dulcis ut esca necet.
Too Potent Love, in Loathing never ends,
As highest Sauce the Stomach most offends.
Can we think, that the Singing-Boys of the Quire, take any great delight in
their own Music? The Satiety does rather render it troublesome and tedious to
them. Feasts, Balls, Masquerades and Tiltings, delight such as but rarely see,
and desire to be at such Solemnities: But having been frequent at such
Entertainments, the relish of them grows flat and insipid: Nay, Women (the
greatest Temptation) do not so much delight those who make a common practice of
the sport. He who will not give himself leisure to be Thirsty, can never find
(...) true pleasure of Drinking. Farces and Tumbling Tricks, are pleasant to
the Spectators, but a pain to those by whom they are performed. And that this
is effectually so, we see that Princes divert themselves sometimes in
disguising their Qualities, a while to depose themselves, and to stoop to the
poor and ordinary way of Living of the meanest of their People.

Hor. car. lib. 3. Ode 29.
Plerumque gratae Principibus vires,
Mundaeque parvo sub lare pauperum
Coenae sine aulaeis, and ostro,
Sollicitum explicuere frontem.
Even Princes with Variety tempted are,
Which makes them often feed on clean homely Fare,
In a poor Hut, laying aside the State,
Purple and Pomp, which should on Grandeur wait,
In such a Solitude to smooth the Frown
Forced by the weighty Pressure of a Crown.
Nothing is so distastful and disappointing, as Abundance. What Appetite would
not be baffled, to see Three Hundred Women at his Mercy, as the Grand Signior
has in his Seraglio? And what Fruition of Pleasure, or Taste of Recreation, did
he of his Ancestors reserve to himself, who never went a Hawking without Seven
Thousand Falconers? And besides all this, I Fancy that this Luster of Grandeur
brings with it no little disturbance and uneasiness upon the Enjoyment of the
most tempting pleasures: they are too conspicuous, and lie too open to every
ones view. Neither do I know to what end a man should any more require them to
conceal their Errors, since what is only reputed indiscretion in us, they know
very well the people in them brand with the names of Tyranny, and contempt of
the Laws; and besides their proclivity to Vice, are apt to censure, that as a
heightning pleasure to them, to Insult over the Laws, and to trample upon
Public Ordinances. Plato indeed, in his Gorgeas defines a Tyrant to be one,
who in a City has License to do whatever his own Will leads him to. And by
reason of this Impunity, the Over-tacting and Publication of their Vices, does
oft-times more Mischief, than the Vice it self. Every one fears to be pried
into, and discovered in their Evil Courses; but Princes are, even to their very
Gestures, Looks and thoughts, the People conceiving they have right and title
to Censure, and be Judges of them: Besides, that the Blemishes of the Great,
naturally appear greater, by reason of the Eminency and Luster of the place
where they are seated; and that a Mole or a Wart appears greater in them, than
the greatest Deformity in others. And this is the reason why the Poets feign
the Amors of Jupiter to be performed in the disguises of so many borrowed
shapes, that amongst the many Amorous Practices they lay to his charge, there
is only one, as I remember, where he appears in his own Majesty and Grandeur.
But let us return to Hiero, who complains of the Inconveniences he found in his
Royalty, in that he could not look abroad, and Travel the World at liberty,
being as it were a Prisoner to the Bounds and Limits of his own Dominion: And
that in all his Actions, he was evermore surrounded with an importunate Crowd.
And in truth to see our Kings set all alone at Table, environed with so many
People prating about them, and so many strangers staring upon them, as they
always are, I have often been moved, rather to pity, than to envy, their
condition. King Alphonsus was wont to say, that in this, Asses were in a better
condition than Kings, their Masters permitting them to feed at their own ease
and pleasure; a favor that Kings cannot obtain of their Servants. And it would
never sink into my fancy, that it could be of any great benefit to the Life of
a Man of sense, to have Twenty People prating about him, when he is at Stool;
or that the Services of a Man of Ten Thousand Livers a Year, or that has taken
Casal, or defended Siena, should be either more commodious, or more acceptable
to him, than those of a good Groom of the Chamber, that understands his place.
The Advantages of Sovereignty, are but Imaginary upon the matter: Every degree
of Fortune has in it some Image of Principality. Caesar calls all the Lords of
France, having Free-Franchise within their own Demeans, Roylets; and in truth,
the Name of Sire excepted, they go pretty far toward Kingship; for do but look
into the Provinces remote from Court, as Brittany for example, take notice of
the Attendance, the Vassals, the Officers, the Employments, Service, Ceremony
and State, of a Lord that Lives retired from Court, is constant to his own
House, and that has been bred up amongst his own Tenants and Servants; and
observe withal, the flight of his Imagination, there is nothing more Royal; He
hears talk of his Master once a Year, as of a King of Persia, or Peru, without
taking any further notice of him, than some remote Kindred, his Secretary keeps
in some Musty Record. And, to speak the truth, our Laws are easy enough, so
easy, that a Gentlman of France scarce feels the weight of Sovereignty pinch
his Shoulders above Twice in his Life. Real and effectual Subjection, only
concerns such amongst us, as voluntarily thrust their Necks under the Yoke, and
who design to get Wealth and Honors by such Services: For a Man that loves his
own Fireside, and can Govern his House, without falling by the Ears with his
Neighbors, or engaging in Suits of Law, is as free, as a Duke of Venice. (...)
servitus, plures servitutem tenent. Servitude seizes of few, but many seize of
her. But that which Hiero is most concerned at, is, that he finds himself
stripped of all Friendship, and deprived of all Natural Society, wherein the
true and most perfect Fruition of Humane Life does consist. For what Testimony
of affection and good will, can I extract from him, that owes me, whether he
will or no, all that he is able to do? Can I form any assurance of his real
Respect to me, from his humble way of speaking, and submissive Behavior, when
they are Ceremonies, it is not in his Choice to deny? The Honor we receive
from those that Fear us, is not Honor, those Respects are paid to my Royalty,
and not to me.

Seneca Thiest. Act. 2. Scae. 1.
Maximum hoc Regni bonum est,
Quod facta domini cogitur populus sui
Quam far, tam laudare.
It Is the great Benefit of Kings, that they,
Who are by Law Subjected to their Sway,
Are Bound in all their Princes say or do,
Not only to Submit, but Praise it too.
Do I not see, that the Wicked, and the good King, he that is hated, and he
that is beloved, has the one as much Reverence paid him, as the other? My
Predecessor was, and my Successor shall be, served with the same Ceremony and
State. If my Subjects do me no harm, it is no Evidence of any good Affection;
why should I look upon it as such, seeing it is not in their Power if they
would? No one follows me, or Obeys my Commands, upon the account of any
Friendship betwixt him and me; there can be no contracting of Friendship, where
there is so little relation and correspondence: My own Height has put me out of
the Familiarity of, and Intelligence with men: There is too great disparity and
disproportion betwixt us; they follow me either upon the account of decency,
and custom; or rather my fortune, than me, to increase their own: All they say
to me, or do for me, is forced and dissembled, their liberty being on all parts
restrained by the great power and Authority I have over them. I see nothing
about me but what is dissembled, and d^sguis'd. The Emperor Julian being one
day applauded for his exact Justice: I should be proud of these praises, said
he, did they come from persons that durst condemn, or disapprove the contrary,
in case I should do it. All the real advantages of Princes are common to them
with Men of meaner condition: It Is for the Gods to Mount winged Horses, and
feed upon Ambr^sia: Earthly Kings have no other Sleep, nor other Appetite, than
we; the Steel they (...) themselves withal, is of no better temper, than that
we also use; their Crowns do neither defend them from the Rain, nor Sun
Dioclesian who wore a Crown so Fortunate and Revered, resigned it, to retire
himself to the Felicity of a private Life: And some time after the necessity of
Public Affairs, requiring, that he should reassume his Charge, he made Answer
to those who came to Court him to it, You would not offer, (said he) to
persuade me to this, had you seen the fine Order of Trees I have Planted in my
Orchard, and the fair Melons I have Sowed in my Garden. In Anacharsis his
Opinion, the happiest Estate of Government would be, where all other things
being equal, Precedence should be measured out by the Virtues, and Repulses by
the Vices of Men. When King Pyrrhus prepared for his Expedition into Italy, his
Wise Counselor Cyneas, to make him sensible of the Vanity of his Ambition;
Well Sir, (said he,) to what End do you make all this Mighty Preparation? To
make my self Master of Italy, (replied the King.) And what after that is done,
(said Cyneas?) I will pass over into Gaul and Spain, said the other. And what
then? I will then go to Subdue Africa; and lastly, when I have brought the
whole World to my Subjection, I will sit down and rest Content at my own Ease.
For God sake, Sir, (replied Cyneas,) tell me what hinders, that you may not, if
you please, be now in the condition you speak of? Why do you not now at this
instant, settle your self in the State you seem to aim at, and spare the Labor
and Hazard you interpose?

Lucret. l. 5.
Nimirum quia non been norat quae esset habendi
Finis, and omnino quoad crescat vera voluptas.
The end of being Rich he did not know;
Nor to what pitch Felicity should grow.
I will conclude with an old Versicle, that I think very pat to the purpose.

Corn. Nep. in vit. A. Hici.
Mores cuique sui fingunt fortunam. Himself, not Fortune, every one must blame,
Since Men's own Manners do their Fortunes frame.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Sumptuary Laws.
THE way by which our Laws attempt to regulate idle and vain expenses in Meat
and Clothes, seems to be quite contrary to the end designed. The true way would
be to beget in men a contempt of Silks and Gold, as vain, frivolous, and
useless; whereas we augment to them the Honors, and enhance the value of such
things, which sure is a very improper way to create a disgust. For to enact,
the none but Princes shall eat Turbes, shall wea^ Velvet, or Gold-Lace, and
interdict these things to the people, what is it but to bring them into a
greater esteem, and to set every one more agog to eat, and wear them? L^^ Kings
(a Gods name) leave of their Ensign^ of Grandeur, they have others enough
besides; those excesses are more excusable in any other, than a Prince. We may
learn by the Example of several Nations, better ways of exterior distinction
of quality (which truly I conceive to be very requisite in a State) enough,
without fostering up this corruption, and manifest in convenience to this
effect. It Is strange how suddenly, and with how much ease custom in these
indifferent things establishes it self, and becomes authority. We had scarce
worn Cloth a year (in compliance with the Court) for the Mourning of Henry the
Second, but that Silks were already grown into such contempt with every one,
that a man so clad, was presently Concluded a Citizen. The Silks were divided
betwixt the Physicians, and Surgeons, and though all other people almost
went in the same habit, there was notwithstanding in one thing or other,
sufficient distinction of the calling, and conditions of men. How suddenly do
greasy Chamois Doublets become the fashion in our Armies, whilst all neatness
and riches of habit fall into contempt? Let Kings but lead the dance, and begin
to leave off this expense, and in a Month the business will be done throughout
the Kingdom, without an Edict; we shall all follow. It sold be rather
proclaimed on the contrary, that no one should wear Scarlet, or Goldsmiths
work, but Whores and Tumblers. Zeleucus with the like invention reclaimed the
corrupted manners of the Locrians. Whose Laws were, That no free Woman should
be allowed any more than one Maid to follow her unless she was drunk: nor was
to stir out of the City by night, wear Jewels of Gold about her, or go in an
Embroidered Robe, unless she was a professed and public Whore: The Bravo's, and
Russians excepted, no man was to wear a Gold Ring, nor be seen in one of those
effeminate Vests woven in the City of Miletum. By which infamous exceptions, he
discreetly diverted his Citizens, from Superfluities, and pernicious pleasures,
and it was a project of great Utility to attract men by honor, and Ambition to
their Duty and Obedience. Our Kings may do what they please in such external
Reformations, their own inclinations stand in this case for a Law, Quicquid
Principes faciunt, Quinct. Decla. 4.
praecipere videntur. What Princes themselves do, they seem to enjoin others.
Whatever is done at Court passes for a rule through the rest of France. Let the
Courtiers but fall out with these abominable Breeches, that discover so much of
those parts should be concealed: These great Bellied Doublets, that make us
look like I know not what; and are so unfit to admit of Arms; these long
effeminate Locks of Hair: This foolish Custom of Kissing, what we present to
our equals and our Hands in saluting them; a ceremony in former times only due
to Princes: And that a Gentleman shall appear in place of respect without his
Sword, unbuttoned and untrust, as though he came from the House of Office; and
that contrary to the custom of our Forefathers, and the particular privilege
of the Nobless of this Kingdom, we shall stand a long time bare to them in what
place soever, and the same to a hundred others, so many Tierces and Quarts of
Kings we have got now a days, and also other the like innovations, and
degenerate customs; they will see them all presently Vanished and Cried down.
These are, it is true, but superficial Errors; but however of ill consequence,
and it is enough to inform us that the whole Fabric is Crazy and Tottering,
when we see the rough-cast of our Walls to cleave and split. Plato in his Laws,
esteems nothing of more pestiferous consequence to his City, than to give
Young Men the liberty of introducing any change in their Habits, Gestures,
Dances, Songs, and Exercises, from one form to another; shifting from this to
that, Hunting after Novelties, and applauding the Inventors; by which means
Manners are corrupted, and the old Institutions come to be nauseated and
despised. In all things saving only in those that are evil, a change is to be
feared; even the change of Seasons, Winds, Viands, and Humors. And no Laws are
in their true credit, but such to which God has given so long a continuance,
that no one knows their beginning, or that there ever was any other.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of Sleep.
REason directs, that we should always go the same way; but not always the same
pace. And consequently though a Wiseman ought not so much to give the Reins to
humane Passions, as to let them deviate him from the right Path; he may
notwithstanding without prejudice to his Duty, leave it to them to hasten, or
to slack his speed, and not fix himself like a motionless, and insensible
Coloss. Could Virtue it self put on Flesh and Blood, I believe the Pulse would
Beat faster going on to an Assault, than in going to Dinner: That is to say,
there is a necessity she should Heat, and be moved upon this account. I have
taken notice, as of an extraordinary thing of some great Men, who in the
highest Enterprises, and greatest Dangers, have detained themselves in so
settled and serene a Calm, as not at all to hinder their usual Gayety, or break
their Sleep. Alexander the Great on the Day assigned for that furious Battle
betwixt him and Darius, slept so profoundly, and so long in the Morning, that
Barmenio was forced to enter his Chamber, and coming to his Bedside to call
him several times by his Name, the time to go to Fight compelling him so to do.
The Emperor Otho, having put on a resolution to Kill himself the same night,
after having settled his Domestic affairs, divided his Money amongst his
Servants, and set a good edge upon a Sword he had made choice of for the
purpose, and now staying only to be satisfied whether all his friends were
retired in safety, he fell into so sound a sleep, that the Gentlemen of he
Chamber heard him Snore. The death of this Emperor has in its circumstances
parallelling that of the great Cato, and particularly this before related: For
Cato being ready to dispatch himself, whilst he only staid his hand in
expectation of the return of a messenger he had sent, to bring him news whether
the Senators he had sent away, were put out from the Port of Utica, he fell
into so found a sleep, that they had him into the next Room; and he whom he had
sent to the Port, having awaked him to let him know, that the Tempestuous
weather had hindered the Senators from putting to Sea; he dispatched a way
another messenger, and composing himself again in the Bed, settled again to
sleep, and did so, till by the return of the last messenger, he had certain
intelligence they were gone. We may here further compare him with Alexander
too, in that great and dangerous Storm that threatened him by the Sedition of
the Tribune Metellus, who attempting to publish a Decree for the calling in of
Pompey with his Army into the City, at the time of Catiline's Conspiracy, was
only, and that stoutly opposed by Cato, so that very sharp language and bitter
menaces past betwixt them in the Senate about that affair; but it was the next
day in the Fore-Noon, that the controversy was to be decided; where Metellus,
besides the favor of the People, and of Caesar, (at that time of Pompey's
Faction) was to appear accompanied with a Rabble of Slaves and Fencers; and
Cato only fortified with his own Courage and Constancy; so that his Relations,
Domestics, and several virtuous People of his Friends were in great
apprehensions for him. And to that Degree, that some there were, who past over
the whole Night without Sleep, Eating, or Drinking, for the manifest danger
they saw him running into; of which his Wife and Sisters did nothing but Weep,
and torment themselves in his House; whereas he, on the contrary, Comforted
every one, and after having Supped after his usual manner, went to Bed, and
slept profoundly till Morning, that one of his fellow Tribunes roused him to go
to the encounter. The knowledge we have of the greatness of this Man's Courage
by the rest of his Life, may warrant us securely to judge, that his
indifference proceeded from a Soul so much elevated above such accidents, that
he disdained to let it take any more hold of his Fancy, than any other ordinary
adventure. In the Naval Engagement, that Augustus won of Sextus Pompeius in
Sicily, just as they were to begin the Fight he was so fast asleep, that his
Friends were compelled to wake him to give the Signal of Battle: And this was
it that gave Mark Anthony afterward occasion to reproach him, that he had not
the Courage so much as with open Eyes, to behold the order of his own
Squadrons, and not to have dared to present himself before the Soldiers, till
first Agrippa had brought him news of the Victory obtained. But as to the
business of young Marius, who did much worse (for the day of the last Battle,
against Sylla, after he had ordered his Army, given the word and Signal of
Battle, he laid him down under the Shade of a Tree to repose himself, and fell
so fast asleep, that the Rout, and Fight of his Men could hardly awake him,
having seen nothing of the Fight) he is said to have been at that time so
extremely spent, and worn out with Labor and want of Sleep, that Nature could
hold out no longer. Now upon what has been said, the Physicians may determine,
whether sleep be so necessary that our lives depend upon it: for we read that
King Perseus of Macedon being Prisoner at Rome, was waked to Death; but Pliny
instances such as have lived long without sleep. Herodotus speaks of Nations,
where the Men sleep and wake by half years: And they who write the Life of the
Wise Epimenides, affirm that he slept seven and fifty years together.

CHAP. XLV
Of the Battle of Dreux.
OUR Battle of Dreux, is remarkable for several extraordinary accidents: But
such as have no great kindness for the Duke of Guise, nor do much favor his
reputation, are willing to have him thought to blame, and that his making a
Halt and delaying time with his Forces he Commanded, whilst the Constable who
was General of the Army was Racked through and through with the Enemies
Artillery, his Battalion Routed, and himself taken Prisoner; is not to be
excused: And that he had much better have ran the hazard of charging the Enemy
in the Flank, than staying for the advantage of falling in upon the Rear, to
suffer so great and so important a loss. But, besides what the event
demonstrated, who will consider it without passion or prejudice, will easily be
induced to confess, that the aim and design not of a Captain only, but of every
Private Soldier ought to look at the Victory in general; and that no
particular occurrences, how nearly soever they may concern his own interest,
should divert him from that pursuit. Philopoemen in an encounter with
Machanidas, having sent before a good strong party of his Archers, to begin the
Skirmish, which were by the Enemy Routed, and pursued; who pursuing them, and
pushing on the Fortune of their Arms in the heat of Victory; and in that
pursuit passing by the Battalion where Philopoemen was, though his Soldiers
were impatient to fall on, yet he was better tempered, and did not think fit to
stir from his post, nor to present himself to the Enemy to relieve his Men, but
having suffered them to be chased about the Field, and Cut in pieces before his
Face, then charged in upon their Battallion of Foot, when he saw them left
Naked by their Horse; and notwithstanding that they were Lacedaemonians, yet
taking them in the nick, when thinking themselves secure of the victory, they
began to disorder their Ranks, he did his business with great facility, and
then put himself in pursuit of Machanidas. Which case is very like that of
Monsieur de Guise: In that Bloody Battle betwixt Agesilaus, and the Boeotians,
which Xenophon, who was present at it reports to be the rudest and most Blood
that he had ever seen, Agesilaus waved the advantage that Fortune presented
him, to let the Baeotians Battalion pass by, and then to Charge them in the
Rear, how certain soever he made himself of the Victory, judging it would
rather be an effect of Conduct than Valor, to proceed that way: And therefore,
to show his prowess, rather chose with a wonderful ardour of Courage to charge
them in the Front; but he was well beaten, and wounded for his pains, and
constrained at last to disengage himself, and to take the course he had at
first neglected; opening his Battalion to give way to this torrent of the
Boeotians fury, and being past by, taking notice that they marched in disorder,
like men that thought themselves out of danger, he then pursued, and charged
them in their Flanks and Rear; yet could not so prevail as to bring it to so
general a Rout, but that they leisurely retreated, still Facing about upon him,
till they were retired into safety.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of Names.
WHat variety of Herbs soever are shuffled together in the Dish, yet the whole
Mass is swallowed up in one name of a Sallet. In like manner, under the
consideration of Names, I will make a hodge-podge of differ'ng Articles. Every
Nation has certain Names, that I know not why, are taken in no good sense, as
with us, John, William, and Benoist. In the Genealogy of Princes, also there
seems to be certain Names fatally affected, as the Ptolemies of Egypt, the
Henry's of England, the Charles's of France, the Baldwins of Flandert, and the
Williams of our Ancient Aquiraine, from whence, it is said, the Name of Guyenne
has its derivation; which would seem far fetched, were there not as rude
derivations in Plato himself. It Is a very frivolous thing in it self, but
nevertheless worthy to be recorded for the strangeness of it, which is writ by
an Eyewitness; that Henry Duke of Normandy, Son of Henry the Second, King of
England, making a great Feast in France, the concourse of Nobility and Gentry,
was so great, that being, for Sports sake, divided into Troops, according to
their Names, in the first Troop, which consisted of Williams, there were found
an Hundred and Ten Knights sitting at the Table of that Name, without reckoning
the ordinary Gentlemen, and their Servants. It is as pleasant to distinguish
the Tables by the Names of the Guests, as it was in the Emperor Geta, to
distinguish the several Courses of his Meat, by the first Letters of the Ments
themselves, where those that began with B, were served up together, as Brawn,
Beef, Bream, Bustards and Beccaficos, and so of others. Now there is a saying,
that it is a good thing to have a good Name, that is to say, Credit, and a good
Repute: But besides this, it is really convenient, to have such a Name as is
easy of pronunciation, and easy to be remembered; by reason, that Kings, and
other great Persons, do by that means the more easily know, and the more hardly
forget us; and indeed, of our own Servants, we more frequently call and employ
those, whose Names are most ready upon the Tongue. I my self have seen Henry
the Second, when he could not for his heart hit of a Gentleman's Name of our
Country of Gascony; and moreover was fain to call one of the Queen's Maids of
Honor, by the general Name of her Family, her own being so difficult to
pronounce or remember. And Socrates thinks it worthy a Fathers Care, to give
fine Names to his Children. It Is said, that the Foundation of Nostre Dame la
Grande, at Poictiers, took its original from hence. That a Debauched Young
Fellow formerly Living in that place, having got to him a Whore, and at her
first coming in, asking her Name, and being answered, that it was Mary, he felt
himself so suddenly darted through with the Awe of Religion, and the Reverence
to that Sacred Name of the Blessed Virgin, that he not only immediately put his
Lewd Mistress away from him, but became a reformed Man, and so continued the
remainder of his Life: And that in consideration of this Miracle, there was
Erected upon the place, where this Young Man's House stood, first a Chapel
Dedicated to our Lady, and afterward the Church that we now see standing
there. This Auricular Reproof wrought upon the Conscience, and that right into
the Soul. This that follows, insinuated it self merely by the sense. Pythagoras
being in company with some wild Young Fellows, and perceiving that, heated with
the Feast, they complotted to go Violate an Honest House, commanded the Singing
Wench to alter her Wanton Airs; and by a Solemn, Grave and Spondaick Music,
gently enchanted and laid asleep their Ardour. Will not Posterity say, that our
Modern Reformation has been wonderfully exact, in having not only scuffled
with, and overcome Errors and Vices, and filled the World with Devotion.
Humility, Obedience, Peace, and all sorts of Virtue; but to have proceeded so
far, as to quarrel with the Ancient Baptismal Names of Charles, Lewis, and
Francis, to fill the World with Methusalems, Ezekiels, and Malachies, of a more
Scriptural sound? A Gentleman, a Neighbor of mine, a great Admirer of
Antiquity, and who was always preferring the Excellency of preceding Times, in
comparison with this present Age of ours, did not (amongst the rest) forget to
Magnify the Lofty and Magnificent sound of the Gentlemen's Names of those
Days, Don Grumedar, Quadregan, Angesilan, etc. which but to hear Named, he
perceived to be other kind of Men, than Pierre, Guillot and Michel. I am
mightily pleased with Jaques Amiot, for leaving throughout a whole French
Oration, the Latin Names entire, without varying and dissecting them, to give
them a French termination. It seemed a little harsh and rough at first: But
already Custom, by the Authority of Plutarch, (whom he took for his Example)
has overcome that Novelty. I have often wished, that such as write Chronicle
Histories in Latin, would leave our Names as they find them, and as they are,
and ought to be, for in making Vaudemont, Vallemontances, and Metamorphosing
Names, to make them suit better with the Greek or Latin, we know not where we
are, and with the persons of the Men, lose the benefit of the Story. To
conclude, it is a scurvy Custom, and of very ill consequence, that we have in
our Kingdom of France, to call every one by the Name of his Manor, or
Signeury, and the thing in the World that does the most prejudice, and confound
Families and Descents. A Younger Brother of a good Family, having a Manor left
him by his Father, by the Name of which he has been known and honored, cannot
handsomely leave it; Ten Years after his Decease, it falls into the hand of a
stranger, who does the same: Do but judge whereabouts we shall be, concerning
the knowledge of these Men. We need look no further for Examples, than our own
Royal Family, where every Partage creares a new Surname, whilst in the mean
time the Original of the Family is totally lost. There is so great liberty
taken in these Mutations, that I have not in my time seen any one advanced by
Fortune to any extraordinary condition, who has not presently had Genealogick
Titles added to him, new, and unknown to his Father, and who has not been
inoculated into some illustrious Stem; and by good Luck, the obscurest
Families, are the most proper for Falsification. How many Gentlemen have we in
France, who, by their own talk, are of Royal Extraction? More I think, than who
will confess they are not. Was it not a pleasant passage of a Friend of mine?
There were a great many Gentlemen assembled together, about the dispute of one
Lord of a Manor, with another; which other had in truth, some pre-eminence of
Titles and Alliances, above the ordinary Scheme of Gentry. Upon the Debate of
this Priority of Place, every one standing up for himself, to make himself
equal to him, alleging one one Extraction, another another, one the near
resemblance of Name, another of Arms, another an old worm-eaten Patent, and the
least of them, Great-Granchild to some Foreign King. When they came to sit down
to dinner, my Friend, instead of taking his place amongst them, retiring with
most profound Congees, entreated the Company to excuse him, for having hitherto
Lived with them at the saucy rate of a Companion: but being now better informed
of their Quality, he would begin to pay them the Respect due to their Birth and
Grandeur, and that it would ill become him to sit down among so many Princes;
and ended the Farce with a Thousand Reproaches. Let us in God's Name satisfy
our selves with what our Fathers were contented, and with what we are: We are
great enough, if we rightly understand how to maintain it: Let us not disown
the Fortune and Condition of our Ancestors and lay aside these ridiculous
pretenses, that can never be wanting to any one that has the Impudence to
allege them. Arms have no more Security, than Sir-names. I bear Azure powdered
with Trefoiles, Or, with a Lions Paw of the same armed gules in Fesse. What
Privilege to continue particularly in my House and Name? A Son-in-Law will
transport it into another Family; or some paltry Purchaser will make them his
first Arms; there is nothing wherein there is more change and confusion. But
this consideration leads me perforce into another subject. Let us pry a little
narrowly into, and in God's name examine upon what foundation we erect this
Glory and Reputation, for which the World is turned topsy turvy: Wherein do we
place this Renown, that we hunt after with so great flagrancy, and through so
many impediments, and so much trouble? It is in conclusion, Peter or William
that carries it, takes it into his possession, and whom it only concerns. O
what a valiant faculty is hope, that in a mortal subject, and in a moment makes
nothing of usurping infinity and immensity, and of supplying her Masters
Indigence at her pleasure with all things he can imagine, or desire! Nature has
given us this passion for a pretty toy to play withal. And this Peter or
William, what is it but a sound when all is done? or three or four dashes with
a Pen, so easy to be varied, that I would fain know to whom is to be
attributed the glory of so many Victories, to Guesquin, to Glesquin, or to
Gueaquin? and yet there would be something of greater moment in the case, than
in Lucian, that Sigma should serve Tau with a process for, Aeneid. lib. 12.
-- Non levia, aut ludicra petuntur Praemia. To do brave acts, who has the
noble Spirit,
Slights mean rewards, as things below his merit.
The chase is there in very good earnest: The question is, which of these
Letters is to be rewarded for so many Sieges, Battles, Wounds, Imprisonments,
and Services done to the Crown of France, by this famous Constable. Nicholas
Denisot never concerned himself further than the Letters of his name, of which
he has altered the whole Contexture to build up by Anagram the Count of
Alsinois, whom he has celebrated with the utmost force and glory of his Poetry,
and Painting. And the Historian Suetonius could be satisfied with nothing he
Writ, unless it might redound to his own particular honor, which made him
casheer his fathers Surname Lewis, to leave Tranquillus Successor to the
reputation of his writings. Who would believe that Captain Bayard should have
no honor, but what he derives from Peter Terrail; and that Antonio Escalin
should suffer himself to his face, to be Robbed of the honor of so many
Navigations and Commands at Sea and Land by Captain Paulin and the Baron de la
guard; These are injuries of the Pen, common to a thousand people. How many are
there in every Family of the same Name and Surname? and how many more in
several Families, Ages, and Countries? History tells us of three of the name of
Socrates, of five Platos, of eight Aristotle's of seven Xenophons, of twenty
Demetrius's, and of twenty Theodores; and how many more she was not acquainted
with we may imagine. Who hinders my Groom from calling himself Pompey the
Great? But after all, by what Virtue, what Authority, or what secret
conveyances are there, that fix upon my deceased Groom, or the other Pompey,
who had his Head cut off in Egypt, this glorious Renown, and these so much
honored flourishes of the Pen, so as to be of any advantage to them?

Aeuid. lib. 4.
Id cinerem, and manes credis curare sepultos? Can we believe the Dead regard
such things? What sense have the two Colleagues of the greatest esteem amongst
men? Epaminondas of this glorious Verse, that has been so many Ages current in
his praise;

Consiliis nostris laus est attrita Laconum: One Sparta by my Counsels is
overthrown. or Africanus of this other?

A sole exoriente, supra Moeotis Paludes
Nemo est, qui factis me aequiparare queat.
From early dawn, unto the setting Sun,
No one can match the deeds that I have done.
Survivers indeed tickle themselves with these praises, and by them incited to
Jealousy or Desire, inconsiderately, and according to their own fancy,
attribute to the Dead those Virtues themselves pretend to most: God knows how
vainly flattering themselves, that they shall one day in turn be capable of the
same Characters: however

Iuvenal. Sat. 10.
-- Ad haec se
Romanus, Grajusque and Barbarus, Induperator
Erexit; causas discriminis, atque laboris
Inde habuit, tanto major famae sitis est, quam
Virtutis.
Greek, Roman and Barbarian Chiefs to these,
Devote their Valor and Contrivances,
And to that Greediness of Glory owe
The Dangers and Fatigues they undergo;
So much more Potent is the Thirst of Fame
Than that of Virtue.
CHAP. XLVII.
Of the Incertainty of our Judgment.
IT was well said of the Poet, (...) There is every where liberty of Arguing
enough, Homer Iliad. 20.
and enough to be said on both fides: For Example,

Petrar. Son. 83.
Vince Annibal', and non seppe usar' pot
Ben la vittoriosa sua ventura.
Hannibal Conquered; but was not Wise
To make the best use of his Victories.
Such as would improve this Argument, and condemn the oversight of our Leaders
in not pushing home the Victory at Moncontour; or accuse the King of Spain of
not knowing how to make his best use of the advantage he had against us at St.
Quintin, may conclude these oversights to proceed from a Soul already drunk
with success, or from a Courage, which being full, and overgorg'd with this
beginning of good Fortune, had lost the appetite of adding to it, already
having enough to do to digest what it had taken in: He has his Arms full, and
can embrace no more: unworthy of the benefit conferred upon him, and the
advantage she had put into his hands: for what utility does he reap from it, if
notwithstanding he give his Enemy respite to rally to recover his astonishment,
and to make head against him? What hope is there that he will dare at another
time to attack an Enemy reunited, and recompos'd, and armed anew with Spite and
Revenge, who did not dare to pursue him when routed, and unmann'd by fear?

Lucret. l. 7.
Dum fortuna calet, dum conficit omnia terror. Whilst Fortune's in the heat, and
Terror does
More than their Sharpest Swords subdue their Foes.
But withal, what better opportunity can he expect, than that he has lost? It Is
not here, as in Fencing, where the most hits gain the Prize: For so long as the
Enemy is on foot, the Game is new to begin, and that is not to be called a
Victory, that puts not an end to the War. In the encounter where Caesar had the
worse, near to the City of Oricum, he reproached Pompey's Soldiers, that he
had been lost, had their General known how to overcome; and afterward clawed
him away in turn. But why may not a man also argue on the contrary, that it is
the effect of a precipitous, and insatiate Spirit, not to know how to bound,
and restrain its ardour: that it is to abuse the favors of God to exceed the
measure he has prescribed them: and that again to throw a Man's self into
danger, after a Victory obtained, is again to expose himself to the mercy of
Fortune: and that it is one of the greatest discretions in the Rule of War, not
to drive an Enemy to despair. Sylla and Marius in the Associate War having
defeated the Marsians; seeing yet a Body of Reserve, that prompted by Despair,
was coming on like enraged Brutes to charge in upon them, thought it not
convenient to stand their charge. Had not Monsieur de Foix his ardour
transported him so precipitously to pursue the remains of the Victory of
Ravenna, he had not obscured it by his own Death. And yet the recent memory of
his Example served to preserve Monsieur d' Anguien from the same misfortune at
the Battle of Serisoles. It Is dangerous to attack a Man you have deprived of
all means to escape, but by his Arms: for necessity teaches violent
resolutions: Port. Latin Decla.
Gravissimi sunt morsus irritatae necessitatis, enraged necessity bites deep.

Lvc lib. 4. M^yes Luc.
Vincitur haud gratis jugulo qui provocat hostem. The Foe that meets the Sword
never gratis Dies. This was it that made Pharax withhold the King of
Lacedaemon, who had won a Battle of the Matineans, from going to Charge a
Thousand Argians, who were escaped in an entire Body from the defeat; but
rather let them steal off at liberty, that he might not encounter Valor
whetted and enraged by mischance, Clodomire King of Aquitaine, after his
Victory pursuing Gondemar, King of Burgundy, beaten, and making off as fast as
he could for safety, compelled him to face about, and make head, wherein his
obstinacy deprived him of the fruit of his Conquest, for he there lost his Life.

In like manner, if a Man were to chose, whether he would have his Soldiers
Ainquant, and richly accoutred with Damaskt Arms, or armed only for necessary
defense; this argument would step in, in favor of the first (of which Opinion
was Sertorius, Philopoemen, Brutus, Caesar, and others) that it is to a
Soldier an enflaming of Courage, and a spur to Glory, to see himself brave,
and withal an imitation to be more obstinate in Fight, having his Arms, which
are in a manner his Estate, and whole Inheritance to defend, which is the
reason (says Xenophon) why those of Asia, carried there Wives, Concubines, with
their choicest Jewels, and greatest Wealth along with them to the Wars. But
then these arguments would be as ready to stand up for the other side, that a
General ought rather to render his Men careless and desperate, than to increase
their solicitude of preserving themselves: That by this means they will be in a
double fear of hazarding their persons; as it will be a double temptation to
the Enemy, to fight with greater Resolution, where so great booty and so rich
spoils are to be obtained: And this very thing has been observed in former
times, notably to encourage the Romans against the Samnites. Antiochus showing
Hannibal the Army he had raised wonderfully splendid, and Rich in all sorts of
Equipage, asked him, if the Romans would be satisfied with that Army? Satisfied?
replied the other, yes doubtless were their Avarice never so great. Lycurgus
not only forbad his Soldiers all manner of Bravery in their Equipage, but
moreover to strip their Conquered Enemies, because he would (as he said) that
Poverty, and Frugality should shine with the rest of the Battle.

At Sieges, and elsewhere, where occasion draws us near to the Enemy, we
willingly suffer our Men to Brave, Rate, and Affront the Enemy with all sorts
of injurious Language; and not without some color of reason: For it is of no
little consequence, to take from them all hopes of Mercy, and Composition, in
representing to them, that there is no fair Quarter to be expected from an
Enemy, they have incensed to that degree, nor other Remedy remaining, but in
the victory. And yet Vitellius found himself deceived in this way of
proceeding; for having to do with Otho, weaker in the valor of his Soldiers,
long unaccustomed to war, and effeminated with the delights of the City; he so
nettled them at last with injurious Language, reproaching them with Cowardice,
and the regret of the Mistresses, and entertainments they had left behind at
Rome, that by this means he inspired them with such resolution, as no
exhortation had had the power to have done; and himself made them fall upon
him, with whom their own Captains before could by no means prevail. And indeed
when they are Injuries that touch to the quick, it may very well fall out, that
he who went but ill-favour'dly to work in the behalf of his Prince, will fall
to it with another sort of Mettle, when the quarrel is his own.

To consider of how great importance is the preservation of the General of an
Army, and that the Universal aim of an Enemy is levelled directly at the head,
upon which all the others depend; the advice seems to admit of no dispute,
which we know has been taken by so many great Captains of changing their habit,
and disguising their persons upon the point of going to engage. Nevertheless
the inconvenience a Man by so doing runs into, is not less than that he thinks
to avoid: For the Captain by this means being concealed from the knowledge of
his own Men, the Courage they should derive from his Presence and Example,
happens by degrees to cool and to decay; and not seeing the wonted As at the
Battle of Ivry, in the person of Henry the Great.
Marks, and Ensigns of their Leader, they presently conclude him either Dead,
or that, despairing of the business, he is gone to shift for himself; and
experience shows us that both these ways have been both successful, and
otherwise. What besell Pyrrbus in the Battle he fought against the Consul
Levinus in Italy, will serve us to both purposes: For though by shrouding his
person under the Arms of Demogacles, and making him wear his own, he
undoubtedly preserved his own Life, yet by that very means he was withal very
near running into the other mischief of losing the Battle. Alexander, Caesar,
and Lucullus, loved to make themselves known in a Battle, by Rich Furnitures,
and Arms of a particular Luster and Color: Agis, Agesilaus, and that great
Gilippus on the contrary used to Fight obscurely Armed, and without any
imperial attendance, or distinction.

Amongst other oversights Pompey is charged withal, at the Battle of Pharsalia,
he is condemned for making his Army stand still to receive the Enemies Charge;
by reason that (I shall here steal Plutarch's own words, that are better than
mine) he by so doing, deprived himself of the violent impression, the motion of
running adds to the first shock of Arms, and hindered the justle of the
Combatants (who were wont to give great impetuosity, and fury to the first
Encounter; especially when this came to rush in with their utmost Vigor, their
Courages increasing by the Shouts and the Career) rendering the Soldiers
Animosity, and Ardour, as a Man may say, more reserved, and cold. This is what
he says: But if Caesar had come by the worse, why might it not as well have
been urged by another, that, on the contrary the strongest, and most steady
posture of Fighting, is that wherein a Man stands planted firm without motion;
and that who makes a halt upon their march, closing up, and reserving their
force within themselves for the push of the business, have a great advantage
against those who are disordered, and who have already spent half their breath
in running on precipitously to the charge? Besides, that an Army being a Body
made up of so many individual Members, it is impossible for it to move in this
fury with so exact a motion, as not to break the order of Battle, and that the
best of Foot are not engaged, before their Fellows can come in to relieve them.
In that unnatural Battle betwixt the two Persian Brothers, the Lacedaemonian
Clearchus, who commanded the Greeks of Cyrus's party, led them on softly, and
without precipitation, to the Charge; but coming within fifty paces hurried
them on full speed, hoping in so short a Career, both to look to their order,
to husband their breath, and at the same time to give an advantage of violence,
and impression both to their persons, and their missile Arms: Others have
regulated this question in charging thus; if your Enemy come running upon you,
stand firm to receive him; if he stand to receive you, run full drive upon him.

In the Expedition of the Emperor Charles the Fifth into Provence, King
Francis was put to choose either to go meet him in Italy, or to expect him in
his own Dominions; wherein though he very well considered of how great
advantage it was, to preserve his own Territories entire, and clear from the
troubles, and inconveniences of the war, to the end that being unexhausted of
her stores, it might continually supply Men, and Money at need, that the
necessity of War requires at every turn to spoil, and lay waste the Country
before them, which cannot very well be done upon ones own; to which may be
added that the Country people do not so easily digest such a havoc by those of
their own party, as from an Enemy, so that Seditions and Commotions might by
such means be kindled amongst us; that the License of Pillage and Plunder
(which are not to be tolerated at home) is a great ease and refreshment against
the fatigues, and sufferings of War; and that he who has no other prospect of
gain, than his bare pay, will hardly be kept from running home, being but two
steps from his Wife, and his own House: That he who lays the Cloth, is ever at
the charge of the Feast: That there is more Alacrity in assaulting than
defending, and that the shock of a Battles loss in our own Bowels, is so
violent as to endanger the disjointing of the whole Body, there being no
passion so contagious as that of fear; that is so easily believed, or that so
suddenly diffuses its Poison; and that the Cities that should hear the Rattle
of this Tempest, that should take in their Captains, and Soldiers yet
trembling and out of breath, would be in danger in this heat and hurry, to
precipitate themselves upon some untoward resolution: Notwithstanding all this,
so it was, that he chose to recall the Forces he had beyond the Mountains, and
to suffer the Enemy to come to him. For he might on the other side imagine,
that being at home and amongst his Friends he could not fail of plenty of all
manner of conveniences; the Rivers, and Passes he had at his Devotion, would
bring him in both Provisions and Money in all security, and without the trouble
of Convoy; that he should find his subjects by so much the more affectionate to
him, by how much their danger was more near and pressing; that having so many
Cities and stops to secure him, it would be in his power to give the Law of
Battle at his own opportunity and best advantage; and if it pleased him to
delay the time, that under covert, and at his own ease, he might see his Enemy
founder, and defeat himself with the difficulties he was certain to encounter,
being engaged in an Enemies Country, where before, behind, and on every side
War would be made upon him; no means to refresh himself or to enlarge his
Quarters, should Diseases infest them, or to lodge his wounded Men in safety:
No Money, no Victuals, but all at the point of the Lance; no leisure to repose
and take breath, no knowledge of the ways, or Country to secure him from
Ambushes and Surprises: And in case of losing a Battle, no possible means of
saving the remains. Neither is there want of Example in both these cases.
Scipio thought it much better to go attack his Enemies Territories in Africa,
than to stay at home to defend his own, and to Fight him in Italy, and it
succeeded well with him: But on the contrary, Hannibal in the same War ruined
himself, by abandoning the Conquest of a strange Country, to go defend his own.
The Athenians having left the Enemy in their own Dominions, to go over into
Sicily, were not savoured by Fortune in their design; but Agathocles King of
Syracuse, found her favorable to him, when he went over into Africa, and left
the War at home. By which Examples, and diverse others, we are wont to conclude,
and with some reason, that events, especially in War, do for the most part
depend upon Fortune, who will not be governed by, nor submit unto humane
prudence; according to the Poet. Manil. Astron. lib. 4.
Et male consult is praetium est, prudentia fallax,
Nec fortuna probat causas, sequitur que merentes:
Sed vaga per cunctos nullo discrimine f^rtur.
Scilicet est aliud quod nos cogatque, regatque
Majus, and in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
Prudence deceitful and uncertain is,
Ill Counsels sometimes hit, where good ones miss;
Nor yet does Fortune the best Cause approve,
But wildly does without distinction Rove.
So that some greater and more constant Cause,
Rules and Subjects us to more powerful Laws:
But if things hit right, it should seem that our Counsels and Deliberations
depend as much upon Fortune, as any things else we do, and that she engages our
very Reason and Arguments, in her uncertainty and confusion. We Argue rashly
and adventurously, says Timaeus in Plato, by reason that, as well as our
selves, our Discourses have great participation with the Temerity of Chance.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of Horses dressed to the Menage, called Destriers.
I Am now become a Grammarian; I who never Learned any Language but by Rote,
and who do not yet know Adjective, Conjunction, or Ablative, I think I have
Read, that the Romans had a sort of Horses by them called Funales, or
Dextrarios, which were either Led-Horses, or Horses laid in at several Stages
to be taken fresh upon occasion; and thence it is, that we call our Horses of
Service, Destriers: And our Romances commonly use the Phrase of destrer for
accompagner, to accompany. They also called such as were dressed in such sort,
that running full speed side by side without Bridle or Saddle, the Roman
Gentlemen Armed at all pieces, would shift, and throw themselves from the one
to the other, desutorios equos. The Numidian Men at Arms, had always a
Led-Horse in one Hand, besides that they Rode upon, to change in the heat of
Battle: ^iv. l. 23.
Quibus, desultorum in modum, binos trahentibus equos, inter accerrimam saepe
pugnam in recentem equum ex fesso armatis, transultare, mos erat. Tanta
velocitas ipsis, tamque docile equorum genus. Whose use it was, leading along
two Horses after the manner of the Desultorum, Armed as they were, in the heat
of Fight, to vault from a tired Horse to a fresh one; so Active were the Men
and the Horses so Docile. There are many Horses trained up to help their
Riders, so as to run upon any one that appears with a drawn Sword, to fall both
with Mouth and Heels upon any that front or oppose them: But it often falls out,
that they do more harm to their Friends than their Enemies, considering that
you cannot loose them from their hold, to reduce them again into order, when
they are once engaged and grappled; by which means you remain at the Mercy of
their senselss Quarrel. It happened very ill to Artibius General of the Persian
Army, Fighting Man to Man with Onesilus King of Salamis, to be Mounted upon a
Horse dressed after this manner, it being the occasion of his Death; the Squire
of Onesilus cleaving him down with a Scyth betwixt the Shoulders, as the Horse
was reared up upon his Master And what the Italians report, that in the Battle
of Fornoue, King Charles his Horse, with Kicks and Plunges disengaged his
Master from the Enemy, that pressed upon him, without which he had been Slain,
sounds odly, and he ran a very great hazard, and came strangely off, if it be
true. The Mamalukes made their Boast, that they had the most ready Horses of
any Cavalry in the World; that by nature and custom they were taught to know
and distinguish the Enemy, they were to fall foul upon with Mouth and Heels,
according to a Word or Sign given: As also to gather up with their Teeth Darts
and Lances scattered upon the Field, and present them to their Riders, as they
should have occasion to use them. It Is said, both of Caesar and Pompey, that
amongst other excellent Qualities they were Masters of, they were both
excellent Horsemen and particularly of Caesar, that in his Youth, being Mounted
on the bare Back, without Saddle, or Bridle, he could make him run, stop and
turn, and perform all his Airs, with his hands behind him. As nature designed
to make of his Person, and of Alexander two Miracles of Military Art, so one
would say, she had done her utmost to Arm them after an extraordinary manner:
For every one knows, that Alexander's Horse Bucephalus had a head enclining to
the shape of a Bull, that he would suffer himself to be Mounted and Governed by
none but his Master, and that he was so Honored after his Death, as to have a
City erected to his Name. Caesar had also another, who had Fore-feet like the
Hands of a Man, his Hoof being divided in the form of Fingers, who likewise was
not to be Ridden by any but Caesar himself; who after his Death dedicated his
Statue to the Goddess Venus. I do not willingly alight when I am once on
Horseback; for it is the place where, whether well, or sick, I find my self
most a ease. Plato recommends it for health, as also Pliny says it is good for
the Stomach, and the Joints. We read in Xenophon a Law, forbidding any one who
was Master of a Horse to Travel on Foot. Trogus and Justinus say, That the
Parthians were wont to perform all Offices and Ceremonies, not only in War, but
also all Affairs, whether public or private, make Bargains, conferr,
entertain, take the Air, and all on Horseback; and that the greatest
distinction betwixt Freemen and Slaves amongst them, was, that the one rode on
Horseback, and the other went on Foot: An Institution of which, King Cyrus was
the founder. There are several Examples in the Roman History, (and Suetonius
more particularly observes it of Caesar) of Captains, who in pressing occasions
Commanded their Cavalry to alight, both by that means to take from them all
hopes of Flight, as also for the advantage they hoped for in this sort of
Fight. Quo haud dubie superat Romanus. Wherein the Romans did questionless
excel: So says Livy; Live. l. 3.
however the first thing they did to prevent the Mutinies and Insurrections of
Nations of late Conquest, was to take from them their Arms and Horses: And
therefore it is that we so often meet in Caesar: Caesar's Com.
Arma proferri, jumenta produci, obsides dari jubet. He commanded the Arms to
be produced, the Horses brought out, and Hostages to be given. The Grand
Signior to this Day, suffers not a Christian, or a Jew, to keep a Horse of his
own, throughout his Empire. Our Ancestors, at the time they had War with the
English, in all their greatest Engagements, and pitched Battles, fought for the
most part on Foot, that they might have nothing but their own Force, Courage
and Constancy, to trust to, in a Quarrel of so great Concern, as Life and
Honor. You stake (whatever Chrysantes in Xenophon says to the contrary,) your
Valor, and your Fortune, upon that of your Horse, his Wound or Death brings
your Person into the same danger; his Fear or Fury shall make you reputed Rash
or Cowardly; if he have an ill Mouth, or will not answer to the Spur, your
Honor must answer it: And therefore I do not think it strange, that those
Battles I spoke of before, were more firm and furious, than those that are
Fought on Horseback. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 10.
-- Cedebant pariter, pariterque ruebant
Victores victique, neque his fuga nota, neque illis.
They charged together, and did so retreat
The Victors, and the vanquished; nor yet
The knack of running was unto the one,
Or to the other of the Parties known.
Their Battles were much better disputed: Now adays there are nothing but
Routs: primus clamor, atque impetus rem decernit. The first shout or the first
charge puts an end to the business: And the Arms we choose to make use of in so
great a hazard, should be as much as possible at our own command: Wherefore I
should advise to choose them of the shortest sort, and such of which we are
able to give the best account. A man may repose more confidence in a Sword he
holds in his Hand, than in a Bullet he discharges out of a Pistol, wherein
there must be a concurrence of several executions, to make it perform its
office, the Powder, the Stone, and the Wheel, if any of which fail, it at lest
endangers your Fortune: A Man strikes much surer than the Air directs him.
Lucan. l. 8.
Et quo far velint permittere vulnera ventis,
Ensis habet vires, and gens quaecunque virorum et
Bella gerit gladiis.
Mr. May' s Trans.
-- Far off with Bows
They shoot, and where it lists the wind bestows
Their wounds: but Fight of Sword does strength require,
All Manly Nations the Sword fight desire.
But of that Weapon I shall speak more fully, when I come to compare the Arms
of the Ancients with those of modern use, though by the way, the astonishment
of the ear abated, which every one grows familiar with in a little time. I look
upon it as a Weapon of very little execution, and hope we shall one day lay it
aside. That missile Weapon which the Italians formerly made use of both with
Fire and without, was much more terrible: They called a certain kind of
Javeline Armed at the point with an Iron three foot long, that it might pierce
through and through an Armed Man, Phalarica, which they sometimes in
Field-service darted by hand: sometimes from several sorts of Engines for the
defense of beleagured places: The shaft whereof being roul'd round with Flax,
Wax, Rozin, Oil, and other combustible matter, took Fire in its flight, and
lighting upon the Body of a Man, or his Targuet, took away all the use of Arms
and Limbs. And yet coming to close fight, I should think they should also
endamage the Assailant, and that the Camp being as it were planted with these
Flaming Truncheons, should produce a common inconvenience to the whole crowd.
Virg. Aenid. 9.
-- Magnum stridens contorta Phalarica venit,
Fulminis acta modo. --
The Comet like Phalarica does fly,
With a huge noise like lightning through the Sky,
They had moreover other devices which custom made them perfect in (which will
seem incredible to us who have not seen them) by which they supplied the
effects of our powder and (...) They darted their Piles with so great violence,
as oft-times transfixt two Targets, and two Armed Men at once, and pinned them
together. Neither was the effect of their slings less certain of execution, or
of shorter carriage: Saxis globosis funda, Live. l. 38.
mare apartum incessantes: coronas modici circuli magno ex intervallo loci
assueti trajicere: non capita modo hostium vulnerabant, sed quem locum
destinassent. Culling round stones from the shore for their slings: and with
them practicing at a great distance to throw through a Circle of very small
circumference, they would not only wound an Enemy in the head; but hit any
other part at pleasure. Their pieces of Battery had not only the Execution, Id.
Ibid.
but the thunder of our Cannon also: ad ictus moenium cum terribili sonitu
editos, pavor, and trepidatio coepit. At the Battery of the Walls, which is
performed with a dreadful noise, the defendants began to fear and tremble
within. The Gauls our Kinsmen in Asia, abominated these treacherous missile
Arms, it being their use to fight with greater Bravery Hand to Hand. Non tam
patentibus plagis moventur, Id. Ibid.
ubi latior, quam alitor plaga est, etiam gloriosius se pugnare putant: iidem
quum aculeus sagittae aut glandis abditae introrsus tenui vulnere in speciem
urit: tum in rabiem and pudorem tam parva perire pestes versi, prosternunt
corpora humi: They are not so much concerned at large wounds; when a wound is
wider than deep, they think they have fought with greater glory: But when they
find themselves tormented within, under the aspect of a slight wound, with the
point of a Dart, or some concealed glandulous Body, then transported with fury
and shame, to perish by so small, and contemptible an Officer of death, they
fall to the ground; an expression of something very like a harquebuse shot. The
ten thousand Greeks in their long and famous retreat, met with a Nation who
very much galled them with great and strong Bows, carrying Arrows so long, that
taking them up one might return them back like a Dart, and with them pierce a
Buckler, and an Armed Man through and through. The Engines of Dionysius his
invention at Syracusa, to shoot, vast massy Darts, and Stones of a prodigious
greatness with so great impetuosity, and at so great a distance, came very near
to our modern inventions. But in this discourse of Horses and Horsemanship, we
are not to forget the pleasant posture of one Maistre Pierre Pol, a Doctor of
Divinity, upon his Mule, whom Menstrelet reports always to have rid aside
through the streets of Paris like a Woman. He says also elsewhere, that the
Gascons had terrible Horses, that would wheel, and make the Pirouette in their
full speed, which the French, Picards, Dutch, and Brabanters looked upon as a
Miracle, having never seen the like before; which are his very words. Caesar
speaking of the Swedes; in the charges they make on Horseback, says he, they
often throw themselves off to fight on foot, having taught their Horses not to
stir in the mean time from the place, to which they presently run again upon
occasion; and according to their custom, nothing is so unmanly, and so base as
to use Saddles, or Pads, and they (...) spise such as make use of those
convenienc^^ Insomuch that being but a very few in number, they fear not to
attack a great many. That which I have formerly wondered at, to see a Horse made
to perform all his Aris with a Switch only, and the Reins upon his Neck, was
common with the Massilians, who rid their Horses without Saddle or Bridle.
Aeneid l. 4.
Et gens quae nudo residens Massilia dorso,
Ora levi flectit, froenorum nescia virga,
Et numidae infraeni cingunt.
Massilians who on the bare Backs do ride,
And with a Switch, not knowing Bridles, guide
The menag'd Steed, and fierce Numidians too
That use no Reign, begirt us round.
Equi sine froenis deformis ipse cursus, Live, l. 35.
rigida cervice, and extento capite currentium. The Career of a Horse without a
Bridle must needs be ungrateful, his Neck being extended stiff, and his Nose
thrust out. King Alphonso, he who first instituted the Order des Chevaliers de
la Band, or de l' Escherpe in Spain, amongst other rules of the Order gave
them this, That they should never ride Mule or Mulet, upon penalty of a Mark of
Silver; which I had lately out of Guevara's Letters, which whoever gave them
the title of Golden Epistles, had another kind of opinion of them than I have,
and perhaps saw more in them than I do. The ^ourtier says, that till his time
it was a disgrace to a Gentleman to ride one of these Creatures: But the
Abyssines on the contrary, as they are nearer advanced to the person of Prester
John, do affect to be mounted upon large Mules, for the greater dignity and
grarideur. Xenophon tells us, that the Assyrians were fain to keep their Horses
fettered in the Stable, they were so fierce and vicious: and that it required
so much time to loose and harness them, that to avoid any disorder this tedious
preparation might bring upon them, in case of surprise, they never sat down in
their Camp, till it was first well fortified with Ditches and Rampires. His
Cyrus, who was so great a Master in all manner of Horse Service, kept his
Horses to their ordinary, and never suffered them to have any thing to eat till
first they had earned it by the sweat of some kind of exercise. The Scythians
when in the Field, and in scarcity of provisions, used to let their Horses
blood, which they drank, and sustained themselves by that diet. Ma^t. l. 2.
Venit and epoto Sarmata pastus equo. The Scythian also comes without remorse,
Having before quafft up his bleeding Horse.
Those of Crotta being besieged by Metellus, were in so great necessity for
drink, that they were fain to quench their thirst with their Horses Urine: and
to show how much better cheap the Turkish Armies support themselves than our
European Forces, it is said, that besides that the Soldiers drink nothing but
Water, and eat nothing but Rice and Salt Flesh pulverized (of which every one
may easily carry about with him a months provision) they know how to feed upon
the Blood of their Horses, as well as the Moscovite and Tartar, and salt it for
their use. These new discovered people of the Indies, When the Spaniards first
landed amongst them, had so great an opinion both of the Men and Horses, that
they looked upon the first as Gods, and the other Animals enobled above their
nature. Insomuch that after they were subdued, coming to sue for Peace, and to
bring them Gold and Provisions, they failed not to present of the same to the
Horses, with the same kind of harangue to them, they had made to the other;
interpreting their neighing for a language of Truce and Friendship. In these
nearer Indies, to ride upon an Elephant was the first place of Honor, the
second to ride in a Coach with four Horses, the third to ride upon a Camel, and
the last to be carried, or drawn by own Horse only. Some one of our late
Writers tells us, that he has been in a Country in those parts, where they ride
upon Oxen with Pads, Stirrups, and Bridles, and very much at their ease.
Quintas Fabius Maximus Rutilianus in a Battle with the Samnites seeing his
Horse, after three or four Charges, had failed of breaking into the Enemies
battalion, took his course, to make them unbridle all their Horses, so that
having nothing to check their Career, they might through Weapons and Men, open
the way to his foot, Live. l. 40.
who by that means gave them a bloody defeat. The same command was given by
Quintus Fulvius Flaccus against the Celtiberians: Id cum majore vi equorum
facietis, si effroenatos in hosts equos immittatis: quod saepe Romanos equites
cum laud fecisse memoriae proditum est. Detractisque froenis his ultro
citreque cum magna strage hostium, infractis omnibus hastis, transcurrerunt.
You will do your business with greater advantage of your Horses strength, if
you spur them anbridled upon the Enemy, as it is recorded the Roman Horse to
their great Glory have often done. And their Bits being pulled off without
breaking a Lance, to have charged through and through, with greater Slaughter
of the Enemy: The Duke of Muscovie was anciently obliged to pay this reverence
to the Tartars, that when they sent any one Embassy to him, he went out to meet
them on foot, and presented them with a Mazer, or Goblet of Mares Milk (a
beverage of greatest esteem amongst them) and so great, that if in Drinking, a
drop fell by chance upon the Horses Main, they thought themselves indispensably
bound to lick it off with their Tongue: The Army that Bajazet had sent into
Russia, was overwhelmed with so dreadful a Tempest of Snow, that to shelter,
and preserve themselves from starving, many ripped up, and Embowell'd their
Horses, to creep into their Bellies, and enjoy the benefit of that Vital heat.
Bajazet, after that furious Battle wherein he was overthrown by Tamerlain, was
in a hopeful way of securing his own person by the fleetness of an Arabian
Mare he had under him, had he not been constrained to let her drink her fill at
the ford of a River in his way, which rendered her so heavy and indisposed,
that he was afterward easily overtaken by those that pursued him: They say
indeed that to let a Horse stale takes him off his mettle, but I should rather
have thought that drinking would have refresht her, and revived her spirits:
Croesus marching his Army through certain furrs near Sardis, met with an
infinite number of Serpents, which the Horses devoured with great appetite, and
which Herodotus says was a prodigy of ominous portent to his Affairs. We call a
Horse Cheval entier, that has his Main, Ears, and other parts entire, and no
other will pass muster. The Lacedaemonians having defeated the Athenians in
Sicily, returning triumphant from the victory into the City of Syracusa,
amongst other insolences, caused all the Horses they had taken to be shorn,
and led in triumph. Alexander fought with a Nation called Daae; a people whose
Discipline it was to march two and two together, Armed on Horseback to the
War, and being in Fight one always alighted, and so they fought one while on
Horseback and another on Foot, one after another by turns. I do not think that
for graceful riding, any Nation in the World excells the French; though a good
Horseman, according to our way of speaking, seems rather to respect the Courage
of the Man than his Horsemanship and address in riding. Of all that ever I saw
the most knowing in that Art, that had the best seat, and the best method in
breaking Horses, was Monsieur de Carnevalet who served our King Henry the
Second: I have seen a Man ride with both his feet upon the Saddle, take off his
Saddle, and at his return take it up again, refit, and remount it, riding all
the while full speed: having Gallopt over a Bonnet, make at it very good
shoots, backwards with his Bow, take up any thing from the ground, setting one
foot down and the other in the Stirrup; with twenty other Apes-tricks, which he
got his living by. There has been seen in my time at Constantinople two Men
upon an Horse, who in the height of his speed would throw themselves off, and
into the Saddle again by turn, and one who Bridled and Saddled his Horse with
nothing but his Teeth. Another who betwixt two Horses, one foot upon one
Saddle, and another upon the other, carrying another upon his Shoulders; would
ride full career, the other standing bolt upright upon him, making very good
shoots with his Bow. Several who would ride full speed with their heels
upwards, and their Hands upon the Saddle betwixt several Scymiters, with the
points upward fixed in the Harness. When I was a Boy, the Prince of Salmona,
riding a rough Horse at Naples to all his Airs, held Reals under his Knees and
Toes; as if they had been nailed there, to show the firmness of his Seat.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of Ancient Customs.
I Should willingly pardon our people for admitting no other pattern, or rule
of perfection, than their own peculiar manners and customs. It being a common
Vice, not of the vulgar only, but almost of all Men, to walk in the Beaten
Road, their Ancestors have trod before them: I am content when they see
Fabritius or Lelius, that they look upon their Countenance and Behavior as
Barbarous, seeing they are neither Clothed no^ Fashioned according to our
Mode. But I find fault with their singularity, when it arrives to that degree
of indiscretion, as to suffer themselves to be imposed upon by authority of the
present Usance, as every Month to alter their Opinion, if Custom so require,
and that they should so vary their judgment in their own particular concern:
When they wore the Belly-pieces of their Doublets up as high as their Breasts,
they stiffly maintained that they were in their proper place: Some Years after
they were slipped down between their Thighs, and then they could laugh at the
former fashion as uneasy and intolerable. The fashion now in use, makes them
absolutely condemn the other two, with so great indignation, and so universal
contempt, that a Man would think, there was a certain kind of Madness crept in
amongst them, that infatuates their Understandings, to this strange degree. Now
seeing that our change of Fashions is so prompt and sudden, that the inventions
of all the Tailors in the World, cannot furnish out new Whim-whams enough to feed
our vanity withal; there will often be a necessity, that the despised ones must
again come in vogue, and even those immediately after fall into the same
contempt, and that the same judgment must in the space of Fifteen or Twenty
Years, take up not only different, but contrary Opinions, with an incredible
lightness and inconstancy: There is not any of us so cautelous and discreet,
that suffers not himself to be gulled with this contradiction, and both in
external and internal sight to be insensibly blinded. I will here muster up
some old Customs, that I have in memory, some of them the same with ours, the
others different, to the end, that bearing in mind this continual variation of
humane things, we may have our judgments clearer, and more firmly settled: The
thing in use amongst us of fighting with Rapier and Cloak, was in practice
amongst the Romans also, Sinistris sagos involvant, Caesar de bello civili,
lib. 1.
gladiosque distringunt. They wrapped their Cloaks upon the Left Arm, and handled
the Sword with the Right, says Caesar; And I observe an old Vicious Custom of
our Nation, which continues yet amongst us, which is to stop passengers we meet
upon the Road, to compel them to give an account who they are; and to take it
for an Injury, and just cause of quarrel. if they refuse to do it: At the
Baths, which the Ancients made use of every Day before they went to Dinner, and
as frequently as we wash our Hands, they at first only bathed their Arms and
Legs; but afterward, and by a Custom that has continued for many Ages in most
Nations of the World, they bathed stark Naked in mixed and perfumed Waters,
looking upon it as a great simplicity to bath in mee^ Water: The most delicate
and affected, perfumed themselves all over Three or Four times a Day. They
often caused their Hair to be pincht off; as the Women of France have some time
since, taken up a Custom to do their Foreheads. Mat. lib. 2. Epig. 62.
Quod pectus, quod crura tibi, quod brachia vellis. How do thou twitch thy
Breast, thy Arms and Thighs. though they had Ointments proper for that purpose.

Ll. lib. 6. Epi. 93.
Psiloiro nitet, aut arida latet abdita oreta. This in Wild-vine shines, or else
does calk
Her rank po^es up in a dry Crust of Chalk.
they delighted to lie soft, and pretended it for a great testimony of
hardiness, to lie upon a Matrice. They did Eat lying upon Beds, much after the
manner of the Turks in this Age.

Aeneid. l. 2.
Inde thoro pater Aeneas sic orsus ab alto. Then thus Aeneas from his Bed of
State,
Begun Troy's Woeful Story to relate.
And it is said of the younger Cato, that after the Battle of Pharsalia, being
entered into a Melancholic Disposition, at the ill posture of the Public
Affairs, he took his repose always sitting, assuming a strict and severe course
of Life. It was also their Custom to kiss the Hands of great Persons; the more
and better to Honor, and Caress them: And meeting with their equals, they
always Kissed in salutation, as do the Venetians.

Ovid. de pont. li. 4. Eleg. 9.
Gratatusque darem cum dulcibus oscula verbis. And kindest words I would with
Kisses mix. In petitioning, or saluting any great Man, they used to lay their
Hands upon his Knees. Fasicles the Philosopher and Brother of Crates, instead
of laying his Hand upon the Knee, laid it upon his Private Parts, and being
rudely repulst by him to whom he made that indecent Complement; What, said he,
is not that part your own as well as the other? They used to Eat their Fruits
as we do after Dinner. They wipt their Arses (let the Ladies if they please
mince it smaller) with a Sponge; which is the reason that Spongia is a smutty
Word in Latin; Which Sponge was also fastened to the end of a stick, as appears
by the Story of him, who as he was led along to be thrown to the wild Beasts in
the sight of the people, asking leave to do his business, and having no other
ways to dispatch himself, forced the Sponge and Stick down his own Throat and
choked himself. They used to Terge after Coition with perfumed Wool.

Mart. lib. 11. Epist. 50.
At tibi nil faciam, sed lota mentula lana.
--
they used in the Streets of Rome, to place certain Vessels and little Tubs,
for passengers to Piss in.

Lucret. l. 4.
Pueri saepe lacum propter, se ac dolia curta,
Somno devincti credunt, extollere vestem.
Boys Dream of Pissing in the Tub and Lake,
And find themselves bepist when they awake.
They used to Collation betwixt Meals, and had in Summer Sellars of Snow to
cool their Wine; and some there were who made use of Snow in Winter, not
thinking their Wine cool enough at that Cold Season of the Year. The Men of
Quality had their Cup-bearers, and Carvers, and their Buffoons to make them
sport: They had their Meat served up in Winter, upon a sort of Chafing-Dishes;
which were set upon the Table, and had portable Kitchins (of which I my self
have seen some) wherein all their service was carried after them.

Mart. l. 7. Epig. 47.
Has vobis epulas habete lauti.
Nos offendimus ambulante Coena.
Those Feasts by you indeed are highly prized
At walking Suppers we are scandalized.
In Summer they had a contrivance, to bring fresh and clear Rills through their
lower Rooms, wherein were great store of living Fish, which the Guests took out
with their own Hands to be dressed; every Man according to his own liking. Fish
has ever had this preeminence, and keeps it still, that the great ones all
pretend to be Cooks in their favor, and indeed the taste is more delicate,
than that of Flesh, at least to me. But in all sorts of Magnificence,
Debaunchery, and voluptuous Inventions of Effeminacy and Expense, we do in
truth all we can to parallel them, for our Wills are as corrupt as theirs: But
we want power to reach them; and our force is no more able to reach them in
their Vicious, than in their Virtuous Qualities; for both the one and the
other, proceed from a vigor of Soul, which was without comparison greater in
them, than in us: And Souls by how much the weaker they are, by so much have
they less power to do, or very well, or very ill: The highest place of honor
amongst them was the middle; the name going before, and that following after,
either in writing or speaking; had no signification of Grandeur, as is evident
by their writings, they will sooner say Oppius and Caesar, than Caesar and
Oppius, and me, and thee, than thee, and me, which is the reason that made me
formerly take notice in the Life of Flaminius, in our French Plutarch, of one
passage, where it seems as if the Author, speaking of the jealousy of honor,
betwixt the AEtolians and Romans, about the winning of a Battle, they had with
their joint Forces obtained, made it of some importance, that in the Greek
Songs, they had put the Aetolians before the Romans: If there be no
Amphibology, or double dealing in the words of the French Translation, an
instance of which I present you out of Plutarch, though Monsieur de Montaigne
did not think it worth repeating.

Plut. vit. Tit. Quint. Flaminius.
Here (Friendly Passenger,) we Buried lie,
Without Friends, Tears, or Funeral Obsequie,
Full Thirty Thousand Men in Battle Slain,
By the Aetolians, on Thessalian Plain,
And Latins, whom Flaminius led on,
And brought from Italy to Macedon.
With his fierce Valor, when faint Philip fled
With greater speed to save his timorous Head,
Than Heart or Hind, when Dogs upon the Trace,
Through Woods pursue them with a full Cry Chase.
The Ladies in their Baths, made no scruple of admitting Men amongst them, and
moreover made use of their Serving-men to Rub and Anoint them:

Mart. lib. Epig. 34.
Inguina succinctus nigra tibi servus alluta*
Stat, quoties calidis nuda foveris aquis.
They all Powdered themselves with a certain Powder, to moderate their Sweats.
The Ancient Gauls, says Sidonius Apollinaris, wore their Hair long before, and
the hinder part of the Head cut short, a Fashion that begins to be revived in
this Vicious and Effeminate Age. The Romans used to pay the Watermen their
Fare, at their first steeping into the Boat, which we never do till after
Landing.

H^^. lib. 1. Sat. 5.
Dum as exigitur, dum mula ligatur,
Tota abit hora.
Whilst the Fare's paying, and the Mule is ti'd,
A whole Hours time at least away does slide.
The Women used to lie on that side the Bed, next the Wall: And for that
reason, they called Caesar, Spondam Regis Nicomedis, one of the greatest
Blemishes in his Life, and that gave occasion to his Soldiers to sing to his
Face,

Suet. in vita Cas.
Gallias Caesar subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem. Caesar the Gauls subdued, it is true,
But Nicomedes Caesar did subdue.
Id. e^d not quoted by M^^taigne.
Ecce Caesar nunc triumphat, qui subegit Gallias,
Nicomedes non triumphat, qui subegit Caesarem.
See Caesar Triumphs now for Conquering Gaul,
For Conquering him King Nicomede at all
No Triumph has.
They took Breath in their Drinking, and dashed their Wine,

Hor. lib. 7. Ode 11.
-- Quis puer ocius
Restinguet ardentis falerni
Pocula praetereunte lympha?
What pretty Boy's at leisure to come in,
And cool the heat of the Falernian Wine,
With the clear gliding Stream?
And the Roguish Looks and Gestutes of our Lacquey's was also in use amongst
them.

O Jane, a tergo quem nulla ciconia pinsit,
Nec manus auriculas imitata est mobilis albas,
Nec linguae quantum sitiet canis Apula tantum.
Persius, Sat. 1.
O Ianus, who both ways a Spy do wear,
So that no Scoffer, though behind thee, dare*
Make a Stork's-Bill, Ass Ears, or far more long,
Than thirsty panting Curs, shoot out his Tongue.
The Argian and Roman Ladies, always Mourned in White, as ours did formerly
here; and should do still, were I to Govern in this point. But there are whole
Books of this Argument.

CHAP. L.
Of Democritus and Heraclitus.
THE Judgment is an Utensil proper for all subjects, and will have an Oar in
every thing: Which is the reason, that in these Essays I take hold of all
occasions. Where, though it happen to be a subject I do not very well
understand, I try however, sounding it at a distance, and finding it too deep
for my stature, I keep me on the firm shore: And this knowledge that a Man can
proceed no further, is one effect of its Virtue, even in the most inconsidering
sort of Men. One while in an idle and frivolous subject, I try to find out
matter whereof to compose a Body, and then to prop, and support it. Another
while I employ it in a noble subject, one that has been tossed and tumbled by a
Thousand Hands, wherein a Man can hardly possibly introduce any thing of his
own, the way being so beaten on every side, that he must of necessity walk in
the steps of another. In such a case, it is the work of the Judgment to take the
way that seems best, and of a Thousand Paths, to determine that this or that,
was the best chosen. I leave the choice of my Arguments to Fortune, and take
that she first presents me; they are all alike to me, I never design to go
through any of them; for I never see all of any thing: Neither do they who so
largely promise to show it others. Of a hundred Members and Faces that every
thing has, I take one, one while to look it over only, another while to ripple
up the Skin, and sometimes to pinch it to the Bones: I give a Stab, not so
wide, but as deep as I can; and am for the most part, tempted to take it in
hand by some absolute gracefulness I discover in it. Did I know my self less, I
might p^rhaps venture to handle something or other to the bottom, and to be
deceived in my own inability, but sprinkling here one word, and there another,
Patterns cut from several Pieces, and scattered without design, and without
engaging my self too far, I am not responsible for them, or obliged to keep
close to my subject, without varying at my own liberty and pleasure, and giving
up my self to doubt and incertainty, and to my own governing Method, Ignorance.
All Motion discovers us. The very same Soul of Caesar, that made it self so
Conspicuous in Marshalling and Commanding the Battle of Pharsalia, was also
seen as Solicitous and Busy in the softer Affairs of Love. A man makes a
Judgment of a Horse, not only by seeing his Menage in his Airs, but by his very
walk, nay, and by seeing him stand in the Stable. Amongst the Functions of the
Soul, there are some of a lower and meaner Form, who does not see her in those
Inferior Offices, as well as those of Nobler Note, never fully discover her;
and peradventure, she is best discovered, where she moves her own natural pace.
The winds of Passions take most hold of her in her highest flights; and, the
rather, by reason that she wholly applys her self to, and exercises her whole
Virtue upon every particular subject, and never handles more than one thing at
a time, and that not according to it, but according to her self. Things in
respect to themselves, have peradventure their Weight, Measures and Conditions;
but when we once take them into us, the Soul forms them as she pleases. Death
is Terrible to Cicero, Cove^ed by Cato, and Indifferent to Socrates. Health,
Conscience, Authority, Knowledge, Riches, Beauty, and their contraries, do all
strip themselves at their entering into us, and receive a new Robe, and of
another Fashion, from every distinct Soul, and of what Color, Brown, Bright,
Green, Dark; and Quality, Sharp, Sweet, Deep, or superficial, as best pleases
them, for they are not yet agreed upon any common* Standard of Forms, Rules, or
Proceedings; evey one is a Queen in her own Dominions. Let us therefore no more
excuse our selves upon the External Qualities of things, it belongs to us to
give our selves an account of them. Our good or ill, has no other dependence
but on our selves. It Is there that our Offerings and our Vows are due, and not
to Fortune: She has no power over our Manners, on the contrary, they draw, and
make her follow in their Train, and cast her in their own Mould. Why should not
I Censure Alexander; Roaring and Drinking at the prodigious ^ate he sometimes
used to do? Or, if he played at Chess, what string of his Soul was not touched
by this idle and Childish Game? I hate and avoid it, because it is not Play
enough, that it is too grave and serious a Diversion, and I am ashamed to lay
out as much Thought and Study upon that, as would serve to much better uses. He
did not more pump his Brains about his Glorious Expedition into the Indies; and
another that I will not name, took not more pains to unravel a passage, upon
which depends the safety of all Mankind. To what a degree then does this
ridiculous Diversion molest the Soul, when ^ll her Faculties shall be summoned
together upon this Trivial Account? And how fair an opportunity she herein
gives every one to know* and to make a right Judgment of himself? I do not more
thoroughly sift my self in any other posture, than this. What Passion are we
e^empted from in this insignificant Game^ Anger, Spite, Malice, Impatience, and
a v^hement desire of getting the better in (...) concern, wherein it were more
excusable, to be Ambitious of being overcome: For to be Eminent, and to excel
above the common rate in frivolous things, is nothing graceful in a Man of
Quality and Honor. What I say in this Example, may be said in all others.
Every Particle, every Employment of Man, does Exalt or Accuse him, equally with
any other* Democritus and Heraclitus were Two Philosophers, of which, the first
finding Humane Condition Ridiculous and Vain, never appeared abroad, but with a
Jeering and Laughing Countenance: Whereas Heraclitus Commiserating that
Condition of ours appeared always with a Sorrowful Look, and Tears in his Eyes.

Iaven. Sat. 10.
-- Alter
Ridebat quoties a limine moverat unum
Protuleratque pedem, flebat contrarius alter.
One always, when he over his Threshold stepped,
Laughed at the World, the other always Wept.
I am clearly for the first Humor; not because it is more pleasant to Laugh,
than to Weep; but because it is Ruder, and expresses more Contempt, than the
other; because I think we can never be sufficiently despised to our desert.
Compassion and Bewailing, seem to employ some Esteem of, and Value for the
thing Bemoaned: Whereas the things we Laugh at, are by that expressed to be of no
Moment or Repute. I do not think that we are so Unhappy, as we are Vain, or
have in us so much Malice, as Folly; we are not so full of Mischief, as
Inanity: Nor so Miserable, as we are Vile and Mean. And therefore Diegenes, who
past away his time in rolling himself in his Tub, and made nothing of the Great
Alexander, esteeming us no better than Flies, or Bladders pu^t up with Wind,
was a sharper, and more penetrating, and consequently in my opinion, a Juster
Judge, than Timon Sirnam'd the Man^^^ter; for what a Man Hates he lays to
Heart: This last was an Enemy to all Mankind, did positively desire our Ruin,
and avoided our Conversation as dangerous, proceeding from Wicked and Depraved
Natures: The other valued us so little, that we could neither trouble, nor
infect him by our Contagion; and left us to Herd with one another, not out of
Fear, but Contempt of our Society: Concluding us as incapable of doing good, as
ill. Of the same strain was Sta^^lius his Answer, when Brut^s Courted him into
the Conspiracy against Caesar: He was satisfied that the E^terprize was Just;
but he did not think Me^kind so considerable, as to deserve a Wise M^n's
Concern: According to the Doctrine of Hegesias; who said, That a Wise Man ought
to (...) nothing but for himself, foramuch as he only was worthy of it: And to
the saying of T^^^dorus, That it was not reasonable a Wise Man should hazard
himself for his Country, and ^^^danger Wisdom, for a company of Fools. Ou^
Condition is as Ridiculous, as Risible.

CHAP. LI.
Of the Vanity of Words.
A Rhetorican of times past, said, That to make little things appear great, was
his profession. This is a Shoemaker, who can make a great Shoe for a little
Foot. They would in Sparta have sent such a Fellow to be Whipped, for making
profession of a lying and deceitful Art: And I fancy, that Archidamus who was
King of that Country, was (...) little surpised at the Answer of Thucydides,
when enquiting of him, which was the better Wrestler, Pericles, or he; he
replied, that it was hard to affirm; for when I have thrown him, said he, he
always persuades the Spectators, that he had no fall, and carries away the
Prize. They who Paint, Pounce and Plaster up the Ruins of Women, filling up
their Wrinckles and Deformities, are less to blame; because it is no great
matter, whether we see them in their Natural Complexions, or no. Whereas these
make it their business to deceive not our sight only, but our Judgments, and to
Adulterate and Corrupt the very Essence of things. The Republics that have
maintained themselves in a Regular and well Modell^d Government, such as those
of Lacedaemon and ^reet, had Orators in no very great Esteem. Aristo did wisely
define Rhetoric to be a Science to persuade the People; Socrates and Plato, an
Art to Flatter and Deceive: And those who deny it in the general description,
verify it throughout in their Precepts. The Mahometans will not suffer their
Children to be Instructed in it, as being useless, and the Athenians perceiving
of how pernicious Consequence the Practice of it was, it being in their City of
universal Esteem, ordered the principal part, which is to move Affections, with
their Exordiums and Perorations, to be taken away. It Is an Engine invented, to
manage and govern a disorderly and tumultuous Rabble, and that never is made
use of but like Physic to the Sick, in the Paroxisms of a discomposed Estate.
In those, where the Vulgar, or the Ignorant, or both together* have been all
powerful, and able to give the Law, as in those of Athens, Rhodes and Ro^^* and
where the Public Affairs have been in (...) continual Tempest of Commotion, to
such places have the Orators always repaired. And in truth, we shall find few
persons in those Republics, who have pushed their Fortunes ^o any great degree
of Eminence, without the assistance of Elocution: Pompey, Caesar, C^^^ssus,
Lucullus, Lentulus and Metellus, have thence taken their chiefest Spring to
mo^^^ to that degree of Authority, to which th^^ did at last arrive: Making it
of greater (...) to them, than Arms, contrary to the opinion of better times.
For L. Voluminous speaking publicly in favor of the Election of Q. Fabius, and
Pub. Decius, to the Consular Dignity: These are Men, said he* born for W^^ and
great in Execution, in the Combat of the Tongue altogether to seek; Spirits
truly Consular. The Subtle, Eloquent and Learned, are only good for the City,
to make Praeton of, to administer Justice. Eloquence Flourished most at Rome,
when the Public Affairs were in the worst condition, and the Republic most
disquieted with intestine Commotions, as a frank and untilled Soil bears the
worst Weeds. By which it should seem, that a Monarchical Government has less
need of it^ than any other: For the Brutality, and Facility, natural to the
common People, and that render them subject to be turned and twined, and led by
the Ears, by this charming harmony of words, without weighing or considering
the truth and reality of things by the force of reason: This Facility, I say,
is not easily ^ound in a single person, and it is also more easy by good
Education and Advice, to secure him from the impression of this Poison. There
was never any famous Orator known to come out of Persia, or Macedon.

I have entered into this discourse upon the occasion of an Italian I lately
received into my Service, and who was Clerk of the Kitchen to the late Cardinal
Caraffa till his Death. I put this fellow upon an account of his Office: Where
he fell to discourse of this Palate-Science, with such a settled Countenance,
and Magisterial Gravity, as if he had been handling some profound point of
Divinity. He made a Learned distinction of the several sorts of Appetites; of
that a Man has before he begins to Eat, and of those after the second and third
Service: The means simply to satisfy the first, and then to raise and acuate
the other two: The ordering of the Sawces, first in general, and then proceeded
to the qualities of the ingredients, and their effects: The differences of
Sallets according to their Seasons, which ought to be served up hot, and which
cold: The Manner of their Garnishment and Decoration, to render them yet more
acceptable to the Eye? After which he entered upon the order of the whole
Service, full of weighty and important Considerations.

Iuven. Sat. 5.
-- Nec minimo sane discrimine refert
Quo gestu lepores, and quo gallina secetur.
Nor with less Criticism did Observe
How we a Hare, and how a Hen should Carve.
And all this set out with lofty and magnifick Words; the very same we make use
of, when we discourse of the Regiment of an Empire. Which Learned Lecture of my
Man, brought this of Terence into my Memory.

Ter. Adelp.
Hoc salsum est, hoc adustum est, hoc lautum est
Act. 3.
Illud recte iterum sic memento, sedulo
Scae. 5.
Monco quae possum pro mea sapientia.
Postremo tanquam in speculum, in patinas, Demea,
Inspicere jubeo, and moneo quid facto usus sit.
This is too Salt, this Burnt, this is too plain,
That Is well, remember to do so again.
Thus do I still advise to have things fit,
According to the Ta^ent of my Wit.
And then my ( Demea) I command my Cook,
Tha^ into every Dish he pry and look,
As if it were a Mirrer, and go on
To order all things, as they should be done.
And yet even the Greeks themselves did very much admire, and highly applaud
the order and disposition that Paulus Aemilius observed in the Feast he made
them at his return from Macedon: But I do not here speak of effects, I speak of
words only. I do not know whether it may have the same operation upon other
Men, that it has upon me: But when I hear our Atchitects thunder out their
Bombast words of Pilasters, Architraves and Cornices, of the Corinthian and
Dorick Orders, and such like stuff, my imagination is presently possessed with
the Palace of Apollidonius in Amadis de Gaul; when after all, I find them but
the paltry pieces of my own Kitchen Door. And to hear Men talk of Metonymies,
Metaphors and Allegories, and other Grammar words, would not a Man think they
signified some rare and exotic form of speaking? And this other is a Gullery
of the same stamp, to call the Offices of our Kingdom by the lofty Titles of
the Romans, though they have no similitude of Function, and yet less Authority
and Power. And this also, which I doubt will one Day turn to the Reproach of
this Age of ours, unworthily and indifferently to confer upon any we think fit,
the most glorious Sir-names with which Antiquity Honored but one or two
persons in several Ages. Plato carried away the Surname of Divine, by so
universal a consent, that never any one repined at it, or attempted to take it
from him: And yet the Italians who pretend, and with good reason, to more
spritely Wits, and sounder Discourses, than the other Nations of their time,
have lately Honored Aretine with the same Title; in whose Writings, save a
tumid Phrase, set out with smart Periods, ingenious indeed, but far fetched,
and Fantastic, and the Eloquence (be it what it will) I see nothing in him
above the ordinary Writers of his time, so far is he from approaching the
Ancient Divinity. And we make nothing of giving the Sir name of Great to
Princes, that have nothing in them above a Popular Grandeur.

CHAP. LII.
Of the Parfimony of the Ancients.
ATtilius Regulus, General of the Roman Army in Africa, in the height of all
his Glory and Victories over the Carthaginians, writ to the Republic to
acquaint them, that a certain Hind he had left in trust with his whole Estate,
which was in all, but Seven Acres of Land, was run away withal his Instruments
of Husbandry, entreating therefore, that they would please to call him home,
that he might take order in his own Affairs, left his Wife and Children should
suffer by thi^ disaster: Whereupon the Senate appointed another to manage his
Business, caused his Losses to be made good, and ordered his Family to be
maintained at the Public Expense. The Elder Cato returning Consul from Spain,
sold his Horse of Service, to save the Money it would have cost in bringing him
back by Sea into Italy; and being Governor of Sardignia, made all his Visits
on foot, without other Train, than one Officer of the Republic, that carried
his Robe and a Censer for Sacrifices; and for the most part carried his Mail
himself. He bragged, that he had never worn a Gown that cost above Ten Crowns,
nor had ever sent above Ten Pence to the Market for one Days Provision, and
that as to his Country Houses, he had not one that was rough cast on the
outside. Scipio Aemilianus, after two Triumphs, and two Consul-ships, went an
Embassy with no more than Seven Servants in his Train. It Is said, that Homer
had never more than one, Plato three, and Zeno, founder of the Sect of Stoics,
none at all. Tiberius Gracchus was allowed but Five Pence Halfpenny a Day,
when employed as Public Minister about the Public Affairs, and being at that
time the greatest Man of Rome.

CHAP. LIII.
Of a Saying of Caesar.
IF we would sometimes bestow a little Consideration upon our selves, and
employ the time we spend in prying into other Men's Actions, and discovering
things without us, in examining our own Abilities, we should soon perceive of
how infirm and decaying Materials this Fabric of ours is composed. Is it not a
singular testimony of Imperfection, that we cannot establish our satisfaction
in any one thing, and that even our own Fancy and Desire, should deprive us of
the power to choose what is most proper and useful for us? A very good proof of
this, is the great Dispute that has ever been amongst the Philosophers, of
finding out a Man's principal and sovereign Good, that continues yet, and will
eternally continue, without Resolution, or Accord.

Lucret. l. 3.
-- Dum abest quod avemus, id exuperare videtur,
Caetera, post aliud cum contigit illud avemus,
Et sit is aequa tenet.
The absent thing we covet best does seem, The next that comes captivates our
Esteem At the same rate.

Whatever it is that falls into our knowledge and possession, we find that it
satisfies not, and still pant after things to come, and unknown: By reason the
present do not satiate and glut us: not that, in my judgment, they have not in
them wherewith to do it, but because we seize them with an unruly and
immoderate haste.

Eucret.
Nam cum vidit hic ad victum quae flagitat usus,
Et per quae possent vitam consistere tutam,
Omnia jam firm mortalibus esse parata:
Divitiis homines, and honor and laud potentes
Affluere, atque bona natorum excellere fama,
Nec minus esse domi cuiquam tamen anxia corda,
Atque animum infestis cogi servire querelis:
Intellexit ibi vitium vas facere ipsum,
Omniaque illius vitio corrumpitur intus
Quae collata foris, and commoda quaeque venirent.
For when he saw all things that had regard
To Life's subsistence for Mankind prepared,
That Men in Wealth and Honors did abound,
Had hopeful Issue set their Tables round;
And yet had Hearts as Anxious as before,
Murmuring amidst their Happiness and Store:
He then perceived the Vessel was to blame,
And gave a smatch to all into it came,
That thither from without him was conveyed,
To have him Happy and Contented made.
Our Appetite is irresolute and fickle, it can neither keep nor enjoy any thing
gracefully, and as it should: And Man concluding it to be the fault of the
things he is possessed of, fills himself with, and feeds himself upon: the Idea
of things he neither knows, nor understands, to which he devotes his hopes, and
his desires, paying them all Reverence and Honor, according to the saying of
Caesar, Communi fit vitio naturae, ut invisis latitantiba* atque incognitis
rebus magis confidamus, vehement iusque exterreamur. It Is the common Vice of
Nature, that we repose most confidence, and receive the greatest apprehensions,
from things unseen, concealed and unknown.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of Vain Subtilties.
THere are a sort of little Knacks, and frivolous Subtilties, from which Men
sometimes expect to derive Reputation and Applause: As the Poets, who compose
whole Poems, with every Line beginning with the same Letter: We see the shapes
of Eggs, Globes, Wings and Hatchets, cut out by the Ancient Greeks, by the
measure of their Verses, making them longer or shorter, to represent such or
such a Figure. Of this nature was his Employment, who made it his business, to
compute into how many several Orders the Letters of the Alphabet might be
transposed, and found out that incredible number mentioned in Plutarch. I am
mightily pleased with the humor of the Gentleman, who, having a Man brought
before him, that had learned to throw a Grain of Millet with such dexterity and
assurance, as never to miss the Eye of a Needle; and being afterward entreated
to give something for the reward of so rare a performance, he pleasantly, and
in my opinion ingeniously, ordered a certain number of Bushels of the same
Grain to be delivered to him, that he might not want wherewith to exercise so
famous an Art. It Is a strong evidence of a weak Judgment, when Man approve of
things for their being rare and new, or yet for the difficulty; where Virtue
and Usefulness are not conjoined to recommend them. I come just now from
playing with my own Family, at who could find out the most things, that had
their principal force in their two Extremities; as, Sire, which is a Title
given to the greatest person in the Nation, the King, and also to the Vulgar,
as Merchants and Mechanics, but never to any degree of Men between. The Women
of great Quality are called Madams, inferior Gentlewomen, Mademoiselles, and
the meanest sort of Women, Madams, as the first. The Canopy of State over
Tables are not permitted, but in the Palaces of Princes, and Taverns.
Democritus said, that Gods and Beasts, had a more exact and perfect sense, than
Men, who are of a middle Form. The Romans wore the same Habit at Funerals and
Feasts; and it is most certain, that an extreme Fear, and an extreme Ardour of
Courage, do equally trouble and lax the Belly. The Nickname of Trembling, with
which they Sirnam'd Sancho the XII. King of Navarre, sufficiently informs,
that Valor will cause a trembling in the Limbs, as well as Fear. The Friends
of that King, or of some other person, who upon the like occasion was wont to
be in the same disorder, tried to compose him, by representing the danger less,
he was going to engage himself in: You understand me ill, said he, for could my
Flesh know the danger my Courage will presently carry it into, it would sink
down to the ground. The faintness that surprises us from Frigidity, or dislike
in the exercises of Venus, are also occasio^^ by a too violent desire, and an
immodor^^^ heat. Extreme Coldness, and extreme He^^* Boil and Roast. Aristotle
says, that Sows (...) Lead will melt, and run with Cold, and (...) extremity of
Winter; as with a vehem^^^ Heat. Desire and Satiety fill all the grada^ons
above and below Pleasure with Grief* Brutality and Wisdom meet in the same
Center of Sentiment and Resolution, in the suffering of Humane Accidents; the
Wise control and Triumph over ill, the others know it not: These last are, as
a Man may say, on this side of Accidents, the other are beyond them; who after
having well weighed and considered their Qualities, measured and judged them
what they are, by virtue of a vigoro^^ Soul leap out of their reach. They
disda^^ and trample them under foot, having a solid and well fortified Soul,
against which the Darts of Fortune coming to strike they must of necessity
rebound, and blunt themselves, meeting with a Body upon which they can fix no
Impression; the ordinary and midd^^ condition of Men, are lodged betwixt the^^
two Extremities, consisting of such, who p^^ceive Evils, feel them, and are not
able to support them. Infancy and Decrepitude mee^ in the imbecility of the
Brain; Avarice and Profusion in the same thirst and desire of getting. A Man
may say with some color of truth, that there is an Abecedarian Ignorance that
precedes knowledge, and a Doctoral I^norance that comes after it; an Ignorance
th^^ knowledge does create and beget, at the same time that she dispatches and
destroys the first Of mean understandings, little, inquisitive, and little
instructed, are made good Christians, who by Reverence and Obedience
implicitly believe, and are constant in their belief. In the moderate
understandings, and the middle sort of capacities, the error of Opinions is
begot, and they have some color of reason on their side, to impute our walking
on in the old beaten path to simplicity, and brutishness, I mean in us who have
not informed our selves by Study. The higher, and nobler Souls, more solid and
clear sighted, make up another sort of true believers: who by a long and
Religious Investigation of truth, have obtained a clearer, and more
penetrating, light into the Scriptures, and have discovered the Mysterious and
Divine secret of our Ecclesiastical Polity. And yet we see some, who by this
middle step, are arrived to that supreme degree with mavelous Fruit, and
Confirmation; as to the utmost limit of Christian intelligence, and enjoying
their victory with great Spiritual Consolation, humble acknowledgment of the
Divine Favor, exemplary Reformation of Manners, and singular Modesty. I do not
intend with these to rank some others, who to clear themselves from all
suspicion of their former Errors, and to satisfy us, that they are sound and
firm to us, render themselves extreme indiscreet and unjust, in the carrying on
out Cause, and by that means bl^mish it with infinite Reproaches of Violence
and oppression. The simple Peasants are good People, and so are the
Philosophers: Me^ of strong and clear Reason, and whose Souls are enriched with
an ample instruction of profitable Sciences. The Mongrets who have disda^^'d
the first form of the Ignorance of Letters, ^and have not been able to attain
to the other, (^^ting betwixt two Stools, as I, and a great many more of us
do,) are dangerous, foolish and importunate; these are they that trouble the
World. And therefore it is, that I for my own part, retreat as much as I can
^^wards my first and natural Seation, from whence I so vainly attempted to
advance. The vulgar and purely natural Poesy, has (...) it certain Proprieties
and Graces, by wh^^ she may come into some comparison with (...) greatest
Beauty of a Poesy perfected by (...). As is evident in our Gascon Villanels
and (...) that are brought us from Nations that have no knowledge of any manner
of Science, no^ (...) much as the use of Writing. The indiffer^^ and middle
sort of Poesy betwixt these (...) is despised, of no Value* Honor or Este^
But seeing that the Ice being once broken* and a Path laid open to the Fancy, I
have found, as it commonly falls out, that what we make choice of for a rare
and difficult Subject, proves to be nothing so, and that after (...) invention
is once warm, it finds out an infin^^ number of paralle^ Examples. I shall only
(...) this one; That were these Essays of (...) considerable enough to deserve
a Censure (...) might then I think fall out, that they, (...) not much take
with common and vulga^ Capacities, nor be very acceptable to the singular and
excellemt sort of Men, for the first would not understand them enough, and the
last too much, and so they might hover in the middle Region.

CHAP. LV.
Of Smells.
IT has been reported of others, as well as of Alexander the Great, that their
Sweat exhaled an Odoriferous Smell, occasioned by some rare and extraordinary
constitution, of which Plutarch, and others, have been inquisitive into the
cause. But the ordinary constitution of Humane Bodies is quite otherwise, and
their best and chiefest Excellency, is to be exempt from Smells: Nay, the
sweetness even of the purest Breaths, has nothing in it of greater perfection,
than to be without any offensive Smell, like those of heathful Children: which
made Plautus, say,

Plaut. Molest. Art. 1. Sce. 3.
Mulier tum been olet, ubi nihil olet. That Woman we a sweet one call,
Whose Body breathes no Scent at all.
And such as make use of these exotic Perfumes, are with good reason to be
suspected of some Natural Imperfection, which they endeavor by these Odours to
conceal, according to that of Mr. Johnson, which, without offense to Monsieur
de Montaigne, I will here presum^ to insert, it being at least as well said, as
any of those he quotes out of the Ancient Poets,

Ben. Johnson.
Still to be Neat,still to be Dressed,
As you were going to a Feast,
Still to be Powdered, still Perfumed:
Lady, it is to be presumed,
Though Arts hid causes are not found,
All is not sweet, all is not sound.
As may be judged by these following,

Mart. lib. 6. Epig. 55.
Rides nos, Coracine, nil olente^:
Malo quam been olere, nil olere.
Because thou Coracinus still do go
With Musk and Ambergrease perfumed so,
We under thy Contempt, forsooth, must fall*
I Would rather than smell sweet, not smell at all;
And elsewhere,

Id. lib. a. Ep. 1^.
Posthume, non been olet, qui been semper olet.
He does not Naturally Smell well,
Who always of Perfumes does Smell.
I am nevertheless a strange lover of good Smells, and as much abominate the
ill one* which also I reach at a greater distance; I think, than other Men:

Ho^. Ep. 1^.
Namque sagacius unus odoror,
Polypus, an^gravis hirsutis cubet hircus in alis*
Quam canis ace^ ubi lateat sus.
For I can Smell a Putrid Polypus,
Or the Rank Armpits of a Red-hair'd Fuss,
As soon as best Nosed Hound the stinking S^^e,
Where the Wild Boar does in the Forest Lie.
Of Smells, the simple and natural seem to be most pleasing. Let the Ladies
look to that, for it is chiefly their concern. In the wildest parts of Barbary,
the Scythian Women, after Bathing, were wont to Powder and Crust their Faces,
and whole Bodies, with a certain Odoriferous Drug, growing in their own
Territories; which being cleans'd off, when they came to have familiarity with
Men, they were found Perfumed and Sleek: It Is not to be believed, how strangely
all sorts of Odours cleave to me, and how apt my Skin is to imbibe them. He
that complains of Nature, that she has not furnished Mankind with a Vehicle to
convey Smells to the Nose, had no reason; for they will do it themselves;
especially to me: My very Mustachio's perform that Office; for if I stroke them
but with my Gloves, or Handkerchief, the Smell will not out a whole Day: They
will Reproach me where I have been; the close, luscious, devouring and melting
Kisses of Youthful Ardour would in my Wanton Age have left a Sweetness upon my
Lips for several Hours after. And yet I have ever found my self very little
subject to Epidemick Diseases, that are caught, either by conversing with the
Sick, or bred by the contagion of the Air; I have very well escaped from those
of my time, of which there has been several Vir^lent sorts in our Cities and
Armies. We Read of Socrates, that though he never departed from Athens, during
the frequent Plagues that infested that City, he only was never Infected.
Physicians might (I believe,) if they would extract greater Utility from
Odours, than they do; for I have often observed, that they cause an alteration
in me, and work upon my Spirits according to their several Virtues; which makes
me approve of what is said, namely, that the use of Incense and Perfumes in
Churches, so Ancient, and so universally received in all Nations, and
Religions, was intended to cheer us, and to ^ouse and purify the Senses, the
better to fit us for Contemplation. I could have been glad, the better to judge
of it, to have tasted the Cu^nary Art of those Cooks, who had so rare (...) way
of Seasoning Exotic Odours with the relish of Meats; As it was particularly
observed in the Service of the King of Tu^is, who in our Days Landed at Naples,
to have an interview with Charles the Emperor, where his Dishes were farc'd
with Odo^iferous Drugs, to that Degree of Expense, that the Cookery of one
Peacock, and two Pheasants, amounted to a Hundred Ducats, to dress them after
their Fashion. And when the Carve^ came to break them up, not only the Dining
room, but all the Appartments of his Palace, and the adjoining Streets were
filled with an Aromatic Vapor, which did not presently vanish. My chiefest
care in choosing my Lodgings, is always to avoid a thick and stinking* Air and
those Beautiful Cities of Venice and Paris, have very much lessened the
Kindness I had for them, the one by the offensive Smell of her Marshes, and the
other of her Dirt.

CHAP. LVI.
Of Prayers.
I Propose formless and undetermined Fancies, like those who publish subtle
Questions, to be, after disputed upon in the Schools, not to Establish truth,
but to seek it: I submit them to the better Judgments of those, whose Office it
is to regulate, not my Writings and Actions only, but moreover my very Thoughts
and Opinions. Let what I here set down meet with Correction or Applause, it
shall be of equal welcome and utility to me, my self before hand condemning it
for Absurd and Impious, if any thing shall be found through Ignorance or
Inadvertency, couched in this Rhapsody contrary to the Resolutions and
Prescriptions of the Roman Cotholick Church, into which I was Born, and in
which I will Die. And yet, always submitting to the Authority of their Censure,
who have an Absolute Power over me, I thus Temerariously venture at every
thing, as upon this present Subject.

I know not, if, or no, I am deceived; but since by a particular favor of the
Divine Bounty, a certain Form of Prayer has been prescribed and dictated to us,
Word by Word, from the Mouth of God himself* I have ever been of Opinion, that
we ought to have it in more frequent use, than we yet have, and if I were
worthy to advise, at the sitting down to, and rising from our Tables, at our
rising, and going to Bed, and in every particular Action, wherein Prayer is
required, I would that Christians always make use of the Lord's Prayer, if not
alone, yet at least always. The Church may lengthen, or alter Prayers,
according to the necessity of our Instruction, for I know very well, that it is
always the same in substance, and the same thing: But yet such a preference
ought to be given to that Prayer, that the People should have it continually in
their Mouths; for it is most certain, that all necessary Petitions are
comprehended in it, and that it is infinitely p^ope^ for all Occasions. It Is
the only Prayer I use in all Places and Conditions, and what I still repeat
instead of changing; whence it also happens, that I have no other by Heart, but
that only. It just now comes into my Mind, from whence we should derive that
Error of having recourse to God in all our Designs and Enterprises, to call
him to our Assistance in all sorts of Affairs, and in all Places where our
Weakness stands in need of support without considering whether the occasion be
just, or otherwise, and to Invoke his Name and Power, in what Estate soever we
are, or Action we are engaged in, how Vicious soever: He is indeed our sole and
only Protector, and can do all things for us: But though he is pleased to
Honor us with his Paternal Care, he is not withstanding, as Just, as he is
Good and Mighty, and does ofter exercise his Justice, than his Power, and
favors us according to that, and not according to our Petitions. Plato in his
Laws, makes Three sorts of Belief Injurious to the Gods; That there is none;
That they concern not themselves about Humane Affairs; and that they never
reject or deny any thing to our Vows, Offerings and Sacrifices. The first of
these Errors (according to his Opinion,) did never continue rooted in any Man,
from his Infancy to his Old Age, the other two he confesses, Men might be
Obstinate in. God's Justice and his Power are inseparable, and therefore in
vain we Invoke his Power in an Unjust Cause: We are to have our Souls pure and
clean, at that Moment at least, wherein we Pray to him, and purified from all
Vicious Passions, otherwise we ourselves present him the Rods wherewith to
Chastise us. Instead of repairing any thing we have done amiss, we double the
Wickedness and the Offense, whilst we offer to him, to whom we are to sue for
Pardon, an Affection full of Irreverence and Hatred. Which makes me not very
apt to applaud those whom I observe to be so frequent on their Knees, if the
Actions nearest of Kin to Prayer, do not give me some Evidence of Reformation.

Juven. Sat. 8.
-- Si Nocturnus adulter
Tempora Sanctonico velas adoperta Cucullo.
With Night-Adulteries, if being foul,
Thou shad'st thy guilty Forehead with a Cowl.
And the Practice of a Man, that mixes Devotion with an Execrable Life, seems
in some sort more to be Condemned, than that of a Man conformable to his own
Propension, and Dissolute throughout: And for that Reason, (...) is, that our
Church denies Admittance to, and Communion with Men. Obstinate and Incorrigible
in any kind of Impiety. We Pray only by custom, and for fashions sake, or
rather, we read and pronounce our Prayers aloud which is no better than an
Hypocritical show of Devotion: And I am scandalized, to see a Man Cross himself
Thrice at the Benedi^^^^ and as often, at another saying Grace, (and the more,
because it is a Sign I have in great Veneration, and constant use upon solemn
occasions,) and to Dedicate all the other Hour^ of the Day to Acts of Malice,
Avarice and Injustice. One Hour to God, the rest to the Devil, as if by
Commutation and Consent* It Is a wonder to me, Actions so various in themselves,
succeed one another with such (...) Uniformity of Method, as not to interfere;
no^ suffer any alteration, even upon the very Confines and Passes from the one
to the other what a Prodigious Conscience must that be that can be at Quiet
within it self, whilst it harbors under the same Roof, with so agreeing and so
calm a Society, both the Crime and the Judge? A Man whose whole Meditation is
continually working upon nothing but Impurity, which he knows to be so Odious
to Almighty God, what can he say, when he comes to speak to him? He Reforms,
but immediately falls into a Relapse. If the Object of the Divine Justice, and
the Presence of his Maker, did as he pretends, Strike and Chastise his Soul,
how short soever the Repentance might be, the very fear of offending that
Infinite Majesty, would so often present it self to his imagination, that he
would soon see himself Master of those Vices, that are most Natural and
Habitual in him. But what shall we say of those, who settle their whole course
of Life, upon the Profit and Emolument of Sins, which they know to be Mortal?
How many Trades of Vocations have we admitted and countenanced amongst us,
whose very Essence is Vicious? And he that confessing himself to me,
voluntarily told me, that he had all his Life time profess^d and practiced a
Religion, in his Opinion Damnable, and contrary to that he had in his Heart,
only to preserve his Credit, and the Honor of his Employments, how could his
Courage suffer so Infamous a Confession? What can Men say to the Divine Justice
upon this subject? Their Repentance consisting in a visible and manifest
Reformation and Restitution, they lose the color of alleging it both to God
and Man. Are they so Impudent, as to sue for Remission, without Satisfaction,
and without Penitency, or Remorse? I look upon these as in the same condition
with the first: But the Obstinacy is not there so easy to be overcome. This
contrariety and volubility of Opinion, so sudden and violent as they pretend,
is a kind of Miracle to me. They present us with the state of an indigestible
Anxiety, and doubtfulness of Mind. It seemed to me a Fantastic and Ridiculous
Imagination in those, who these late Years past, were wont to Reproach every
Man they knew to be of any extraordinary Parts, and made profession of the
Roman Catholic Religion, that it was but outwardly, maintaining moreover, to
do him Honor for sooth, that whatever he might pretend to the contrary, he
could not but in his Heart, be of their Reformed Opinion. An untoward Disease,
that a Man should be so Rivetted to his own Belief, as to fancy, that others
cannot believe otherwise, than as he does: and yet worse in this, that they
should entertain so Vicious an Opinion of such parts as to think any Man so
Qualified, should prefer any present advantage of Fortune, before the promises
of Eternal Life, and the means of Eternal Damnation. They may believe me: Could
any thing have tempted my Youth, the Ambition of the danger and difficulties in
the late Commotions, had not been the least Motives.

It is not without very good Reason, in my Opinion, that the Church Interdicts
the Promiscuous, Indiscreet and Irreverent use of the Holy and Divine Psalms,
with which the Holy Ghost Inspired King David. We ought not to mix God in our
Actions, but with the highest Reverence and Caution. That Poesy is too Sacred,
to be put to no other use, than to exercise the Lungs, and to delight our Ears.
It ought to come from the Soul, and not from the Tongue. It is not fit that a
Prentice in his Shop, amongst his vain and frivolous Thoughts, should be
permitted to pass away his time, and divert himself, with such Sacred things.
Neither is it decent to see the Holy Bible, the Rule of our Worship and Belief,
tumbled up and down a Hall, or a Kitchen. They were formerly Mysteries, but are
now become Sports and Recreations. It Is a Book too Serious, and too Venerable,
to be cursorily or slightly turned over. The Reading of the Scripture ought to
be a tempera^e and premediatt^d Act, and to which Men should always add this
Devout Preface, Sursum Corda, preparing even the Body to so humble and composed
a Gesture and Countenance, as shall evidence their Veneration and Attention.
Neither is it a Book for every one to fist, but the Study of Select Men set
apart for that purpose, and whom Almighty God has been pleased to call to that
Office, and Sacred Function: The Wicked and Ignorant, Blemish and Deprave it.
It Is not a Story to tell, but a History to fear and adore. Are not they then
pleasant Men, who think they have rendered this fit for the Peoples handling,
by Translating it into the Vulgar Tongue? Does the Understanding of all therein
contained, only stick at Words? Shall I vent^re to say further, that by coming
so near to understand a little, they are much wider of the whole scope than
before. A total Ignorance and wholly depending upon the Exposition of other
Qualified Persons, was more knowing and salutiferous, than this vain and verbal
knowledge, which has only proved the Nurse of Temerity and Presumption. And I
do further believe, that the liberty every one has taken, to disperse the
Sacred Writ into so many Idioms, carries with it a great deal more of Danger,
than Utility. The (...) Mahometans, and almost all others, have Espoused and
Reverence the Language wherein their Laws and Mysteries were first conceived,
and have expressly, and not without color of reason, forbid the aversion or
alteration of them, into any other. Are we assured, that in Biscay, and in
Brittany, there are enough competent Judges of this affair, to Establish this
Translation into their own Language? Why, the Universal Church has not a more
difficult and solemn Judgment to make. One of our Greek Historians does justly
accuse the Age he Lived in, for that the Secrets of Christian Religion were
dispersed into the Hands of every Mechanic, to Expound and Argue upon,
according to his own Fancy; and that we ought to be much ashamed, we who by
God's especial favor, enjoy the purest Mysteries of Piety, to suffer them to
be: Profaned by the ignorant Rabble* considering, that the Gentiles expressly
forbad Socrates, Pluto, and the other Sages, to enquire into, or so much as to
mention the things committed only to the Priests of Delphos; saying moreover,
that the Factions of Princes, upon Theological accounts, are not Armed with
Zeal, but Fury; that Zeal springs from the Divine Wisdom and Justice, and
governs it self with Prudence and Moderation; but degenerates into Hatred and
Envy, producing Tares and Nettles, instead of Corn and Wine, when conducted by
Humane Passions. And it was truly said of another, who advising the Emperor
Theodosius, and told him, that Disputes did not so much Rock the Schisms of the
Church asleep, as it Roused and Animated Heresies. That therefore all
Contentions, and Logical Disputations, were to be avoided, and Men absolutely
to Acquiess in the Prescriptions and Formula's of Faith, Established by the
Ancients. And the Emperor Andronicus, having overheard some great Men at high
words in his Palace with Lapodius, about a Point of ours of great Importance,
gave them so severe a Check, as to threaten to cause them to be thrown into the
River, if they did not desist. The very Women and Children now adays, take upon
them to document the Oldest and most Experienced Men about the Ecclesiastical
Laws: Whereas the first of those of Plato, forbids them to enquire so much as
into the Civil Laws; which were to stand instead of Divine Ordinances* And
allowing the Old M^n to conferr amongst themselves, or with the Magistrate,
about those things, he adds, provided it be not in the presence of Young or
Profane Persons. A (...) has left in Writing, that at the other end (...) the
World, there is an Isle, by the Anc^en^ called Dioscorides, abundantly Fertile
in (...) sorts of Trees and Fruits, and of an exceeding Healthful Air: The
Inhabitants of whi^^ are Christians, having Churches and Alta^^* only adorned
with Crucifixes, without any other Images, great Observers of Fasts and Feasts:
Exact payers of their Tithes to the Priests, and so Chaste, that none of them
(...) permitted to have to do with more than (...) Woman in his Life. As to the
nest, so content with their condition, that environed wi^^ the Sea, they know
nothing of Navigatio^ and so simple, that they understand not (...) Syllable of
the Religion they profess, (...) wherein they are so Devout. A thing incredible
to such as do not know, that the ^gans, who are so Zealous Idolaters, know
nothing more of their Gods, than their (...) Names and their Statues. The
Ancient beginning of Menalippus, a Tragedy of Euriped^* ran thus,

Jupiter, for that Name alone,
Of what thou art, to me is known.
I have also known in my time some Men's Writings found fault with, for being
purely* Humane and Philosophical, without any mixture of Divinity; and yet
whoever should on the contrary say, that Divine Doctrine, (...) Queen and
Regent of the rest, better, an^ with greater Dec^ncy, Keeps her State apart:
What, she ought to be Sovereign, throughout, not Subsidiary and Suffragan: And
that peradventure, Grammatical, Rhetorical and Logical Examples, may elsewhere
be more suitably chosen, as also the Arguments for the Stage, and Public
Entertainments, than from so Sacred a matter: That Divine Reasons, are
considered with greater Veneration and Attention, when by themselves, and in
their own proper Style, than when mixed with, and adapted to Humane Discourses.
That it is a fault much more often observed, that the Divines Write too
H^manely, than that the Humanists Write not Theologically, enough: Philosophy,
says St. Chrysostom, has long been Banishn'd the Holy Schools, as an
Handmaid, altogether useless, and thought unworthy to (...), so much as in
passing by the Door, into the Sacrifice of the Divine Doctrine. And that the
Humane way of speaking is of a much lower form, and ought not to serve her self
with the Dignity and Majesty of Divine Eloquence. I say, whoever on the
contrary should Object all this, would not be without reason on his ^ide. Let
who will Verbis Indisciplinatis, talk of Fortune, Destiny, Accident, Good and
Evil Hap, and other such like Phrases, according to his own-Humour; I for my
part, propose Fancies merely Humane, and merely my own, and that simply, as
Humane Fancies, and (...) considered, not as determined by any Arrest from
Heaven; or incapable of (...), or Dispute. Matter of Opinion, not matter of
Faith. Things which I discourse (...) according to my own Capacity, not what I
believe according to God; which also I do after a Laical, not Clerical, and yet
always after a very Religious manner. And it were as Rational to affirm, that
an Edict, enjoining (...) People, but such as are Public Professors of
Divinity, to be very reserved in Writing of Religion, would carry with it a
very good color of Utility and Justice* and me, amongst the rest, to hold my
prating. I have been told, that even those who are not of (...) Church, do
nevertheless amongst themselv^^, expressly forbid the Name of God to be (...) in
common Discourse: Not so much as by way of Interjection, Exclamation* Assertion
of a Truth, or Comparison, and I think the^ in the right. And upon what
occasion soever we call upon God, to accompany and assist us it ought always to
be done with the greatest Reverence and Devotion. There is, as I remember, a
passage in Xenophon, where he tells us, that we ought so much the more seldom
to call upon God, by how much it is hard to compose our Souls to such a degree
of Calmness, Penitency and Devotion, as it ought to be in at such time,
otherwise our Prayers are not only vain and fruitless, but Vicious in
themselves, Forgive us (we say) our Trespasses, as we forgive them that
Trespass against us. What do we mean by this Petition but th^^ we present him a
Soul free from all Rancour and Revenge? And yet we make nothing of Invoking
God's Assistance in our Vices, and inviting him into our unjust Designs.

Pers. Sat. 2.
Quae nisi seductis nequeas committere divis. Which only to the God's apart,
Thou have the Impudence to impart.
The Covetous Man Prays for the conservation of his superfluous, and
peradventure, ill got Riches; The Ambitious for Victory, and the Conduct of his
Fortune; the Thief calls God to his Assistance, to deliver him from the Dangers
and Difficulties that obstruct his Wicked Designs: Or returns him thanks for
the Facility he has met with in Robbing a poor Peasant. At the Door of the
House they are going to Storm, or break into by force of a Petarre, they fall
to Prayers for success, having their instruction and Hopes full of Cruelty,
Avarice and Lust.

Id. Ibid.
Hoc ipsum quo tu Jovis aurem impellere tentas,
Dic agedum Staio, proh Jupiter, o bone, clamet,
Jupiter, at sese non clamet Jupiter ipse.
The Prayers with which thou do assault Jove's Ear,
Repeat to Stains, whom thou soon wilt hear.
But Jupiter, good Jupiter, Exclaim:
But Jupiter Exclaims not.
Marguarette Queen of Navarre, tells of a Young Prince, (whom though she does
not name, is easily enough by his great Quality to be known,) who going upon an
Amorous Assignation to Lie with an Advocates Wife of Paris, his way thither
being through a Church, he never passed that Holy place, going to or returning
from, this Godly Exercise, but he always Kneeled down to Pray; wherein he would
emplore the Divine Favor, his Soul being full of such Virtuous Mediations. I
leave others to judge, which nevertheless she instances, for a Testimony of
singular Devotion. But it is by this proof only, that a Man may conclude, no
Man not very fit to treat of Theological Affairs. A true Prayer, and Religious
reconciling of our selves to Almighty God, cannot enter into an impure Soul,
and at the very instant subjected to the very Dominion of Satan. He who calls
God to his Assistance, whilst in a Habit of Vice, does, as if a Cutpurse
should call a Magistrate to help him, or like those who introduce the Name of
God to the Attestation of a Lie.

Lucan. l. 5.
-- Tacito mala vota susurro
Concipimus.
In Whispers we do guilty Prayers make.
There are few Men who durst Publish to the
World the Prayers they make to Almighty God.
Persius, Sat. 2.
Haud cuivis promptum est, murmurque humilesque susurro^
Tollere de Templis, and aperto vivere voto.
It Is not convenient for every one
To bring the Prayer he mutters over there,
Out of the Temple to the public Ear.
And this is the reason why the Pythagor^^^s would have them always Public, to
be heard by every one, to the end they might not prefer indecent or unjust
Petitions, as he did, who having

Hor. l. 1. Epist. 10.
-- Clare cum dixit, Apollo,
Labra movet metuens audiri: pulebra Laverna,
Da mihi fallere, da justum, sanctiumque videri.
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem.
Apollo's Name pronounced aloud: for fear
Any his Oraisons should over-hear,
Muttered betwixt his Teeth, Laverna great,
Grant me the Talent to Deceive and Cheat
All I shall have to do with every where,
Yet all the while, Holy and Just appear,
And from the sight of Men be pleased to Shroud,
My Sins with Night, Frauds with a Sable Cloud.
The God did severely punish the Wicked Prayers of Oedipus, in granting them:
He had Prayed, that his Children might amongst themselves Determine the
Succession to his Throne by Arms; and was so miserable, as to see himself taken
at his word. We are not to Pray, that all things may go as we would have them,
but as most conducing to the good of the World; and we are not in our Prayers
to Obey our Wills, but Prudence. We seem, in truth, to make use of our Prayers,
as of a kind of Gibberish, and as those do who employ Holy Words about
Sorceries and Magical Operations: And as if we made account, the benefit we are
to reap from them, depended upon the contexture, sound and gingle of Words, or
upon the composing of the Countenance. For having the Soul contaminated with
Concupiscence, not touched with Repentance, or comforted by any late
Reconciliation with Almighty God, we go to present him such Words as the Memory
suggests to the Tongue, and hope from thence to obtain the Remission of our
Sins. There is nothing so easy, so sweet, and so favorable, as the Divine
Law: She calls and invites us to her, Guilty and Abominable as we are: Extends
her Arms, and receives us into her Bosom* as foul and polluted as we at present
are, and are for the future to be. But then in return, we are to look upon her
with a respective, and a graceful Eye, we are to receive this Pardon with all
imaginable gratitude and submission, and, for that instant at least, wherein we
address our selves to her, to have the Soul sensible of the ills we have
committed, and at defiance with those Passions that seduced her to offend, for
neither the Gods, nor Good Men (says Plato) will accept the present of a Wicked
Man.

Hor. l. 3. Ode 23.
Immunis aram si tetigit manus,
Non sumptuos^ blandior hostia
Mollivit aversos Penates,
Far pio, and saliente mica
The pious Off ring of a piece of Bread,
If by a pure Hand on the Altar laid,
Than Costly Hecatombs, will better please
The offended Gods, and their just Wrath appease.
CHAP. LVII.
Of Age.
I Cannot allow of the Proportion we settle upon our selves, and the space we
allot to the duration of Life. I see that the Wise contract it very much, in
comparison of the common Opinion. What (said the Younger Clato, to those who
would stay his Hand from Killing himself,) am I now of an Age to be Reproached,
that I go out of the World too soon? And yet he was but Eight and Forty Years
Old. He thought that to be a mature and competent Age, considering how few
arrive unto it, and such, as soothing their Thoughts with I know not what
course of Nature, promise to themselves some Years beyond it, could they be
privileged from the infinite number of Accidents to which we are by natural
subjection exposed, might have some Reason so to do. What an Idle Conceit it
is, to expect to Die of a decay of Strength, which is the last of effects of
the extremest Age, and to propose to our selves no shorter lease of Life than
that, considering it is a kind of Death of all others the most rare, and very
hardly seen? We call that only a Natural Death, as if it were contrary to
Nature, ^o see a Man break his Neck with a Fall, be Drowned in Shipwreck at
Sea; or snatched away with a Pleurisy, or the Plague, and, as if our ordinary
condition of Life did not expose us to these Inconveniences. Let us no more
flatter our selves with these fine sounding Words: We ought rather, at a
venture, to call that Natural, which is Common and Universal To Die of Old Age,
is a Death rare, extraordinary and singular, and therefore so much less
Natural, than the others: It Is the last and extremest sort of Dying: And the
more remote, the less to be hoped for. It is indeed the Boundary of Life,
beyond which we are not to pass: Which the Law of Nature has pitched for a
(...), not to be exceeded: But it is withal a Privilege she is rarely seen to
give us to last till then. It Is a Lease she only Signs by particular favor,
and it may be, to one only, in the space of two or three Ages* and then with a
Pass to boot, to carry him through all the Traverses and Difficulties she has
strewn in the way of this long Carreer. And therefore my Opinion is, that when
once Forty Years Old, we should consider it as an Age to which very few arrive:
For seeing that Men do not usually proceed so far, it is a fign that we are
pretty well advanced, and since we have exceeded the ordinary Bounds, which
make the just measure of Life, we ought not to expect to go much further;
having escaped so many Precipices of Death, whereinto we have seen so many
other Men to fall, we should acknowledge, that so extraordinary a Fortune, as
that which has hitherto rescued us from those imminent Perils, and (...) us
alive beyond the ordinary term of Living, is not likely to continue long. It Is
a fault in our very Laws, to maintain this Error, That a Man is not capable of
managing his own Estate, till he be Five and Twenty Years Old, whereas he will
have much ado to manage his Life so long. Augustus cut off Five Years from the
Ancient Roman Standard, and declared, that Thirty Years Old was sufficient for
a Judge. S^^vius Tullius superseded the Knights of above Seven and Forty Years
of Age, from the Fatigues of War: Augustus dismissed them at Forty Five: Though
methinks it seems a little unlikely, that Men should be sent to the Fireside,
till Five and Fifty, or Sixty Years of Age. I should be of Opinion, that both
our Vacancy and Employment, should be as far as possible extended for the
Public Good: But I find the fault on the other side, that they do not employ
us Early enough. This Emperor was arbiter of the whole World at Nineteen, and
yet would have a Man to be Thirty, before he could be fit to bear Office in the
Commonwealth. For my part I believe, our Souls are Adult at Twenty, such as
they are ever like to be, and as capable then as ever. A Soul that has not by
that time given evident earnest of its Force and Virtue, will never after come
to proof. Natural Parts and Excellencies produce, that they have of Vigorous
and Fine, within that Term, or never.

Of all the great Humane Actions I ever Heard, or Read of, of what sort soever.
I have Observed, both in former Ages, and (...) own, more performed before the
Age of Thirty, than after: And often times in the very Lives of the same Men. May
I not confidently instance in those of Hannibal, and his great concurrent
Scipio? The better half of their Lives, they Lived upon the Glory they had
acquired in their Youth* great Men after, it is true, in comparison of others;
but by no means, in comparison of themselves. As to my own particular, I do
certainly believe, that since that Age, both my Understanding, and my
Constitution, have rather decayed, than improved, and retired, rather than
advanced. It Is possible, that with those who make the best use of their Time,
Knowledge and Experience may grow up and increase with their Years; but the
Vivacity, Quickness and Steadiness, and other pieces of us, of much greater
Importance, and much more Essentially our own, Languish and Decay,

Lucret. l. 3.
-- Ubi jam validis quassatum est aevi viribus
Corpus, and obtusis ceciderunt viribus artus,
Claudicat ingenium, delirat linguaque mensque.
When once the Body's shaken by Time's Rage,
The Blood and Vigor Ebbing into Age,
The Judgment then Halts upon either Hip,
The Mind does Dote, Tongue into Nonsense Trip.
Sometimes the Body first submits to Age, sometimes the Soul, and I have seen
enough, who have got a Weakness in their Brains, before either in their Hams, or
Stomach: And by how much the more, it is a Disease of no great pain to the
infected Party, and of obscure Symptoms, so much greater the danger is. And for
this reason it is, that I complain of our Laws, not that they keep us too long
to our Work, but that they set us to work too late. For the Frailty of Life
considered, and to how many Natural and Accidental Rubs it is Obnoxious and
Exposed: Birth, though Noble, ought not to share so large a Vacancy, and so
tedious a course of Education.

The End of the First Book.
Books Printed for, and Sold by MATTHEW GILLYFLOWER, at the Spread-Eagle, in
Westminster Hall.
FOLIO's
CAbbala: or, Mysteries of State and Government, In Letters of Illustrious
Persons, in the Reigns of Henry the VIII. Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles. The Third Edition, with large Additions.

The Complete Gardener: or, Directions for the right Ordering of Fruit-gardens.
and Kitchin-gardens, with the Culture of Oranges and Melons. Made English by
John Evelyn, Esquire;

The complete Horseman; discovering the surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness,
Faults, and Imperfections of Horses, with the Signs and Causes of their
Diseases: the true Method both of their Preservation and Cure, with the regular
Use of Bleeding and Purging: Also the Art of Shooing, Breeding and Backing of
Colts: with a Supplement of Riding. By the Sieur de Solleysell, Querry to the
French King. Made English from the 8th Edition, by Sir John Hope, Knight. Adorned
with Sculptures.

Aesop's Fables. Englished by Sir Roger L'Estrange, Knight.

The Works of the Famous English Poet, Mr. E. Spenser.

Brownlow's Entries of such Declarations, Informations, Pleas in Bar, etc. and
all other Parts of Pleading, now in use; with Additions of Authentic Modern
Precedents, inserted under every Title.

The Commentaries of Julius Caesar, with judicious Observations. By Clement
Edmunds, Esquire; To which is now added, the Duke of Rohan's Remarks, a
Geographical Nomenclator; with the Life of Caesar, and an Account of his Medals.

OCTAVO's.
The Essays of Michael Seignior de Montaign. Englished by Charles Cotton, Esquire;
In Three Vol. The Third Edition, with the Addition of a Complete Table to each
Vol. and a full defense of the Author.

Tables of Forbearance, and Discompt of Money. By Roger Gla^el* Gent.

Plutarch's Morals Englished by several Hands. In Five Volums.

Charron of Wisdom. Made English by Dr. Stanhope. 2. Vol.

Puffendorf's Introduction to the History of Europe.

The Roman History; from the Building of the City, to the Removal of the
Imperial Seat, by Constantine the Great; containing the space of three hundred
fifty five years. For the use of his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. In Two
Vol. The Third Edition. By Lawrence Eachard, A. M.

An Abridgment of Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World, according to his
own Method, both as to the Chapters and Paragraphs in his larger Vol. with his
Premonition to Princes. The second Edition. To which is added by his Grandson
Philip Raleigh, Esquire; 5 Genuine Pieces of that Learned Knight. not hitherto
published.

A new Voyage into Italy. In two Vol. By Maximilian Misson. Adorned with
Sculptures, now reprinted with large Additions.

The Life of Monsieur Colbert.

The Complete English Physician: or, the Druggist's Shop opened: Explicating
all the Particulars of which Medicines are made, with their Names, Natures,
Preparations, Virtues, Uses, and Doses, and above 600 Chemical Processes. By W.
Salmon.

The Complete Guide for Justices of the Peace. In 2 parts The First, containing
the Common and Statute-laws, relating to that office. The Second, consisting of
the most authentic and useful Precedents. By John Bond of Gray's-Inn, Esquire; The
2d Edition, enlarged and continued down to this time, with a Table referring to
all the Statutes relating to a Justice of the Peace. By E. Bohun, Esquire;

A View of all the Religions in the World, from the Creation till these times.
To which is added, the Lives, Actions and Ends of notorious Heretics, with
their Essigies in Copper Plates. The 6 th. Edition. By Alexander Ross.

Emblems, by Fr. Quarles.

The Elements of Euclid Explained, in a new, but a most easy method; with the
use of every Proposition, through all parts of the Mathematics. By Fr. de
Chaies. Now made English, and a Multitude of Errors Corrected. The Third
Edition.

The History of Scotland, containing the Lives of James the I. II. III. IV. V.
with Memorials of State, in the Reigns of James the VI. and Charles the I. By
W. Drummond.

The Faithful Register; or, The Debates in four several Parliaments, viz. That
at Westminster, October 21. 1680; that at Oxford, March 21. 1680; and the two
last Sessions of King James.

The Works of Cornelius Tacitus. Made English by Mr. Dryden, Sir Roger
L'Estrange, and other Gentlemen, with the Political Reflections, and Historical
Notes of Monsieur Amelot, and those of the Learned Sir Henry Savile. In Three
Volumes.

Memoirs of the Duke of Savoy, during the War.

A Yoyage in the Years 1695, 1696, 1697, on the Coasts of Africa, etc. by a
Squadron of French Men of War. Illustrated with Figures.

The present State of England; with Remarks upon the Ancient State thereof. Ey
Edward Chamberlain. The 19 th. Edition, with great Improvements.

Hobb's Three Discourses, viz. Of Humane Nature: or, The fundamental Elements
of Policy. De Corpore Politico: or, The Elements of Law, Moral and Politic. Of
Liberty Necessity and Chance. The Third Edition.

Valor Beneficiorum: or, A Valuation of all Ecclesiastical Preferments in
England and Wales. To which is added, a collection of Precedents in
Ecclesiastical Matters.

Davenport's Abridgment of Cook on Littleton.

Advice to a Daughter. By the right Honorable the M. of H. The Fifth Edition,
corrected.

-- Idem in French.

Moral Maxims. By the Duke of Rochefoucault.

Walsingham's Manual: or, Prudential Maxims of State, for the Statesman, and
the Courtier. To which is now added, Fragmenta Regalia: or, Observations on
Queen Elizabeth, her Times, and Favors. By Sir Robert Naunton.

Remembrances of Methods, Orders and Proceeding, used and observed in the House
of Lords. Extracted out of the Journal. By Henry Scobel, Esquire; Clark to the
Parliament. To which is added, the Privileges of the Baronage, in and out of
Parliament. By John Shelden, Esquire;

Memorials of the method and manner of Proceedings in Parliament, in Passing
Bills, with the order of the House of Commons: Gathered out of the
Journal-books, from the time of Edward the VI. To which is added, Arcana
Parliamentaria; with the Antiquity, Power, Order, State, Persons, Manner, and
Proceedings in Parliament. By Cambden, Seldom, Cotton, etc.

Monarchy Asserted to be the best, most Ancient and Legal Form of Government;
in a conference had at White Hall with Oliver Cromwell, and a Committee of
Parliament: made good by the Arguments of Oliver Saint John Lord Chief Justice,
Lord Chief Justice Glyme, Lord Whitlock, Lord Lish, Lord Frimes, Lord Broghall,
the Master of the Rolls, Sir Charles Woolsby, Sir Richard Onslow, Coll. Jones.

The Art of Restoring Health; explaining the nature and causes of Distempers,
and showing that every man is, or may be his own best Physicion. By M.
Flammand* M. D.

The Complete Gardener: Or, Directions for Cultivating and right ordering of
Fruit Gardens, and Kitchen Gardens. By the famous Monsieur de la Quintinye,
chief Director of all the Gardens of the French King, is now at the Request of
several of the Nobility and Gentry compendiously abridg'd, and made of more
use, with very considerable Improvements. By George London and Henry Wise. 2d
Edit.

A Complete Body of Chirurgical Operations; containing their Definitions and
Causes, from the structures of the several Parts: The Signs of the Diseases
for, which the Operations are made: The Preparations for, and the Manual
Performance of each: The Manner of Cure after every particular Operation:
Together with Remarks of the most skilful Practitioners upon each Case; as also
Instructions for Sea-Chirurgeons, and all concerned in Midwisery. The whole
Illustrated with copper Plates, explaining the several Bandages and
Instruments. By Monsieur de la Vaug^ion. M. D. and Intendant of the Royal
Hospitals about Paris. Done into English.

The Court and Country Cook, directing how to order all manner of
Entertainments, and the best sorts of the most Exquisite Ragoo's, wherein is
given a particular account of the Entertainments of several of the Royal Family
and Nobless of France: To which is added a second part, containing the whole
Art of Confectionary, according to the most refined modes now in use. With an
Explanation of the Terms relating to both: and all the forms of setting out a
Table demonstrated in Copper Plates.

Now in the Press, and will be suddenly published, Miscellanies, viz. Advice to
a Daughter. The Character of a Trimmer. The Anatomy of an Equivalent. A Letter
to a Dissenter. Cautions for choice of Members to serve in Parliament. A Rough
Draught of a New Model at Sea.
All written by the late Noble Marquis of Hallifax.

The Royal Politician, represented in an hundred Emblems, written in Spanish by
Don Diego Saavedra, Knight of the Order of St. Jago, Plenipotentiary
Ambassador. To the Cantons of Switzerland, At the Imperial Diet at Ratisbon, At
the famous Treaty of Munster, And of the Supreme Counsel of State for both the
Indies.
Translated from the Original by Sir Ja. Astry.

Books Printed for RICHARD WELLINGTON at the Dolphin and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
The History of Polybius the Megalopolitan, containing an Account of the
Affairs of the whole World, but chiefly of the Roman People. In three Vol.
Translated by Sir Henry Sheers, and Mr. Dryden.

Familiar Letters written by John late Earl of Rochester, to the Honorable
Henry Savile, Esquire; etc. with Several Letters by his Grace the Duke of
Buckingham, and several Love Letters by the Ingenious Mr. Thomas Otway. in Two
Vol. price 5. Shillings.

Sir Thomas Pope-Blunt's Essays upon several Important Subjects. Price 3
Shillings.

Mons. Tauvry's Treatise of Medicaments, in Two Vol. Printed at Paris, 1699.
Faithfully Translated into English, by one of the College Physicians* Price 5.
Shillings

FINIS.
A Complete INDEX Of the most Remarkable Matters contained in this First Book.
A
ABundance distastiful and disappointing. 451 Acquaintance. 301 Actions of
former Ages. 361 Actions, that Men should not cover to perform. 413 Actions
Virtuous now unknown. 360 Affectation unbecoming a Courtier. 266 Affection of a
Father toward his Children. 212 Age, and its last effects. 551 Age fit for
managing an Estate. 553 Age dispensing the Knights from the fatigues of the
War. Ibid. Age of Adult. Ibid. Age capable of great Actions. 554 Agesilaus's
Battle against the Boeotians. 466 Albigeois burnt alive 408 Alcibiades's
Constitution. 257 Alexander the Son of Jupiter. 446 Alexander's Cruelty. 6
Alexander blamed by Philip his Father for singing at a Feast. 394 Alexander's
deep Sleep. 461 Alexander's Horse. 489 Alexander's Sweat. 531 Ambassadors may
sometimes conceal from their Master* what they think fit. ^80 Ambassadors of
Samos. 2^^ Ambassadors Employment not confined 81 Ambition Enemy to Society.
37^ Ambition of Cicero and Pliny. 39^ Ambition unworthy. 390 Answer of the Duke
of Florence his Fool. 355 Antigonus the Son of the Sun. 446 Appetites of
several Sorts. 5^^ Appetites of Men irresolute. 525 Arcesilaus Gold and Silver
Vessels. 383 Aretine despised by Montaigne. 521 Arms of Value inflame the
Soldiers Courage. 479 Arms of Value increase the Enemies resolution with (...)
hope of a Rich Spoil. 4^^ Army expecting an Enemy. 484 Armies of the Turks
support themselves cheap. 497 Arses wipt with a Sponge. 5^^ Art of Physic
despised. 179 Atlantis Island. 31^
B
BArbarians who are those that are to be called to that Name. 3^^ Barbarians's
Country, their Buildings, Beds, etc. 3^5 Barbarians's Love toward their Wives,
and (...) toward their Enemies. 3^6 Barbarians believing the Immortality of
the Soul. 327 Barbarians Priests and Prophets. (...) Barbarians Weapons. 32^
Barbarians Obstinacy in their Battles. Ibid. Barbarians noble War. 331
Barbarian Kings power. 338 Barbarians Love Song. 337 Barbarians Language. Ibid.
B^rbarity against Men's Lives. 329 Bargaining hated by Mountaigne. 425 Battle
lost by Antonius. 280 Battle of Botidaea obtained by the Greeks. 361 Battle of
Auroy. 366 Battle of Dreux, remarkable for several Accidents. 465 Battle of St.
Quentio. 477 Battle fought on foot by Cavalry. 491 Battle at Sea gained against
the Turks. 341 Baths used by the Ancients before Dinner. 504 B^wdy-houses of
several sorts. 152 Beyard Captain of greas Courage. 21 Beauty sought after by
Women to the contempt of Rain. 419 Beds made use of, to lie on at Meals. 504
Beggars in Shirt in the depth of Winter. 355 Behavior. 353 Believe. 276
Betis's Silence and Obstinacy. 7 Bodies perfumed. 504 Bodies when young ought
to be bent. 256 Bo^tians's voluntary servitude. 236 Book employment painful.
386 Borromaeus's austere way of Living. 423 B^ws carrying long Arrows. 495
(...) handling a Halbert with the wriggling of his Neck. 148. ^^^vity agreeable
to Men of Understanding. 236 ^^^thers Name. 287 Brotherly Love neglected. Ibid.
Brutes subject to the force of Imagination. 137 Bucanan. 269 Buffoons jesting
an the very moment of Death. 404 Buffoons to make Sport at Meals. 506 Burial
much recommended. 25
C
CAesar and Pompey good Horsemen. 489 Caesar's Horse. Ibid. Calisthenes, how he
lost the favor of Alexander. 256 Cannibals mar^y many Wives. 336 Canon shot
unavoidable. 67 Canopy of State allowed, but in Palaces and Taverns. 527 Care
and foresight of the future. 15 Cato the younger his Death. 362 Cato a true
Pattern of humane Virtue. 363 Cato's Praise. 364 Cato's sound Sleep. 362 Cato's
Parsimony. 522 Cato his Age when he Killed himself. 551 Ceremony used at the
Interview of Princes. 71 Ceremony of the Lacedaemonians at the Interment of
their Kings. 17 Chabrias lost the Fruits of a Victory, to take care of the Dead
bodies of his Friends. 26 Change to be Feared. 460 Chastity valued in Marriage
151 Chastity, a true Virtue. 161 Cheerfulness, Sign of Wisdom. 244 Chess Idle
and Childish Game. 513 Children Whipped to Death. 418 Children in France Pretty.
251 Children spoiled with Delicacy. 254 Children ought not to be Suddenly
awaked from their Sleep. 270 Chivalry amongst the Lacedaemonians. 259
Chrysippus' s Writings. 215 Cicero's Eloquence. 262 Cicero's affected
Eloquence. 397 Clothes unknown to many Nations. 354 Collation betwixt Meals.
506 College of Guienne, where Montaigne was sent at Six Years of Age. 271
Company of ill Men dangerous 373 Commotions, how are to be appeased 186
Composers of Cento's. 217 Compositions that Smell of Oil and Lamp. 56
Confidence gains the Heart. 185 Confidence of another Man's Virtue. 432
Conspiracy against Augustus. 175 Constancy of some Old Men, Women, and
Children. 315 Constancy in Affliction 377 Constitutions of several Sorts. 255
Contempt of Riches. 432 Continency of the Capuchins. 359 Continency in
Marriage. 31^ Conversation. 237 Conversing with Men. 230 Copulation of a
Husband with his Wife already with Child, forbidden. 310 Correction of the Male
Children designed to the Fathers, and to the Mothers that of the Females. 155
Covetousness, from whence proceeds. 424 Counsel of Livia to Augustus,
concerning Cinna's Conspiracy. 176 Counsels depend upon Fortune. 487 Courage,
Reputation and Glory as magnificent in a Closet, as a Camp. 184 Courtesy and
Manners. 71 Cowardice, how to be punished in a Soldier. 74 Cowardice punished
by Shame and Disgrace. 75 Cowardice of Seigneur Franget, how punished. 7^
Creatures esteemed by their proper Qualities. 440 Cruelty's horrid Examples.
315 Cruelty of the Portugueses. 329 Cruelty of Dionysius the Tyrant. 5 Cruelty
of Nero toward his Mother. 369 Cuckoldry not frightful. 423 Custom Stupifies
our Senses. 145 Custom of several Nations in Marriages. 151 Custom's Power. 158
Custom veils the true Aspect of things. 160 Custom, fundamental Reason for many
things. 161 Custom of wearing Clothes. 353 Custom and Manners of the French.
502 Cyrus great Master of Horse service. 497 Cyrus's Reverence to Religion. 22
D
DEath discharges Men of all Obligations. 39 Death, the Day that judges of all
the foregoing Years. 90 Death of three most Execrable Persons. 91 Death
Unavoidable 95 Death, End of our Race. 96 Death a harsh word to the Romans. 97
Death has many ways to surprise Men. 98 Death's Remembrance profitable to Men.
102 Death's Image presented by the Egyptians to the Company after their
Feasts. 108 Death's contempt, certain foundation of Religion. 112 Death, part
of the Order of the Universe. 113 Death cannot concern us either Living or
Dead. 117 Death's Image less dreadful in War than at home. 121 Death preferred
to a continual Trouble, 190 Death of Arius and his Pope Leo. 341 Death of
Heliogabalus. Ibid. Death of Irenaeus. Ibid. Death of Ignatius and his Son both
proscribed. 350 Death of Lilius Giraldus and Costalin. 351 Death, what is,
several Opinions concerning the same. 402 Death prevented or hastened. 403 Death
Shameful endured with great Courage. Ibid. Death constantly looked on the Face,
or Voluntarily sought after. 409 Death Frightful to some People. Ibid. Death of
Otho the Emperor. 462 Death how felt. 411 Dead Men dealt with as being Alive.
19 Dead bodies Boiled, Pounded and Drunk with Wine. 153 Deceit and cunning in
War hat'd by the Achaians. 32 Deceit and Cunning allowed in War. 36 Deceit
ought to be corrected in the greenest Years. 146 Defeat of Leonidas. 333
Democracy. 159 Democritus his Face. 514 Dependence upon Princes. 233 Deserters
punished with Death by the Romans. 75 Desires of gathering Riches has no
Limits. 429 Devotion mixed with an execrable Life. 538 Devotion of the Heathen.
544 Dexterity of a Man throwing a grain of Millet through the Eye of a Needle.
526 Diogenes his Opinion concerning Men. 515 Difference betwixt Man and Man.
439 Dioclesian retired to a private Life. 456 Dioscorides Island, the
Inhabitants thereof Christians. 544 Discipline of the Lacedaemonians. 208
Discourse Pleasant and Witty. 301 Disease of the Mind 376 Diseases of the Mind
and Body, cured with Pain and Grief. 313 Disputes rouse Heresies. 543 Diversion
allowed to Youth. 255 Diviners punished, when found false 328 Divinity and
Philosophy have a saying to every thing. 310 Divinity Queen and Regent. 544
Dionysius, his way of discovering Conspiracies made against him. 188 Doublets,
Belly pieces, as high as the Breast. 502 Duty of Man, to know himself. 15
Dying's Resolution how ought to be digested. 109 Dying's time. 342 Dying's
voluntary Resolution. 405 Dying of Old Age, very scarce. 552
E
EDict of January famous by the Civil Wars. 285 Education of Children the
greatest difficulty of Human Science. 219 Edward the black Prince. 1 Emperors
obnoxious to Passions. 444 Empire of Constantinople. 347 Employments for a
sedentary Life. 384 Employments for a retired Life. 385 Engines of Dionysius's
Invention. 495 Engines made by Archimedes. 194 Enquiry's Office projected. 351
Enterprises Military. 181 Errors of Opinions. 529 Essays of Language. 394
Events in War, for the most part depend upon Fortune. 486 Evil, what is, how
enters Men. 402 Exercises fit for Youth. 253 Exercises wherein Men are to
proceed to the utmost limits of Pleasure. 388 Extremity hurtful to Virtue. 309
F
FAintness from Frigidity. 527 Faith of Military Men very uncertain. 36 Family
of obscure Extraction, the most proper for Falsification. 471 Farting and
Organized Farts. 134 Fashion of some Nations of going Naked. 353 Fashion's
Inconstancy. 503 Fashion of the French Court rules the whole Kingdom. 459
Fathers not concerned at the Death of their Children 422 Fear, the strongest of
all Passions. 83 Fear of an Ensign. Ibid. Fear of a Gentleman. 84 Fear nails
and fetters Men. Ibid. Fear throws men upon Valiant despair. 85 Fear in its
trouble, exceeds all other Accidents. Ibid. Fear is more insupportable than
Death it self. 86 Feast of Paulus Aemilius. 520 Feeding upon human Flesh. 156
Feet performing the Service of Hands. 148 Felicity of Men's lives, depends upon
the Tranquillity of their Spirits. 9^ Fighting with Rapier and Cloak. 503 Fire
sent for a new year's gift. 154 Firmness of a Prince riding a rough Horse. 501
Fish kept in lower Rooms. 507 Fish's pre-eminence, over Flesh. Ibid. Flight in
War granted by several Nations. 66 Fondness and pernicious Education of
Mothers. 228 Flood's strange alterations. 318 Formularies of Faith established
by the Ancients. 543 Fortitude, what is 66 Fortune has a great share in many
Arts. 180 Fortune's Inconstancy. 345 Fortune often meets with Reason. Ibid.
Fortune sometimes seems to play upon Men. Ibid. Fortune playing the Physician.
348 Fortune does, what Art cannot do. Ibid. Fortune corrects the counsels of
Men. Ibid. Fortune surpasses the rules of Prudence. 345 Fortunes benefits how
ought to be Relished. 44^ Foundtaion of Notre Dam la grande de Boitiers. 469
Francisco Taverna, pumped up by King Franci^ 51 France Antartick, where
Veleguignon landed. 317 French wisdom early, but of no continuance. 251
Friendship of several kinds. 286 Friendship begot by voluntary Liberty. 287
Friendship, its true Idea. 294 Friendship true and perfect. 295 Friendship
common and ordinary. 296 Friendship allows community of Goods. 297 Friendship's
rare Example. 298 Friendship perfect admits no Division. 299 Friendship
disunites all obligations. Ibid. Friendship are scarce. 302 Frost hard at the
mouth of the Lake Maeotis. 357 Fruits eaten after Dinner. 505
G
GAuls had Missible arms in abomination. 494 Generals changing their habit upon
the point of an Engagement. 481 Generals richly clothed in the Battle. 482
Generals obscurely armed in War. Ibid. Gentlemen's Duty toward those that come
to visit them. 69 Gifts interdicted betwixt Man and Wife. 297 Gypsies wash
their Children, so soon as they are born. 417 Glory and Curiosity, Scourges of
the Soul. 283 Glory and repose inconsistent. 389 God ought to be called upon,
but seldom. 24 Golden Age. 324 Good and Evil. 50 Good one of a Thousand. 372
Good Men free from all injuries. 378 Goods of Fortune despised. 382 Goods
equally Evil to the unjust. 448 Government of Anacharsis. 456 Governor of a
place how ought to behave himself in the time of a Seige. 33 Governor of a
besieged place may go out to parley. 34 Great men ought to hide their Faults.
451 Greatness of the King of Mexico. 315 Greek and Latin may be bought cheaper
than it is commonly. 268 Greek taught by tricks. 270 Green Sickness. 420
H
HAirs pulled off in great Sorrow. 29 Hairs suffered to grow on one side, and
shaved on the other. 155 Hairs pincht off. 504 Happiness of Men, not to be
counted before they are dead. 87 Head uncovered in the presence of God. 356
Heads naked in all Seasons. 355 Heads of the Egyptians, harder than those of
the Persians. 335 Heraclitus his Face. 514 History of Livy. 235 Honor and
Glory are not communicable. 436 Honor of a Victory. 437 Hope a Valiant
faculty. 489 Horse of Artibius. 488 Horse of King Charles. 489 Horses of
Massilians. 496 Horses of Service, called Destriers. 487 Horses trained up to
help their Riders. 488 Horses of Mamalukes. 489 Horses and Arms taken from
conquered Nations. 490 Horsemen, when ought to alight. Ibid. Horsemen Fighting.
491 Horses fettered in the Stable. 497 Horses of Scythia. Ibid. Horses of
Sweden. 495 Horses valued as much at Men. 498 Horses of the Gascons. 495 Horses
unbridled in a Battle. Ibid. Horses embowled to creep into their Bellies. 499
Horses feeding upon Serpents, 500 Horses led in Triumph. Ibid. Horse-man-ship.
Ibid. Houses where all things lay open. 155 Humor contrary. 352 Humors
congregation in Men's Bodies. 368 Husbandry a Servile Employment. 384
I
JEst of a Man that was going to be Hanged. 403 Jews afflicted to make them
change their Religion. 406 Ignorance of several Sorts. 528 Imagination
occasions diseases and Death. 123 Imagination occasions Ecstasies. 125
Imagination of Women, big with Child. 138 Imagination of Beasts, in the time of
Copulation. Ibid. Immortality refused by Chiron. 120 Impiety of Diagoras. 64
Impostures Subject, things unknown. 339 Impotencies of Lovers. 12 Impurity
odious to God. 539 Incense and perfumes used in Churches. 534 Inconstancy of
Men. 6 Indians Worshipping the Sun. 340 Indians eating dead Bodies. 160 Indians
riding upon Oxen. 498 Indigence accompanies Riches as well as Poverty. 429
Inquiring into Manners and things useful to know. 23^ Insolence Hereditary. 157
Intention judges of Men's Actions. 4^ Interview of two Kings. 70 Invocation of
the Name of God in all our Actions. 536 Joy excessive occasions Death. 12
Island discovered by the Carthaginians. 320 Judgment proper for all Subjects.
511 Julius Caesar his way of Speaking. 265 Julius Caesar his way of winning
Men. 180 Justice ought not to be bought. 162
K
KIng of Persia his Eldest Son, how brought up. 207 King mistrusting, thrust
his Life into his Enemies hands. 185 King of Poland, his Clothing. 356 Kings
painful Duty. 449 Kings in a worse condition, than Private Men in the fruition
of Pleasure. 450 Kings Prisoners to the limits of their Dominions. 452 Kings of
a worse condition than Asses. 453 Kings stripped of all Friendship, and natural
Society. 453 Kisses of Youth. 533 Kissing a Mark of Respect. 505 Kitchins
portable. 506 Knowing confists in present Knowledge. 197 Knowing by rote, no
Knowledge. 227 Knowledge of what shall come to pass. 57 Knowledge much
commended. 196 Knowledge of Great Men, in the Head of those that attend them,
and in their Libraries. 198 Knowledge must be our own. 199 Knowledge without
Judgment defective. 204 Knowledge's effect. 209 Knowledge how gotten. 278
Knowledge of our Selves. 514 Knowledge of the Stares. 242
L
LAdies holding their hands to receive their Kings Spittle. 150 Ladies in the
Baths. 508 Laughing and crying at the same time. 386 Laws of Conscience from
whence derived. 158 Laws received ought not to be altered. 165 Laws changed in
urging Necessity. 172 Lawyers the fourth State in a Government. 163 Leagues and
Confederations. 300 Learning made Lacullus a great Captain. 199 Learning must
be inc^rpor^ted into the Soul. 204 Learning not much required in Women. 205
Learning desired for profit Sake. 206 Learning despised by the Lacedaemonian
Youth. 208 Learning fit for Children. 210 Learnings chief Aim. 222 Led Horse to
change in a Battle. 488 Lesson ought to be measured to the Scholars Capacity.
223 Lesson repeated in Actions. 258 Letters published by Cicero and Pliny to
what end. 392 Letters of Ceremony. 398 Letters of offer of Service. 399 Letters
of favor and recommendation. Ibid. Letters, Qualities and Titles. 400 Letters
Italian. Ibid. Letters of this Age. Ibid. Liberal Sciences. 24^ Lice cracked
with the Teeth. 155 Life in its self, neither good nor bad. 115 Life of Men,
compared to the Assembly of the Olympic Games. 239 Life more precious than
Riches. 343 Ligatures wherewith Men are fettered and prevented from Sport. 126
Live from hand to mouth. 431 Love in the State of Marriage. (...) Love Conjugal
attended with respect. 312 Love for want of a Legitimate object, creates to
himself a Frivolous and false one. 28 Love unnatural, how to be Cured. 160
Loves Definition. 292 Love to Women. 288 Love ends in Friendship. 292 Love
restrained by Theology. 309 Lords of France called Roytelets, by Caesar. 453
Lie, what is. 48 Lying, an accursed Vice. 49 Lying and Stubbornness. 50
M
MAdam, Title given to Women of great Quality 527 Magistracy of Marseilles. 165
Magnanimity in Adversity. 4 Maid living upon Spiders. 144 Man tied from Sport,
how cured. 128 Man's Yard, indocile liberty. 132 Man's Yard, how animated. 133
Marius's sound Sleep. 464 Marriage a Bargain. 289 Married People how ought to
behave themselves the Wedding night. 131 Meats served up by course according to
the first letter of the Meats themselves: 464 Members of Generation. 423 Memory
a Goddess. 45 Memory coupled within firm judgment. Ibid. Men when ought to be
counted happy. 18 Men going naked upon the account of Devotion. 354 Men extend
their concerns, beyond the limits of their Lives. 19 Men had rather prate of
another's Province, than of their own. 77 Men most miserable Creatures. 312
Men-eaters. 328 Men ought to be esteemed by what is their own. 440 Men absolute
Monarchs of them Selves, 443 Mercy of a Prince toward a Conspirator. 175 Mercy
of Augustus toward Cinna. 178 Milk of Mares, esteemed an excellent Drink
amongst the Tartars. 499 Method of Aristotle of instructing Alexander. 249 Mind
pliable of it self. 378 Modesty of Maximilian. 22 Monarchy. 159 Money kept with
more trouble than got. 429 Moneyed men Covetous. 430 Montaigne's Modesty. 213
Montaigne's Education. 268 Montaigne's Fathers Oeconomical government. 352
Montaigne's Poesy. 364 Montaigne's Style in Letters. 39^ Montaigne's Letters.
400 Montaigne's Arms. 472 Montaigne's way of Speaking. 265 Mourning in White.
510 Mule or Mulet much valued. 497 Muretus, great Orator. 269 Music of the
Spheres. 145 Mysteries of Christian Religion. 54^
N
NAme of God ought not to be used in common Discourse. 546 Names taken in bad
Sense. 467 Names fatally affected to the Genealogy of Princes. Ibid. Names of
an easy pronounciation. 468 Names of the Ancient Nobility. 470 Names of Land
and Lordship. Ibid. Names and Sirnames severally altered. 474 Names going
before, without Signification of Grande^r. 507 Nature her Image. 238 Natures
p^e-eminence. 322 Nature her course. 551 Necessity's limits. 383 Necessity
teaches violent resolutions. 478 Nimb^eness of two Men at Constantinople. 501
Nob^^^lity and Blood. 193 Novelty begers ruin. 165 Novelty of a pestiferous
consequence to young Men. 460
O
OBedience due to the King. 16 Obedience dearer to a Superior, than any
Vtility whatsoever. 81 Obedience to the Magistracy. 168 Obsequies of King
Philip. 28 Observation of Graces and Fashions. 234 Obstinacy. 233 Odours with
the Relish of Meats. 534 Economy lies heavy. 432 Oil distributed by Hannibal
to his Soldiers in frosty weather. 357 Opinion espoused to the expense of Life.
406 Opinion gives value to things. 424 Opinion of Pain. 434 Opinions concerning
good and Evil. 401 Oracles ceased before the coming of Jesus Christ. 57 Osorius
Historian. 407 Over study spoils good Humor. 387 Ovid's Metamorphosis. 272
P
PAin the last Evil. 410 Pain principally feared in Death. 412 Pain, the worst
accident of our being. 413 Pain suffered with impatience. 414 Pain of child
bearing. 417 Pain endured at the expense of Life. Ibid. Pain endured with
obstinacy. 418 Pain voluntarily endured to get Credit. 420 Painting. 180 Palate
Science. 519 Parly's time dangerous. 37 Part acted by the Author in a Play. 274
Parthians perform all they have to do on Horseback. 490 Passions of the Soul,
steal the Pleasure of external conveniences. 448 Peasants and Philosophers. 530
Pedants despised. 193 Pedant's pleasant answer. 260 Pedantry contemptible. 191
Peers Ecclesiastical obliged to assist the King in War. 438 Penitence requires
Penance. 41 People going always barefoot. 356 Perfumes Exotic. 531 Person
beloved, preferred to the Lover. 292 Perturbations how far allowed by the
Stoics to their Philosophers. 68 Phalarica, what sort of Arms. 493
Philosophers despised. 192 Philosophy consists in Practice. 258 Philosophy and
her Study. 92 Philosophy, what is, according to Plato. 227 Philosophy rules
humane actions. 239 Philosophy despised with Men of understanding. 243.
Philosophy instructs Infancy. 248 Philosophy formatrix of Judgment and Manners.
252 Philosophy banished out of the Holy Schools. 445 Philosophical Qualities in
Youth. 233 Pity reputed a vice amongst the Stoics. 3 Place not tenible by the
rules of War. 72 Place of honor, amongst the Ancients. 507 Plato true
Philosopher. 258 Plato Sirnam'd Divine. 521 Plato's belief injurious to the
Gods. 537 Plays acted by Princes. 275 Plays of Children. 147 Pleasures of
Matrimony. 310 Pleasures wheedle and caress to Strangle. 387 Plenty and
Indigence depend upon Opinion. 443 Pliny's Judgment. 280 Plutarch's Lives. 235
Plutarch's Elegy. 236 Poesy and its effects. 213 Poesy recommended to Youth.
255 Poesy above Rules and Reason. 364 Poesy of the Ancients. 526 Poesy of
several Sor^^. 530 Poesy Gay. 307 Poets and Rhimers. 263 Poets Lyricks. 249
Poets in greater number, than Judges of Poesy. 363 Poetic Raptures. 180
Politics of Lypsius. 218 Pompey pardons a whole City, on the acount of Zeno's
Virtue. 6 Pompey's Head presented to Caesar. 366 Pompey's engagement with
Caesar. 482 Poor in the midst of Riches. 427 Possession, what it is. 428
Poverty to be feared. 413 Poverty sought after. 4^4 Praises of great Men. 394
Praises rejected. 437 Prayer dictated to us, from the mouth of God, how to be
used by us. 536 Prayers in Secret. 548 Prayers vain. 546 Prayers Religious
reconciling of our Selves to God; cannot enter into an impure Soul. Ibid.
Prayers and Supplications overcome Men. 4 Preparation to Death Necessary. 105
Presumption 279 Princes advantage, as common with Men of mean condition. 456
Princes ought to despise Silks and Gold. 458 Prisoners how used by the
Barbarians. 328 Prisoners constant resolution. 335 Production of all things.
323 Profit of one Man, a loss to another. 142 Prognostications vain and
superstitious. 60 Prognostications abolished by Christian Religion. 58 Prophets
and Priests punished for their false Saying. 327 Psalms of David, indiscreet
use of them Interdicted. 540 Pyrrhus's Head presented to Antigonus. 366
Pyrrhus's Ambition. 456 Python's great Courage. 5
Q
QValities required in an Historian. 321 Qualities misbecoming Merit and
Condition. 393
R
RAshness in Judgment. 277 Reading of History. 235 Reason Human. 151
Recommendation from whence proceeds. 526 Recreation fit for Youth. 253 Regulus'
s Parsimony. 522 Relics of St. Hilary. 28 Relics of Gervase and Protasius.
Ibid. Religion Christian needs not the Authority of Events. 340 Repartee of a
French Gentleman. 150 Repentance. 539 Reproaches against the enemy allowed in a
Seige. 480 Reputation forsaken. 436 Respects due to the Royalty, not to the
King. 454 Resolution and Constancy. 65 Revenge against inanimated Creatures. 29
Revenge of a King against God. Ibid. Revenge of Augustus against Neptunus. 30
Revenge of Thraces against Heaven. Ibid. Revenge desired. 47 Rhetrick a Lying
and deceitful Art. 517 Rhetrick useless and pernicious. 517 Rich Man, who is
that. 424 Riches contempt. 157 Riches Illuminated by Prudence. 430 Riding good
for the Stomach. 490 Rivers obnoxious to changes. 319 Romances. 272
S
SAbinus' s Life. 417 Sacrifices of Human Bodies. 315 Sadles or Pads. 496
Sallets according to their Seasons. 519 Sancho King of Navarre Surnamed
Trembling. 527 Savages. 322 Savage' s Policy. 324 Sawces. 519 Scanderbeg Prince
of Epirus, 2 Scaevola' s Constancy. 418 Scepter, heavy Burden. 449 Schools and
Classes. 254 Schoolmasters, how ought to behave themselves in Teaching their
Scholars. 222 Science softens the Courage. 211 Science of a mavelous use. 220
Science Steril. 388 Scipio's confidence to a Barbarian. 184 Scipio's great
Acts, due in part to Laelius. 438 Scythians declining a Battle. 66 Secret
faithfully kept. 41 Self murder. 314 Senses judge of Pain. 411 Sentiments of
Beasts free and natural. 415 Servitude voluntary. 284 Severity of the Colleges.
254 Severity enemy to Education. 253 Severus spoke best ex Tempore. 56 Shame
causes Death. 12 Shrine of St. Stephen. 281 Silence and Modesty. 230 Silk ou^
of Fashion in France. 454 Sire, what Title. 527 Sirnames glorious amongst the
Ancients. 521 Surname of Great to Princes. 522 Slings. 494 Smell Good and Bad.
532 Smell simple and natural. 533 Snows storms in Armenia. 358 Snow used to
cool Wine. 506 Society of bad Men unfortunate. 372 Socrates his Demon. 64
Solicitude of Reputation and Glory. 435 Solitude what is. 376 Solitary Life
preferred to a voluptu^s way of Living. 343 Solitude has the best pretense in
those that have employed their flourishing Age in the World^ Service. 380
Solitude sought after on the Account of Devotion. 385 Solitude obnoxious to
Miscarriages. 391 Sorrow called by the Italians Malignity. 8 Sorrow hurtful to
Men. Ibid. Sorrow Silences Men. 9 Sorrow proceeding from Love cannot be
Represented. 10 Sorrow strikes Men dumb and Dead. 11 Sovereign 524 Soul has not
Settled limits. 43 Soul looking upon things several ways. 370 Soul is, where
she is busied. 374 Souls fit for solitude and Retirement. 381 Soul variable
into all sorts of Forms. 415 Soul the sole cause of her Condition. 433 Soul
discovered in all Motion. 512 Soul colors things as she pleases. 313 Soul
ought to be pure at Prayer time. 537 Sounding from whence proceeds. 125 Spanish
Body. 420 Speaking fine. 267 Spectacles profitable to the Society. 275 Speech
fit for Pleaders. 54 Speech fit for Preachers. Ibid. Stoick' s State. 69
Stoick's did allow to feed upon Carcases. 330 Stories. 396 Stratagems in War,
contrary to the Eldest Senator^ Practice. 31 Study excessive hinders the Action
of the Mind. 192 Study and its advantages. 226 Subjection Real and Effectual.
454 Submission mollifies the Heart. 1 Subtilties of Logic abuse. 249 Suit of
Arms under a Religious habit. 421 Surprises in War. 33 Suspicion breeds
jealously. 183 Sweetness of Breath. 531 Switzer Woman. 417 Swords the best
Weapons. 492
T
TAble talk. 301 Tables distinguished by the Names of the Guests. 468 Teachers
how should be paid. 201 Temerity in the understanding. 282 Terence' s Comedies.
393 Terror Panick. 87 Testimony of Adrianus Turnebus. 203 Things present don't
satiate Men. 524 Thirst immoderate after Knowledge Brutifies, 25 Thracian King
how distinguished from his People. 444 Threatenings of an approaching Death. 332
Timoleon' s Tears. 371 Timon Man-hater. 515 Title of Books. 401 Travailing very
instructive to Youth. 227 Troubles of this Life. 374 Trees buried in Winter.
358 Turks make themselves scars in honor of their Mistresses. 420 Tutor. 222
Tyrant. 452
V
Valor of three French Gentlemen. 2 Valor and its Bounds. 72 Value of a Man
consists in the Heart. 333 Virtue aims at Pleasure. 93 Virtue enabled by
difficulties. Ibid. Virtue's great Benefit. 94 Virtue taught by the Persians,
as Letters by other Nations 207 Virtue seated in a Plain. 245 Virtue Enemy to
Anxiety and Sorrow. 246 Virtue's Value. 247 Virtue the nursing Mother of all
Human Pleasures. Ibid. Virtue satisfied with her self. 378 Virtue her proper
and peculiar office. 248 Virtue embraced with two violent desire becomes
Vicious. 308 Virtue greedy of Danger. 413 Virtue of the Loadstone. 364 Vices
derive their Propensity from Infancy. 146 Victory ought not to be Stolen. 38
Victory obtained by the Lacedaemonians Flying. 66 Victory chief aim of a
General, and of every private Soldier. 465 Victory puts an End to the War. 477
Victory not allowed to him that did ask for a Dead Body. 19 Victory in what
consists. 332 Victories fairly gotten. 333 Virgins forced to their Husbands
Bed. 368 Uncertainty and Immutability of Humane Things. 88 Uncertainty of this
Life, 426 Understanding rules and Reigns. 226 Understandings of severel Sorts.
529 Urine of Horse drunk. 497 Use of the understanding. 410
W
WArs of Sylla and Marius. 478 Wars amongst the Barbarians. 32 Wars proclaimed
by the Tolling of a Bell. 33 Warlike Women. 156 Water-mens Faro. 509 Way of
speaking of the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and retians 267 Weapons formerly
used in War. 493 Will our, the effects thereof not always in our Power 40 Will
Irregular and disobedient. 134 Will judges of Actions. 361 Wine cut with
Hatchets in Winter time. 357 Wine dashed. 510 Writings of the Counts of Foix.
221 Wise man's Country. 237 Wise man may live every where content. 373 Wise men
ought to do every thing for themselves. 516 Wisdom's Acquiescency. 15 Wisdom
and Brutality. 528 Wits ought not to be idle. 41 Wits of several degrees. 440
Wool perfumed made use of. 506 Woman turned into a Man. 124 Woman that goes to
Bed to a Man, must put off her Modesty with her Petticoat. 131 Woman fancying
she had Swallowed a Pin. 136 Woman causes her Face to be flead. 419 Women
bitten by Lice. 154 Women incapable of a perfect Love. 290 Women buried alive
with the Corpse of their Husbands. 405 Women Succeeding to Peerages. 438 Women
masked and Painted. 517 Women and Children excluded from inquiring into the
Laws. 543 Words the only Tie of Men. 49 Words obliging. 398 Words finely
Spoken. 264 Words affected. 266 World a Looking-Glass and a Book. 238
X
XEnophon a great Captain and a Philosopher. 37 Xerxes considering his Forces,
was siezed with joy and Sorrow. 370
Y
YOuth must be accustomed to labor. 229 Youth's debauchery and Excess. 256
Z
ZEal of the Jews to their Belief. 408 Zeal immoderate. 308 Zeal governed with
Moderation and Prudence. 543 Ze eu^us's Laws against Women's Sumptuousness. 459
Zeno's Disciples. 267

