Behold you RULERS, And hearken proud MEN And WOMEN, Who have let in the spirit
of the world into your hearts, whereby you are lifted up in the earth, hear
what Truth says.
YOu have gained Riches, and you seek worldly Glory, an evil covetousness to
your selves; and these Idols being set up in your hearts to be worshipped, you
rage and wonder why the children of light will not worship your Gods you have
set up, and fall down before the glory of the World in you, so you are angry;
but why are you so blind to think that such who have denied to bow to the same
spirit and pride in themselves, and have (through the Cross) obtained power
from above to cast out the same dols out of their own hearts, and can they bow
to them in another; nay, the day is come, and the children of light have found
the living God to worship, and there is none besides him to us, and now in vain
is the Idol preached; we cannot worship with you, however you be tormented, it
is of God to famish the worlds Idols; and he alone will be worshipped who is
mighty to save, what have we to do any more with Idolatry, pride cannot save
us, nor can the worlds glory preserve in the hour of temptation, though we
should how thereto; we cannot trust in uncertain riches, nor may we take
counsel at silver or gold, flocks or herds, we have proved your Idols, and
know what is in them, and we have found them destroyers and not Saviors;
whatever your glory promises you (who most seek it) we know in its right hand
is a lie, flattery, and falsehood, and all who loves it comes short of the glory
of God, humility is our glory, and he is our Savior, who says, learn of me
for I am lowly, and ye shall find rest for your souls, and this we have
proved, and we find his words truth, and all loftiness a lie; so having found
the truth, the truth has made us free, free from pride, free from vainglory,
free from that spirit that puts it on, and would have it worshipped, free from
the manner of the Gentiles, who exercise Lordship in that nature which is out
of the light and doctrine of Christ.

So the truth having made us free, in that liberty we stand fast, and may not
be entangled again with your yoke of bondage, nor the manners of the Gentiles;
and then you say its our pride and stubbornness, and many such accusations you
cast on us; alas what darkness is this, and how have you lost your judgment,
what is Mordecai become prouder than Haman with you? is he proud who denies to
worship pride, and he that would be worshipped free? is not this to put light
for darkness, and darkness for light, to condemn the innocent to hide the
offender? come down to that of God in your consciences, and let that judge, and
let pride be seen and ashamed where it is; and then you plead Scripture and
say, Let every soul be subject to the higher power, and be subject to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, etc. Now this we say also and own the
Scriptures, but man's pride is not the higher power; in humility we find a power
above pride, higher than oppression, higher than men's wills, higher than the
lusts of the eye, yea higher than all that in man would exalt against it; so we
deny the lower, that we may subject our selves to that which excels, which
is ordained of God, and to every ordinance of man are we subject for the Lords
sake; but should we bow to the spirit of pride, we should betray the Lord, and
give his honor to another, and that is not for the Lords sake, and what is
against him for his sake we deny, and with him suffer under it, as witnesses
for him against it, so we give Caesar his due, and honor to whom it belongs,
but all glory and worship to God alone, to whom it is due.

But you say, that worship we plead for is Civil, not Religious, but where do
you read in Scripture of civil worship? we find, honor all men in the Lord,
and that which is in the Lord, is Religious; and that which is not in the Lord
is Idolatrous, is there any thing honorable in man but the Image of God which
is spiritual, he that worships where that is not, worships the beast, or that
which is worse, the Devil, and if any bow to that of God in man, how comes it
not to be religious? and yet you say for conscience sake, and not religious, so
your distinctions will not gain worship from them who knows God and his Image,
and the beast and his image in their several appearances, and by this are they
known for ever, he that is from above seeks not honor from man, but that honor
which is of God alone; Gods presence in him makes him honorable in the hearts
of all that loves God, so God gives him grace, and glory, and honor, but the
other must have none from God, who abides not in that which is honorable, and
so becomes as the beast seeking honor by force from such as he has power
over, and rages if he cannot have it, and this nature has no right to it,
though the false Prophet join with him to plead for it, who must into the lake
together; and all that worship the beast and his Image, must drink of the wine
of the wrath of God, powered out without mixture, as says the Scripture.

So you that are in place to rule, and seek for honor, seek first that which
is honorable, and none can hold you from honor, and know it is the gift of
God only to such as honor him, and not themselves; seek that glory and honor
that has immortality and eternal life, which is obtained of God by
continuance in well doing; seek humility that goes before honor, exalt
justice, set up righteousness and truth in judgment, hold forth Gods sword to
all people under you, and not your own wills, without respect of persons, then
you honor God, and he will honor you, seek first the Kingdom of God, that he
may rule in your own hearts, over your pride, over your passion, over lust,
over covetousness, over respect of persons, and over all unrighteousness, so
shall you set up the higher power in you, for every soul to be subject to,
which that of God in every conscience shall answer to, then are you Ministers
of God, and he shall add to you that honor which is of God, which is
spiritual, which is immortal, binding every conscience and soul in
subjection to your authority which all that resist receive damnation to
themselves, and this is religious and an ordinance of God, and receives not its
honor from man, but from God alone, who has ever honored holy men and women
that ruled for God with God, as you may read in the Scriptures, who never
needed to seek it from men while they retained God; but Saul when God wa^
departed from him, through covetousness and disobedience, cried, Hoour me
before the people, who had lost the kingdom of God, had lost his honor, had
lost that which binds the conscience, and to which the soul is to be subject,
who cried, Honor me before the People, from whom God was departed, who had
departed from God, who sought honor to himself without God, the Kingdom of God
being rent from him, his honor departed: So you that would have Honor, seek
God, and retain him, exalt his Kingdom in your hearts, and he will add honor
thereto; but if you be disobedient, and your own souls be not subject to the
higher Power, then another power rules, to which the righteous soul cannot
subject for conscience sake; then gets up he that is out of Gods Kingdom, and
cries honor me before the people.

And this is he that sought David's life, and seeks the life of his seed, who is
disobedient, who is covetous, who is greedy of Honor, who is a murderer, who
keeps not the Word of God, nor abode in the Truth, to keep down Pride and vain
glory; then the false Prophet cries worship this; so such as be out of the
Faith of Christ, disobedient to the Law of God, and in respect of Persons; such
as be Flatterers, Liars, Scorners, Fighters, Suers, Drunkards, Swearers, and
such as be out of the Kingdom of God, whose souls are not subject to the higher
power for conscience sake, such bow and worship with putting off Hats, and
bowing of the knee to the person, but the soul of such is not subject to the
Power that is of God for conscience sake; yet such is the darkness of many
Rulers, as to account this subjection to Authority, while such whose souls do
truly bow to the Power of Righteousness, Justice, and equity, where ever it is,
without flattering where it is not, are condemned for unmannerliness, disorder,
and suffer as disobedient to Authority; but to that of God in every Conscience
do we appear, whether such souls exalt the Power which is of God, and seek his
honor, or their own, and so as you honor God, with God shall you be honored;
but seek it as eagerly as you will without him it will flee from you, though
flattery you may obtain, which will corrupt your judgment, and let in upon you
everlasting dishonor. Wherefore turn to the Lord with your whole hearts, and
seek his Glory alone, that he may put upon you his Spirit of humility, and
righteous Judgment, that you may be covered therewith, as with a Garment, so
shall you freely have our souls subjection, which now in secret mourns for you
with Prayers and tears before God, and openly suffers under you for a test^mony
against you, and now you that are not in place to rule and seeks to be
worshipped of us, what is it you would have us bow to, in you, or upon you?
Gladly would we see humility appear in you, and behold you covered with the
Spirit of God, that in our souls we might subject thereto, and so in the Lord
honor you; but should we bow to your Gold and Silver Lace, your costly Apparel,
or Earthly Riches? To that of God in you all we appear, if we should not
worship Idols, and break the Law of God, for which doing how should we be
excused before God at the day of account, let such as fear God more than man,
judge.

J. N.

O You Rulers and Teachers of these Nations, to which Christ Jesus has showed
so much savor as to honor these Nations with his first appearance now after so
long a night; and that from hence the Sunrise of Righteousness should shine
forth in clearness to the world over the head of all Idolatry, false Worships,
corrupt Laws, violence and oppression, and all the numberless number of vain
customs, pride and excess, in which the whole world lies in wickedness, and
with which the Holy pure One is burdened, and has been grieved these many
years, against which he is now arisen in many of his Servants openly to
declare, not only here, but in most parts of the World, and should you be the
men now to set your selves against this work by evil entreating such as are
called thereto, and are found therein, nor does your Teachers go about it
themselves; what will you answer the Lord to these things? is there no need of
this work at home or abroad? Is your streets and markets clear, and your
worships pure? Where can the pure eye of God look out, and not behold iniquity
and provocation? do you look for his coming, and evil entreat his servants whom
he sends to prepare his way before him? Would you have him to find you as Sodom
at his coming? If you see these evils abound in the World, why do you set your
selves against such as call to Repentance where these things most abound? Is
your Streets and Temples prepared for the pure God to walk and be worshipped in
with delight, when a mortal man who has but modesty in his face cannot behold
but be grieved with the excess of vanity and deceit shining openly therein? is
the way prepared in your streets and Temples for the Lamb, when a Lion cannot
pass for Briars and Thorns, and other fruitless Trees tearing, and haling, and
bruising? Did you love him in truth you would also hate that which would grieve
his holy spirit at his coming in your selves, and in others, and you would
hinder none that come in his Name who seek to make an end of sin, seeing
nothing else hinders his appearance, nor has caused his departure from the
children of men; and you that call your selves Ministers of Christ, had not the
spirit of slumber possessed you this would be your work; did the holy Spirit
dwell in your Houses, and look out at your windows, you could not be silent
till you had driven Iniquity into a corner, and made Pride to blush, and Lying,
swearing, and all cursed speaking afraid to utter its voice in the streets,
that the pure eye might bless you, and the holy one delight to walk in the open
streets of your greatest Meetings; should not this be the work of the Ministers
of Righteousness, and Messengers of Christ Jesus, rather than to petition the
Rulers of the World against such as are found in this work, to the utmost of
your power, hindering it both at home and abroad, neither going about it your
selves, nor suffering them that would; were you seen to be diligent in this
work you should appear to be such Servants as truly wait for your Lords coming
in Peace, and not in Wrath, and that you had received the earnest of the Spirit
which travels for the delivering of the Creation from the bondage of
Corruption, and the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, and the Joy and Peace
of the King of Righteousness at his coming over the whole World.

J. N.

These was Written in Oliver Cromwels Time, to him, his Rulers and Teachers,
and published, and the former of them then printed, and now reprinted.

THE END.
LONDON: Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.


