A DEFENSE OF THE PARLIAMENT of 1640. And the PEOPLE of ENGLAND, AGAINST King
Charles I. And his ADHERENTS; CONTAINING A short Account of some of the many
Illegal, Arbitrary, Popish and Tyrannical Actions of King CHARLES I. unjustly
called the Pious Martyr; together with the following Tracts, etc. 1. The Pope's
Letter to King Charles. 2. K. Charles's Letter in Ans. thereunto. 3. The
Articles of Marriage made (in Favor of Papists) with France. 4. King Charles
his Commission to the Irish Rebels, And 5. Philem, O Neal and Rorie Macquire's
Declaration to the Irish thereupon. 6. King Charles II's Letter to the Court of
Claims of Ireland, in behalf of that great Rebel, the Marquess of Antrim, to
restore him to his Estate; for that the said Marquess, had made it appear, That
what he acted in that Rebellion, was done by the Express Orders, and Commands
of Charles I. his Father. 7. King Charles I's Warrant by Secretary Nicholas, to
the King's Printer, Commanding him to Print no more than 40 of those
Proclamations, that Proclaimed the Irish Rebels. 8. An Abstract of those
strange Articles of Peace, King Charles I. made with the Irish Rebels. 9. King
Charles his two Letters to the Protestants of Rochel, wherein he assured them
of Relief against the French K. 10 The Miserable and Deplorable Remonstrance
those poor Protestants made to him, upon his Sacrificing them to the Mercy of
the French King. 11. The Earl of Angl^sey's Memorandum. Dr. Anthony Walker and
Mrs. Gauden's Proofs, That Eicon Basilice was not Writ by King Charles, but by
Dr. Gauden, Bishop of Exeter. 12. A Copy of the Kings, and Pamelia's Prayers,
taken out of Eicon Basilice, and Sir Phillip Sydny's Arcadia (which agree
almost in every Word.) 13. Twenty Articles against that wicked Prelate Laud.
14. To give a clear Demonstration of this holy Martyr's Religion and Piety, see
his Declaration for the Lawfulness of Sports and Pastimes on the Lord's Day,
Printed at large in this Book.


LONDON, Printed, School.

TO THE READER.
IT is not the least of Man's Unhappiness, that he is the greatest Enemy of his
own Interest, having Opportunities for his own Advantage, he lets them slip,
and by Brutish Incogitancy, rather than Natural Impotency, (as our Parents at
first) he is soon cheated into his own Misery; his present Contentment is his
chiefest Achievement, and he will have his Will though it be his Woe. He is apt
to kill his Friends, (as the Jews did Christ) for their Endeavors to Save him,
and to Court his Enemy (as Eglon did Ehud) whose Design was to Slay him. The
great Controversy (between the Advocates for King Charles the First, and his
wicked Favorites, and the Friends of the Parliament and People, that were
necessitated to Resist him, could never have been spun out into above 40 Years
length, had the dim Eyes of dull People been cleared up to a true discerning of
their Friends from their Oppressive Foes. How apt have the Idolizers of King
Charles the First been, with the Army of the Assyrians, to travel to Samaria
instead of Dothan, and with the Jews to gratify Caesar, in Crucifying their
Savior? Whereas heretofore they generally reputed for Saints those faithful
and courageous Barons, who lost their Lives in the Field, making a glorious War
against Tyrants for the Common Liberty. Such as Simon de Mamfort, Earl of
Leicester, against Henry the Third; Thomas Platagenet, Earl of Lancaster,
against Edward the Second, etc.

I cannot willingly ascribe the Love of Tyranny and Oppression, to the Natural
Disposition of an English Man, but rather to two other Causes; the first is the
Clergy of all Ranks, whose Pulpit Stuff from before 1640, till now, has
generally been the Doctrine, and perpetual Infusion of Servility and
Wretchedness, to their Hearers, and their Lives most commonly the Types of
Worldliness, with a slender Pattern of Virtue, Righteousness and Self-Denial,
in their whole Practice. The Second is, I attribute it to the factious
Inclination of most Mendivided from the Public Interest of their Country, by
several Selfish Ends and Humors of their Own; who may truly be called
Sacrificers of the Common Welfare of Mankind, to their own private Advantage,
that they might thereby attain to their Ambitious Purposes. Dryden (as I am
informed) gives this true Character of these Sort of Men, viz. Mark those which
Dote on Arbitrary Power, and you will find them either Hotbrain'd-Fools, or Needy
Bankrupts.

It Is a wonderful and amazing thing, to find so great a part of Mankind fondly
and foolishly Doting, nay, which is more Unchristian, with a sort of Idolatry,
Idolizing this Prince, when they are not capable of giving to the World a clear
Demonstration of one good Act he did designedly for the Benefit of his People:
Certainly if his Virtue and Piety toward God, and his Country, had been in the
least conspicuous, his mighty Adorers have been defective in their Panegerical
Encomiums of him; for I must with the greatest Assurance declare, that neither
by reading the Defenses of him, or Conversation with the greatest of his
Advocates, could I find the least Cause to Esteem him a Saint, or to clear him
from the Tyrannical Oppression, nay, from the Blood and Misery of England, so
justly laid to his Charge by the Parliament of 1640, and those worthy Patriots
that joined with them. Let the Advocates for Tyranny and Arbitrary Power say
what they will to the contrary, I am confident the People of England have a
great Esteem and Value for a King that Governs according to Law, and, in all
his Actions, aims at his People's Good equal with his own; and if at any time
they betake themselves to Arms against their Prince, it is his, and not their
Fault: Neither is it rational to believe, that the Generality of the Nobility,
Gentry and Commonality of England, would, without an apparent Cause and
Necessity, engage in a Bloody Civil War, and thereby run the hazard of their
Lives and Fortunes: And he that shall consider impartially, in a Civil or
Religious Sense, the Quality of those that espoused that King against their
Native Country, will find the Parliament, and those that joined with them, did
infinitely exceed, in all respects, the Party that assisted that King. For it
is notoriously known, that the Popish and Superstitious People throughout the
Kingdom, were united, as one Man for the King against the Parliament; and if we
consider them in a Civil respect, were not all the Pattentees, Monopolizers,
Cruel Usurping Oppressors, but Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, the Pillars of the
Star Chamber, Councel-Table, High Commission Court, etc. were not these the
great Abettors, and Supporters of that Bloody War, against the Parliament and
People of England.

Were not his Clergy, for the generality of them, a wretched Parcel of Court
Sycophants, that gave vent to those Plaguy-Doctrines of Non-Resistance,
Absolute and Arbitrary Government (after the Mode of France) in Loans,
Free Quarter, Ship Money, Monopolies, etc. during the Oppressive Ministry of
Buckingham, Stafford, and Laud, that countenanced those two Court Parasites and
Ear-Wiggs, Mountague and Manwaring, who poisoned the Ears of King Charles the
First, with such infectious Doctrine that proved to be fatal to the King and
Kingdoms. It Is true indeed, both Montague and Manwaring were doomed and
condemned for the same in open Parliament, Sentenced and Fined, and made
incapable of all Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions.

But King Charles was so much in Love with these two wicked Levites, and their
Doctrines, that soon after the Parliament was dissolved, he punished them with
two Fat Bishoprics.

That the World may know for what Manwaring was thus Rewarded by the King, I
shall produce three of his pernicious Assertions out of his two Sermons before
the King, Printed under the Title of Religion and Allegiance.

1. That the King is not bound to observe the Laws concerning the Subjects
Rights, but that his Will in Imposing Loans and Taxes without consent in
Parliament does oblige the Subjects Conscience, Upon Pain of Eternal Damnation.

2. That they who refused the Loan, did offend against the Law of God, and
against the Kings Supreme Authority; and thereby became Guilty of Impiety,
Disloyalty, Rebellion, etc.

3. That Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the raising of Aids and
Subsidies; and Dr. Sibthorp, Vicar of Brackley, printed a Sermon, which he
Preached at the Assizes at Northampton, and Dedicated to the King, wherein he
Poisons his Country with these vile Positions.

1. That it is the Prince's Duty to direct and make Laws, (his Text, by the
way, was Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their Dues) he justified this by
that Opposite Proof, Eccles. 8.3, 4. He does whatsoever pleases him. -- Who may
say unto him, what do thou?

2. That all Antiquity is absolutely for absolute Obedience to Princes, in all
Civil and Temporal Things.

3. That if Princes command any thing which Subjects may not perform, because
against the Laws of God, of Nature, or Impossible, yet they are bound to
undergo the Punishment, without Resistance, and so to vield a Passive
Obedience, where they cannot Exhibit an Active One. P -- g, Sh -- k, and
others, have largely since that time, obliged the World with these Enslaving
Doctrines.

As this King took great care to Reward such Ministers as these, so he was
resolved to make Examples of those Pious and Worthy Clergymen, that stood up
against the Oppressions of those Times; for Brevities Sake, I shall instance
but two of the many that might be Named. The first was, that Good Man Dr.
Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, because he could not in Conscience comply with
the King, who with Menaces required him to License that abominable Sermon of
Sibthrops, (before mentioned) and thereby make that Good by Divinity, which had
been done against the Laws. And when the Lord Conway, Secretary of State, was
sent with a threatening Message from the King to him, this good Old Man
persisted in his Refusal, saying, with the Psalmist, I shall not be afraid of
any Evil Tidings, for my heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.

The King instantly Suspended this Archbishop, and also confined him, and
committed the Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction to five Bishops, all of the New
Church of England, and Sibthorp's Patrons, viz. London, Durham, Rochester and
Oxford, and honest Laud of Bath and Wells.

The second was Dr. Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, who also felt the heavy
Oppression of this Protestant King. In the first Year of his Reign, he was Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, but upon his appearing in Parliament against the
Kingdoms great Grievance, the Duke of Buckingham, he was Disgraced und
Sequestered from the King's Presence, and Council Table. In his second Year, he
was accused for speaking publicly against the Loan, and also for refusing to
give way to proceedings in his Courts against the Puritans. The King Imprisoned
him in the Tower, but this good Bishop, out-living his Imprisonment, upon the
King's throwing the Gauntlet, he came to a Trial of Skill, for the Old English
Liberties, and he resolutely said, Nolumus Leges Angliae Mutari, and took
Command in the Parliament's Army, and bravely asserted his Country's Liberties
with his Sword.

If I should proceed to relate how this King dealt by the Nobility and Gentry;
both Lawyers and others that stood up for the Laws of the Land, and Liberties
of the People, this Tragical Story would swell to too great a Bulk for a
Preface; I shall therefore give a short Account of the matters contained in the
following Treatise, viz. that He Favored, Protected, and was Ruled by, the
worst of Men, both Clergy and Laity; Secondly, That He highly favored Papists;
Thirdly, That He Governed by an Arbitrary Power, and raised Money upon his
Subjects without Act of Parliament, which is directly against the Constitution
of the Government of England, and of a most dangerous Consequence to the People
of England; for when ever such a Power is Established in these Kingdoms, the
People may bid a sad farewell to all their Felicity, for they would soon
undergood the same Miserable Fate, the poor People of France have done ever
since that King violated their Magna Charta, called, the Edict of Nants, etc.
which is to be Taxed according to that Prince's Will and Pleasure; Fourthly,
That he was not that Pious Prince the mad World without reason would represent
him to be; of all these, you have too many Instances in the following Treatise,
which for the satissfaction of Mankind, contains not only 26 Articles, or
Charges against this King, but also the following Tracts, all of which were
never Printed at large in any one Book before, viz. The Popes Letter to King
Charles I. and King Charles his Letter in Answer thereunto, calling the Pope
Most Holy Father, etc. The Articles of Marriage made (in Favor of Papists)
with France. King Charle 's Commission to the Irish Rebels, and Philem Oneles,
and Rorie Macquire 's Declaration thereupon. King Charles II's Letter to the
Court of Claims of Ireland, in behalf of that great Rebel, the Marquess of
Antrim, to restore him to his Estate, for that the said Marquess had made it
appear, that what he acted in that Rebellion, was done by the Express Orders
and Commands of Charles I. His Father King Charles I's Warrant by Secretary
Nicholas, to the King's Printer, Commanding him to Print no more than Forty
Proclamations that Proclaimed the Irish Rebels. An Abstract of those Strange
Articles of Peace, that King Charles the First made with the Irish Rebels. The
two Letters he writ to assure the Rochellers of his relieving them, and the
miserable and deplorable Remonstrance those poor People made to him upon his
Sacrificing them to the Mercy of the French King. The Earl of Anglesey 's
Memorandum. Dr. Anthony Walker, and Mrs. Gauden 's Proofs, that Eicon Basilice
was not Writ by King Charles, but by Dr. Gauden Bishop of Exeter. That Copy of
the Kings, and Pamelia's Prayers taken out of Eicon Basilice, and Sir Philip
Sydneys Arcadia, will agree almost in every Word. Twenty Articles against that
wicked Prelate Laud, and to give a clear Demonstration of this Holy Martyrs
Religion and Piety. His Declaration for the lawfulness of Sports and Pastimes
on the Lord's Day is printed in this Book at Large.

To conclude, If all these and many more sad matters of Fact, already in this,
and other Books produced to the World, will not be of force enough to satisfy
the generality of Mankind, that they have been most notoriously imposed upon,
by the Clergy, and some of the Laity, in their Defense of King Charles I.
against the Parliament of 1640. and People of England. I shall conclude, that
nothing but the coming down of an Angel from Heaven, will be able to convince
them of their Error; I shall, therefore leave them to God, and end all with
this hearty Prayer, That he would be pleased so to open their Eyes, that they
might see what will make for the Peace and Happiness of these Kingdoms, and no
longer promote and keep up those Unhappy Divisions, that are yet amongst us,
after above 40 Years Controversy on this Melancholy Subject.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 5. read Immerited. p. 4. l. 11. r. Gorges. p. 4. l. 15. r. Desert
f. Defect. p. 4. last line r. Coat. p. 5. l. 24. r. that. p. 6. l. 12. r. the
King. p. 6. l. 25. r Bath. p. 9. l. 13. r. Prins. p. 10. l. 25. Dele and also
King Charles II's Declaration after his Restoration. p. 12. l. 23. r. Papists.
p. 14. l. 10. r. things f. time. p. 15. l. 10 r. proportion. p. 18. l. 5. dele
it. p. 18. l. 9. incert ( to) after Relations. p. 21. l. 21. r. Wentworth. p.
21. l. 28. r. Suspiria. p. 23. l. 3. r. dismiss. p. 27. l. 25. r. have done. p.
28. l. 27 r. Zyons. p. 37. l. 18. r. alia p. 39. l. 21. after imaginable r. to
enslave his people. p. 44. l. 25. r. Article. p. 46. l. 12. r. therein. p. 48.
l. 12. r. irreconcilable. p. 50. l. 29. r. have. p. 51. l. 34. dele not. p. 54.
l. 19. r. cordially f. Cardinals,

ENGLANDS Black List; OR, A short Account of some of the many Illegal,
Arbitrary, Popish and Tyrannical Actions of King Charles I. falsely and
unjustly called the Pious Martyr of ever Blessed Memory; I shall not pretend to
describe them Gradually, or Annually, but as they Occur.
1. HE took in the Duke of Buckingham to be one of the chief Conductors of all
his Affairs, notwithstanding the said Duke was impeached for a very suspicious
Plaster and Portion administered to King James the First. See the Earl of
Bristols, and Sir Dudley Digg's Speeches against him in Rushworth. The Duke's
Mother, and many near about him, were Papists, and advanced Men popishly
Devoted, to places of the chief C^mmand in the Court and Camp. Three
Parliaments in the beginning of this Reign, found and declared this Duke the
cause of all their Miseries and Disasters, the Grievance of Grievances; yet
King Charles would against all Justice protect him.

2. He made that wicked Bishop Laud (who was afterward deservedly beheaded)
another of his Favorites, by whose precious Councils poor England has
notoriously suffered; to write his Life according to his Actions, would
sufficiently darken the Luster of those immerite and impious Encomiums given by
that Notorious Jacobite Mr. Wharton. The Pious Dr. Abbatt, then Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, has in his Writings given a sad account of him. It Is said that
Archbishop Sancroft had a great hand in putting forth this Book.

3. His Marrying Heneretta Maria of France, a violent Papist, and agreeing to
private Articles in favor of Papists, viz. That those who had been Imprisoned,
as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, should be Released: That Papists should be
no more molested for their Religion; by which means the Papists grew impudent,
and Scoffed at Parliaments and Law. Read the Articles at large in this Book.

4. That received a Letter from the Pope, and writ him an Answer, saluting
Antichrist with the Title of Sanctissime Pater, Most Holy Father. That Procured
the Pope's Dispensation for his Marriage, which was solemnized by Proxy,
according to the Ceremonies of the Romish Church. See the Pope's and King's
Letter at large in this Book.

5. That pursuant to his Private Article with France, immediately Granted a
special Pardon to twenty Popish Priests for all the Offenses they had Committed
against the Laws, and Built a Chapel at Somerset House, with Conveniences for
Friars which were permitted to walk abroad in their Habits. Baker the Jesuit,
was one of many that was Pardoned after the Lords and Commons had sent a
Petition to him for advancing the True Religion, and suppressing of Popery. He
made Weston (who died a Papist) his Lord Treasurer, and preferred so many
Papists to places of great Trust, as Lord Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Justices of the Peace, etc. That the Commons of England, complained by their
Petition, of near One Hundred of all Ranks; he restrained the Ecclesiastical
and Temporal Courts from intermedling with Papists, which was little less then
a Tolleration. He not only Schreened, but Pardoned Mountague his Chaplain, whom
the Commons had Voted, had endeavored to Reconcile England to Rome, and
instanced, that he maintained these Positions. That the Church of Rome is, and
ever was, a True Church; That Images might be used for the instructions of the
Ignorant, and for Exortation of Devotion; That Saints have a Memory, and a more
peculiar charge of their Friends; and that it may be admitted, that some Saints
have a peculiar Patronage, Custody, Protection and Power, as Angels also have
over certain Persons and Countries by special Deputation; That impiously and
profanely scoffed at Preaching, Lectures, Bibles, and all show of Religion;
and though the Commons prayed, that for these and other matters, Mountague
might be Punished, and his Books Burnt, yet the King would do neither, but
Pardoned him as aforesaid; being incensed at the Commons prosecuting a Man
after his own Heart.

6. That to the great Dishonor of England, the Scandal of the Protestant
Religion, and the great Weakening of the Protestant Interest abroad, Did lend
Eight Ships (Equipped with the subsidies given for the relief of his distressed
Protestant Sister, the Electress Palatine, and the poor oppressed Protestants
of the Palatinate) to the French King, to fight against the miserable
Protestants of Rochel. Captain Pennington in the Vantguard went Admiral; the
Commanders and Mariners protested against the Service, though tempted with
Chains of Gold, etc. Declaring they would sink rather then fight against their
own Religion. The Duke of Rohan, and the French Protestants, solicited the
King not to let the Ships go again, and had good Words and Hopes: Nevertheless,
Ordered Pennington by Letter, Dated the 28th. of July, 1625. without Delay, to
Consign the Vantguard into the Hands of the Marquess de Effiat for the French
King's Service, and to require the seven other Ships in his Name, to put
themselves into the Service of the French, Commanding Pennington to use all
Force, even to sinking in case of Refusal. Hereupon Pennington put his Ship
into the Absolute Power of the French King, and Commanded the rest to do so;
But the honest Seamen refused to be slaves to the French, and fight against
the Protestant Religion, till forced by Shots: But Sir Ferdinando Gerges, to
his Eternal Honor, brought away the Neptune with Detestation of the Action.
All the English, Men and Boys, except (one Gunner who was slain in Charging a
piece of Ordnance, according to his defect) declined the Service and quitted
the Ships, refusing to serve against the Rochellers. In September following,
these seven Ships were actually employed against the Rochellers, almost to
their utter ruin. The French boasted that the Vantguard mowed the Heretics
down like Grass; by these wicked means, were these good People wholly lost:
They held the Town till the Year 1628. but were reduced to incredible Misery,
having lived long upon Horse Flesh, Hides, Leather, Dogs and Cats, etc. There
were but Four Thousand lest of Fifteen Thousand Souls, many dyed with Famine,
and they usually carried their Coffins into the Churchyard, and there laid
themselves and Dyed. A Sad Story, that ought never to be forgotten in the
History of Our Blessed Martyr's Reign, (as wickedly called.)

7. That in Civil Matters, took his Peoples Goods from them against their
Wills, and their Liberties against the Laws; that plucked up the Root of all
Property; that acted almost like the Turks, who send their Janissaries, and
place their Halbards at the Door, and then are Masters of all; for in the very
beginning of his Reign, he levied twelve thousand Soldiers contrary to Law, and
then required the Country to furnish the charge of Coal and conduct Money.

8. That appointed Commissioners to Try, Condemn and Execute those he unjustly
called Delinquents by Martial Law, directly against the Laws of the Land, and
some were Executed thereby.

9. That struct directly at the Property of the Subject's Goods, by issuing out
Commissions ( contrary to many Laws) for Raising Money by way of Loan, and the
Commissioners were ordered to certify to the Council Board, the Names of all
Refractery Persons; particularly, he Demanded One Hundred Thousand Pounds of
the City of London, and upon their Refusal, he threatened them, saying, He would
frame his Councils as appartained to a King.

10. That against all Law, required, the Londoners to set forth Twenty Ships
Manned and Victualed for three Months, against which the Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council Petition, but to no purpose: Being answered, That Petitions and
Pleadings were not to be received, and that the Precedents of formers Times
were Obedience, not Direction.

The Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace of Dorsetshire, being
Commanded to set forth Ships, insisted, That the Case was without President,
for which, they were severely checked, and told, that State Occasions were not
to be guided by Ordinary Presidents.

Those Persons of Quality, that refused to subscribe to the Loan, were turned
out of the Commission of the Peace and Lieutenancy.

Sir Peter Hayman, upon his refusal of the Loan, was commanded against his
Will, to go upon the King's Service, beyond the Seas; others of meaner Rank,
were either bound to appear before the Leiutenancy of the Tower, to be Enrold
for Soldiers for Denmark, or were impressed to serve in the King's Ships.

Sir Randolph Crew, the then Learned Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
for Declaring against the Loan, and not giving Judgment, that the King might
Imprison, during Pleasure, was turned out, and Sir Nicholas Hide put in his
Room, who presently complied with the King.

Sir Thomas Darnell, Sir John Corbet, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Hevingham, Sir
Edward Hamden, five of the Gentlemen Imprisoned for Refusing the Loan, brought
their Habeas Corpus in Michaelmas Term, in the third year of his Reign. The
Warden of the Fleet made his Return, that they were detained in his Custody by
the special command of King; and Sir Robert Heath, then Attorney Generral,
justified this sort of Imprisonment, though no special Cause was assigned, and
the Lord Chief Justice Hide (who was made on purpose for it) did singly give
Judgment for remanding the Gentlemen to perpetual Imprisonment.

11. That Billotted Soldiers (many of which were Papists) upon whom he pleased
for Punishments; these Soldiers committed so many Disorders, mastered the
People, and disturbed the Peace, that there was a General Outcry against them,
many being undone by them: Yet this was not redressed.

12. That in the year 1627. Issued a Commission under the Great Seal to several
Temporal Lords, with Neal and Laud, Bishops of Winchester and Bath and Wells,
and others to Raise Money by way of Excise, and to enforce the Payment (and
which is very probable) to awe the Parliament, which was to Assemble the 17 th.
of March; He

13. Upon the 13 th. day of January, 1627. sent a private Seal to the Lord
Treasurer, to this Effect: We command you forthwith to pay to Philip Burlemark,
Merchant, Thirty Thousand Pounds, to be paid by him over by Bill of Exchange
into the Low Countries and Germany, unto Sir William Balfoure, and John Dolbier,
Esquire (who was a Papist) for Levying and Providing certain Numbers of Horse, with
Arms for Horse and Foot, to be brought over into this Kingdom, for our Service,
etc.

Burlemark being afterward called into the House of Commons, and examined
about this matter, Declared, That he received the Thirty Phousand Pounds; That
one Thousand Horse were levied, and these Horses and their Riders were to come
over, and Arms were to be provided for them in Holland, but heard a Countermand
was gone to stay them.

14. That caused Mr. Chambers, a Merchant, to be fined two thousand Pounds, to
be committed to the Fleet, until he made his Submission, for saying, That the
Merchants in no part of the World are scrued and wrung as in England; and that
in Turkey they have more Encouragement.

15. That Oppressed and Imprisoned all Rank or Order of Men, viz. The Earl of
Bristol was two Years confined without being charged with any Accusation, or
brought to Trial, or permitted to Answer for himself for offering to accuse the
Duke of Buckingham. He Committed the Earl of Arrundel to the Tower, in time of
Parliament, without expressing any cause of his Commitment, which was a
manifest violation of the Privileges of the House of Peers; and though the
Lords presented a Remonstrance, yet this Lord was long detained Prisoner.

16. That sent a threatening Message to the House of Commons, That if he had not
a timely Supply, he would betake himself to New Councils. Which could only mean
the putting an End to the use of Parliaments. That at another time, said to the
Lords and Commons, Remember that Parliaments are altogether in my Power,
therefore as I find the fruits of them, Good or Evil, they are to continue or
not to be.

17. His shameful betraying the poor Protestants in the Palatinate, and using
the Money (given by the charitable Protestants of England for their relief) in
Equipping Ships to be sent to the Assistance of the French King, against the
poor Protestants of the Isles of Rhee and Rochell.

18. That without doubt, had a great hand in the Notorious Irish Rebellion,
wherein above 150 thousand poor Protestant Souls were most Barbarously
Murdered, and this will more plainly appear by reading the Commission given by
this King in the 17th. Year of his Reign, dated from Edinborough, and also the
Commission thereupon of Peilem Oneale, and Rorie Macguire to all the Papists,
both English and Irish, within the Kingdom of Ireland; both which for the
Readers better satisfaction, are Printed at large in this Book; and also a
sheet of Paper, called, Murder will Out, containing King Charles II's Letter
to the Court of Claims in Ireland, 1663. Requiring the then Commissioners to
restore the Earl of Antrim to his Estate, for that he had made it appear, he
had acted nothing but by Order and Commission from King Charles I. read the
Letter at large. Take notice this Earl of Antrim had been a very great Rebel,
yet restored for serving that King, in murdering his Protestant Subjects;
neither can any impartial Men think that King Innocent of this Wicked Act, if
they consider how Treacherously and Basely he dealt with the Protestants of
England, of the Palatinate, of the Isles of Rhee and Rochell. What Articles he
made with France in favor of Popery upon his Match; what a mighty Influence
his Popish Queen had over him; how he employed in great Places of Trust, not
only great Favorers of Popery, but also many professed Papists, and was very
much Advised and Governed by their Counsels to the great Sorrow and Misery of
his poor Protestant Subjects; as also that in the Summer before that dreadful
October 1641. a Committee of the most Active Papists, all afterward in the
head of the Rebellion, were in great favor at White Hall, and admitted to many
private Consultations there with the King in the Queens Presence; and those
Irish Priests departed not thence till within two Months before that Bloody
Rebellion and Massacre. It was at that time, I morally believe, that King
Charles favored the Irish Massacre, and the Irish Papists were so well assured
of it, that they called themselves the Queen's Army, and said they had good
Warrant in Black and White for their Proceedings, and cried out against the
Parliament of England, as the King's Enemies. He that has a desire of being
satisfied how great a favourer King Charles was of Papists, let him read Mr.
Pinn's Book, called, The Royal Court Favorite. He was very much advised by the
then Parliament, to send early Relief to the poor Protestants of Ireland, but
it is notoriously known, how backward he was therein, and that he suffered them
to be Sacrificed to the cruel Mercy of the Irish Cutthroats. It is also plain,
that the Parliament had long and often requested the King to Declare the Irish,
Rebels; yet was this rare Protestant Martyr so Tender of the Poor Catholics
Reputation, for Acting according to his Commands, that no less than three
Months past, before he would gratify the House of Commons with Proclaiming
them Rebels, and when he had against his real inclination thus done, he was
resolved; That but a small number should be Printed and Published, and in order
thereunto, the following Warrant was sent to the King's Printer from his
Secretary of State.

IT is His Majesty's Pleasure, that you forthwith Print, in very good Paper,
and send unto Me, for his Majesty's Service, Forty Copies of the Proclamation
enclosed, leaving convenient space for his Majesty to Sign above, and to affix
the Privy Signet underneath: And His Majesty's Express Command, is, Chat you
Print not above the said Number of Copies, and forbear to make any further
Publication of them till his Pleasure be further Signified, for which, this
shall be your Warrant.

White Hall, Jan. 2. 1641. Edward Nicholas.

See here what special care was taken, that a few only should come to the
knowledge of this Proclamation, when at the same time it was well observed, he
dealt far otherwise by the Scots, for they were more sharply Proclaimed, and
those Proclamations with great care and diligence, dispersed throughout the
whole Kingdom, and ordered to be read in all Churches accompanied with Public
Prayers and Execrations. But his Aversion to the Proclaiming and Proceeding
against the Irish Rebels, is not to be much wondered at; for they call
themselves The Queen's Army, and declared that they Rose to maintain the King's
Prerogative, and the Queen's Religion, against the Parliament; much more might
be collected from diverse Authors, of this Tragical Story, which for Brevity
Sake, I shall now omit.

19. That to his Eternal Infamy against all Laws, both Humane and Divine,
caused A Declaration to be Published concerning the Lawfulness of Sports,
Pastimes, etc. on the Lord's Day, and gave Archbishop Laud an Order, under his
Hand, to see that this Declaration was Printed. Read the Order, and Declaration
Printed at large in this Book; and also King Charces II's Declaration after his
Restoration. It is a wonderful and amazing thing, that there can be found
amongst us, such Clergymen and Gentlemen, that against all Reason and Truth,
shall make a Saint, nay, a Martyr, of this (as you see) Pious King; How these
Men at the Great Day of Judgment, will be able to Answer for the many
abominable Lies, and Blasphemies they have been Guilty of, in Defending this
King's Tyrannies and Oppressions, and Deifying him after a most scandalous
Rate, is a Mystery to me: The Publication of this Licentious Book, was so
apparently destructive to Religion, and so dishonorable to God, and the King,
That the Pious and Sober Clergy of that time, absolutely refused either to Read
it, or to permit it the said abominable Declaration to be Read; and how
barbarously, and unchristianly they were used for their Refusal, is too well
known.

20 That gave Wicked, Arbitrary and Tyrannical Orders, Instructions and
Commissions to the Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; all which,
the said Earl, took such care to Execute, that the Parliament which was made up
of Grave, Able, and discerning Persons, fell so severely upon him, that they
caused him to be Committed to the Tower, Impeached him, and soon after caused
him to be according to his deserts, Beheaded. He pleaded the King's Authority
for what he had done, but the Commons saw no reason to acquit him. 'Twas
observed, that tho the King and Queen would not publicly Solicit for his
Relief, yet several secret Instances were made by them both, to save him that
had obeyed their Commands, etc. But the just Cries of the People, etc.
necessitated the King against his Will to sign the Warrant for his Execution.
And having now given a short account of the Earl of Strafford, I think it
proper for the satisfaction of all those good People, that desire to be rightly
informed, for what Laud Archbishop of Canterbury was most justly Beheaded. The
House of Commons having proof, that he had a great Hand in all the Arbitrary
Proceedings and Dealings with Rome, December 18 th. 1640. they Voted him to be
a Traitor; and Mr. Hollis was sent to the Lords, to Accuse him of High Treason,
which he did immediately; assuring the Lords, that in convenient time, there
should be a charge put in against him, to make Good the Accusation, desiring
that he might be sequestered from the House and Committed, which was forthwith
done by the Lords. The Articles wherewith he was charged, consist of these
Heads, etc. 1. For that he had Treacherously endeavored to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom of England; and instead thereof
to Introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law. 2. That he had
labored to Overthrow the Authority of Parliaments, and the Force of the Laws
of the Kingdom of England. 3. That he had labored to corrupt and pervert the
Ministers of Justice. 4. That he himself had corruptly bought and sold Justice
in his Seat. 5. That he had put a New Book of Cannons in Execution against Law.
Vide 2 Vol. 2 d. Part of Rushworth's Hist. Collect. Fol. 1365. and sequent. 6.
That he had Traytorously assumed to himself a Papal and Tyrannical Power, both
in Ecclesiastical and Temporal Matters. 7. That he had labored to subvert the
Protestant Religion, and instead thereof, to set up Popish Superstition and
Idolatry. 8. That he had preferred notorious Papist to Places of Dignity. 9.
That he had chosen to himself a Chaplain Popishly affected. 10. That he had
kept Confederacy and Intelligence with Popish Priests and Jesuits. 11. That he
had cruelly persecuted Godly Ministers. 12. That he had labored to make
Divisions and Discord between us and other Churches. 13. That he had stirred up
War and Enmity between his Majesty's two Kingdoms of England and Scotland. 14.
That he had Slandered, and Incensed His Majesty against Parliaments. 15. That
he had labored to slander Parliaments with the Nick Name of Puritans, and
commended the Papists for harmless and peaceable Subjects. 16. That he had
Traytorously endeavored to advance the Power of the Council Table, the Cannons
of the Church, and the King's Prerogative, above the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm. 17. That he had Wittingly and Willingly, Harbored, Countenanced and
Relieved, diverse Popish Priests and Jesuits; and particularly one called, Santa
Clara alias Damport a dangerous Person, and Franciscan Friar; and did also
provide Maintenance, and Entertainment for one Monsieur St. Gyles, a Popish
Priest at Oxford, knowing him to be a Popish Priest. 18. That he had
threatningly said, there must be a Blow given to the Church, such as had not
been yet given, before it could be brought to Conformity. 19. That he punished
diverse Ministers in Prosecution of the last Cannons, made by himself. 20. That
he had wickedly and maliciously Advised His Majesty to dissolve the last
Parliament, and presently after it was Dissolved, told His Majesty, That then
he was absolved from all Rules of Government, and left free to use all
extraordinary Ways for his Supply.


These were the chief Heads of the Charge against that Proud, Popish, and
Arbitrary Prelate, for which he was sent Prisoner to the Tower. After some
close Inquiries and Examinations taken from the Informations of the late Lord
Deputy of Ireland; it was sufficiently known, that the Archbishop was the
Conduite Pipe, through which the Popish Party, made the pernicious Seed of
Division run so smoothly; that he was the Wicked Instrument they made use of to
stir up the Division between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and
between the Protestants of the Church of England and the Presbyterians.

These heavy charges being made good against this Bishop, and he most
righteously executed for these his notorious Evil Actions, Why are most of our
Clergy, and some of our Laity so wicked, as to vindicate him, and without the
least Reason, or shadow of Truth, cry him up for a Blessed Martyr, that had
violated all the Laws of the Land, and was so great a Cause of most of the
Miseries of England? That to prevent the Peoples being too Religious, advised
and highly promoted the Declaration of Sports on the Lord's Day; a time so
odious in the sight of any thing of a Christian, that it ought never to be
forgotten.

21. That after he had completely acted the part of a great Tyrant, and thereby
had justly lost the general Love, Esteem, and Affection of the best Protestants
of the three Kingdoms. He willingly consented that Bishop Gauden, Bishop Duppa,
etc. should compose a Book, and call it, His Portraiture or Picture; and this
Book the King was to own as his, that it was composed by him, when God knows he
had neither so much Piety, nor Capacity, as that Work re-required, though as a
Noble Peer lately said, Let that Book be Written by the King, or by any body
else, there is little in it that deserves Esteem. The design of this Book was
threefold; the first was, By the Lies thereby, to justify the King's
Arbitrary and Illegal Actions; secondly, Heavily to load the People of England
with Rebellion, etc. for standing up for the legal Liberties and Properties
belonging to them, though absolutely forced thereunto, to prevent the
Inundation of Misery and Popish Slavery, that the King and his wicked Court
Favorites were then bringing on the three Kingdoms; thirdly, The cunning drift
of the Factious and Defeated Party, designed to make the same Advantage of his
Book, as they did before of his Regal Name and Authority, and intended it, not
only for a Defense of the King's former Actions, but also for promoting their
own future Designs. As for the Book, who ever is the real Author, has no
occasion to value himself for that Work, two things being with the greatest
ease to be proved upon him. First, That he is a most Notorious Liar, both as to
his Assertions of the King's Innocence of those sad matters justly laid to his
Charge, and also of his many unjust Accusations of the People of England; and
secondly, That he was a Thief, and had so much Piety, as to have recourse to
the famous Sir Philip Sydney's Arcadia ( a Romance) in the time of his
Troubles, and from thence to steal the Prayer of Pamelia (to an Heathen Diety)
being under Imprisonment; not finding a suitable Form in the Liturgy, Psalms of
David, or any other places of the sacred Scripture. And that the Reader may be
satisfied of the Truth of this Piece of Thievery, I have thought fit to Print
both Prayers in Collums one against the other. That of Pamelias may be found in
Pembrook's Arcadia, p. 248. 13 Edit. Printed 1674. That of King Charles I's, is
called a Prayer in time of Captivity, Printed in a Great Folio, called, the
Works of King Charles, and also in his Eicon Basilike.

The King's Prayer.
O Powerful, O Eternal God, to whom nothing is so Great, that it may resist, or
so Small, that it is contemned; look upon my Misery with thine Eye of Mercy,
and let thine Infinite Power vouchsafe to limit out some proportion of
Deliverance unto me, as to thee shall seem most Convenient. Let not Injury, O
Lord, Triumph over me, and let my Faults by thy Hand be Corrected, and make not
my unjust Enemies the Ministers of thy Justice. But yet, my God, if in thy
Wisdom, this be the aptest Chastisment for my unexcusable Transgression; if
this ungrateful Bondage be fittest for my over high Desires if the Pride of my
(not enough humble) heart be thus to be broken, O Lord, I yield unto thy Will,
and cheerfully embrace what sorrow thou will have me suffer; only thus much let
me crave of thee (let my craving, O Lord, be accepted of, since it even
proceeds from thee) that by thy goodness, which is thy self, thou will suffer
some Beam of thy Majesty, so to shine in my mind, that I, who in my greatest
Affliction, acknowledge it my Noblest Title to be thy Creature, may still
depend confidently on thee; let Calamity be the Exercise, but not the overthrow
of my Virtue; O let not their prevailing Power be to my Destruction; and if it
be thy Will that they more and more vex me with Punishment, yet, O Lord, never
let their wickedness have such a hand, but that I may still carry a pure mind
and steadfast Resolution, ever to serve thee without fear, or Presumption, yet
with that humble confidence, which may best please thee; so that at last I may
come to thy Eternal Kingdom, through the Merits of thy Son our alone Savior,
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Pamelia's Prayer to the Heathen Deity.
O All seeing Light, and Eternal Life of all things, to whom nothing is either
so Great, that it may resist, or so Small, that it is contemned; look upon my
Misery, with thine Eye of Mercy, and let thine Infinite Power vouchsafe to
limit out some proporrion of Deliverance unto me, as to thee shall seem most
Convenient. Let not Injury, O Lord, Triumph over me, and let my Faults by thy
hand be Corrected, and make not mine unjust Enemies the Minister of thy
Justice. But yet, my God, if in thy Wisdom, this be the aptest Chastisment for
my unexcusable Folly; if this low Bondage be fittest for my over high Desire;
if the Pride of my (not enough humble) heart be thus to be broken, O Lord, I
yield unto thy Will, and joyfully embrace what sorrow thou will have me suffer;
only thus much let me crave of thee (let my craving, O Lord, be accepted of
thee, since even that proceeds from thee;) let me crave even by the Noblest
Title, which in my greatest Affliction, I may give my self, that I am thy
Creature, and by thy goodness which is thy self; that thou will suffer some
Beam of thy Majesty to shine into my mind, that it may still depend confidently
on thee; let Calamity be the Exercise, but not the overthrow of my virtue; let
their Power prevail, but prevail not to Destruction; let my Greatness be their
Prey; let my pain be the sweetness of their Revenge; let them (if so it seem
good unto thee) vex me with more and more Punishment; but, O Lord, let never
their Wickedness have such a hand, but that I may carry a pure mind in a pure
Body; and pausing a while, O most gracious Lord, said she, whatever becomes of
me, preserve the virtuous Musidorus.

Having now given an Account of the design of Publishing this special Book, and
also what it is composed of, I shall now produce diverse Reasons (enough I think
to convince any rational Man that will not be wilfully blind. And first, I
shall give you the Noble Earl of Anglesey's Memorandum, perfixt before the Book
reputed to be King Charles I's, called, Icon Basilice, and found by Edward
Millington, who sold the said Earl's Library, all Written with the Earl's own
Hand, in these Words:

King Charles the Second, and Duke of York, did both (in the last Session of
Parliament, 1675. when I showed Them in the Lord's House, the Written Copy of
this Book, wherein are some Corrections, and Alterations written with the late
King Charles I's own Hand, Assure me, That this was none of the said King's
Compiling, but made by Dr. Gauden, Bishop of Exeter; which I here incert for
the undeceiving others in this Point, by attesting so much under my Hand.

ANGLESEY.

This Noble Earl's Advertisement, or Memorandum, must have the greater Weight,
for that he concealed it (for ought I can hear) from the Public, which
doubtless he would not have done, if he had had any design to carry it on by
making it Public. This Memorandum being true, the World has the Words of two
Kings, that Bishop Gauden, and not King Charles, Composed this lying Book: For
further proof, that Dr. Gauden writ this Book, take a Summary Account of some
Papers relating, Eicon Basilice, now, or lately in the Hands of Mr. North,
Merchant, living on Tower Hill, London; whereby it appears that Dr. Gauden,
late Bishop of Exeter, and afterward of Worcester, was the Author of that
Book, and not King Charles I. as the World has for above Forty Years been
imposed upon to believe.

Mr. North is a worthy Person, and a Member of the Church of England; he, and
Mr. Charles Gauden (the Bishop's Son) married two Sisters, and Mr. Gauden dying
about Ten Years since, all his Papers were left with his Widow, and Mr. North
having occasion to look them over, for some relating to his Sister-in-laws
affairs, found these relating to the Eicon Basilice, carefully tied up together.

Mr. North, by reason of his Marriage, had many years acquaintance with Bishop
Gauden's Family, and knows that the Bishop's Widow, at first gave them to her
Darling Son, John Gauden, and upon his Death, they came to Mr. Charles Gauden.
And further, that in his many years knowledge of that Family, it has
constantly, and without any manner of doubt, been declared, that the Bishop was
the Author of the Book. There are several Letters and Papers, I shall briefly
give the Contents of them, for the truth of which, I shall refer to the
Original Papers, and to those many reverend and worthy Persons, who have Read,
or been at the Reading of them.

Bishop Gauden, at the time of King Charles the Second's Restoration, was
incumbent of Bocking in Essex, and from that fat Parsonage was promoted to the
Lean Bishopric of Exeter, which he complained was not sufficient to keep up
the Port of a Bishop, and thought that by his Merits he might lay claim to a
better; and the Death of Dr. Duppa, Bishop of Winchester, being daily expected,
he applied himself to the King, with great Importunity, to be translated
thither; pleading his Desert, which, as is evident from the Papers I mention,
could be no other than that of having written a Book which did such great
Service to the Royal Family, that King Charles the 2d. thought himself obliged
to promise him that Bishopric, though when it became Void gave it to an other.

1. There is Letter from Sir Edward Nicholas, Secretary of State, to Dr.
Gauden, dated January 1660, wrote by the King's Command, intimating the King
had received his Letter, and that he should not have Cause to complain of his
removal from Bocking.

2. In the Bishops Letter to Chancellor Hide, dated 28. December 1661, and his
Petition to the King, the Bishop sets forth, That he had an high Rack [The
Bishopric of Exeter] but Empty Manger; and declares what hazards he had run of
Life and Estate; and what great Advantage had accrued to the Crown by his
Service: That what he had done was for Comforting and encouraging of the King's
Friends, Exposing his Enemies, and converting, etc. He pleads that what was
done like a King, should have a Kinglike Retribution; and Instances in the
Cases of Joseph, Mordecai, and Daniel, who were Honored and Rewarded for the
Service they did to the Respective Princes, (though as he observes) they were
Captives in a strange Land.

3. The Bishops Letter to the Duke of York, dated the 17th of January 1661:
Strongly urges the great Services he had done, and Importunately Begs his Royal
Highness, to intercede for him with the King.

4. There is an Original Letter from the Lord Chancellor Hide (all of his own
hand writing) to the Bishop of Exeter, dated 13 th. of March 1661, importing,
that the Chancellor had received several Letters from him: That he was uneasy
under the Bishop's Importunity, excuses his not being yet able to serve him;
Speaks of annexing a Commendum to his Bishopric; and toward the close it has
this remarkable Expression, The Particular you mention, has indeed been
imparted to me as a Secret; I am sorry I ever knew it, and When it ceases to be
a Secret, it will please none but Mr. Milton. This is Subscribed, Edw. Hide, C.

5. Mrs. Gauden after the Death of the Bishop, writes to her Son Mr. John
Gauden, That she had sent him an Hogshead of Cider, and Orders some Pictures to
be sent her by the same Man.

In this Letter she speaks of the Book commonly called the Kings; she calls it
the Jewel; and tells her Son, that her Husband hoped to make a Fortune by it,
and wonders it should be doubted whether her Husband wrote it; but says, She
has a Letter of a very Great Man's that will clear it up.

6. There is also a long Narrative of Mrs. Gauden's Handwriting, showing, that
her Husband wrote the Book. This she sent to her Son, with the Letter, wherein
she said, She had sent it that she might be a Clavis to him.

The Narrative sets forth, That after her Husband had wrote the Book, He showed
it to the Lord Capel, who approved it, and was for the printing of it; but
wished the King might have a Sight of it.

That an Opportunity was taken to Convey it to his Majesty by the Lord Marquess
of Hertford, when He went to the Treaty at the Isle of Wight.

That the Marquess after his Return from thence, told her Husband, that he gave
the Book to the King; and his Majesty did not like it, but was for putting it
out, not as his own, but another's. But it being Urged, That CROMWELL, and
others of the Army, having got a great Reputation with the People, for Parts
and Piety, it would do best to be in the King's Name. His Majesty took time to
consider of it.

That the Marquess told her Husband, He knew not what was become of the Papers;
and said, God knows what will become of the King.

That her Husband not hearing the King's pleasure about it, and finding Danger
hastening on him, he having kept a Copy by him, sent it by one Mr. Symmonds, a
persecuted Minister, to the Press, together with a Letter. That Mr. Royston was
the Painter, but did not know but the King wrote it: That part of it was seized
in the Press, together with her Husband's Letter, and Mr. Symmonds was taken.

Nevertherless the Work was carried on, and finished a few days after his
Majesty's death: That when it was published, the Parliament was Enraged; and
her Husband conceiving his Life and Estate to be in danger, fled to Sir John
Wennworth's, near Yarmouth, intending thence to pass the Seas: But Mr. Symmonds
falling sick, and dying soon after, not having been Examined, and it not being
discovered that her Husband was concerned in it, (the Letter which had been
taken having no Name to it) he altered his purpose, and returned home.

That there was an Epistle at first intended: That the first Title was Suspisia
Regalia, but changed to Eicon Basilice; and that there were two Chapters added.

That the Marquess of Hertford, the Lord Capel, Bishop Duppa, and Bishop
Morley, were at first the only Persons privy to it.

That after the King's Restoration, Dr. Morley told her Husband, That his Merit
was such, that he could Ask nothing but he could receive it.

That Duppa, Bishop of Winchester, being very sick, her Husband went to the
King, and acquainted him that He was the Author of the Book; and for the Truth
thereof appealed to Bishop Duppa, his Majesty's Tutor, who was yet living; and
made an Apology for printing it, without his Majesty's Father's Order, or his;
but pleaded the Circumstances of Time, and the King's danger.

That His Majesty told her Husband, That till then, He never knew that he wrote
it, but thought it was his Father's; yet wondered how he could have time: And
observed That it was wrote like a Scholar, as well as like a King; and said
that if it had been published sooner, it might have saved his Fathers Life.
That at the same time the King gave him a Promise of the Bishopric of
Winchester.

That when he afterward acquainted the Duke of York That he was the Author of
that Book, yet went under his Father's Name, the Duke answered, He thought his
Father Wrote it. That her Husband then told his Highness, that the King had
promised him the Bishopric of Winchester; and that his Highness assured him of
his Favor.

That Bishop Duppa dying, her Husband applied to the King upon his Promise; but
Dr. Morley, (who had told her Husband that he might have what he would ask) got
it; and her Husband was made Bishop of Worcester; but having enjoyed it but
about half a Year, fell Sick and Dyed.

That She Petitioned the King; setting forth, That her Husband left her a
Widow, with four Sons and a Daughter: That it cost her Husband 200 l. to
remove from Exeter to Worcester; and prayed his Majesty to bestow the half
Years Rents upon her, which he denied, and gave them to another.

Reader, take Notice, This is the Substance, though not perhaps the Express Words
of Mrs. Gaudens Papers, and it could be wished, that the Papers themselves were
made Public, then this short account would be fully justified.

I cannot dismish this matter without admiring the remarkable Providence of
God, in the several steps toward the Discovery thereof, which was the interest
of so great a number of Men, to have for ever Concealed and Buried. And

1. Had not Dr. Gauden been disappointed of the Bishopric of Winchester, we
should never have heard of his compiling the Icon Basilice; nor would he ever
have bragged, That he had done like a King, if he had had a Kinglike
Retribution.

2. Had Mrs. Gauden but been made Bishop of Worcester for half an Year, she
would probably have robbed her Husband of the Glory of this Book, and suffered
it to have been for ever a Jewel of the Crown.

That the World may have a further satisfaction in this matter, I shall give a
short account of what the Reverend and Pious Dr. Walker, lately Rector of
Feyfield in Essex, has Written and Published a short time before he died, in
Answer to the Ignorance and lying Impertinence of Dr. Hollingworth, Dr. Anthony
Walker, in this Book called the True Account of the Author, of a Book Entitled,
Icon Basilice, etc. gives the Reason of his Writing on this Subject. It was
occasioned by Dr. Hollingworth's Reproachful Charge on him, for declaring, That
King Charles I. was not the Author of that Book. He secondly, solemnly appeals
to the Searcher of Hearts, Avenger of Falsehood, and Revealer of Secrets; that
he will write nothing for Truth, that he was not thoroughly persuaded of, and
that by as full Evidence as he judged such a matter of Fact wanted, and at such
distance of Time, is capable of. Thirdly, that he will with undisguised
openness, produce the means of his Knowledge, the reasons of his Belief, and
the probable Arguments upon which his opinion is Grounded. His Word are these:
Fol. 3. Sect. 11.

I know and believe the Book, whose Author is enquired after, was Written by
Dr. Gauden, ( except two Chapters Writ by Bishop Duppa) so far as the subjoined
means may produce such Knowledge, and the Reasons may induce such Belief.

First, Dr. Gauden, sometime before the Whole was finished, was pleased to
acquaint me with his Design, and showed me the Heads of diverse Chapters, and
some of the Discourses written of them, and after some time spent in persual,
he vouchsaft to ask my Opinion concerning it, and after some consideration, I
told him, I supposed, it would be much for the King's Reputation, Honor and
Safety: But I expressly added, I stuck at the lawfulness of it, and modestly
asked him, how he satisfied himself, so to impose upon the World? To which he
so readily replied, that I concluded he had thought on it before, viz. look on
the Title, it is the Portraicture, etc. and no Man draws his own Picture, which
satisfied himself; and that he perfectly remembers, that in the 2 Chapter of
the Earl of Strafford, in the first Edition, p. 8. l. 18, 19, 20. he explained,
that he meant Dr. Juxton, then Bishop of London, in the following passage, viz.
He only has been least vexed by them, who counseled me, not to consent against
the Vote of my own Conscience.

Secondly, That some good time after, what had passed as now related, we being
both in London, and having dined together, Dr. Gauden in the Afternoon desired
me to walk with him to a Friend; when we were gone part of the way, he told me,
he was going to the Bishop of Salisbury, Dr. Duppa ( whom he had acquainted
with his design) to fetch what he had left with his Lordship to be perused, or
to show him what he had further Written, desired me after a little
Conversation, to withdraw and leave them two alone, which I did, and after
they had been some considerable time together, Dr. Gauden returned, and in the
street gave me this Account of their Conference. My Lord of Salisbury told me
there were two subjects more, he wished I had thought on, and propounded them
to me, viz. The Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book, and the denying His
Majesty the Attendance of his Chaplains ( which are now the 16th. and 24th.
Chapters in the Printed Book, and desired me to Write two Chapters upon them,
which I promised, I would. But before we parted, he recalled that request, and
said, I pray go you on, to finish what remains, and leave these two to me: I
will perpare two Chapters upon them, which accordingly he did, as Dr. Gauden
owned to me and others whom he had made privy to the whole, and never pretended
to have Written these, as he did to have done all the rest.

Thirdly, Sometime after the King was Beheaded, I asked Dr. Gauden, whether the
King had ever seen the Book? he gave me this Answer, I know it certainly, no
more then you; but I used my best endeavors he might, for I delivered a Copy
of it to the Marquess of Hartford, when he went to the Treaty at the Isle of
Wight, and entreated his Lordship, if he could obtain any private opportunity,
he would deliver it to His Majesty, and humbly desire to know His Pleasure
concerning it. But matters running then high against the King, he had no answer
by that Lord.

Fourthly, After he was Lord Bishop of Worcester Elect, I asked him in private,
whether that King Charles II. knew that he wrote it? He gave me this Answer; I
cannot possitively and certainly say, he does, because, he was never pleased to
take express notice of it to me. But, I take it for granted, he does; for I am
sure the Duke of York does, for he has spoken of it to me, and owned it as a
seasonable and acceptable service, and he knowing it, I question not but the
King also does.

Fifthly, Mrs. Gauden his Wife, Mr. Gifford ( who, if I am not mistaken,
Transcribed that Copy that was sent to the Isle of Wight) and my self, believed
it as much as we could any thing, and when we spoke of it in his Presence, or
Absence, did it, without the least Doubt of his having Writ it; and we should
be imposed upon to the highest degree imaginable, if Dr. Gauden wrote it not.

Sixthly, Dr. Gauden delivered to me with his own hand, what was last sent up
(after part was Printed, or at least in Mr. Royston's hand to be Printed) and
after he had showed it me, and sealed it up, gave me strict caution, with what
wariness to carry and deliver it, and according to his Direction, I delivered
it, Saturday December 23d. 1648. in the Evening to one Peacock ( Brother to Dr.
Gauden 's Steward or Bailiff) who was instructed by what hands he should
transmit it to Mr. Royston, and in the same method, a few days after the
Impression was finished, I received six Books by the hand of Mr. Peacock, as an
acknowledgment of that little I contributed to that Service; one of which I
have still by me, and to justify this matter against the ignorant impudence of
Dr. Hollingsworth, be Declares Fol. 15. That he is ready to confirm his
Knowledge and Belief herein with a Solemn Oath.

Mrs. Gauden, Widow, residing at Gloucester, and often Declaring that her
Husband had writ that, called, the King's Book, it coming at last to the
knowledge of Dr. Nicholson then Bishop of Gloucester, who desiring to be fully
satisfied in that point, did put the Question to her; upon her receiving the
Sacrament, and she then affirmed, that it was wrote by her Husband. This,
Persons of undoubted credit now living in Gloucester, can affirm for a Truth;
and it is not questioned, but the present Bishop of Gloucester, will
acknowledge that those Persons have related this matter to him, that it is well
known to Mrs. Gauden's Brother, and several of her Relations, that Mrs. Gauden
constantly in her Conversation, Declared, That her Husband was the Author of
this Book. I could, if necessity requird, produce a great many Arguments more
out of Doctor Walkers, or other Writings, to prove the Truth of this matter,
but shall conclude it with this one of the Doctors, in reference to the
Providence of this Discovery.

Though God had many Holy, Righteous and Gracious ends to serve his Providence
by, in the Publication of this Book; yet as I find it expressed in this very
Book, Chap. the last p. 262. of the first Edition. God's wise Providence (we
know) often permits many Events, which his revealed Word, in no sort approves.
And, I confess, I have many cogent reasons to persuade me, that God was not
well pleased with Dr. Gauden, others, or my self; for what we contributed to
it. And though for the aforesaid ends, he suffered it to succeed, yet I know
not but he may have other ends now to serve, by suffering this Discovery to be
Wrung, and rested from me, (I had almost said) by some Bodies (viz.
Hollingworths) Impertinent Affection, to meddle with what he understands not.
Thus spoke that good Man.

I had not enlarged so much on this 21 st. Article, but that I was desirous of
giving full satisfaction to the World, of the Real Author of Eicon Basilice.

That Posterity might not be deceived by the many Impudent, Ignorant, False,
and Scandalous Assertions of most of the Clergy, and too many of the Laity, who
to their Eternal Shame have taken more care and pains to defend that Book, and
its pretended Author King Charles I. than they done to Vindicate the Holy
Bible, and the Truth of the Christian Religion.

22. That caused the Star Chamber and High-Commission-Courts to be made Use of,
to the general Grievance of the People of England, and was unwilling to part
with them, till he found these Courts were highly offensive to the Parliament,
and that it was not Seasonable to displease the Kingdom at that time, for which
Reasons at last he passed the Bills to take them away: And indeed there were
many, and great Reasons, why those abominable oppressive Courts should be
pulled down, and taken away. For that Old Serpent Archbishop Laud, and diverse
of his Brethren, had cast off all Humanity, and were metamorphosed into
Ravenous Wolves, and these Courts were under their Management. The Star Chamber
had abounded in Extravagant Censures, whereby the Subjects were oppressed by
Grievious Fines, Imprisonments, Stigmatizings, Mutilations, Whippings,
Pillories, Gags, Banishments, etc. And the High Commission Court, was grown to
such Excess of Sharpness and Severity, as was not much less than the Spanish
Inquisition. To repeat two or three of the many Instances of the Horrid
Oppressions, and barbarous Cruelty, exercised in these Tyrannical Courts.

Upon the 17 th. of February, 1629. Dr. Leighton coming out of Black Friars
Church, (it seems then he was no Conventicler) was seized by a Warrant from the
High Commission Court, and dragged to Bishop Laud's House; from thence without
any Examination, he was carried to Newgate, and there clapped into Irons, and
thrust into a Nasty Hole, where he continued from Tuesday Night, till Thursday
Noon, without Meat or Drink: They kept him in that loathsome Place, where Snow
and Rain beat in upon him Fifteen Weeks, not permitting his Wife, or any
Friend, to come near him, and denied to give him a Copy of his Commitment; then
they brought him into the Star Chamber Court, where an Information was
Exhibited against him, for Publishing a Book, called, Lyon's Plea against the
Prelates.

Dr. Leighton confessed, that in 1628. He drew up the Heads of that Book, and
having the approbation of five hundred Persons, under their hands, some whereof
were Parliament Men. He went into Holland, and got between five and six hundred
Printed for the use of the Parliament; but they being Dissolved, he returned
home, not bringing any of them into the Land, but made it his special care to
suppress them. In the same information, the Doctor was charged with these Words
in the said Book; We do not read of greater Persecutions of God's People in any
Nation professing the Gospel, then in this our Island, especially since the
Death of Queen Elizabeth. He confessed the Words, and Answered, That the thing
was too true, as appeared by the Prelates taking away Life and Livelihood from
many M^nisters and private Men; of whom, many were pined to Death in Prison,
and many wandered up and down, their Families being left desolate and helpless:
That besides this, the Blood of Souls had been endangered by the Removal of the
Faithful Shepherds from the Flock; this was a cutting Truth. And

Wicked Laud, being enraged, Desired the Court to put the highest Censure that
could be put upon him; which they did to his Content, Condemning him to have
his Ears cut, his Nose slit, to be Branded in the Face, Whipped at a Post, to
stand on a Pillory, to pay Ten Thousand Pound fine (though they knew he was not
worth so much) and to be perpetually Imprisoned. This Hellish Sentence being
past, that vile Wretch Laud was so well pleased with it, that he pulled of his
Cap, and holding up his Hands, gave thanks to God who had given him Victory
over his Enemies. This Sentence being so miserably severe, the Execution
thereof was little expected. But,

Laud had his design; for upon the 26 th. of November, 1630. The Censure was
Executed in a most cruel manner, His Ears were cut, his Nose slit, his Face
Branded with burning Irons, he was tied to a Post, and Whipped with a treble
Cord, to that cruel Degree, that he himself Writing the History thereof Ten
Years after, affirmed that every lash brought away the Flesh, and that he
should feel it to his dying day. He was lastly, put into the Pillory, and kept
there near two hours in Frost and Snow; and then, after this most barbarous
Usage, not permitted to return to his Quarters in the Fleet Prison, in a Coach
provided to carry him, but compelled in that sad Condition, and severe Season,
to go by Water.

After this, was kept Ten Weeks in Dirt and Mire, not being sheltered from Rain
and Snow; They shut him up most closely, Twenty Two Months, and he remained a
Prisoner Ten or Eleven Tears, not suffered to breath in the open Air, until
that Noble Parliament of November, 1640. most happily delivered him. When he
came abroad to prosecute his Petition, in that Parliament, he could neither Go,
See, nor Hear.

This Dismal Story, will be an Eternal Blot, not only on Laud, who was the
chief Instrument in that sad Oppression, but also upon the pretended Martyr
King Charles, for permitting such Barbarous, and inhumane Cruelties to be
exercised on his Subjects. I shall show you something mo^e of this Bloody
Villains Barbarity, viz.

That upon the first of February, 1632. Laud procured Mr. Prin, to be sent
close Prisoner to the Tower, there he lay till the 21 st. of June, 1633. when
an Information (without mentioning any particular Passages in his Book) was
exhibited against him, in the Star Chamber Court, for Publishing a Book
concerning Interludes, entitled. Histriomastix, which was Licensed by a
Chaplain of Dr. Abbatts, Archbishop of Canterbury. Upon the 17 th. of February,
1633. notwithstanding his Book was Licensed, yet he had this heavy Sentence
passed upon him, viz. To be Imprisoned for Life, pay Five Thousand Pounds Fine,
be Expelled Lincoln's Inn, Disabled to Exercise the Prosession of a Barrister,
Degraded by the University of Oxford of his Degrees there taken; and that done,
to be set in the Pillory at Westminster, and have one of his Ears there cut
off, and at another time, to be set in the Pillory in Cheap Side, and there to
have his other Ear cut off.

Though many of the Lords never dreamt of the Execution of this Horrid
Judgment, nay, though Queen Henrietta Maria, (which deserves an Honorable
Mention) and she shall have it, for She was the present King's Royal
Grandmother, earnestly interceded with, the Biggotted, Cruel, and Merciless
King, (who was an abominable T --) to remit its Execution; yet on the 7th. and
10 th. of May, it was fully Executed with great Rigor, and Mr. Prin remained
Sundry Tears in the Tower upon this censure.

Mr. Burton, and Dr. Bastwrick, were also without the least just cause
violently prosecuted after the same manner; it will be too tedious to relate
theirs and others unchristian uses; when Tyranny and Arbitrary Power were
Rampant.

23. That against the Law of Nature, against the Rules of Justice, falsely
charged those Innocent Men, the Noble Lord Mandeville, Mr. Hollis, Mr. Strode,
and others, with Treason, for which in the Face of the Highest Judicature in
the Kingdom, they were most unjustly Imprisoned, the King denying them the
Names of their Accusers; and which was an Act of Tyranny beyond Parrallel, He
accused them, and yet would produce no Witness, he confessed them clear in his
own Judgment, yet they must not profess their own Innocence for fear of
wounding his Honor.

24. That was not satisfied with Imprisoning and Oppressing some of the
Parliament Men, but tempted and encouraged his English Army, with no less than
the Spoil of the City of London, to come up and destroy the Parliament. He in
an Hostile and inexcusable manner, made a most high Invasion upon the
Privileges of both Houses; Hereupon many Citizens unarmed, resorted to
Westminster to present their Petitions, and express their stedfastness to the
Parliament, whose Lives and Safety, by more than slight Rumors, they doubted
to be in Danger; the King having fortified White Hall, and entertained Armed
Men, not a few, planted them at the Gate of his Palace. ['Tis remarkable, the
first Blood that was drawn in this Cause, was in that very place where the
King's own Blood was afterward shed, 1 K. 21. 19.] where they Reviled,
Menaced, and with drawn Swords, actually Wounded many of the Citizens, as they
passed by in a peaceable manner, whereof some dyed. Nay, they went farther, and
were come to that height of Boldness, as to give out Insolent and Menacing
Speeches against the Parliament it self, and to imbrue their hands in the Blood
of the King's Subjects in Westminster Hall, and at the Doors of the Parliament,
as well as at his own Gate. And when the Parliament and People complained, and
demanded Justice for those Assaults, the King justified and abetted his own
Crew in what they did.

Nor can the passing by of a multitude of the King's Subjects, armed with no
other Weapons then Petitions, be justly called Tumults; neither could the
Parliament have forbid them, without the Breach of the Peoples Freedom. Unarmed
Petitioners surely could not be formidable to any; and it must not be
forgotten, that a very short time before His Majesty pretended to dread these
Tumultuary Citizens, the City Entertained, Feasted, and Conducted him to
White Hall, with as pompous Sollemnity, and costly Expressions of Love and
Duty, as ever had been known. Nay, after he had highly exasperated the People
by his Irruption with the House of Commons, he went in his Coach unguarded into
the City: He received not the lest Affront, much less, Violence in any of the
Streets, but rather humble Demeanours and Supplications. He knew the People so
full of Awe and Reverence to his Person, as to commit himself single amongst
the thickest of them, at a time when had most provoked them: This shows beyond
doubt, That all his fear of Tumults, was but a mere pretense, and occasions
taken for his resolved Absence from the Parliament, that he might turn his
slashing at the Court Gate, to slaughtering in the Field. In order thereunto,
the King retires first to Hampton Court, commanding his Servants, who were then
Members of Parliament, to leave their service there, and to give their
Attendance upon his Person. Soon after, his Popish Queen passes into Holland,
carrying with her, all, or the the greatest part of the Crown Jewels, which she
immediately Pawned, and with the Money bought Arms and Ammunition for the War
which was not yet begun.

Upon the 1 st. of March, 1641. Both Houses called upon His Majesty, by their
Petition presented at Theobalds; That for the Dispatch of the great Affairs of
the Kingdom, the safety of his Person, the Protection and Comfort of his
Subjects, he would be pleased to continue his abode, near the Parliament, and
not to withdraw himself to any of the remoter Parts, which if he should do,
must needs be a cause of great danger and distraction; and they prayed him to
accept this humble Counsel, as the Effect of that Duty and Allegiance which
they owed unto him, and which would not suffer them to admit of any thoughts,
intentions, or endeavors, but such as were necessary and advantageous for His
Majesty's Greatness and Honor, and the Safety and Prosperity of the Kingdom.
These are Expressions surely, that did not in the least savor of that Sedition
and Rebellion, with which our wicked Clergymen, charge the Memory of this Great
and Noble Parliament.

The King willingly giving himself up to the Conduct of Evil Counselors, was
deaf to the importunate supplication of the Lords and Commons for his Return;
they therefore called again upon him more earnestly, and sent after him a
Declaration to New Market, by the Earls of Pembrook and Holland, and a
Committee of the Commons, wherein they laid before him the Causes of their own
Fears and Jealousies, in these particulars:

1. That the design of altering Religion, had been potently carried on, by
those in greatest Authority about him; the Queen's Agent at Rome, the Pope's
Nuncio here, are not only Evidences of this Design, but have been great Actors
in it.

2. That the War with Scotland, was procured to make way for this Intent, and
chiefly fomented by the Papists, and others Popishly affected, whereof we have
many Evidences.

3. That the Rebellion in Ireland, was framed and contrived here in England;
and that the English Papists should have risen about the same time: We have
several Testimonies, etc. The Irish Rebels affirm, That they do nothing but by
Authority from the King; they call themselves the Queen's Army; the Booty which
they take from the English, they mark with the Queen's mark, and it is proved,
that their purpose was to come to England, after they had done in Ireland.

4. The laboring to infuse into Your Majesty's Subjects an evil Opinion of the
Parliament, and other Symptons of a disposition of raising Arms, and dividing
your People by a Civil War, in which Combustion, Ireland must needs be lost,
and this Kingdom miserably wasted and consumed, if not wholly ruined and
destroyed.

5. That Your Majesty sent away the Lord Digby by your own Warrant beyond Sea,
after a Vote had passed in the House of Commons, Declaring, That he had
appeared in a Warlike manner at Kingston upon Thames, to the terror of your
Majesty's good Subjects; that he being so got beyond Sea, he vented his
traitorous Conceptions, that Your Majesty should declare your Self, and retire
to a place of Strength, and intimated some service which he might do in those
parts, whereby, in probability, he intended the procuring of some Foreign Force
to strengthen Your Majesty, in that Condition into which he would have brought
you; which malicious Counsel, we have great cause to doubt, made too deep an
Impression in Your Majesty, considering the course you are pleased to take, of
absenting your Self from that Parliament, and carrying the Prince with you,
which seems to express a purpose in Your Majesty to keep your Self in a
readiness for the Acting of it.

6. The manifold Advertisements which we have had from Rome, Venice, Paris, and
other parts, That they still expect that Your Majesty has some great design in
hand, for the altering of Religion, the breaking the Neck of your Parliament,
and that you will yet find means to compass that design; that the Pope's Nuncio
has solicited the Kings of France and Spain to lend Your Majesty 4000 Men a
piece, to help to maintain your Royalty against the Parliament.

These are some of the grounds of our Fears and Jealousies, which made us so
earnestly to implore your Royal Authority and Protection for our Defense, and
security, in all the ways of Humility and Submission, which being denied by
Your Majesty, We do with sorrow apply our selves to the use of that Power [
viz. the Militia] which by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, resides in us;
yet still resolving to keep our selves within the Bounds of Faithfullness, and
Allegiance to your Sacred Person and your Crown.

And as to the Fears and Jealousies which His Majesty seemed to have
Entertained of them.

The Lords and Commons thus Answered.

We have according to Your Majesty's desires, laid our hands upon our Hearts;
we have asked our selves in the strictest Examination of our Consciences; we
have searched our Affections, our Thoughts; considered our Actions, and can
find none that can give Your Majesty any just Occasion to absent your self from
White Hall, and the Parliament; but that you may with more Honor and Safety
continue there, than in any other place.

Your Majesty lays a great Charge upon Us; if you will graciously be pleased to
let us know the Particulars, we shall give a clear and satisfactory Answer: But
what hope can we have of ever giving Your Majesty satisfaction, when those
particulars which you have been made believe were true, yet being produced and
made known to us, appeared to be false; and Your Majesty notwithstanding, will
neither Punish, nor Produce the Authors: But go on to contract new Jealousies
and Fears, upon general and uncertain Grounds, affording Us no means or
possibility of particular Answer, to the clearing of our selves. We beseech
Your Majesty to consider in what state you are, how easy and fair a way You
have to Happiness, Honor, and Greatness, Plenty and Security, if you will join
with the Parliament in the Defense of the Religion, and public good of the
Kingdom; this is all we expect from you. And for this we return to you, our
Lives, Fortunes, and utmost Endeavors to support Your Majesty, Your just Power
and Sovereignty over us; but it is not Words that can secure us in these our
humble Desires. We cannot, but too well and sorrowfully remember, what Gracious
Messages we had from You this Summer, when with your Privity, the bringing up
the Army was in Agitation: We cannot but with the like Affections recall to our
Minds, how, not two days before your own coming to the Commons House, You sent
a Gracious Message, that You would always have a care of their Privileges, as
of your own Prerogative; of the safety of their Persons, as of your own
Children: That which we expect, which will give us Assurance, that you have no
thought but of Peace and Justice to your People, must be some real effect of
your Goodness to them, in granting those things which your present necessity of
the Kingdom do enforce us to desire; and that you will be Graciously pleased to
put from you those Mischievous Counselors, which have caused all these Dangers
and Distractions, and to continue your own Residence and the Princes, near
London and the Parliament, which we hope will be an happy beginning of
Contentment and Confidence betwixt Your Majesty and People, and be followed
with many succeeding Blessings of Honor and Greatness to Your Majesty, and of
Security and Prosperity to them. These are brief Heads of the Declaration, to
which the King Answered: Have I violated your Laws? To which both Houses made
this pertinent Reply. We are heartily sorry We have such plentiful Matter of an
Answer to that Question, Have I violated your Laws?

I must also take Notice, that in the beginning of the Year, 1642. a time when
the King was in appearance transacting matters amicably with the two Houses,
and we seemed to be in a deep Peace; a time when he Declared, That he had
received no other Carriage from his Parliament, than what he professed himself
satisfied with; and that if the Bills he had past, were again to be offered, he
should cheerfully and readily Assent unto them. Even then, he dispatched away
Letters, and an Agent to the King of Denmark, complaing of the Parliament, and
asking Supplies from thence, AD PROPUL SANDOS HOSTS, you know the English of
that is, to Subdue his Enemies, and declared himself in these Words; Ad allia
Consilia Animum Convertendum Duximus: We resolve to betake our selves to new
Counsels. The very Words he used to that Parliament in the Year, 1628.

Further, upon the discovery of his Plot to bring up the English Army against
the Parliament, he turned to the Scottish Army then at New Castle, and baited
his Temptation with a rich Reward, not only to have 300000 l. in hand, and the
spoil of London, but four Northern Counties to be made Scotists. Moreover, to
encourage them to join with him, he Declared to them, That he was to have Money
and Horse from Denmark, and that he would make York the place of his Residence,
for the better accommodation of both Nations, or fuller Revenge upon London.

He also gathered Men in London, under pretense of raising Forces for Portugal,
who were to possess themselves of the Tower. The Queen in Holland was buying
Arms, and His Majesty had actually raised Forces in diverse Counties. The
Parliament was all this time Petitioning in Peace; and for the Reasons now
assigned amongst many others, They humbly besought him, that he would be
pleased to put the Tower of London, and the Militia, into the Hands of such
Persons, as should be recommended unto him by both Houses of Parliament. The
King seemed to comply herein, and by his Answer promised them, That the Militia
should be put into such Hands, as they should approve of, or recommend to him;
hereupon both Houses nominated Persons of the greatest Honor, as fit for that
Trust. I shall give you the Names of some of them; The Earls of Holland,
Rutland, Bedford, Bullingbrook, Salisbury, Warwick, Pembrook, Leicester,
Stamford, Essex, Clare, Northumberland, Lincoln, Suffolk, etc. Lords, Paget,
North, Strange, Roberts, Gray of Werk, Chandois, Dacres, Mandeville, Wharton,
Spencer, Brook, Herbert, Fielding, Littleton, Lord Keeper, etc. Men Eminent in
all Qualifications of Honor and Sufficiency were recommended for several
Counties, and the King was desired to agree thereunto, as he had promised; upon
his delaying to give a satisfactory Answer, they again Petition, setting forth,
That nothing could enable them to suppress the Rebellion in Ireland, and secure
England, but the granting of their Humble Petition, which they find so
absolutely necessary for the preservation of the King and Commonwealth, that
the Laws of God and Man injoin them to see it put in Execution. They followed
him to Theobalds, and his several removes to York, but he having Abdicated the
Parliament, and being deaf to all their Importunities, they declared, That
there had been of late a most desperate Design upon the House of Commons, which
they had just cause to believe was an effect of the Bloody Councels of Papists,
and other evil affected Persons, who had already raised a Rebellion in Ireland,
and by reason of many Discoveries, They could not but fear they would proceed,
not only to stir up the like Rebellion and Insurrection in this Kingdom, but
also to back them with Forces from Abroad; and thereupon, both Houses made an
Ordinance for the ordering of the Militia of England and Wales, there appearing
an urgent and inevitable necessity for putting His Majesty's Subjects in a
posture of Defense for the Safeguard of both His Majesty and his People; and
they resolved, That in this Case of extreme danger, and of His Majesty's
Refusal, the Ordinance agreed to by both Houses for the Militia, does oblige
the People, and ought to be obeyed by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.
They further about that time Resolved, That the King's Absence so far remote
from his Parliament, was not only an Obstruction, but might be a Destruction to
the Affairs of Ireland.

These (and many other) Reasons that may, with the greatest ease be given, it is
notoriously manifest, That King Charles began, and carried on, that Bloody
Civil War against his poor Subjects without the least Color of Reason and
Justice, for which wicked Acts, God justly suffered him to be brought to that
shameful and untimely End. This King studdying and endeavoring by all ways
imaginable, as he lived without the Love, so he died without the Lamentation of
most People, but those Villains, that had been large instruments, in bringing
him, and his People, into that miserable War and Division.

25. That after he had taken God to Witness of his readiness to Treat at
Uxbridge with the Parliament for avoiding of Bloodshed (as pretended) he took
the advantage of a Mist, the fittest Weather for Deceit and Treachery, and
followed at the Heels, those Messengers of Peace, with a Train of Covert War,
and with a Bloody surprise falls on the Parliaments secure Forces, which lay
Quartering at Brentford, in the thoughts and expectation of a Treaty.

He gives his Reason why he seemed for Peace, in a Letter to his Queen, which
was, That She must know as a certain Truth, That all, even his Party, are
strongly impatient for a Peace, which oblidged him so much the more to show on
all occasions his Intentions to Peace; but tells her, no danger of Death shall
make him do any thing unworthy of her Love. An excellent Resolution no doubt,
for the preserving the Protestant Religion, made to his Popish Queen.

At the very instant of this Treaty, which was in 1644. the King used all
imaginable meams to bring not only Foreign Forces, but the Irish Cut Throats,
against the Parliament. To clear up this point, and also to show how insincere
he was in his pretended Intentions of Peace, I will briefly present his
Underhand Transactions, as well with Foreign Princes, as those Rebels; and in
the first place, I shall take notice of some passages between Him and the
Queen, in relation to this, and other Treaties.

In a Letter to Her of January 9 th. 1644. he Writes thus: The Scots
Commissioners have sent to me to send a Commission to their General Assembly,
Which I am resolved not to do, but to the end of making some use of this
occasion, by sending an honest Man to London, and that I may have the more time
for a handsome Negative, I have demanded a Pasport for Phil. Warwick, by whom
to return my Answer.

At another time the same Month He tells Her, That as for my calling those a He
had agree to Treat with them as a Parliament, the Queen upbraided him for so
doing, and he thus vindicates himself.
Parliament, if there had been but Two of my Opinion, I had not done it; the
calling did no ways acknowledge them to be a Parliament, upon which condition
and construction I did it, and accordingly it is registered in the Council Books.

Nothing is more evident, than that the King was steered by the Queen's
Council, in the management of this Uxbridge Treaty, and that which is called
the Church of England [ The Bishops] was greatly her care. By Letter in January
1644. before the beginning of that Treaty, She instructs him not to abandon
those who have served him, lest they forsake him in his need; that She hopes he
will have a care of her, and her Religion; that in Her Majesty's Opinion,
Religion should be the last thing upon which he should Treat; for if he do
agree upon strickness against the Catholics, it would discourage them to serve
him, and if afterward there should be no Peace, he could never expect succors
from Ireland, or any other Catholic Prince.

In another of her Letters, we find her writing thus: January 17. 1644. It
comforts me much to see the Treaty shall be at Uxbridge. -- I received
Yesterday Letters from the Duke of Lorrain, who sends me word, if his service
be agreeable to you, he will bring 10000 Men. -- Above all, have a care not to
abandon those who have served you, as well the Bishops, as the poor Catholics.

By the King's Letters to the Queen in February, when the Treaty at Uxbridge
was depending, He Styles the Parliament, Unreasonable, Stubborn, Perfidious
Rebels, presses her to hasten all possible Assistance to him, particularly that
of the Duke of Lorrain. He tells her, That the limited days for treating are
now almost expired, without the least Agreement upon any one Article, wherefore
I fend for enlargement of days, That the whole Treaty may be laid open to the
whole World, and I assure thee, thou needst not doubt the Issue of this Treaty;
for my Commissioners are so well chosen, (though I say it) that they will
neither be Threatened nor Disputed from the Grounds I have given them, which
(upon my Word) Is according to the little Note thou so well remembers. -- Be
confident, that in making Peace, I shall ever show my Constancy in adhereing to
Bishops, and all our Friends, (which could be meant of no other than the
Catholics; for the Queen in her Letter before mentioned, had given him Charge
of both together) and not forget to put a short Period to this perpetual
Parliament.

We find in another Letter, Dated the 5 th. of March, expressing himself in
these Words: I have thought of one means more to furnish Thee with my
assistance, than hitherto thou have had; it is, That I give Thee power to
promise in my Name, that I will If this were so good a King, Why so much
clamor against King James the II. for designing the same thing.
take away all the Penal Laws against the Roman Catholics in England, as soon
as God shall enable me to do it.

In relation to Ireland, he wrote to the Marquess of Ormond to this Effect,
Jan. 7.

The Rebels here have agreed to Treat, and most assuredly one of the first and
chiefest Articles they will insist on, will be, To continue the Irish War,
which is a Point not popular for me to break on, of which you are to make a
double use; First, To hasten with all possible diligence the Peace there, the
timely conclusion of which will take off that Inconvenience, which otherwise I
may be subject to, by the Refufal of that Article upon any other Reason;
Secondly, By dexterous conveying to the Irish, the danger there may be of their
Total Exclusion from those Favors I intend them, in case the Rebels here clap
up a Peace.

Not doubting of a Peace, I must again remember you, to press the Irish for
their speedy Assistance to Me here, and their Friends in Scotland. -- I desire
that the Irish would send as great a Body as they can, to Land about
Cumberland, which will put those Northern Counties in a brave Condition.

Upon the 14 th. January, he Writes thus to the Queen: As for the Peace of
Ireland, to show Thee the Care I have had of it, and Fruits I hope to receive
from it, I have sent Thee the last Dispatches, I have sent concerning it. --
For God's sake, let none know the particulars of my Dispatches. [ Some secret
piece of Villainy against his Protestant Subjects no Doubt, that he was so
afraid of having it Discovered.]

Another Letter to Her of the 20 th. of March, has this Expression: I find
that thou much mistakes me concerning Ireland, I desire nothing more than a
Peace there, and ever forbid thy Commerce there.

By another Lettter, he commanded Ormond to Dispatch the Irish Peace out of
hand, and thereby promises, that the Penal Laws, against the Roman Catholics,
Shall not be put in Execution: The Peace being made, and that when the Irish
give him that Assistance which they have promised for the suppression of this
Rebellion, then he would consent to the Repeal of them by a Law; and Concludes,
Recommending to him again, the speedy dispatch of the Peace of Ireland.

Another Letter to Ormond, upon the 27 th. of February 1644. was, That he
thought himself bound in Conscience, not to lose that assistance which he might
hope from his Irish Subjects, for such scruples as in a less pressing condition
might reasonably be struck at by him, and therefore Commanded him to conclude a
Peace with the Irish whatever it cost; so that his Protestant Subjects there
might be secured, and his Regal Authority preserved. -- If the present taking
away the Penal Laws against Papists will do it (said he) I shall not think it a
hard Bargin, so that freely and vigourously they engage themselves in my
Assistance against my Rebels of England and Scotland, for which no Conditions
can be too hard, not being against Conscience or Honor.

By another Letter to the Marquess of Ormond, in the same Month, he Writes
thus: Now again, I cannot but mention the necessity of hastening the Irish
Peace, for which, I hope, you are already furnished by Me, with Materials
sufficient. But in case (against all Expectation and Reason) Peace cannot be
had upon those Terms, you must not by any means fall to a New Rupture with
them, but continue the Cessation.

There was at this time high Division in London, between the Presbyterians and
Independants; therefore to ruin both, by fomenting misunderstandings between
them, the Independants are to be Cajoled; a thing worthy remembrance in all
times.
He wrote to the Duke of Richmond, one of his Commissioners for the Uxbridge
Treaty, To remember to Cajole well the Independants and the Scots; nay, he
instructed Secretary Nicholas to bribe the Commissioners for the Parliament,
with the promise of Security, Rewards and Places.

Now upon the whole matter, let any impartial and unbyassed Person tell me,
whether he does not in his Conscience believe, that the Parliament were far
more sincere in making an Honorable Peace for poor England, than this
apparently, False, Popish, and tricking King, whom the wicked part of Mankind
so madly cry up for a Martyr.

26. That for many Reasons it was concluded, That King Charles had no small
share in the abominable Act of Poisoning his own Father, King James I. and that
Good Man, Prince Henry, his Son. It being very plain, diverse Parliaments were
but short lived; if they did but mutter, that an Enquiry should be made of
their untimely Ends, and that the Duke of Buckingham was protected for that,
and other Villainies.

And that I may Demonstrate to the World more fully than I have already done in
the 6 th. Articles, That King Charles I. did most Dishonourably and
Perfidiously Betray the poor Protestants of the Isle of Rhee and Rochel. I
shall produce Copies of two of his Letters to them.

LETTER I.
The King of England's Letter, Directed to the Mayor, Sheriffs, Peers,
Burghers, and Inhabitants of the City of Rochell, dated 19 th. of May, Old
Style 1628.
Gentlemen,
BE not Discomforted, though my Fleet be returned, hold out unto the last, for
I am resolved, that all my Fleet shall Perish, rather than you shall not be
Relieved, and to this end I have Countermanded it, and have sent Ships to make
them change their Design, that they had taken to come back: I shall shortly
send you some number of Ships to reinforce it, and with the help of God, the
Success will be happy for that Deliverance.

Your Good Friend, CHARLES R.

And on the 21 st. in the Morning, there came to Rochell from England, a
Soldier bringing another Letter from the King, Dated 27 th. of May Old Style,
sealed with the Arms of England, which was as follows:

Gentlemen,
I Have been troubled to here that my Fleet was upon the Point of Returning,
without Answering my Commands, which were to force the Entry of your
Provisions, whatever came of it, and have given it new Orders to Return into
your Road, and not stir until it has relieved you with Victuals, or that I
have sent them an Additional strength, for which I have caused Men to work with
all Diligence; Be assured that I will never Abandon you, and that I will employ
all the Force of my Kingdom for your Deliverance, until it please God to bless
Me with giving you an assured Peace.

Given at Our Palace at Westminster. May 27, 1628. Old Style. GENTLEMEN, Your Good
Friend, CHARLES R.

Whosoever shall carefully Read, and Consider these two Letters, and the
Sollemn Declarations there, and observe how contrary to his Royal Word, he
Sacrificed these Poor Protestants, will have cause to harbor the worst of
thoughts of this King, and to blush at the horrid Impudence and Impiety of
those Wicked Wretches, that would make a Saint and a Martyr of him. And to
demonstrate this Treachery, I shall incert a Copy of the Remonstrance made by
one of the Deputies of the City of Rochel, because it will very much illustrate
the Subject, and be as an Eternal mark of Infamy to the Memory of that Prince,
and deserves to be Engraven on Brass, and Wrote on Marble, that so the
Remembrance of it may never be lost; it is as follows.

A Copy of the Remonstrance of the Sieur Vincent, to the King of Great Britain,
drawn out of his own Journals.
SIR,
THE Grief which obliges us to fill the Ears of Your Majesty with our Cries,
and to Reiterate them so often, ought to be extreme to the last Degree. Behold
us now, Sir, prostrate at your Feet, to Wash them with our Tears, and God
Almighty Grant, that we do not in a little time, come to Sigh out our last
Breath, with the News of the Desolation of our City. We know not how, Sir, to
conceal it from You, the Sense we have of Her being at Her last Gasp, puts us
into Despair; seeing the Succors which Your Majesty has made us hope would be
ready, has been deferred from day to day for many Weeks together.

SIR, the City of Rochell did by us beg of You, with all the Humility they were
capable of Expressing, to receive them into your Protection, and You as
Solemnly agreed to it; since they have had at diverse times, all the Assurances
possible, as well from your own Month, as under the Hand of Your Majesty, that
you would never abandon them: Whereupon by a Miracle of Constancy, they have
held our hitherto firm a whole Year, contending with the Horrors of a most
ghastly Famine, that thereby they might give Your Majesty, full leisure to send
them the Succors You were graciously pleased to promise them; and thus
constant and unshaken were they, even when all Europe, believed they ought to
have despaired, in that after they had Relief, as they thought several days in
their sight, it returned without effecting, or attempting any thing. And though
our Enemies have from thence taken occasion to make them diverse Overtures of
Accommodation, which their extreme Necessities seemed to Counsel them to
hearken unto; yet they chose rather to run the Hazard of their utter
Destruction, then to be wanting in the least to the Promises we had Sworn for
them to Your Majesty, or to show they had the least Diffidence of your
Protection.

After all this, Sir, shall it be Recorded in the History of Your Reign; That
they perished in your Hands without having reaped any other Fruit of the Good
Will Your Majesty has professed toward them, and of the Assurance they have
therein relied upon; then the rendering them irrecountable to their King, from
whom otherwise they might have hoped to have found Grace and Favor!

Pardon, Sir, this, from a People who see themselves upon the very Threshold of
their Sepulchers, if they cannot avoid Sighs which may seem undecent in your
Royal Presence. It is common for those that are near their End, to finish their
Lives with Groans. In the Name of God, Sir, so long as there remains any Breath
in us, and before we do quite Expire, command your Succors to hasten to our
Assistance; provided that diligence be yet used, we will remain Caution to Your
Majesty with the Peril of our Heads, that they will arrive time enough to save
us. As to the Impossibilities that some may be willing to find in it, permit us
to tell You freely, Sir, That those are only founded, either in their fear, or
their very little Affection for us; and that besides the Report which some
Persons unsuspected, have made to Your Majesty, we beseech You, be You judge,
whether our City, which is within fight of the Digne and Pallisade, and
carriage of her Cannon, would send time after time to implore Your Assistance,
if they thought it would be unprofitable to them, and if having every day
offers of Capitulation upon advantageous Conditions, if they would hearken to
it for themselves alone, they would be so imprudent to neglect the opportunity.
But we are ready if it shall please Your Majesty to permit it, to take upon us
the first Risques and Hazzards of the Execution, to the end that we may be
justified to all the World in the sincerity of our Proceeding; and that it may
not be imputed to us, that we are prodigal of the Blood of Your Majesty's
Subjects to ill purpose, to be sparing of our own: No, Sir, there is no such
impossibility as what some would pretend.

The only Cause of our Fears, comes from the slowness and continual neglects
from one Day to another, and one Week to another, which makes our hopes Recoil.
After the Return of your Fleet, we comforted our selves with the Promise that
was made us by Your Majesty, That it should depart again within fifteen days;
but when after twenty were past, there were added fourteen more to them: And
after that, we found diverse other neglectful Disappointments, that have now
taken up two Months complete; Good God, Sir, How long has that time seemed to
those miserable Wretches that have not Bread! We know very well the good
Inclinations Your Majesty has for our Weal; as also we have had most certain
Proofs of the Duke of Buckingham, your high Admiral, his passionate applying
himself for us, as also the same of the Lords of your Council; but shall we not
be excusable, if seeing the Effects thereof crossed, by all these Delays? We
entertain Jealousies, that Your Majesty is not well served, and that there is
some secret Hand, which clandestingly obstructs, that which the Zeal of others
endeavors to advance. It is ordinary for Men in misery to be suspicious, and
possibly here we are not injuriously so; indeed we do not know any Person on
whom to determine our Diffidence, nor have we any intention to call to mind any
thing that is past; may that, Sir, remain buried in Eternal Oblivion, and for
the future at least, let those to whom Your Majesty shall give your Commands,
answer so well your kindness to us, with their Affection and Diligence, that
without any farther delay, your Fleet may put to Sea, and deliver us yet out of
the Cruel Arms (...) Death(...)

If, Sir, upon this occasion, you will please to Discern those who serve you
Faithfully, from other Men (if there be any such) let Your Majesty be pleased
to hold it indubitable, that all those who under any pretext whatsoever, shall
Counsel the least Delayings, do it from an ill Intention, there being none can
pretend ignorance of the dreadful Necessities to which our City is reduced, and
that one single days delay more, may be the cause of its ruin. Have therefore
some consideration of it, we beseech You, by the Tears and pitiful Cries of
more than Twelve Thousand poor languishing Souls, whom Hunger devours, and who
are all ready to Perish, by the Interest of above a Million of others, who
without doubt will see themselves Buried under our Ruins, and who will find the
Knife at their Throats, the very next day after we are lost.

By the Glory of your Scepter, under the Sanctuary of which we are come to put
our selves, and which it has pleased you to tender us for our Security; by the
Magnificent Title of Defender of the Faith, which obliges Your Majesty to
relieve those that are Oppressed for that very Reason; in short, by the Faith
and Word of a King, which it has pleased You of your Grace to Engage us,
permit not, Sir, our Innocent Blood to reflect upon your Crown, to stain it to
Ages that shall succeed us, and at present to cry against Your Majesty before
God and Man.

This is that, Sir, which our Consciences, and the Duty we owe to our Afflicted
Fellow Citizens, oblige us to come and represent a new to Your Majesty, in
whose Charity, Magnanimity, Piety, and inviolable Fidelity, we hawe such
Confidence, That we assure our selves, God will take this in good part, and in
convenient Consideration: And since that all our Supplications tend to make You
be pleased, to cause your Fleet to set Sail with all possible Diligence, and to
afford your Presence at Portsmouth, where it is so absolutely necessary, that
without it, we can scarce hope for any success.

We therefore do in all Humility supplicate Your Majesty, immediately to put in
Execution the Resolution you have taken of going thither; and here, Sir, we
fall upon our Knees before Your Majesty, with most Ardent Prayer to God, that
it will please him to make us find more and more Favor in your Sight, that
even we, who now Supplicate You, may come again to render to You, our most
humble and grateful Acknowledgments, as to our Great Deliverer, from whom, next
to God, we shall hold our Estates, Honors and Lives, and the memory of so
signal a Deliverance, we may leave to our Children, to the end that they may
Celebrate it after us.

Yet, all these Sufferings, and the lamentable Estate of the Rochellers, nor
the sad and pressing Remonstrance of their Deputies (enough to melt the Heart
of any One, but a Cruel faithless Tyrant) were Efficatious enough to oblige
that Wicked Court, to let this third Fleet set sail before September following,
under the Command of the Earl of Lindsey, who arrived before Rochell toward
the latter end of the said Month; but instead of succouring the City, breaking
the Digue, and opening the Passage, to get in Provisions, which the King had
made them to expect, and which they had already almost swallowed in their
hopes. That Commander had set on Shore the Lord Mountague, (unknown to the
Deputies that were on Board, and to the Duke of Soubize) who went straight to
the French King's Camp, where after some Conferences with the Cardinal, with
whom (as was then reported) he had concerted the Delivery of the City to the
King, which was very far from giving it any Succor. He went Post for England,
to give an Account of it to his Master. After the English Fleet had been a
Month in the Road without doing any thing, and without sending the Besieged
Army any manner of Victuals, which were on Board: Then the poor Rochellers, who
were not able to hold out no longer, saw plainly how they were Abused and
Betrayed; so hereupon they resolved (no more to expect the Illusory Succors of
the English, and the vain Hopes of assistance from them, to deliver up the
City; and whilst the Lord Montague was going for England, and to return to the
French King with the Effects of his Negotiation, they resolve to throw
themselves into the Arms of the King, their Sovereign, in hopes after all, by
their Repentance for their so long Obstinancy, to obtain his Grace and Favor.

And about the end of October, their Agreement was made among themselves, and
Signed: And the first of November, the King made Entrance into Rochell, where
he found the Inhabitants more like Skeletons, than Men and Women. And this King
had more compassion than the hard-hearted Oppressor of England, for he was so
sensibly touched with that sad Sight, that he could not refrain letting fall
some Tears.

On the 5th. of November, the English Fleet, after having been a Month and six
days in the Road, and seen from thence the Reductien of Rochell to the
Obedience of the King, set sail, carrying a long with them a great party of
French, as well as Victuals, they had brought from England.

27. That was an Exorbitant and Outrageous T -- upon the People of Scotland, as
appears in many particulars; to recount some of them Briefly,

1. In overturning their Church Government, Established by many Acts of
Parliament, and obtruding upon them Laud's Liturgy, and Popish Ceremonies,
after that wicked Bishop had sent his Liturgy to Rome to be approved there.

2. In denying them (the undoubted Right of all Subjects) to Petition for
Redress of their Grievances.

3. In dissolving their Synod and Parliament, Burning the Pacification made
with them, by the Hangman's hands; and Imprisoning the Lord's sent by them, to
Petitiom him to perform his Sollemn Promises, and Redress their Grievances.

4. In levying Doctrines against them, and raising a Civil War, to justify
himself in the Violation of their Laws. A Civil War it was, said the Great Lord
Digby, seeing we are of the same Religion, and under the same King. And

5. In attempting to make use of the Love and Affection of the English, to
Enslave and Ruin the Scottish Nation.

It is not improper here to observe.

1. That the Scottish Covenant was not a new Invention or Innovation, but
Established by the Law of Scotland, and taken by King James the First, seventy
Years before King Charles the Second took it.

2. That Bishops and Clergymen in Conjunction with Papists, abetted and
assisted this T -- in the violation of the Laws, when the Bulk of the Nobility,
Gentry, and People of England, appeared undauntedly in Defense of the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom.

3. That Popery has greatly spread in Scotland ever since Laud's Superstition
was introduced here, the Number of Papists not exceeding 600. And therefore
Presbetery being now restored by a Law, it may be reasonably hoped, that it
will reduce many who have been deluded into that Idolatry.

4. That Princes are not always to trust to the Insinuations and Suggestions of
Scottish Bishops; seeing that when they instigated King Charles I. to Dissolve
the Synod and Parliament, he was seduced by them into a belief. That the
Scottish Covenanteers were a contemptible Number, and their Party in Scotland
was sufficient to deal with them.

5. That the Scots were not Rebels in taking Arms to Assert their Rights, and
Vindicate the Laws and Liberties of their Country.

That the horrid Imposition of Laud's Popish Liturgy, did occasion the Troubles
of Scotland, is very manifest from Dr. Burnet's (now Bishop of Salisbury) his
Memoirs of Duke Hamilton, for he says, Page 30. The Liturgy had some
Alterations from the English, which made it more Invidious and less
Satisfactory. -- The Imposing it, really varied from their former Practices and
Constitutions. -- Page 33. The Lords Petitioned, complaining against the
Liturgy, and Book of Canons; offering under the highest Penalties, to prove
they contained things both contrary to Religion, and the Laws of the Land, page
36. The Earls of Traquaire and Roxbourgh, by Letter to the King, advised him to
secure the People of that which they so much apprehended, the fear of
Innovation of Religion, saying, that they found few or none well satisfied,
page 33. The Earl of Traquaire went to Court, and gave Account, that all the
Troubles were occasioned by introducing the Liturgy; with which, scarce a
Member of Council (except Bishops) was well satisfied: Neither were all these
Cardinals for it, for the Archbishop of St. Andrews, from the beginning, had
withstood these Designs, and the Archbishop of Glascoe, was worse pleased.

Their Commissioners in their Charge against Laud, exhibited to the Parliament
of England, 1641. say, page 11. etc. This Book inverteth the Order of the
Communion in the Book of England, of the diverse secret Reasons of this Change,
we mention one only: In joining the Spiritual Praise and Thanksgiving, which is
in the Book of England, pertinently after the Communion, with the Prayer of
Consecration before the Communion; and that under the Name of Memorial or
Oblation, for no other ends, but that the Memorial and Sacrifice of Praise,
mentioned in it, may be understood according to the Popish meaning; Bellarmin
de Missa. Lib. 2. Chap. 21. not of the Spiritual Sacrifice, but of the Oblation
of the Body of the Lord.

The Corporal Presence of Christ's Body, is also to be found here; for the
Words of the Mass Book, serving to this purpose, which are not to be found in
the Book of England, are taken in here: Almighty God is inca^'d; That of his
Almighty Goodness, he may vouchsafe so to Bless and sanctify with his Word and
Spirit, these Gifts of Bread and Wine, that they be unto us the Body and Blood
of Christ. -- On the one part, the Expressions of the Book of England, at the
delivery of the Elements: Of feeding on Christ by Faith, and of Eating and
Drinking in Remembrance, that Christ died for thee, are utterly Deleted.

To prove that Laud did send this Liturgy to Rome to be approved of; Read a
Book of Good Credit, Entitled, New Survey of the West Indies, Wrote by a
Reverend Divine of the Church of England, Mr. Thomas Gage, Minister of Deal in
Kent, it is in page 280. in the Folio Edition; He there tells you, That being a
Friar, he went to Rome with Letters of Recommendation to Cardinal Barbarini,
the Pope's Nephew, Entitled, The Protector of England: That coming acquainted
with Father Fitzherbert, of the English College of Jesuits, he highly praised
Archbishop Laud, and said, That he not long since sent a Common Prayer Book (
which he had composed for the Church of Scotland) to be first viewed and
approved by the Pope and Cardinals; and, That they liked it very well for
Protestants to be Trained up in a Form of Prayer and Service; yet the Cardinals
(first giving him thanks for his Respect) sent him word that they thought it
was not fitting for Scotland; that Father Fitzherbert told him, he was Witness
of all, this being sent for by the Cardinal to give him his Opinion about it,
and of the Temper of the Scots. And that Laud hearing the Censure of the
Cardinals, concerning his Intention and Form of Prayer, to ingratiate himself
the more in their Favor, Corrected some things in it, and made it more harsh
and unreasonable for that Nation.

This Good Man, Mr. Gage, after he had here related the matter as above,
expresses himself thus: This most True Relation of Archbishop Laud, I have often
spoke of in private Discourse, and publicly in Preaching; and I could not in
Conscience omit it here, both to vindicate the just Censure of Death, which the
Parliament gave against him, and to reprove the ungrounded Opinion and Error of
some Ignorant Spirits, who have since his Death, highly exalted and cried him
up as a Martyr.

It Is worthy of Notice, that these Passages (making Laud to appear a great
Villain) were by the means of Priest Craft left out of the Impression in Octavo.

Something like this of Mr. Gage, may be found in Bishop Burnet's Memoirs of
Duke Hamilton, fol. 83. he relates, That in the Year 1638. one Abernethy, who
from a Jesuit, turned a zealous Presbyterian, spread a story in Scotland which
took wonderfully, of the Liturgy of that Kingdom, being sent to Rome to some
Cardinals to be Revised by them; and that Seignior Con, (the Popes Nuncio to
the Court of England) had showed it to Abernethy at Rome, and though Con denied
it afterward, as is pretended, yet it does not follow that what Abernethy
asserts, was false, for it is well known, that Con being a Jesuit, might Lie
for the Holy Church.

If I had time, and that this Book would not be too large, I could produce very
many more instances of King Charles his Tyrannical Oppressing his Subjects of
England, Scotland and Ireland. I shall end this Melancholy Story with the
Heads of the many Articles of Mis-government of that Prince, viz.

His taking Buckingham, Laud, and many more Evil Counselors into the highest
Favor, and being Governed by them.

His Popish Match, and Private Articles, in favor of Popery.

His receiving a Letter from the Pope, and sending him an Answer, calling him
most Holy Father, etc.

His Pardoning 20 Popish Priests, etc. pursuant to the Private Articles of
Marriage.

His most unchristian like Betraying the Isle of Rhee and Rochell, a sad Story.

His plucking up the Root of all Property, by taking the Peoples Goods against
their Wills, and their Liberties against Law.

His giving Commissions to Try and Execute his Subject by Martial Law.

His Raising Money by Loans against Law.

His requiring London, and other places, to set out Ships for him at their own
Charge.

His Billotting Soldiers (many of which were Papists) on his poor Subjects.

His giving Commissions to several Lords to raise Money by way of Excise.

His ordering his Treasurer to pay 30000 l. to buy a large number of German
Horse, with Arms, both for Horse and Foot, to be brought to England against the
Parliament.

His causing Mr. Chambars, a Merchant, to be fined 2000 l. for complaining of
the hard Usage the Merchants of England had.

His oppressing, and Imprisoning all Ranks and Orders of Men Unjustly.

His threatening the House of Commons, if they would not give Money.

His shameful betraying the Palatinate, and keeping the Charity of England from
them.

His having, without doubt, a great Hand in the wicked Irish Rebellion.

His large Demonstration of his Piety, by ordering a Declaration of Sports on
the Lord's Day.

His giving Wicked, Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Orders, Instructions and
Commissions to the Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and
endeavored to save him from the Parliaments Just and necessary Prosecution.

His suffering the Bishops, Gauden and Duppa, to compose a lying Book, called,
Eicon Basilice, and to put it out in his Name, the better to justify his evil
Actions against his People.

His causing the Star Chamber and High Commission Courts to be made use of, to
the great Grievance of the People of England.

His falsely charging with Treason, and unjustly imprisoning the Lord Mandevil,
Mr. Hollis, Mr. Strode, and many others, and would produce no Witness against
them.

His Tempting and Encouraging his English and Irish Armies to come and Destroy
the Parliament.

His dealing most Basely and Treacherously with the Parliament whilst Treating
at Uxbridge.

His having a hand in the untimely Deaths of King James the First, and Prince
Henry.

His being an Exorbitant and Outrageous Tyrant upon the People of England.

Murder will Out: OR, THE KING'S LETTER, JUSTIFYING THE MARQUESS of ANTRIM, And
declaring, That what he did in the Irish Rebellion, was by Direction from his
Royal Father and Mother, and for the Service of the Crown.

Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate, says the Lord,

Jer. 2. 12. For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, nor any
thing hid which shall not be known, or come abroad,

Mat. 10. 26. London, Printed School.

IRELAND, Aug. 22 d. 1663. Ever Honored Sir,
LAST Thursday we came to Trial with my Lord Marquess of Antrim, but according
to my Fears (which you always surmised to be in vain) he was by the King's
Extraordinary, and Peremptory LETTER of Favor, restored to his Estate, as an
Innocent Papist. We proved Eight Qualifications in the Act of Settlement
against him, the least of which made him incapable of being restored as
Innocent. We proved, 1. That he was to have a hand in surprising the Castle of
Dublin, in the Year, 1641. 2. That he was of the Rebels party before the 15th.
of September, 1643. which we made appear by his hourly and frequent intercourse
with Renny O Moore, and many others; being himself the most notorious of the
said Rebels. 3. That he entered into the Roman Catholic Confederacy before the
Peace in 1643. 4. That he constantly adheard to the Nunctio's Party, in
opposition to His Majesty's Authority. 5. That he sat from time to time in the
Supreme Council of Kilkenny. 6. That he signed that execrable Oath of
Association. 7. That he was Commissionated, and acted as Lieutenant General,
from the said Assembly at Kilkenny. 8. That he declared by several Letters of
his own Penning, himself in Conjunction with Owen To Oneale, and a constant
Opposer to the several Peaces, made by the Lord Leiutenant with the Irish.


We were seven Hours by the Clock in proving our Evidence against him, but at
last the King's Letter being opened, and read in Court, Rainsford, one of the
Commissioners, to us, That the King's Letter on his behalf was Evidence without
Exception, and thereupon declared him to be an Innocent Papist.

This Cause (Sir) has (though many Reflections have passed upon the
Commissioners before) more startled the judgments of all Men, than all the
Trials since the beginning of their sitting; and it is very strange and
wonderful to all of the Long Robe, that the King should give such a Letter,
having divested himself of that Authority, and reposed the Trust in the
Commissioners for that Purpose: And likewise it is admired, that the
Commissioners having taken solmn Oaths, To execute nothing but according to,
and in pursuance of the Act of Settlement, should, barely upon His Majesty's
Letter, declare the Marquess Innocent.

To be short, there never was so great a Rebel, that had so much favor from so
good a King: And it is very evident to me, though young, and scarce yet brought
upon the Stage, that the consequence of these things will be very bad; and if
God of his extraordinary Mercy do not prevent it, War, and (if possible)
greater Judgments, cannot be far from us; where Vice is Patronized, and Antrim,
a Rebel upon Record, and so lately and clearly proved one, should have no other
color for his Actions but the King's own Letter; which takes all Imputations
from Antrim, and lays them totally upon his own Father.

Sir, I shall by the next, if possible, send you over one of our Briefs against
my Lord, by some Friend: It Is too large for a Packet, it being no less in bulk
than a Book of Martyrs. I have no more at present, but refer you to the King's
Letter, hereto annexed.

CHARLES R.
RIght Trusty and well-beloved Cousins and Counselors, etc. We greet you well.
How far We have been from interposing on the behalf of any of Our Irish
Subjects, who by their miscarriages in the late Rebellion in that Kingdom of
Ireland, had made themselves unworthy of Our Grace and Protection, is notorious
to all Men, and We were so jealous in that particular, that shortly after Our
return into this Our Kingdom, when the Marquess of Antrim came thither to
present his duty to Us, upon the Information We received from those Persons who
then attended Us, by a Deputation from Our Kingdom of Ireland, or from those
who at that time owned our Authority there, that the Marquess of Antrim had so
mis-behaved himself toward Us, and Our late Royal Father of Blessed Memory,
that he was in no degree worthy of the least Countenance from Us, and that they
had manifest and unquestionable Evidence of such his Guilt. Whereupon We
refused to admit the said Marquess so much as into Our Presence, but on the
contrary committed him Prisoner to our Tower of London; where after he had
continued several Months under a strict restraint, upon the continued
Information of the said Persons, We sent him into Ireland, without interposing
the least on his behalf, but left him to undergo such a Trial and Punishment,
as by the Justice of that Our Kingdom should be found due to his Crime,
expecting still that some heinous Matter would be objected and proved against
him, to make him incapable, and to deprive him of that Favor and Protection
from Us, which we knew his former Actions and Services had merited. After many
Months attendance there, and (We presume) after such Examinations as were
requisite, he was at last dismissed, without any Censure, and without any
transmission of Charge against him to Us, and with a License to transport
himself into this Kingdom. We concluded that it was then time to give him some
instance of Our Favor, and to remember the many Services he had done, and the
Sufferings he had undergone, for his Affections and Fidelity to Our Royal
Father, and Our Self; and that it was time to redeem him from those Calamities,
which yet do lie as heavy upon him since, as before Our happy Return: And
thereupon We recommend him to you Our Lieutenant, that you should move Our
Council there, for preparing a Bill to be transmitted to Us, for the
Re-investing him the said Marquess, into the Possession of his Estate in that
Our Kingdom, as had been done in some other Cases. To which Letter, you Our
said Lieutenant returned Us answer, That you had informed Our Council of that
Our Letter, and that you were upon consideration thereof, unanimously of
Opinion, that such a Bill ought not to be transmitted to Us, the reason whereof
would forthwith be presented to Us from Our Council. After which time We
received the enclosed Petition from the said Marquess, which We referred to the
considerations and examinations of the Lords of Our Privy Council, whose Names
are mentioned in that Our Reference, which is annexed to the said Petition, who
thereupon met together, and after having heard the Marquess of Antrim, did not
think fit to make any Report to Us, till they might see and understand the
Reasons which induced you not to transmit the Bill We had proposed, which
Letter was not then come to Our Hands: After which time We have received your
Letter of the 18 th. of March, together with several Petitions which had been
presented to you, as well from the Old Soldiers and Adventurers, as from the
Lady Marchioness of Antrim, all which We likewise transmitted to the Lords
Referees. Upon a second Petition presented to Us by the Lord Marquess, which is
here likewise enclosed, commanding Our said Referees to take the same into
their serious consideration, and to hear what the Petitioner had to offer in
his own Vindication, and to report the whole matter to Us, which upon a third
Petition herein likewise enclosed, We required them to be expedite with what
speed they could. By which deliberate Proceedings of Ours you cannot but
observe, that no importunity, how just soever, could prevail with Us to bring
Our Self to a Judgment in this Affair, without very ample Information. Our said
Referees, after several Meetings, and perusal of what has been offered to them
by the said Marquess, have reported unto Us, That they have seen several
Letters, all of them the handwriting of Our Royal Father to the said Marquess,
and several Instructions concerning his treating and joining with the Irish, in
order to the King's Service, by reducing to their Obedience, and by drawing
some Forces from them for the Service of Scotland. That besides the Letters and
Orders under His Majesty's Hand, they have received sufficient Evidence and
Testimony of several private Messages and Directions sent from Our Royal
Father, and from Our Royal Mother, with the Privity, and with the Directions of
the King, Our Father, by which they are persuaded, that whatever Intelligence,
Correspondence or Actings, the said Marquess had with the Confederate Irish
Catholics, was directed or allowed by the said Letters, Instructions and
Directions; and that it manifestly appears to them, that the King, our Father,
was well pleased with what the Marquess did, after he had done it, and approved
the same.

This being the true state of the Marquess his Case, and there being nothing
proved upon the first Information against him, nor any thing contained against
him in your Letter of March 18. but that you were informed, he had put in his
Claim before the Commissioners appointed for executing the Act of Settlement;
and that if his Innocence be such as is alleged, there is no need of
transmitting such a Bill to Us as is desired; and that if he be Nocent, it
consists not with with the Duty which you owe to Us, to transmit such a Bill,
as if it should pass into a Law, must needs draw a great Prejudice upon so many
Adventurers and Soldiers, which are, as is alleged, to be therein concerned.
We have considered of the Petition of the Adventurers and Soldiers, which was
transmitted to Us by You; the Equity of which consists in nothing, but that
they have been peaceably in Possession for the space of 7 or 8 Years, of those
Lands which were formerly the State of the Marquess of Antrim, and others, who
were all engaged in the late Irish Rebellion; and that they shall suffer very
much and be ruined, if those Lands should be taken from them. And We have
likewise considered another Petition from several Citizens of London, near 60
in Number, directed to our Self, wherein they desire, That the Marquess his
Estate may be made liable to the payment of his just Debts, that so they may
not be ruined in the favor of the present Possessors, who (they say) are but a
few Citizens and Soldiers, who have disbursed very small Sums thereon. Upon the
whole matter, no Man can think We are less engaged by Our Declaration, and by
the Act of Settlement, to protect those who are Innocent, and who have
faithfully endeavored to serve the Crown, how unfortunate soever, than to
expose to Justice those who have been really and maliciously guilty. And
therefore we cannot in Justice, but upon the Petition of the Marquess of
Antrim, and after the serious and strict Inquisition into his Actions, declare
unto you, That We do find him Innocent from any Malice or Rebellious Purpose
against the Crown; and that what he did by way of Correspondence or Compliance
with the Irish Rebels, was in order to the Service of Our Royal Father, and
warranted by his Instructions, and the Trust reposed in him, and that the
benefit thereof accrued to the Service of the Crown, and not to the particular
advantage and benefit of the Marquess. And as We cannot in justice deny him
this Testimony, so We require You to transmit Our Letter to Our Commissioners,
that they may know Our Judgments in this Case of the Lord of Antrims, and
proceed accordingly. And so We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, July 10. in the 15 th. Year of our Reign,
1663. By His Majesty's Command, HENRY BENNET.
Entered at the Signet-Office,

July 13. 1663.


To Our Right Trusty and Right entirely Well-beloved Cousin and Counselor,
James Duke of Ormond, Our Lieutenant General and General Governor of Our
Kingdom of Ireland; and to the Lords of Our Council of that Our Kingdom.

King Charles I. his Order to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for Printing his
Declaration concerning Sports on Sundays.
CHARLES R.

Canterbury, See that Our Declaration concerning Recreations on the Lord's Day
after Evening Prayer, be Printed.

The KING'S Majesty's Declaration to His Subjects, concerning Lawful SPORTS to
be Used.
By the KING.

OUR Dear Father of Blessed Memory, in his return from Scotland, coming through
Lancashire, found that his Subjects were debarred from Lawful Recreations upon
Sundays after Evening Prayers ended, and upon Holy Days: And He prudently
considered, that if these times were taken from them, the meaner sort, who
labor hard all the Week, should have no Recreations at all to refresh their
Spirits. And after his return, he farther saw that his Loyal Subjects in all
other parts of his Kingdom did suffer in the same kind, though perhaps not in
the same Degree: And did therefore, in his Princely Wisdom, Publish a
Declaration to all his loving Subjects, concerning Lawful Sports to be used at
such times, which was Printed and Published by his Royal Commandment, in the
Year 1618. in the Tenor which hereafter Follows.

By the KING.

WHereas upon Our return the last Year out of Scotland, We did publish Our
Pleasure, touching the Recreations of Our People in those parts under Our Hand;
for some Causes Us thereunto moving, We have thought good to Command these Our
Directions then given in Lancashire, with a few Words thereunto added, and most
appliable to these parts of Our Realms to be Published to all Our Subjects.

Whereas We did justly in Our Progress through Lancashire, Rebuke some
Puritanes and precise People, and took order that the like unlawful Carriage
should not be used by any of them hereafter, in the prohibiting and unlawful
Punishing of Our Good People, for using their Lawful Recreations, and Honest
Exercises upon Sundays and other Holy Days, after the Afternoon Sermon or
Service: We now find, that two sorts of People, wherewith that Country is much
infected, (We mean Papists and Puritans) have Maliciously traduced and
calumniated those Our just and Honorable Proceedings. And therefore, lest Our
Reputation might upon the one side (though innocently) have some Aspersion laid
upon it, and that upon the other part, Our Good People in that Country be
misled by the mistaking and misinterpretation of Our meaning; We have therefore
thought good hereby, to clear and make Our Pleasure to be manifested to all Our
Good People in those parts.

It is true, that at Our first entry to this Crown, and Kingdom, We were
informed, and that too truly, that Our County of Lancashire abounded more in
Popish Recusants, than any County of England, and thus has still continued
since to Our great Regret, with little amendment, save that now of late, in Our
last riding through Our said County. We find both by the Report of the Judges,
and of the Bishop of that Diocses, that there is some Amendment now daily
beginning, which is no ^all Contentment to Us.

The report of this growing Amendment amongst them, made Us the more sorry,
when with Our own Ears We heard the general Complaint of Our People, that they
were barred from all Lawful Recreation, and Exercise upon the Sundays
Afternoon, after the ending of all Divine Service, which cannot but produce two
Evils: The one, the hindering of the Conversion of many, whom their Priests
will take occasion hereby to vex, persuading them that no honest Mirth or
Recreation is Lawful or Tolerable in Our Religion, which cannot but breed a
great Coffeehouse in Our Peoples Hearts, especially of such as are
peradventure upon the point of Turning. The other Inconvenience is, that this
Prohibition barreth the common and meaner sort of People from using such
Exercise, as may make their Bodies more able for War, when We, or Our
Successors shall have occasion to use them. And in place thereof, sets up
filthy Tiplings and Drunkenness, and breeds a number of idle and discontented
Speeches in their Alehouses. For when shall the Common People have leave to
Exercise, if not upon the Sundays and Holidays, seeing they must apply their
Labor, and win their Living in all Working Days.

Our express Pleasure therefore is, that the Laws of Our Kingdom and Cannons of
Our Church, be as well observed in that County, as in all other Places of this
Our Kingdom. And on the other part, that no Lawful Recreation shall be barred
to Our Good People, which shall not tend to the breach of Our aforesaid Laws,
and Cannons of Our Church: Which to express more particularly, Our Pleasure is,
That the Bishop, and all other Inferior Churchmen, and Churchwardens, shall
for their parts be careful and diligent, both to instruct the Ignorant, and
Convince and Reform them that are misled in Religion, presenting them that will
not Conform themselves, but obstinately stand out to Our Judges and Justices:
Whom We likewise Command to put the Law in due Execution against them.

Our Pleasure likewise is, That the Bishop of that Diocese take the like
straight Order with all the Puritanes and Precisians within the same, either
constraining them to Conform themselves, or to leave the County according to
the Laws of Our Kingdom, and Cannons of Our Church, and so to strike equally on
both Hands, against the Contemners of Our Authority, and Adversaries of Our
Church. And as for Our Good Peoples Lawful Recreation, our Pleasure likewise
is, That after the end of Divine Service, Our Good People be not disturbed,
let, or discouraged from any Lawful Recreation, such as Dancing, either Men
or Women, Archery for Men, Leaping, Vaulting, or any other such harmless
Recreation, nor from having of May-Games, Whitson-Ales, and Morris-Dances, and
the setting up of May-Poles, and other Sports therewith used, so as the same be
had in due and convenient time, without impediment or neglect of Divine
Service: And that Women shall have leave to carry Rushes to the Church for the
decoring of it, according to their old Custom. But withal, We do here account
still as prohibited all unlawful Games to he used upon Sundays only, as Bear
and Bull-baitings, Interludes, and at all times in the meaner sort of People by
Law prohibited, Bowling.

And likewise, We bar from this Benefit and Liberty, all such known Recusants,
either Men or Women, as will abstain from coming to Church or Divine Service,
being therefore unworthy of any Lawful Recreation after the said Service, that
will not first come to the Church, and serve God: Prohibiting in like sort, the
said Recreations to any, that though conform in Religion, are not present in
the Church at the Ser-Service of God, before their going to the said
Recreations. Our Pleasure likewise is, That they to whom it belongs in
Office, shall present and sharply punish all such as in Abuse of this Our
Liberty, will use these Exercises before the ends of all Divine Services for
that Day. And We likewise straightly Command, that every Person shall resort to
his own Parish Church to hear Divine Sirvice, and each Parish by it self to use
the s^id Recreation after Divine Service. Prohibiting likewise any Offensive
Weapons to be carried or used in the said times of Recreations. And our
Pleasure is, That this Our Declaration shall be Published by Order from the
Bishop of the Diocese, through all the Parish Churches, and that both Our
Judges of Our Circuit, and Our Justices of Our Peace be informed thereof.

Given at Our Manor of Greenwich, the Four and Twentieth Day of May, in the
Sixteenth Year of Our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the
One and Fiftieth.
Here follows King Charles II. Corroborating Declaration, to have the
Recreations and Sports to be used on the Lord's Day.
NOW out of a like Pious Care for the Service of God, and for suppressing of
any Humors that oppose Truth, and for the Ease, Comfort, and Recreation of Our
well deserving People, Woe do ratify and publish, this our Blessed Father's
Declaration: The rather, because, of late in some Counties of Kingdom, We find
that under pretense of taking away Abuses, there has been a general
Forbidding, not only of ordinary Meetings, but of the Feasts of the Dedication
of the Churches, commonly called Wakes. Now Our express Will and Pleasure is,
that these Feasts. with others, shall be observed, and that Our Justices of the
Peace in their several Divisions shall look to it, both that all Disorders
there, may be prevented or punished, and that all Neighborhood and Freedom,
with Manlike and Lawful Exercises be used. And We farther command Our Justices
of Assize in their several Circuits, to see that no Man do Trouble or Molest
any of Our Loyal and Dutiful People, in, or for their lawful Recreations,
having first done their Duty to God, and continuing in Obedience to Us and Our
Laws. And of this, We command all Our Judges, Justices of the Peace, as well
within Liberties as without, Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Officers,
to take notice of, and to see observed, as they tender Our Displeasure. And We
farther Will, that Publication of this Our Command be made by Order from the
Bishops through all the Parish Churches of their several Diocesses respectively.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster, the 18th. of October, in the Ninth of Our
Reign. God save the King.
A true Copy of the Commission said to be given by the King to his Catholic
Subjects of Ireland, with the Warrant and Deposition annexed.
From our Camp at Newrie this Fourth of Nov. 1641. Philem. O. Neale, Rorie
Macguire.
To all Catholics of the Romish Party, both English and Irish, within the
Kingdom of Ireland, we wish all Happiness, Freedom of Conscience, and Victory
over the English Heretics, who have for a long time Tyrannized over our
Bodies, and usurped by Extortion our Estates.
BE it hereby made known unto you all our Friends and Countrymen, That the
King's most Excellent Majesty, (for many great and urgent Causes him thereunto
moving, reposing Trust and Confidence in our Fidelities) has signified unto us
by his Commission, under the great Seal of Scotland, bearing date at Edinburgh,
the first Day of this Instant October, 1641. and also by Letters under his Sign
Manuel, bearing date with the said Commission; of diverse great and heinous
Affronts that the English Protestants, especially the Parliament there, have
published against his Royal Prerogative, and also against our Catholic Friends
within the Kingdom of England. The Copy of which Commission we have here sent
unto you, to be published with all Speed in all parts of this Kingdom, that you
may be assured of our sufficient Warrant and Authority herein.

The Commission.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Our Catholic Subjects within Our Kingdom of Ireland, Greeting.
Know ye, That We for the Safeguard and Preservation of Our Person, have been
enforced to make Our Abode and Residence in Our Kingdom of Scotland for a long
Season, occasioned by reason of the Obstinate and Disobedient Carriage of Our
Parliament in England against Us; who have not only presumed to take upon them
the Government, and Disposing of those Princely Rights and Prerogatives, that
have justly descended upon Us from Our Predecessors, both Kings and Queens of
the said Kingdom, for many hundred Years last past; but also have possessed
themselves of the whole Strength of the said Kingdom, in appointing Governors,
Commanders and Officers in all parts and places therein, at their own Wills and
Pleasure, without Our Consent, whereby We are deprived of Our Sovereignty, and
left naked without Defense. And forasmuch as We are (in Our self) very
sensible, That those Storms blow aloft, and are very likely to be carried by
the Vehemence of the Puritan in another Copy.
Protestant Party into Our Kingdom of Ireland, and endanger Our Regal and
Authority there also. Know ye therefore, That We reposing much Care and Trust
in your Duties and Obedience, which We have for many Years past sound, do
hereby give unto you full Power and Authority to Assemble and meet together
with all the Speed and Diligence that a Business of so great a Consequence does
require, and to Advise and Consult together by sufficient and discreet Numbers,
at all Times, Days and Places, which you shall in your Judgments hold most
Convenient and Material for the Ordering, Settleling and Effecting of this
Great Work (mentioned and directed unto you in Our Letters) and to use all
politic Ways and Means possible to possess your selves (for Our Use and
Safety) of all the Forts, Castles and Places of Strength and Defense within the
said Kingdom (except the places, Persons and Estates of our Loyal and Loving
Subjects the Scots) and also to Arrest and Seize the Goods, Estates and Persons
of all the English Protestants within the said Kingdom, to Our use, and in your
care and speedy performance of this Our Will and Pleasure, we shall perceive
your wonted Duty and Allegiance unto Us, which We shall accept and reward in
due time.

Witness Our self at Edinburgh, the first day of October, in the Seventeenth
Year of Our Reign.
More of these secret Intreagues of King Charles the First and Second, you will
find in a Book, Entitled, Great Britain's Miseries, in a short History of the
manifold Difficulties this Kingdom has labored under these 40 Years last past.

A LETTER From Pope Gregory XVth. to Charles Steward, Prince of Wales, and
since King of England, during the time of his being in Spain: As likewise the
said Prince's Answer.
Both taken out of the History of England, at the Pages 1162, 1163, 1164.
Written by the Sieur Andrew du Chesne; being the Third Edition, printed at
Paris, in the Year 1641, by William Loyson at the Palace in the Middle of the
Prisoners Gallery; and which are also to be met with in the French Mercury of
the Year 1623, when these Letters were Written, both which the said King never
Disowned.

Most Noble Prince,
AFter wishing you all immaginable Health, and the Illumination of Gods Divine
Grace, We give you to Understand, That whereas Great Britain has always
abounded in Virtues, and in Persons of singular Merit and Esteem, and
consequently filled both Worlds with the Glory of its Renown; so she has also
very frequently exacted the Consideration and Commendation of the Apostolic
See. And indeed the Holy Church was but yet in its Infancy, when the King of
Kings pitched upon it, for the Portion of his Inheritance, and which he did
with so great Zeal and Affection, that scarce the Roman Eagles got possession
of it before the Cross: And we may withal Observe that many of its Kings
likewise, being instructed in the surest means of their Salvation, have all
along preferred the Holy Cross to the Regal Scepter, and the Doctrine of
Religion, either to Ambition or Covetousness, transmitting thereby Examples of
Piety both to foreign Nations and Posterity: So that having sufficiently
merited in Heaven, the Privileges and Preeminences of Beatitude, they have also
Obtained on Earth the Triumphal Ornaments of never-dying Sanctity. And now
although the Church of England has for some time, been born and separated from
the true Catholic Faith, yet at the same time we perceive the Court of Great
Britain adorned and embellished with so many Moral Virtues, that we cannot but
be encouraged in our Love toward her, and should Acknowledge her as one of the
chiefest Ornaments of the Christian Name, provided she were but Qualified, and
Influenced with the Orthodox, and Universal Truth. For which reason, and so
much the rather, as we have the deepest Sense of, and the sincerest Respect
for, the Glory of your most Serene Father, and your own great Natural
Abilities, so we heartily and passionately desire that the Gates of Heaven may
be set open to you, and the Tenets of the True Church be received by you.
Moreover, whereas Gregory the Great, Our Glorious Predecessor of most pious
Memory first taught the People of your Nation to obey the Law of the Gospel,
and to submit to the Apostolic Authority, so we (though Inferior to him, both in
Piety and Virtue) yet of the same Name and Dignity with him, do think it but
reasonable that we follow his holy Steps, and endeavor to procure the
Salvation of your Country, especially at thsi Juncture, when your happy
Intentions, Most Noble Prince, have raised in us hopes of a successful Event.
Therefore as you are at present at the Court of the most Catholic King, with
Inclinations to make an Alliance with the House of Austria, we cannot but
extremely commend Your Design; and the rather, by reason that we are satisfied
that your principal end in it is, the promoting the Advantage of our Supreme
Prelacy and Dignity: For since you seem so earnestly to desire the Infanta of
Spain in Marriage, we may easily infer that in all probabily the ancient seeds
of Christian Piety, which have formerly flourished so prosperously in the
Hearts of the Kings of Great Britain, may revive and recover their pristine
Glory in you, and we cannot think that he who professes so sincere an esteem
for such an Alliance, should be an Enemy to the Catholic Religion, or be ever
inclined to molest the Holy See. In pursuance whereof we have commanded
continual and most humble Orations, to be put up to the Father of Mercies that
it would please his Divine Goodness to establish you, as the blooming Flower of
Christendom, and the Sole Hopes of Great Britain, in the Throne of your Noble
Ancestors, who for the most part, have all made it their chiefest Business, to
Assert the Authority of the Sovereign Pontificat, and to combat the Monsters of
Heresy. Propose to Yourself the Modells of former Ages; inspect the Behavior
of your Forefathers, and they will show you, what Method you are to take to
get the Throne of Bliss; and what Policy Temporal Princes have always made use
of, to inherit an Eternal Kingdom. Behold your gloriours Predecessors Enthroned
above! Who formerly, waited on by Angels went to Rome, to Honor and do Homage
to the Lord of Lords, and to the Successors of his Holy Apostle St. Peter.
Their Works and Examples are of so many Voices, whereby God Exhorts you to
imitate their Lives, to whose Empire you shall one day arrive. Is it possible
that you can suffer the Heretics, to Profane and Condemn those Holy Men, whom
the Faith of the Church, enjoins us to believe to Reign above the Clouds with
Jesus Christ; and to have command and Authority over all the Principalities and
Potentates of the Earth? See these blessed Saints stretch out their Arms, to
Conduct you safe to the Court of this most Catholic King; and behold with what
Ardour they desire to lead you to the Bosom of the Mother Church; That Church
which is often suppliant with inexpressible Agonies, before the Throne of
Almighty Wisdom, for your Reformation and Safety, and which even now tenders
its Apostolic Charity, with all imaginable Christian Affection, to receive you
to her self; You, that are her Darling Son; You, that are her most desired,
though hitherto her too misguided, Offspring! Certainly you can never be more
Obliging to the Christian State, than to put the Prince of Apostles into the
possession of your most noble Island, which has almost all along hitherto
approved its self the most potent Arbiter both of Church and State. The most
glorious Work will the easier be Effected, if you first show an Example, by
Opening to God that knocks at the Door of your Heart, and wherein consist the
Absolute Happiness and Salvation of this Kingdom. This is so great Charity,
occasions us to desire that You, and your most Serene Father, should be
qualified with the glorious Titles of Deliverers, and Restorers of the Ancient
and Paternal Religion of Great Britain, which we hope may be speedily Effected,
by means of the great Power and Goodness of God, in whose Hands the Hearts of
Kings are, and who causes the People of the Earth to receive Relief, and which
we shall always be ready to Favor and Encourage to the utmost of our Power: In
the mean time, be pleased to understand by the Contents of this Letter, that
for Our parts We will omit nothing that may anywise tend to procure your
Happiness; and that We shall never repent of having writ it, if it may be but
so efficacious, as to raise the least Spark of the Catholic Faith in your
Breast, whose Benefit we so much desire, and to whom We wish long Life, and an
endless Increase of all Christian Virtues. Given at Rome, in the Palace of St.
Peter, the 20th. Day of April, 1623, and in the Third Year of Our Pontificat.

This Letter was delivered to the said Prince by the Pope's Nuncio, accompanied
by all the Italian Lords, who were then at the Court of Spain.

King CHARLES I's. ANSWER, (Being then PRINCE of WALES) TO THE POPE'S LETTER.
Most Holy Father,
I Have received Your Holinesse's Letter with infinite satisfaction, paying all
imaginable respect to the Piety and Good Will, with which your Holiness writ
it. But what has occasioned me inexpressible Pleasure was, to read of the
generous exploits of the King's, my Predecessors, in whose deserved
Commendations Posterity hitherto has not been a little Niggardly. I am willing
to believe Your Holiness set their Example before my Eyes, that I might
endeavor to imitate them in all my Actions, for in truth, they have often
exposed, both themselves and their Dominions, for the Exaltation of the Holy
See; insomuch that their Courage, with which they attacked the Enemies of the
Holy Cross, has ever approved it self as vigorous, as my endeavors shall
always be to introduce Peace, good Intelligence, which have hitherto been so
much wanting into Christendom; for as the common Enemy of Peace labors
incessantly to insult Hatred and Dissension into the hearts of Christian
Princes, so I am of Opinion, that the Glory of God requires indispensably that
they should be united, and I do not value my self in being descended from so
many great Princes on any account, so much as in my Unfeigned and true Zeal, to
pursue the footsteps of their Piety. To support me in which design, it is no
small advantage to me, to be backed by the Will and Pleasure of my most
Honored Lord and Father, and the pious Intention of his Most Catholic
Majesty, both who are more than ordinarily concerned to think of the great
Calamities that must necessarily proceed from a Disunion among Christian
Princes. This the unexampled Prudence of Your Holiness has foreseen, while you
deemed the Marriage between me and the Infanta of Spain, to be so absolutely
necessary for the Public Good, and nothing is more certain, than that I shall
be always most passionately desirous of an Alliance with a Prince who has the
same Sentiments of the true Religion with my self; wherefore I earnestly beg
Your Holiness, to believe that I have always been very far from encouraging any
Novalties in Religion, or from favoring any Faction opposite to the Interest
of the Apostolic See; but on the contrary, have sought after all occasions, to
take away any suspicions or jealousies I might lie under, being resolved to
employ the remainder of my Days, in the practice of one Religion, and one
Faith, since we ought all to follow alike in Jesus Christ, in pursuance
whereof, I shall for the future avoid no hazards, and cheerfully undergo all
manner of Inconveniences, even to the Exposing of my Life and Fortune, upon an
occasion that will undoubtedly be so acceptable and well-pleasing to God.
Nothing more remains but that I humbly thank Your Holiness for admitting me to
this unworthy Address, and I also earnestly beseech Almighty God, to grant Your
Holiness Health in this World, and Eternal Happiness in that to come, after so
many Labors and Fatigues, which your Holiness has undergone for the
Propagation and Preservation of the Holy True Church.

Signed, CHARLES R.

The substance of the Articles of Peace made and concluded with the Irish
Papists and Rebels, by James Lord Marquess of Ormond, for, and on the behalf of
His Majesty King Charles I.
THE Substance of the Proclamation is, That whereas the Lord Marquess of
Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, by virtue of an Authority given him by King
Charles I. had agreed to a Peace, on his said Majesty's account, with the
General Assembly of Roman Catholics of that Kingdom; all the Inhabitants are
obliged to take Notice thereof, and to be Obedient to the same at their Peril.
Also that the Motives which induced that King to such a Peace, were the Benefit
and Traffic of his Subjects, and to put a stop to the Miseries which they had
so long undergone. Signed Ormond, and Dated from the Castle of Kilkenny the 17
th. June, 1648.

The Substance of the Articles are, That in consideration of his said Majesty's
having been acknowledged Rightful and Lawful Sovereign, by his Dutiful and
Loyal Subjects the Roman Catholics of Ireland, and for their hearty Proffers
of doing him all imaginable service that King was pleased to Grant.

1. That that they shall have the free Exercise of their Religion, without
being subject to any Penalties for the same; That they shall not be forced to
receive any other than what is Agreeable to their Conscience; That they shall
not be obliged to take the Oath of Supremacy, but only bind themselves to be
True and Faithful to the King, as their Temporal Lord. Nevertheless, the Lord
Lieutenant does not pretend to alter the Established State of Spiritualities,
having no Authority for that purpose; but however, promises that the said Roman
Catholics shall not be interrupted in any of their Possessions and
Jurisdictions, till His Majesty, upon a full consideration of their desires,
shall declare his further Pleasure in the next Free Parliament, wherein also
these gracious Confessions are to be Enacted as Laws.

2. That a Free Parliament shall be called in Ireland within 6 Months, or as
soon after as 12 Persons named in this Article, or the major part of them,
shall desire; and that in the mean time, these Articles shall be inviolably
observed as Laws: Yet in case a Parliament be not held within 2 Years after the
Date hereof, then is the Lord Leiutenant, at the Request of the said Twelve, to
Convene the General States for the better settling of Affairs in that Kingdom;
and that the Contents of these Articles are to be transmitted into England,
according to the usual Form to be passed in Parliament there, and that no
Alterations to the prejudice of the King's Catholics, or Protestant Subjects,
shall be made either here or there, other than what His Majesty shall declare
his Pleasure in, for the satisfaction of his Subjects, or than such Matters, as
the then Lord Leiutenant shall propose to both, or either Houses for the
Advancement of His Majesty's Service, and the Peace of the Kingdom, but which
must not in the least entrench on these present Articles. Moreover, this
Parliament may either Repeal or Suspend Poyning's Law, which imports that no
Parliament shall be held in Ireland till the Acts are first Certify'd into
England.

3. That all Acts made to the prejudice of the Irish Roman Catholics, since
the 7th. of August, 1641. shall be null and void, and that they be vacated
accordingly in the next Parliament, and in the mean time they have no Force.

4. That all Processes in prejudice of the said Roman Catholics, made since
the said 7th. of August, 1641. shall be made void in such manner, as no Memory
shall remain thereof; and this, when ever the said Twelve, or the major part of
them shall desire the same, and in the interim they are to be of no Force, and
what has already been done upon their Account, is to be restored, or made good.

5. The Roman Catholics shall be deemed qualified to Set in the succeeding
Parliaments.

6. All Debts are to remain as they were on the 23 d. of October, 1641.
notwithstanding any Alliance made on account of these Processes, and this to be
Enacted by the next Parliament.

7. That the Estates, and reputed Estates, of all the Inhabitants of the
Counties of Cannought, Clare, Thomond, Limerick and Tipperary, be secured to
them according to the 25 th. Article of the Grant in the 4 th Year of his
Majesty's Reign, to be held by the same Rents and Tenures as they were in the
said 4 th. Year. And as for the Laws in the Counties of Kilkenny and Wickloe,
to which His Majesty was Entitled by Offices found for him during the Earl of
Stafford's Government, the State of them is to be considered the next intended
Parliament, when his Majesty will Assent to what is Just and Honorable; and
that the Act for limitation of His Majesty's Titles, for the security of his
Subject's Estates in this Kingdom, be passed in the said Parliament, pursuant
to what was Enacted in the 21 st Year of James I. in England.

8. All Incapacities imposed on the Irish Catholics, to be taken away in the
succeeding Parliament, and they enabled to Erect Inns of Court, or Free
Schools, where the Lord Lieutenant in conjuction with the Twelve, or the major
number of them, shall think fit, and the Students and Scholars are to take only
an Oath of Allegiance; this likewise is to be Enacted by the next Parliament.

9. Roman Catholics are to be deemed, qualified for any Trust in the Army, and
to be preferred according to their respective Merits. As, likewise to be
received into the Civil Government, with the like Privileges; also they are to
be entrusted with any Garrisons in the same manner. And that, till full
settlement in Parliament, 15000 Foot and 2500 Horse of the Irish Roman
Catholics, shall be of the standing Army, which number may be either Augmented
or diminished by the power of the Lord Lieutenant, and the aforesaid Twelve, or
their Majority, as often as they shall see convenient.

10. The King is to receive 12000 Pound annually, in lieu of whatever profits
may accrue to him within the Jurisdiction of the Court of Wards.

11. No Noble Man for the future is to be allowed to make above 2 Proxies in
Parliament, and all Blank Proxies to be totally disallowed. Also, where a Baron
has not 200 Pound per Ann. a Viscount 400, an Earl 600, a Marquess 800, and a
Duke 1000, they shall be disabled to sit in Parliament, and the Commons also
are to be stated, and resident within the Kingdom.

12. As for the Parliament of Ireland, depending on that of England, they are
left to make such Declaration therein as shall be agreeable to their Laws of
their Kingdom.

13. That for the future, the Council Table is to be confined within its own
Bounds, and to meddle only with matters of State and Weight, other Business
between Party and Party is to be left to the Ordinary course of Law.

14. Several Acts shall be Repealed, relating to Wool, Flocks, Tallow, etc. and
diverse Officers appointed by the Lord Lieutenant, and the aforesaid Twelve, or
the majority of them, to ascertain the Rates of all Merchandise, either to be
Exported or Imported.

15. All Persons wronged by Offices found in the first of King James I. or
since, in the Province of Ulster, and other Provinces of this Kingdom, may
Petition His Majesty, and be Redrest upon Examination.

16. That as to the particular cases of 16 Persons named, they may Petition in
the next Parliament, and shall be relieved accordingly.

17. The former Inhabitants of Cork, Youghall and Downegarven, shall be
restored to their respective Estates, where their Number does not endanger the
Garrifons, and shall choose and return Burgesses as formerly.

18. An Act of Indemnity to pass in the next Parliament, to extend to all His
Majesty's Loving Subjects of this Kingdom, and Pirates on the Sea, except such
as have been Convicted or Attainted on Record before the 23 of October 1641. it
shall not extend to remit any of the King's Debts, or Subsidies, due before the
said time; provided, that such Barbarous Crimes as shall be agreed upon by the
Lord Lieutenant, and the Twelve, or the Majority of them, be left to be
adjudg'd by such Commissioners, as the said Lord Lieutenant and the Twelve
shall Assign, and that the power of such Commissioners be limited to two
Years. The other Provisoes are omitted for Brevities sake.

19. The great Officers of the Kingdom are excluded from being Farmers of the
Customs.

20. An Act of Parliament to pass against Monopolies, pursuant to that Enacted
in England, in the 21 st. of James I. with a clause to Repeal all Grants of
Monopolies. Likewise Commissioners to be appointed by the Lord Lieutenant, and
the Twelve, or the majority of them, to rate the Customs and Impositions on
Aquivita, Tobacco, etc.

21. Commissioners agreed upon by the Lord Lieutenant, and the Twelve, or their
Majority, were to regulate the Court of Castle Chamber.

22. The two Acts prohibiting the Plowing with Horses by the Tail, and the
Burning of Oats in the Straw, to be Repeal^d.

23. That the Grievances Petitioned for by both Houses of Parliament, and by
Agents sent for that purpose in the 4 th. Year of His Majesty's Reign, shall be
Redressed.

24. All Sea Affairs to be determined in this Kingdom, and in case of Appeal,
it may be only to the Chancery of Ireland, or to the Parliament of this
Kingdom, and until such a Parliament is, the Admiralty, and all Maritine
Causes, are to be ordered and settled by the Lord Lieutenant, together with the
Advice and Consent of the Twelve, or their majority.

25. That His Majesty's Subjects be eased of all Rents and Increase of Rents,
raised by the Commission for defective Titles in the Lord of Stafford's
Government. This to be by Act of Parliament.

26. That by Act to be passed in the next Parliament, all Interest Money, not
satisfied since the 23 d. of October, 1641. until the perfection of these
Articles, shall be released and forgiven, and that for 3 Years ensuing 5 per
Cent. shall be taken only for Interest.

27. The aforemention Twelve, immediately after the perfection of these
Articles, are to be empowered by the Lord Lieutenant, and the Twelve, or their
majority to lay Taxes by Excise, or otherwise for Payment of the Army and
Garrisons until there shall be a settlement in Parliament. The Commissioners of
the Taxes are to consist both of Protestants and Roman Catholics. The Twelve,
or their majority, have likewise power to levy all Arrears of Taxes, imposed by
the Confederate Roman Catholics, and yet unpaid, and to call all Receivers.
etc. to Account, either by themselves, or Commissioners. They shall also have
power to Let and Improve the Estates of all such as shall not submit to this
Peace, and the Revenues thereof are to be converted by the Lord Lieutenant,
toward the use of the Army till settled by Parliament. They are likewise
Empowered, or the Majority of them, to lay up Arms and Ammunition in Magazines,
and for entertaining as many Frigates as shall be thought Necessary. They may
moreover imprison all that resist this their Power, or else distrain their
Goods. They are also to cause Books to be made of their paid Imprests, and to
deliver Duplicates of them to the Lord Lieutenant. Their Number is to be
supplied in case either of Death or Disability of any, by the choice and
direction of the rest.

28. That the Lord Lieutenant, together with the Twelve, or the majority, shall
nominate all Justices of the Peace, Oyer and Terminer, etc. to continue during
Pleasure, but whose power must not extend to before the 1 st. of May last past,
nor to determine Civil Causes exceeding 10 l. Their Power likewise is not to
extend to Examine any Injuries done, contrary to the Articles of Cessation, by
and with the Roman Catholic Party, since May last; but those matters are to be
determined by the indifferent Persons that are to be Named by the Lord
Lieutenant and the Twelve, or their majority: The Justices, Judges, etc. shall
take an Oath to Execute their Offices faithfully.

29. All Roman Catholic Governors of Cities, etc. to continue till removed by
Parliament, and to be subject to such as the Lord Lieutenant and the Twelve, or
their ma^ority, shall nominate, or set over them.

30. All Customs and Tenths of Prizes shall be paid into His Majesty's
Receipts, and to the Persons appointed by the Lord Leiutenant, and the Twelve,
or their majority; and in case any Person has a Right to any of these Offices,
and whereunto he may not be admitted till Settlement in Parliament, then is he
to have a Pension till he is restored.

31. As for His Majesty's Rents due at Easter next, and from thenceforth to
grow due, he will not require them till a full settlement in Parliament be
first made.

32. The Judges power, appointed as aforesaid, shall commence on the 1 st. of
May last past, and continue to the first day of the next Parliament.

33. That several Courts of Judicature shall be Estabish'd in this Kingdom, and
their Officers nominated by the Lord Lieutenant, and the Twelve, or their
majority.

34. The Roman Catholic Regular Clergy, not to be disturbed in their
Possessions, or Pensions, until a Settlement by Parliament.

35. That as to all other Demands of the said Roman Catholics, they be referred
to His Majesty's Gracious Favor, and further Concessions.

Signed and Witnessed by the Lord Leiutenant, in His Majesty's Name, and by Sir
Richard Blake, Chairman of the General Assembly of the Roman Catholics, by
their Order and Unanimous Consent,
the 17th. of Jan. 1648. and in the 24th. Year of King Charles I's Reign.
FINIS.

