May it please your Lordship,
HAving formerly discourst amongst the Crowd of Arguments which have been
vented since the knowledge of the Peace; whether was the more proper for the
defense of it, a great number of the Disciplined Forces, who courageously
behaved themselves during the War, and were as eminent Instruments as the Arm
of Flesh could be, for enforcing a Potent Prince whom all his Neighbors
conjectured that he aimed at being Universal Monarch, which (God be praised) he
now seems not to pursue; But whether he is so far to be trusted, as that we may
safely part with most of these hardy and well Disciplined Men, and rely wholly
upon the Militia, who have formerly defended this Island as has been
Historically set forth, is now the main matter to be considered, and looks so
Janus like, I know not which to admire, both Faces having excellent good Eyes;
I am apt to think they will both look about them for their Honors, so that
neither of them may be absolutely laid aside, nor do I apprehend that the
Thinking Men (who have not been abroad nor in Arms) do conclude that the
Militia can at present be so useful as to defend us, in case the Disciplined
Men be clearly Disbanded; and sometimes Negligence and Nakedness encourages
watchful Politicians to attempt those things that they would not have thought
on, whilst they were apprehensive of a reasonable Guard; Nor do I apprehend
moderate Men do think the Militia are fully useful, but seem to hope they may
be made so; In short, if you are near a Common, or many Neighbors whom you are
to Fence from, if you permit your Gates to lie open, and are careless of your
Fences, you will have little Hay to make, or none to carry away; So without
question the Disciplined Force must be kept up, till the Militia is made
useful; And how it will ever become so without new and more Laws for that
purpose, and those Laws put in practice, I do not apprehend; Laws were talked of
last year and this, yet there is small Appearance of them, and when we have
them, and they are pursued with all Vigor imaginable, I do not apprehend how
the Nation can be without the Number of the necessary force that is now in
being* Perhaps as the Militia grows useful, they may be placed in other
Quarters; But whether some Men that talk much of a Militia are in real earnest,
is something doubtful, for at the same time they discourse of her, they say she
is chargeable, and her Men are changeable, so do scruple or are doubtful,
whether she is materially Improveable; and our latter Kings have showed a sort
of Platonic Love to her, talk of her, see her sometimes, Court her with a
seeming cool Affection, and yet will not part with her for an hour, will not
suffer any other to court her, nor will they absolutely dissolve her nor lay
her to Sleep, yet will let her ofttimes drouze, which the common People are not
very well pleased with; For tho sometimes they grumble at her as Burthensom and
Chargeable* yet they love her as they do Hopkins and Sternhold, because they
are pleased in having a little share in the Government as they have in the
Devotion; Therefore to come as near to the satisfaction of all Parties as my
Capacity will bring me to, having said formerly I had some Observations (by
employing my thoughts) which may perhaps tend to the making the Militia useful,
I have drawn a small Scheme, which compared with former Practices and Charges
may happily, with something less charge, make the Militia more useful, and when
that appears, Additions will come on by Inclination; so that the present
posture of the Disciplined Forces may be changed again into their former
Station, and yet the same number kept up.

But at present, I confess, I do not see how either Persons, Pay, or Numbers,
or Stations, can be safely altered, till the Militia is made more useful* And
that being an Affair I have aimed at, I here humbly offer you the summary
account of what has past and is now in being; and also what number of Men, what
Sum for Pay, what enlargement of Time I hope will make the Militia Useful; and
yet keep within the bounds of the present Expense England and Wales have been
accustomed and are still liable unto, as will appear by these following
particular Accounts of the Militia of all the Counties of England and Wales,
according as the public Prints, sold in Westminister-Hall, say they are
Returned by the Deputy Lieutenants of the several Counties; with a Computation
of the customary Charge.

Horse Officers 450 Total of Officers 2788 Horse Men 6386 Total of Troopers and
private Soldiers, 82003 Foot Officers 2338 Foot Men 75617

Total of Horse and Foot 84791. And allowing a 12th. part more, or 7000 Men for
the 5 Counties which are Blank in the Print, makes the whole Number 91791, viz.
Horse about 7450, and Foot about 84391.

For Troopers in the Militia, the Act says they shall be allowed 2s. 6d. But as
its practiced in Drinking and Extravagancies its generally 4s. if not 5s per
day; Compute at 4s. per diem.

Horse Men (Officers Exclusive) 6386 comes to which at 14 days per Ann. amounts
to l. s. d. 1277 04 00 17880 16 00

For Foot Soldiers in the Militia, the Act says they shall be allowed 1s. per
day, but generaly they have 2s. or 2s. 6d. or more, compute at 2s. per diem.

Foot Men (Officers Exclusive) 75617 comes to which at 14 days per Ann. amounts
to l. s. d. 7561 14 00 105863 16 00

Trophy Money which includes all Officers Pay (except Mustermasters) Also
Colors, Drums, Trumpets, Clarks, Deputy Lieutenants Entertainments, etc.

l. s. d. Amounts to 17500 00 00 Muster Master at 1s. per Horsman, 6386 Men
amounts to 319l. 06s. For Foot at 6d. per Ann. per Man, which for 75617.
amounts to 1890l. 08s. 06d. 2209 14 06 Horse Tropers 17880 16 00 Foot Soldiers
105863 16 00 Sum Total 143454 06 06 Besides Clothing, which per Man once in two
Years at 50s. comes to per Ann. 105988 15 00 In all 249443 01 06 To which
adding a 12 part for the 5 Blank Counties or 21000l. makes the whole charge
270443 01 06

These particulars amount to above 270000 /. and yet neither Arms, Ammunition,
Accoutrements or Horses are mentioned; which if I could compute would amount to
a very considerable Sum. But I shall not insist upon them, being durable and
not Annually consumptive, only Ammunition is an Annual Charge, especially here
in London, Middlesex and Tower Hamless, who by the Printed Particular are
12077, besides 131 Horsemen, Exclusive of Officers who are 278. and these being
out more than the 14 days limitation upon every Alarm, either Inland Plot or
Insurrection, or Foreign Designs or Invasions feared or apprehended, makes the
Citizens think the charge very great, being forced many times to give 4 or 5s.
per day or more, to an indifferent Man for the Service to appear and mount the
Guard, which seems to indicate, that there is a growing necessity that some
coercive Power or Law should be set up again, as formerly, for making the
Militia, Artillery or Trainedbands useful as formerly. I shall not insist upon
this coercive Power at present; but appropriate it to a particular Paragraph,
where I shall not argue it to be placed as an Additional Power in the Military
Officer, but rather adhere to the fixing of it in the Civil Magistrate, who
must be Diligent and Active, consentaneously with the Military Officer,
according to the Emblem and Motto of our Neighbors, being two Earthen Pots
Floting on the Sea, with this Inscription, Si collidimur frangimur.

I know not to what charge and uncertainty we shall run: for its visible, that
ever since the Civil-War, the Militia has Annually declined, and it was in
those Unhappy Times that the first attempt was for putting the charge of the
Militia into standing Troops, for Awing and Insulting the Nobility, Gentry and
Freeholders; I hope we shall not follow the pattern of those unaccountable
times, when we were so unfortunate and unhappy as to want both King, Lords and
Free Parliaments; tho I must consess we seem by the neglect and disparaging of
the Militia, to incline to the like circumstances, for it is observable, King
Charles II endeavored as much as he could to raise and keep up Regular Troops,
Guards, Regiments and Independent Companies; And that King James, when he had
increased them, chose rather to part with his Parliament than with his Regular
Troops and Regiments, which are in a great part near an Establishment, for its
concluded by Arguments lately, 7000 Men that were in King Charles's time for
Guards and Garrisons are not now sufficient, tho they make another figure for
its thought 120000l. paid them Annually then; and it appears the Government
allows 300000l. for the Annual Payment of these 7000, who must be increased
twice 7 in a few years more, if the Militia be not improved; for it is not
20000 Men in regular standing Discipline that are sufficient for our Security,
if the Arguments are true, that our Neighbors are so formidable and likely to
Invade us, by which arguments I did think they had been coming, but God be
praised I neither see nor hear of their coming now: I hope its the noise or
discourse of our Militia that does something discourage them, who if they be
made useful, will be certainly our safeguard; but when that will be I dare not
venture to say: for it is a rational business, and requires time to effect it,
but if it be only talked of, never gone about, its not to be accomplished. Its
like Propagation, which must first have copulation, and then lie forming near
12 Months in the Womb before it creeps or crawls out to view, and then some
time before it finds motion and can go, and then some years before it comes to
Maturity, but better late than never.

Therefore I humbly offer in Writing what I have been long loath to come unto,
desiring rather to have proposed and explained my self by Discourse, for I
solemnly protest, I do not think my self properly qualified for such a Penman
as is fit to appear in Print; but its the sincere affection I have for my
Country, that has prompted me to form my Notions into two Schemes, the first
your Lordship has already viewed of Numbers and Charges, the other I humbly
Present here; which I heartily wish may prove worth the Pains of your honors
view and consideration. Its no new Project, Chimera or Capricio, its but the
effects of the studies which I thought my Duty, when I had the Honor to be in
the Honorable House of Commons, as a Representative of the City of Litchfield,
in King James' Parliament; when that Honorable House of Commons were as Warm
and Zealous for lessening the Army they had consented should be raised, as this
or the last years have been; tho that Army was but a handful of Men then, or
very small to what, this was lately. I remember very well I was behind an
Eminent, Eloquent, Lordly Estated Member then, and is the same now, who said
there in a debate for Disbanding the Army. What, shall it be said that we who
are in an Island, in a great measure guarded by Gods Providence* do that which
no part of the World does tho upon the Continent, Establish a Standing Army;
and an Army that's picked up in the Streets. To this there was no direct reply,
tho I confess I thought the last Expressions Haughty, and possibly that worthy
Member did not at that time consider that many of the greatest Nobility and
Quality in England were in that Army. And I do believe, the Nobility and Gentry
of England never put themselves under Command and into Arms so readily and
willingly, as they did into that small Army, comparative to what has been
since: to this warm expression the chief reply was by a Member of excellent
parts also, (who is now also of that House, but I think beyond Seas) who moved,
that the Army might be continued till the Militia was made useful: then the
House went upon Propositions for making the Militia useful: whereupon it was my
good Fortune (for the House was pleased to hear me) to say Time was a necessary
ingredient for the exercising and making of Soldiers; and that Fourteen Days in
the Year was too short and strait a time for bringing Men into Order and
Exercise, so much of the time being spent in coming and going, and then I was
allowed to propose 20, 24 or 28. And then the House did allow the enlarging of
time to 28 Days; I do not recite this out of Ostentation, to show the Honor
and Favor I had at that time, but to demonstrate its no new thing, if the
Parliament should think fit to do something like these following Propositions,
which had been offered then if the Parliament had continued; but the discourse
and Arguments then for Disbanding the Army, was supposed to be the chief cause
for the breaking up the Parliament. For as I remember 700000l. was voted to be
given, and some steps were made toward the raising of it; but rather than the
King would part with his Army or Popish Officers and Servants, he then slighted
the Money and parted with the Parliament: this I confess is a little digressive
from that I promised, which demonstrates, like a Maidens Blush, that I am
afraid to come to, but out it must come however it succeeds.

In the first Place, I Humbly Propose, to lessen the Number of Foot one Half or
more, and a little increase the Number of Horse: as thus, the computed Number
of Foot are 8439. which I would reduce to 40000 Officers Inclusive. The Horse
being 7400, I would increase them to 8000, Officers Inclusive; now with
submission or allowance I will proceed to computation of Pay for 48000 Horse
and Foot. For the 40000 Foot (Officers Inclusive) I would propose to allow 1s.
per day a Man which comes in the whole to 2000l. per diem. These 40000 Men to
be divided into Forty Regiments, consisting of 1000 Men in a Regiment, and
every Regiment being divided into 10 Companies, every company consisting of 90
Sentinels, one Captain, 2 Lieutenants, 1 Ensign, 2 Sergeants, 1 Gentleman of
the Pikes, 3 Corporals, and 2 Drums, these make the Company 102, so that if 5
or 6 be drawn out of the Squadron of Pikes, and 2 of them allowed for Hautboys,
and the other 2 allowed for Lieutenants Men, compleats the Company to a 100.
and 24 Pikes are a good stand to a Company; these at 1s. per day come to 5l.
which are to be proportioned and Paid thus, 84 Private Sentinel at 9d. per day
comes to 3l. 3s. the remaining 1l. 17s. to be divided thus, the Captain 7s. per
day, 2 Lieutenants and their Men 12s. per day, that is 6s. each, the Ensign 4s.
6d. 2 Drums at 1s. 6d. per day 3s. 2 Hautboys 1s. 6d. per day 3s. 2 Sergeants
1s. 6d. per day 3s. 1 Gentleman of the Pikes, who is to Write well, and as it
were a Clerk to the Company 1s. 6d. per day, 3 Corporals 3s. which all together
makes 5l.

Horse 8000 (Officers Inclusive) at 2s. 6d. per day, comes to 1000l. per day,
which divided into 16 Regiments are 500 in a Regiment, and those divided into
10 Troops are 50 in a Troop; and those are to be divided into 36 private
Troopers, which make 9 Ranks 50 half Crowns is 6l. 5s. per diem, which is thus
proportioned, 36 Troopers 4l. 10s. the remaining 1l. 15s. to be divided thus,
to the Lieutenant and his 2 Servants 15s. per day, the Quartermaster 6s. per
day; 2 Trumpets 3s. 6d. per day; 2 Trumpets 3s. 6d. per day 7s. 2 Corporals 3s.
6d. per day 7s. the Captain and Cornet with their Servants complete the 50, and
are not thought to have pay; because they are concluded to be Persons of
Quality or of great Estates, especially the Captain, who is excused from
serving Sheriff, and other places of Charge and Trouble; as all Military Men
should be excused from other Employments, and as for Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors and Captains, if they be not Knights being Men of
Estates, by serving the King and their Country, (and indeed its also serving
themselves,) yet its odds but their Courage and Readiness to serve the King and
their Country may obtain them Knighthood, when they appear before the King,
and why not as well as Lord-Mayour and Sheriffs; and as to the Cornet he has no
Pay, because he being supposed to be a young Gentleman that either has an
Estate and leisure to accompany the Captain to gain Experience, if he be not
his Eldest Son, and so likely to succeed his Father, especially if he has
gained Experience. Thus having proportioned the days Pay into Fractions, count
the whole together for the Year, the Foot being 2000l. per day, first for 14
days is 28000l. Then 8000 Horse at 1000l. for 14 days is 14000. total for 14
days per Ann. is 42000l. for 48000 Men; out of which I would desire to Detach
10000 Foot and 2000 Horse to be Marched and Encamped, for which I would desire
28 Days Yearly, to be added to the other 14 Days, being in all 6 Weeks, which
being employed in Marching, encamping and daily Exercised whilst Encamped, and
the farther from their own Country the more and the better they will learn, and
bring them to such perfection they cannot forget the Discipline in Three Years,
especially Marching and Exercising 14 Days every Year of the Three Years. And
by this means or Method the 48000 are Rotated, Marched, Encampt and
Disciplined. The whole Charge of this is thus computed, first the 2000 Horse
comes to 250l. at 2s. 6d. per day, consequently at 28 days 7000l. the 10000
Foot 500l. per diem, for 28 days is 14000l. The Total of 12000 Horse and Foot
for 28 days is 21000l. which added to the 42000l. for 14 days makes the whole
in the year 63000l. Clothing 12000 Men yearly at the rate of 2l. 10s. per Man,
by which means they appear fresh in the Camp with Airing them the 14 days, in
the other 3 years they may last the Rotation, and will amount to 30000l. For
Colors, Drums, Trumpets and ouher contingent Charges allow 7000l. Arms, Horses
and Accoutrements I do not compute in this Scheme, because I left them out in
the other The Total is per Annum 100000l.

The computation of the present incident charge of the Militia amounting to
about 270000.

And this Scheme amounting but to 100000l. there will be less in charge,
170000l.

Ammunition I humbly refer for computation and determination, as I do every
thing to the better consideration of Authority, to whom I also submit, whether
the Muster-master be necessary, for I do with submission, think the Captain or
Lieutenant of every Troop and Company presenting a fair Roll every time they
meet, to the Colonel, and he or they handing the Rolls to the Deputy
Lieutenants or Lord Lieutenants, who will have power to Punish Absenters or
other Faults; and they once in the Year present them to the King, or such a
Mustermaster-General as his Majesty shall from time to time think fit to
appoint for viewing and examining, and at his Majesty's time or call
representing the Defaults, Misdemeanors, Inconveniences or Improvements, as
the Officers of each Regiment shall describe or subscribe at the Foot of their
Rolls; so that conveniences and inconveniences will be represented to his
Majesty with ease, and be reduced and improved as his Majesty shall think best,
with the Advice of his Council, until such time as the Parliament shall help or
redress.

The Charge and Burden of Defensive Arms, as Back, Breast and Pot for
Horseman; and also the Charge and Burden of Back, Breast and Headpiece for
Pike Men, shall be waved, omitted and excused; and in case of any Extraordinary
occasion, its not to be doubted the Officers of the Ordnance will send
sufficient Numbers of Defensive Arms with the Train of Artillery; if the Horse
Men be furnished with a long Carbine in a Sling or Belt and Box at his Saddle,
as is now in the Guards, he will be better pleased, and at more ease than with
the Burden of the Back and Breast, etc. and also the Foot, Bagonets for their
sides and Muzzels of their Muskets; and I consess I did not think of Cloaks in
the Clothing of the Horsemen, but if they amount to 3 or 4000 per Annum the 4
first Years, they will last an Age for the use will be made of them.

Having lessened the Number from Ninety odd Thousand to 48000 Men, and also Pay
and Charges from 27000l. per Ann. by these 2 Schemes to 100000l. per Ann. and
time very near, if not absolutely fitting for completing the Militia, so that
they are capable of suppressing any Insurrections that shall be
Enthusiastically or Diabolically raised in the Kingdom, and I doubt not will be
in a fit readiness to make a proper Stand or Defense, if any Foreigner shall
attempt. And if our Trade happily increase, the Blood in Youth will be so warm:
or if Trade should unhappily be in the wane, there will be Desperadoes in
readiness for going to defend any of our Plantations, Planting any new Colony
that shall be found out, or to assist any Neighbor his Majesty shall think
fit: or upon mature Consideration with his Parliament, will cheerfully and
readily List themselves for making a Descent upon those that shall either
affront the Honor of England, or disturb and annoy her Trade; It must be
confessed, one Volunteer is better than two Pressed; there is a Stanza of a Poet
confirms this, by saying

In Expedition greatest Love appears,
Soldiers and Wives are best when Volunteers.
For Officers it is not to be doubted the Guards will be a Nursery; nor is it to
be doubted the Militia will afford many Officers, who will go Voluntarily upon
such occasions; for tho it must be confessed that Estates in the Country are
exemplary to the Freeholder, and a Corroboration of the Militia; yet to say the
Captains, Lieutenants and Ensigns of Foot, and the Lieutenants and
Quartermasters shall have such and such Estates, will be excluding many
Gentlemen of lesser Estates, and especially Younger Brothers who are generally
fittest for Soldiers, especially for Soldiers of Fortune; and will willingly be
in the Nursery of the Militia, whereby he may have some Experience for going
Abroad, if any occasion encourage them: yet I confess for the encouragement and
Honor of the Militia, I would wish that every Commission Officer should be a
known Gentleman in his Country; not that I would have the Freeholder disgusted;
for if he will put himself under Arms or send a Son, who having seen a Campain
or two, and then having carried a Halbert and Exercised the Company another
Campain: with submission I think him qualified and proper for a Lieutenant in
the Militia, and so advance in Foreign Service as Fortune shall favor his
Courage and Industry. Its not proposed they should be stopped in their advance in
the Militia, because they are not capable of being Soldiers. But the design of
having Gentlemen of Good Estates and known Families in the Country to become
Militia Officers, is to encourage the Freeholder to serve in Person, or send
his Son; or if he is not of Ability of Body, or is Infirm by Accidents,
Sickness or Age, he will the more consider the Representative he sends, and to
conclude its an Indecency, Absurdity and Irrational, that he should send an
Idle, Drunken Swaggering Person to be in an acceptance of fellow Soldier, with
the best Estates and Quality in the Country.

This is unreasonable and unnatural to the solid and substantial design and
intent for preservation of the Nation, and every individual Property and Person.

Which brings me to distinguish betwixt Persons and Pay; for although I
heartily wish to see the Militia Marching with Gentlemen of great Estates in
the head of them, and every other Commission-Officer a Gentleman, every
Horseman so well Mounted, Accoutred and Clothed, that his Master of 500l. per
Annum may not be ashamed to own him for his Representative; nor the Freeholder
of 50l. per Annum his Representative in the Foot; so that we stick close to the
Pattern of the present Militia, only Improveing in the care and diligence of
sending better Men and Horses, and not changing either under Penalties without
good reasons, and those with vouchers to the Officers, and not frivolous
Excuses or Favor of the Officer. And for this care and diligence under severe
Penalties for neglect; it seems Rational and Natural there should be a
Relaxation of their Charge, for whatever tends to a general good, ease or
advantage; its natural Equity the Expense or Charge should be born by every
individual Person, according to the proportion of his Estate; not that the
Landed Men Finders shall be abated one Farthing in the County Tax, (I think
there is a common Lawyers Latin, Honos habet onus and Terras querras,) which is
proposed as genearl upon this occasion as any Tax that has brought in Land,
Money, Personal Estate or Offices; for the Soldier Exercises his Arms and
Hazards himself in their Defense equally; only this I must add to
consideration, whether it is not also equitable that the finders of Horse and
Foot, should be excused from Offices in the Civil Government; not that the
finder of a whole Horse or half a Horse should be excused from High Sheriff,
for that would Excuse the whole County and Kingdom, but from serving on the
Grand Jury or other Juries if he will plead the Privilege; and the Freeholder
also of 50l. per Annum, being a Foot-Soldier or Finder, is to be excused from
Juries or serving Constable and other small Offices in the Parish; provided
that he applies himself to the next Justice of the Peace, and demonstrates to
him, that there are others in the said Parish qualified for the Duty: if so,
(and he is freed from their Services) he has no Excuse for not being in
readiness upon any sudden Summons or Alarm; nor is he to go any long Journey
from home, without satisfying the Officer in whose District he is, or the next
Justice of the Peace, that he leaves a fit Representative; and also a years pay
in the said Officer or Justices hands, taking a Receipt for the same.

I crave leave to offer one consideration more of these Finders, that tho the
Horse or his Rider is not to go out of the County above five or six Miles,
without the leave of one of the Commission Officers, under whose command he is,
or the next Justice of the Peace; yet in case it shall happen the Horse Fails
or dies by any violence or occasion Military, not if upon a natural Distemper,
(that he may do in the Stable at home,) but if the Commission-Officers or
Officer, under whose Command he is, does certify under his hand, that the
Horse failed by reason of his Military Duty, and also computes his value if
Dead, or the damage that may be to his Finder, if Lamed or Blemished; upon the
Finders delivery of the Certificate to the Treasurer of the County, he is to
pay the sum certified, and the Certificate is to pass in the accounts of the
Treasurer at the Assizes or Sessions: or when the Lieutenancy with two or three
Justices or more, whereof one to be of the Quorum and not a Military Officer,
shall pass the general accounts: and also the Soldier whether Horse or Foot
Man, if he be adjudged by his Officers to become Sick either by Heats ot Colds
in Marching, Encamping, or any Post or Part of his Duty, or Maimed or Disabled;
upon the Certificate of his Officers or one Field-Officer, his Finder is to see
he has all necessaries of Cloths, Diet or other sustenance, and due
applications for Sickness or Wounds or other requisites for his Condition,
until the next Quarter Sessions; and then as it shall appear to the Bench, he
shall according to their direction be Allowed and Maintained out of the Public
Stock of the County.

Here it may be said (and I expect it) that it will be a great difficulty to
proportion and raise this Money; and that your Lordships have not Power, either
by your Lieutenancy, or Authority of your whole House to raise Money: to your
Lordships power of raising Money I acquiece, but with submission to your
Lordships, if your Lordships who are Lord-Lieutenants of all the Counties of
England and Wales, consult to draw a Bill for making the Militia more useful,
leaving Blanks for the Horse and Foot, with a Blank for such a computed sum to
be raised yearly; and this Bill be approved by your most Honorable House, I am
with submission apt to hope, and inclined to think, the Honorable House of
Commons will fill up the Blanks and complete the Bill; especially if the Bill
have a Preamble containing the Charge and Services of former Ages, to what our
present Freedom is, and will be; if such a Bill as these and the like
Propositions should take effect. For if your Lordships take this present
Printed List of Horse and Foot, amounting to Ninety odd Thousand (who are short
of the computed Annual value of the Kingdom, which is Fourteen Millions per
Ann.) and reduce them again to 48000 Horse and Foot, which is about half; and
then Abstract and Proportion every County Proportionably, I do suppose it will
be no great difficulty to say how many Men and how much Money each County shall
raise; and by way of Addition scattering the 7000l. for contingent Charges into
parcels, through the Dominions of England and Wales. There may a difficulty
arise amongst your Lordships, I confess, how to join small and great Counties
together for Regimenting of them, and then dividing the 40000 Foot into four
parts, and also the Horse of 8000 into four parts, so that 10000 Foot and 2000
Horse may March and Encamp every Year.

This, when the Charge is agreed, will be a greater Nicety than the
proportioning the Money; yet if your Lordships meet with serious Intention and
amicable Inclination for settling the Militia near these Schemes or Discourse,
I doubt not but this seeming ravel'd Clue of Pack-thread may be drawn straight;
and after one or two years Encampments at Hounslow, of these 12000 for one
Month, who will have a very short March from London and Middlesex, and the
Counties adjacent, for the first year or two; by that time the remoter
Counties, who are more ignorant, will gain some Information and Experience and
become fashionable: as Iter Borcale sings,

Thus Ring the Bells of Bow,
Down to the Country Candlesticks below.
These little Instances may be tedious to your Lordship, your Honor being
inclinable to make the Militia useful, and it is probable your Honor's Thoughts
may be employed in a better way to a true value; yet if this my Pains proves
like the Labor of cutting a Pebble stone, which with artificial Setting may
make a show till your Diamond appears, yet the Labor is not wholly lost; for
it will be discernibly meaner than your Luster, and consequently your Care for
your Country will be wonderfully admired; tho you in the instance actuate your
personal and Posterity's Preservation: as may appear more clearly after I have,
according to promise, presented a Paragraph of the Word Coersive.

Which is not to be defined with my Incapacities; but I hope the Recital of
Ancient Statutes will demonstrate I am in some measure apprehensive of the Word.

Imprimis, Stat. 7. Edw. I. Says, it belongs to the King to prohibit Force of
Arms, and all other Force against the Peace, and to punish Offenders therein
according to Law. And herein every Subject is bound to be aiding.

Stat. 1. E. III. Stat. 2. 5. None shall be charged to arm himself other ways
than was used in the time of the King's Progenitors; neither yet shall any be
compelled to go out of his Shire, but when Necessity requires, and the sudden
coming of strange Enemies into the Realm, and then it shall be done, as in
times past, for the Defense of the Realm.

Stat. c. 18. Hen. VI. 19. It is Felony for a Soldier (retained to serve the
King in his Wars) not to go with, or to depart from his Captain without License.

Stat. 7. Hen. VII. 1. A Captain which shall not have the whole Number of
Soldiers, or not pay them their due Wages within six days after he shall have
received them, shall forfeit all his Goods and Chattels, and suffer
Imprisonment.

Stat. 2. and 3. Edw. VI. 2. A Soldier that makes away his Horse or Arms
(proof thereof being made before the Chief Commander) shall suffer Imprisonment
without Bail, until he has satisfied the Party at whose Charge he was set out.

In this Act also it is Felony (without Benefit of Clergy) for a Soldier
retained to depart without License of his Commander; whereupon Justices of the
Peace may proceed as in case of Felony.

After these Strictnesses comes the Compassion and natural Equity in that Age,
which was a considerable Sum in those days, for a maimed Soldier, upon a
Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Chief Commander, or the Captain
under whom he served; to him that has not born Offices not exceeding 10 l. To
any Officer under a Lieutenant 15 l. To a Lieutenant 20 l.

This Statute admits of many Particulars, as Wingate, in his Abridgment
reviewed and revived by Washington, will demonstrate; from whom I have these
Abstracts, and shall recite more; therefore I may be easily discovered upon
Suspicion or Dislike. If I quote, I will as near as I can be true; where I do
not quote, if I say that which is not allowed to be generally good, it is my
Misfortune; for I intend every Particle for the best in the main; tho most
Actions and even a short Sentence may admit of various Constructions, and it is
often said that most things have two Handles; and if I am taken by the weakest,
and must, like a crazy piece of Earthen Ware, fall to the ground and be dashed
in pieces, I am the more Unfortunate; especially at this Season, when the
Doctrine of Charity and Compassion for Misfortunes and Infirmities is the grand
Admonition. But if I am the only Person blameable, I hope in the Conclusion
(after I have recited some more Statutes, and sum'd up the Heads of this
Discourse in this Escrole) to say something for my self by way of Declaration,
which may indicate my Desire for an Atonement.

Stat. 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. 3. If any one, who shall be commanded to muster
by any authorized thereunto, does absent himself (having no lawful Excuse) or
at such Musters does not bring with him his best Arms, he shall suffer ten days
Imprisonment without Bail, to be imposed by the Persons so authorized, unless
he agree to pay 40 l. as a Fine, to the use of the King and Queen, and the
Heirs and Successors of the Queen: which Fine shall be estreated into the
Exchequer by the said Persons so authorized under their Seals, within two
Months after such Agreement, and afterward levied as Fines assessed by
Justices of Assize and Gaol delivery in their Circuits.

This Statute must be concluded to extend to the Person himself, whom we will
call a Finder; for it cannot be supposed that a Servant riding his Master's
Horse, or an Hireling representing a Freeholder, is capable of Compounding for
40 l. There are several material Instances in this Act, which are to be viewed
at leisure and at large, which neither Time nor Room will admit of now.
Therefore I only recite these two Instances.

First, Offenses committed during the time of Service shall be heard and
determined by the Chief Commander.

Secondly, This Act shall not discharge Service of War incident to the Tenure
of Land.

This brings me to the Recital of Tenures heretofore, which have been these,
Knights Service, Villenage, Escuage, Wardship, and several others; which are
described in several Volumes of Antiquity, which are an obsolete Reading tho
divertive, yet not to be brought within the compass of a Pamphlet or Vade
mecum. But upon this occasion of comparing former Ages with the present they
are really necessary; therefore I request here to recite their Efficacy.

Knights Service obliged to attend the King, when in Arms either at home or
abroad. He that held Land in a whole Knights Fee, was obliged to attend the
King forty days, well and conveniently arrayed for the War. If he had two or
three Knights Fees, his times were to be increased accordingly. If half a
Knights Fee, twenty days, etc. pro rata.

Villenage was upon the seeming present sort of Yeomanry, who were to take care
of the Liege-Lords Lands in Demean, as we say; for Plowing and all Husbandry,
besides fetching his Coals, Materials for Buildings, or such Services he should
be called to, which in short did not allow him any time for him to say he was
Master of, especially during the War.

Escuage seems to mitigate this Rigor; for Escuage according to my
apprehension, was either to go in Person, as above, in Knights Service, or
Commute, as we say now, commonly Compound, by paying a Sum pro. rata, according
as the Land he possesses, Knight's Fee 2,3, or half One.

A Ward I shall not describe; because under Age, and not fit to march under
Mars's Banner; yet the coercive Power to serve under Venus seemed a greater
Grievance to the Subject; for under the one you could dye but once, under the
other you might live 60 Years in daily Torment, each minute worse than Death.
For Marriage was ost-times directed, like or not like, as the Guardian thought
fit. This last, or any of the former, when really considered, I stood amazed at
the Health to old England, and the more now, because some Gentlemen I have met
with lately, who I thought had read more than my self, have laughed at my
Desires for a Definition of old England.

If these Four Instances may be looked upon as Members of the Body Politic in
former times, I desire to be pardoned if I say this Monarchical Power was as
Despotical as any Monarchy in Christendom; it is confessed it did not extend to
Life; but it had the Privilege of the first Night with the Bride, which yet in
some places pays a Composition, and is called Gava.

More Instances of this kind might be brought even from Magna Charta her self.

31. If a Barony escheat to the King, the Tenants that hold of the same (not
having other Lands that hold of the King in chief) shall pay like Relief, and
do like Services to the King after such Escheat, as they did to their former
Lords, etc.

32. No Freeman shall give or sell so much of his Land, that of the residue the
Lord of the Fee may not have Services due to him.

It Is confessed, several little Rents are remaining to keep in mind the
Services the Generality of the People underwent formerly; which certainly are
not to be wished for under the honorable and happy Character of old England
has been under hard Services since Magna Charta (which was obtained by popular
Sway,) what did she endure or undergo before Magna Charta gained? I would
willingly join issue, and pledge their Health if they only recite the Honor and
Courage of old England, which appeared, demonstrated, and effected their great
Exploits by those Services; which do clearly evidence, that the Nobility and
Gentry going personally into the Field, do defend and conquer with Honor and
Advantage, like our present King, and like the ancient Romans, who, whilst they
went in person, conquered for the most part: But when they had enlarged their
dominions, and raised, as they thought, an immortal Terror, Honor, and
Character, they became effeminate, and made use of mercenary Armies, and
declined the Use of Arms themselves: So that in process of time, they waving
the general Good, set up for deep Politicians, and by separate Insinuations,
obtained Popularity, and so fell into domestic Quarrels, till there is nothing
remaining more than some of their Statues, Medals, and Histories to demonstrate
what they have been.

I only hint at this Precedent with some of our own, to demonstrate the
Advantages of Personal Appearance. It was by this means that the Scots were so
often repulsed when they made Incursions upon us; By these means Wales was
brought to an entire Obedience and Union; By these means Ireland became
tributary; By these means it was the English made In roads into France to such
a degree, we claim it as our Conquest. And the Name of Talbot remains as a
Terror: But we have lost that Power by a long series of Peace in Queen
Elizabeth's days and King James's; for after she had happily defeated the
Spanish Armado: she did, it is confessed, set up and went a great way in the
Dominion of the Narrow Seas, and soon after rested her self contented with
Familiarities and pretty Insinuations into her People: whose Steps King James
I. followed, for he had such an Aversion to Gun powder he smelt it at a great
Distance, and so being a Man of Literature he conversed with Scholasticks, and
did go a great way toward arguing out Popery; which made the subtle Jesuit go
another way to work, and dress himself in a Fanatical Disguise, under which
it is doubted he still lurks amongst us; however its sadly experienced that the
Jesuit was the Bellows that blew up the late Civil War; and that although he could
not insinuate himself into the majority of the Nobility and Gentry so as to
alienate them from their Duty to their King; yet he knew what I have several
times heard recited as the Original of an English Gentleman or two, That the
only means to counter Honor is Zeal. And so we found that the Enthusiastic
Head and hard Hand encouraging the unthinking Mobb at that time with Plunder
and Sacrilege, brought us almost to Devastation; and yet I hear some admire the
Man that had the Gathering of two or three easy Reigns, or Gleanings of that
Confusion, as we naturally call Arbitrary Power. It Is confessed those Times
showed great Courage; Blood and Slaughter on both sides appeared as a Scene of
Mirth to him that thought he had Success. But when we commend these Traditions
or Historical Stories of Courage, we seem to resemble the Person that loves
Honey, but does not consider the laborious Be who goes abroad with a natural
Inclination to gather Store against the Winter, at every Glimps of Sun shine
innocently moving not apprehensive of the Storm that is coming, which perhaps
affrights her home before she has found out any thing to compensate her Pains,
and so returns home empty of any Loading, only rejoicing she has saved her
Life; and if when the best of Days happen to favor her, and she make quick
Returns, unloading her self immediately as she gathers, yet we scarce think or
know from what Briars, Brambles, Thorns and prickly Bushes she has obtained
this we so much delight in, and so tyrannically, as I may call it, destroy this
laborious Creature. This is a true Representation of our Government Power and
its Effects till lately; it is since the Revolution that the English Subject was
put into the most likely Enjoyment of what the Terrestrial Matters can afford,
and these Halcyon days were secured us by the Stat. 12 Car. II. c. 24. All
Tenures by Knights Service in Capite, and Common Soccage, and the Fruits and
Consequents thereof shall be taken away; and all Tenures turned into Free and
Common Soccage; and all Conveyances and Devises since the 24th of February,
1645, shall be of such Effect, as if the Lands and Hereditaments had then been
holden in Free Soccage only, and all Tenures to be created by the King shall be
in Free Soccage only, and not in Capite.

From hence it is we may say we were freed from the strait Reins and Spurrs
that hung up in the Hall of the Prerogative Palace, tho they have not been
effectually put on for some time; we having been by the Indulgence of the
former Reigns, I now mentioned, grown rather like untameable Creatures than
Colts, and found our selves grown to full Strength; so that we would neither
endure Bit nor Bridle, and the Spurs are of no use without Backing; so that in
truth it was no great Difficulty to treat with the Crown to part with these
Tackle; which (unless the Court of Wards) in my apprehension had not been made
use of for many years; yet the Wisdom of the Nation did not like to see them
hang in their Sight; and therefore were willing to come to a Compact. And the
whole Nation having drank rather too much in the Rejoicing at the Restoration
of him that had an Hereditary Right, and was affable in his Treat to a Bargain;
and so, as I apprehend it, either by shortning the Measure, or smalling the
Liquor, or taking away a little of the Brewers immense Profit, we were eased of
all these Encumbrances for Excise. The Militia being reestablished and in some
parts a little new modeled; which seemed very satisfactory and a good
Security, till our Neighbors grew potent, and we considerable, having in the
main recovered our intestine Ruins the Plague and Fire of London. And then
Grumblings began, Jealousies again increased, and then every individual Person
began to arm again, and Politicians began to publish Reasons: and had not our
Neighbors Potency both by Sea and Land, given us Apprehensions of their
Readiness to slip in amongst us; we looked very like the adventuring another
Eruption, which Providence has mercifully prevented by his own scourging
methods, which put us in through Fears, tho in his mercy he has stopped both the
apparent Dangers, either of bringing in Popery or arbitrary Powar by
Insinuations and Policies, or Popery and Devastation by a Potent Neighbor.

For avoiding of which for the future is the main End of several Scriblings and
Discourses, and several serious Considerations of the wiser Heads. All which
are or ought to be wished to be successful for finding out the best Expedients
for our Preservation. For which I shall not adventure to say any more at
present, tho I have more Thoughts about the Militia and the Disciplined Army,
in the Discourse of which I have said so much, I must decline any farther,
without continuance of these or those of Annuities; and endeavor to offer two
or three Apologies for composing or making my Peace for what I have said; tho I
hope it is no more than my common or standing Misfortune, rather than wilful
Fault, for I am sure I do not do any thing spleenatickly nor out of Disgust.
But my present State is much as my Case was in King Charles's Sickness, for
obeying Commands and doing my Duty.

The most dismal and melancholy Morning (with Showers and Floods of Tears) that
ever I beheld in the Faces of all People, Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty, both
in Court and City, (wherein I had my share, by hazard of Life and the little
Fortune I had left) was when King Charles the Second fell into an Apoplectick
Fit, which he never recovered: immediately upon his Fatal Silence I was
commanded to double the Guards, and shut up (if it was possible) all the
Avenues to the House; and personally attend at the Door (into the Fane Room)
out of the great Anti-Room to the Bed Chamber; and admit no Persons, of any
Degree or Quality whatsoever, to come in or to continue in that great Room,
unless Privy Counselors. In observance of which I drew upon me the Odium of
most of the Nobility, Quality, and Officers* so that I had Threats and
Challenges innumerable: every individual Person, through his Affection and
Interest, being as desirous as if his own Life was at the period; to know the
King's Condition. After some distinct times Lords were allowed to be there, and
then Lords Sons. But all the first day the Saw was drawn over me betwixt the
Lord Chamberlain, Groom of the Stole and Lord of the Bed Chamber in Waiting,
all of them, claiming the Jurisdiction of that Room, so that I was teazed
within, and so threatened without, I concluded I must never appear in Public.
My case may not be far differing now, without Providence favor me, and that
your Lordships, the Army and the Generality of the Nation will believe that
what I have adventured to say, and do in these Papers proceed from the dictates
of my Daty and Conscience for the general good of the present and future Age
and Ages, and not out of Pride or Fantastic conceit; and where I am erroneous
I hope it will be gently passed over as the effect of ignorance and Melancholy;
which I confess is sometimes near being my Master, particularly when I find my
intentions for a general or particular good (for others as well as for my
self;) are taken in another sense, and turned to my Inconveniency or Prejudice;
therefore I crave your Lordships Pardon in general for the trouble that these
Papers may have occasioned; promising that if I remain after this Sessions
discountenanced both in the attempts for making the Militia more useful, and
also the renewing and better settling the Annuities, I will never set my hand
again to a Public Print as I do to this, rather by way of Declaration than
Recantation of what I have unhappily published to my loss, and the
dissatisfaction of a particular Lord; from whom I do hereby solemnly declare
with Truth and Sincerity; that I have received more Favor and Kindness than
any Man Living, both at Court and in his own House and Family; and that I think
my self obliged to Serve him and them with the utmost of my Ability, and this
is all I can say toward an Atonement for what is past; if it stands as a
Fault Recorded, which can be no worse Charactered than the Latin affords,

Nil habet infaelix Paupertas durius in se,
Quam quod Ridiculos homines facit.
My gross Presumption was Printing a Favor without License, for and with which
I humbly offered a Reason and endeavored an Apology, so that I can say no more
till I hear what Submission is made for Printing Letters of those of the
Highest Quality, and Exposing them to public Sale, which I have by me and by
Purchase, which with Submission, tho they tend to the same purpose, are not
more Emphatical or Essicacious, and why he shall rest unrecriminated that
exposes Quality to public Sale, and I generally blamed for communication to
the Pares of the Original Author, is, I yet hope not so much a Fault as
Misfortune, being sincerely intended as a step rather toward corroboration of
Honor than disturbance or any inconveniency; if these approaches can not
prevail for a Pardon, I must farther follow the advice I long since learnt,

Dum Furor in cursu est, currenti cede furori. Humbly assuring your Lordships,
that for the future I shall be very Cautious of presuming to discourse, either
of, or with Honor, or Honors; but rather observe the Scripture instructions,
When thou come to a Rich Man's Table put thy Knife to thy Throat, i. e.
converse with none but thy equals.

And this Causes me to look back into this Paper to review and consider whether
I have not presumed, in saying the Nobility of England never put themselves
into Arms with more Willingness and Readiness than they did at King James's
Access to the Crown. Now finding it so nice and Difficult a Point to mention
Honor; I must enlarge by observing also, That when the Protestant Nobility
understood the Dispensing Power was putting in practice, for relaxing or
setting aside those Laws which had been many years and several Reigns in making
for defense of the Protestant Religion we now pretend to; and that all
Eneavours possible were in agitation for introducing the Popish Persuasion: the
Protestant Nobility and Gentry quitted their Posts in the Army, and other
Employments and Trusts as fast as any sober People in the World ever did: for
although they have a great regard to Monarchy, yet they will not so much indulge
it as arbitrariously to disannul those Laws by which we enjoy (as happily as
any People in the World) our Religion and Property, which God continue long:
For I am near an assurance it is not in the power of Foreigners to give us any
great Disturbance, so long as we continue the present appearing mutual
Affection, and interchangeable Addresses and Answers as have past betwixt the
King, Lords and Commons, this present Parliament; who, if they continue like
the Sheaf of Arrows, are not to be broken: but should they unhappily separate,
then our Neighbor (by the Instigation of the lurking Jesuit) may break or snap
us in pleces, like dry Reeds and Tobacco-pipes.

I must request leave for two or three Lines toward explaining my self, for
keeping my peace with the Soldiery, who I hope will allow me to explain my
self thus, That I think it absolutely neceslary they should continue in the
Station they seem settled for this year, and also filled up to a complete
number equal to their Officers, if occasion requires; or a greater Number upon
emergent Necessity, such as has been discoursed of the French Landing. For the
Militia must be dwindled below Effeminacy, and become as inconsiderable as a
cast Mistress, not having been looked upon these seven years last past; she has
been mentioned, and so far enacted several years as to be in readiness, not
with Arms and Ammunition, but with a Months Pay in their Pockets.

If this be all the Improvement that can be made of her, it is time to lay her
aside absolutely, and enlarge and encourage those Military Powers, who have put
a stop to all designed Insults over us, either by French Power or Popish
Designs; and, I doubt not, are of Courage, Disposition and Affection to
preserve the present King, with the Religion and Property of all his Dominions,
both from Foreign Powers and Domestic Enemies.

This I say because I in part know, and am apt to believe more than I know,
that many of Quality, great and good Estates, have ventured Lives and Fortunes,
rather for preservation of the Constitution, and those Laws that preserve cur
Religion and Property, than obtaining Self interest. Its apparent few have
gained Advantage by these Wars; and it is now as clear to the World by the
general Peace, that the major part of the Confederacy entered into and
maintained the War the best they could, rather upon the Consideration of
Property than Religion.

For we hear very little of any Article in the Peace concerning Religion,
unless some mention of the Vaudois. But many in this Island have ventured their
Persons, and all of us our Money very freely, by Sea and Land, and the main of
the Argument has been the Defense of Religion. For which I have heard several
Officers declare themselves such Champions, that if the King shall think there
is any Danger, they are ready to obey his Commands; yet if the Wisdom of the
Nation think it secure, they are willing to turn their Swords into Plow-shares.
These Dispositions are to be esteemed and admired, and deserve Encouragement by
Honors and Rewards. It Is much to be lamented Conquering time should deprive
the World of such Men who have charged, and, as it were, bid Defiance to Death
by their hazardous and fatiguing Voyages and Marches by Sea and Land, not
regarding their own Safety in Sieges and Battles, whilst the Honor and
Preservation of their own Country, with the Good and Safety of their Neighbors
and Confederates, were in their thoughts: these Men are immortal, whose Fame
may last long after they have yielded their Courageous Heads to the Summons of
pale Death upon a soft Pillow. For it is doubtful whether they will be succeeded
with the like Principles after a long Peace. It is natural for courageous Men
to love each other for ever after they have past through Difficulties and
Dangers, especially Officers and Soldiers their Commanders and General; and
more particularly after so long Experience and Acquaintance for above seven
years; in all which time we have not heard of a Mutiny or Desertion in the
Army; which is a clear demonstration of Affection to their General, whose
prudent Care and great Example, in Religion and Morals as well as Military
Courage and Experience, without all doubt will keep the Army steady to him, tho
he should outlive most or all of his Veterane Soldiers.

The Inconvenience or Danger of a Standing Army in this Island, will be at the
change of the Persons at the Helm of the Government; for tho we have all the
Assurances Man can wish for, that this King, who has preserved our Constitution
from dangerous Attempts; and, it is not to be feared, will all his time
establish or amend our Laws. But the Doubt or Fear is, whether his Successor or
Successors, having a mercenary Army at their Command, may not alter the
Constitution to their own Humor: or in case of a Minor, or weak King or Queen,
unexperienced in Arms: or in case of Want of Pay for the Army, may not the Army
carve for themselves, and set up whom they please: or in case of Competition,
it is natural for them to adhere to those who will pay them best and gratify
their Humors; several Instances we have of this kind in History. The Roman
Histories afford innumerable Instances of their Potentates and Generals coming
to untimely Ends, by the Revolts Mutinies and Bribings of mercenary Men, when
they had declined employing their Arms abroad, and fell into Animosities and
Contentions among themselves, which has been more fatal to England than Foreign
Enemies; nor did ever any Foreigner come here without Invitation: And as for
our Animosities, those in the year 1641, were the Original of my Ruin.

Therefore, tho a Militia may not be so proper and effectual to make Inrodes
into Foreign Countries as a constant disciplined Army, and tho they may be
looked upon as Raw and Undisciplined, and Cowardice may be imputed to them;
compared to those whose Fortune and Business it is to be always in Agitation
and Management, like a Trade; yet it is undeniable both the Constitution, the
Government and Governors, and every individual Man's Property is best secured
by his own Eye and Actions, having his Estate and Family at the stake and in as
much danger as his Person.

These Considerations will unquestionably put every individual Man of Estate
and Family upon ready and hearty Endeavors for making the Militia more useful,
according to the Methods the Parliament shall think proper.

This was my weak Opinion in King James's Parliament, when I was in the Army,
and as near a Soldier of Fortune as any body, for that Pay was my chief
Subsistence; and it is these principles and Duty for the good of Friends and
Relations, and the Preservation of the Constitution, and also for an essential
Good and Security to the Nobility and Gentry and others that have Opulency and
a visible Posterity, which may put every one upon rational Means and Methods
for securing themselves to future Generations, rather than any Ends of my own:
for I am as free and fit as any Man to repeat the Old Saying, Nec habeo, nec
careo, nec curo. For my Time is so far spent in this World, the Appetites for
it are near wearing out, and the Estate near being crumbled to pieces by long
and various Turmoils; nor have I Posterity to take care for, if my Family or
Estate were material, all which being decayed rather through Duty and
Principles in my Father than prodigality; therefore I may more plainly express
what I hope may be for the Safety and Joy of future Times and Generations;
Which that your Lordships and your Posterity may enjoy, are the hearty Wishes of

Your Lordship's most Humble Servant at Command, THO. ORME,

FINIS.

