A DISCOURSE Concerning GOD's Foreknowledge, AND Man's Free Agency: WHEREIN
Their seeming Opposition is reconciled, and real Consistency Demonstrated from
the Holy Scriptures, and Arguments thence deduced.

Acts 4.28. For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy Counsel determined before to
be done.

Phil. 2.12, 13. -- Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling. For it
is God which works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.

Deuteronomy. 30.19. I have set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing;
therefore choose Life, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1697.

The PREFACE.
IF in the Perusal of this small Tract, the Reader finds but small
Satisfaction, I hope he will not much wonder at it, when he remembers, that
Larger Volumes, and even Learned Ones too, in Matters especially of this
Nature, do not always answer Expectation. I pretend to no great share of
Learning, nor any large measure of Acute Judgment; only I am naturally disposed
to Thinking and Consideration, and upon the Occasion mentioned at the Entrance
of the Ensuing Discourse, which is no fictitious Pretense, but a thing that did
really happen about two years ago, I took a Fancy to set down my thoughts upon
this abstruse Subject. Some few that have seen it in Manuscript, have thought
it to be tolerable Sense, and might perhaps be a further Occasion to some Man
of better Parts to speak more clearly to the Point, for which cause I am not
unwilling to permit it is Publication; for I believe the Subject has not been
hitherto exhausted; and I desire nothing more than to be outdone, or even
confuted, by any one that can make things more coherent, and better vindicate
the Divine Attributes.

In the mean time, By a Fellow of the R. S.
I have met with a Curious Discourse concerning things above Reason, amongst
which the Subject here treated of, is mentioned as one; by which I perceive,
that this Essay of mine is not impertinent, though perhaps it may be ineffectual,
and come far short of the Design. For how can an Unlearned Head (by never so
much thinking) think to bring that under Reason, which so great a Wit has
ranked among things above it? So that the importance of the Attempt will not (I
fear) account for the ill management of it: Yet its Innocence will (I hope)
defend it from any heavy Censure. If I have not wholly subdued my Province unto
Reason, yet I have given it a kind of Negative Voice; that is, though Reason
cannot absolutely command the Affirmative, it shall nevertheless so far rule
the Opposer, as to prevent his Negative. Some things must be granted, though
perhaps not without difficulty, because they cannot be denied without far
greater Inconvenience.

If it be said, We cannot understand how any thing can be certain, and yet
contingent; or how a voluntary Action can be foreseen, which depends upon
Free-choice, and that at any time until it be effected, may be either done or
let alone. Let such Persons try how they can clear the Inconveniences of an
Ignorant and Imperfect Deity, which will lie hard upon them if they grant not
Divine Prescience. On the other side, let them see with what success they can
take away distributive Justice, and root out the Notion and Existence of Good
and Evil; which task is of Necessity incumbent on them that deny Man to be a
Free Agent. If things to come be not foreseen, what will become of Divine
Providence? If there be not in Man a free Election, where is sin? for where
there is no choice, how can any one choose amiss? To chastise my Child for
Disobedience, would be all one as to whip my Clock for going amiss. Either God
Almighty foresees things future, or he cannot be God: Either Man is a voluntary
Agent, or he cannot be Man. If these things therefore will not stand together,
Reason it self may seem impertinent, and it is natural Conclusions altogether
useless: For, to what purpose is Discourse or Ratiocination, when either there
can be no Transgression, or none to take Notice of it, and punish it?

These are the inconveniences which men run the hazard of in this matter: For
rather than admit one apparent difficulty, which consists perhaps only in the
narrowness of humane understanding, they choose to fill the World with
Contradiction and Absurdity. Some will venture to mix Heaven and Earth
together, under a State of War and Rapine, without any sense of Divine
Authority to Awe Rebellious Mankind; and others will attempt to turn God out of
the World, because they cannot comprehend his Perfections and Operations. But
surely it is not advisable to Cashier every thing that puts a stress upon our
limited Faculties, nor run down all those things for false, which consist not
well with what we apprehend to be true. To which purpose the Discourse above
mentioned contains is parcel of the Noblest Instances, applied and managed with
the greatest Clearness, and to the highest Ends and Advantage, of any Book I
have hitherto met with. From thence I gladly learn, that there are certain
Priviledg'd Things, which will by no means stoop to Common Reason, nor
accommodate themselves to those Rules and Measures which are sufficient for
other Matters. Not but that there is a peculiar sort of Reason in these also;
for though they are above my Reason to apprehend them fully, yet I apprehend very
good Reason why they should be so. For, either my Capacity is bounded, or it is
not; if it be, it is sure to be overpowered in grasping an unlimitted thing; if
not, it must then be infinite: And since I know many Capacities about the same
Level with mine own, and not a few incomparably greater, it must follow, that,
not only a multitude of infinites are consistent, but a Number also of
Capacities, each of which is more than infinite; which Conclusion I think is
more than sufficiently absurd. Besides, since God cannot do what is
inconsistent, or involves a Contradiction, he could not create a Power or
Faculty, comprehensive of his own Perfections; for that could be no less than
infinite, he cannot parcel out his peculiar Attributes unto his Creatures; for
that would imply a contradiction. Wherefore the most shallow Reason may
conclude, there must of necessity be those things, which the most refined Wit
cannot adequately comprehend.

And this is so, not only in reference to the Divine Perfections, but in things
also of a lower Nature, of which it may not be improper to insert one instance
in this place, whereby an undeniable Truth will appear to be attended with
unaccountable difficulty. For the Ensuing Discourse pretends not to answer all
the Cavils that may be made against a Meridian Truth, (which yet like the Sun
it self) has some Obscurities; much less does it undertake to make men see,
who are either blind or shut their Eyes. But the design of it is, to assert
from the Scriptures, the Truth of Divine Prescience, and of voluntary Election;
to evince the necessity of admitting them both; to accommodate the seeming
Opposition, and to point out some of those unconcluding Arguments, that mislead
Men to apprehend an inconsistence where there is none. But in case I have not
performed this with sufficient Strength and Clearness of Expression, it will
not be foreign to the matter in hand, to show by an instance, that somethings
may not only be true, but are almost universally acknowledged, which yet how
they can be so, is insuperably hard to be conceived.

And this shall be an instance which does frequently occur to every one that is
conver sant about Decimal Numbers: Scarce any good Accomptant but understands,
no learned man but will acknowledge the force of it. For you may have a small
fraction, suppose of a farthing, or of a barley corn, not worth demanding,
which yet cannot be denied to be infinitely Divisible; insomuch, that going
about to find some determinate part of such a fraction, as,, or the like, you
may indeed divide it according to Decimal Arithmetic, and you shall presently
come near the truth, and the further you continue your Division, you shall
still come the nearer: But though you Divide it everlastingly, you shall never
be able to get out entirely the part you aim at, but the Quotient will still be
defective, and something will for ever remain of the Dividend.

To make out this the more evidently, I put the following Case for an Example:
Seven Workmen are to receive for some piece of Work 20 s. to be equally divided
amongst them; and supposing my self to be one of the seven, I demand my share;
but first I am to compute what it comes to. To do this, I make use of Decimals,
which in many Questions are very expeditious, and much in use at this day. It
is no more but only to divide 20 by 7: But since there is a remainder, ^
I add Ciphers to the Dividend, and so continuing the Division to four places.
I find in the Quotient this mixed Number, 2.8.5.7. which comes to 2 s. 10 d. 1
q. and something more, which is a solution exact enough for common practice.

But this is not all; for there remains one of the Dividend, that is to say,
one thousandth part of a Shilling, and of this I demand 1/7, to make up my full
proportion of the 20 s. I there still proceed to Divide, in order to get out my
seventh part exactly, but I shall never be able to do it; no, though the
Division were to be continued from Age to Age for one thousand years, and after
that for another, yet still the Quotient would be too little, and the Dividend
inexhaustible.

In this plain and familiar Question, resolved by Decimals, three things are
evident. 1. That in a few minutes time an answer may be given, though not exact,
yet sufficiently true for common use; that is to say, in half an hour at most,
I may safely aver it, that so much is my full share, within less than one
Millioneth part of a farthing; and yet at the same time, I may be sworn, that
the same is not my proportion exactly.

2. Let me continue the Division as far, and as long as I please, I shall come
nearer still and nearer to the truth, and every new figure in the Quotient,
adds something to my share, which I had not before; it lessons the Dividend and
approaches by various (or rather infinite) degrees nearer to 1/7, which is the
proportion aimed at. But

3. It can never be accomplished; Myriads of Ages would not suffice to drain
this Fountain. You may suppose (if you please) the Quotient to be extended in
Decimal Fractions, as far as from the Artick to the Antartick Pole; all that
would not reach a true seventh part, though every figure (as I said) advances
something toward it.

Let us now lay all this together, here is a Mark to be hit, as suppose it were
a Jack lying in a Bowling-Alley, you may aim at it, and presently come within
an hair's breadth, your Bowl may be still in motion, and every moment come
nearer to the Mark, and yet shall never touch it.

This Example in Arithmetic seems to conclude no less than those two other
Noted Curiosities in Geometry, concerning the Hyperbole and Diagonal, and has a
respective Affinity to them both. For whereas the Hyperbole, may have such a
Relation to a right line drawn near it, that both being prolonged, it shall
come nearer and nearer to the said right Line; yet how far soever both lines be
extended, they shall never meet; this is very nearly resembled in the case
before us. And whereas it is impossible to assign any common Measure for the
Side and Diagonal of a Square, which shall exactly measure them both, but there
will remain a part of the one line, less than the said common measure, after
you have made that as little as you please: So here, it is impossible to
exhaust Decimal Numbers by sevens, because that 7. and 10. (or any number
consisting of 1. with the Addition of Ciphers) are so far incommensurable, that
nothing above an Unit can be a common Measure to them both. To conclude, from
this plain and familiar instance, may be inferred the endless Divisibility of
matter, that the Parts of any thing exceed the whole, and that the whole Globe
of Earth is no further divisible, nor cannot be said to contain a greater
Number of Parts, than one small grain of Sand.

Now if there be such a mysterious depth in Lines and Numbers, such a boundless
Abyss in any small particle of Earth or Clay, that the Wit of Man cannot
comprehend it, what shall we say of him that made all things in Number, Weight
and Measure? How can we excuse the audacious folly of pretending to measure
Eternity by the unequal standard of our Judgment, or Circumscribe infinity
within the narrow Circle of Humane Capacity? Wherefore if the Reader shall
dislike the following Discourse, and the Reasons therein made use of, let him
for his own satisfaction (and for mine too, if he please) bethink himself of
better, and therein he may do a piece of service, both useful and acceptable.
But for any one to confine the ineffable perfections of the Supreme Being to
his own faculties, is a piece of egregious vanity, and an undertaking
altogether desperate.

A DISCOURSE Concerning GOD's Foreknowledge, AND Man's Free Agency.
I Happened a while ago, to be present at a Discourse between two Gentlemen,
concerning the fatal Period of Man's Life, or the fixed certainty of Future
Events: The one affirming it, from the consideration of God's Foreknowledge;
the other denying it, from the evident certainty of Man's Free Will. The former
urged; what God Foresees, cannot but come to pass; the latter pleaded, Man
cannot choose, nor refuse, the doing of that, which is certain to be done. I
thought there was truth in what they both grounded their Arguments upon, but
certain inferences, pretended to be drawn from thence, which this Discourse
produced, I could by no means approve of, I did therefore interpose a little
for an accommodation, but with so ill success, that I have a mind to try, if I
can do any better in this Paper. Not that I will presume to moderate betwixt
two Persons, each of them better Learned, and of far greater Abilities than my
self. But since their Discourse has so fixed the Subject in my mind, that I
cannot easily remove it, I will only attempt to clear the Notion a little to my
own Apprehension, by setting my thoughts in some kind of order in reference to
this matter. I shall therefore endeavor these three things.

1. To assert from Scripture, that God foresees future Events; and that
nevertheless, Man is a free and voluntary Agent.

2. To show, how these two things agree together; and detect the fallacy of
those Reasonings that represent them inconsistent.

3. To answer some of those Objections, that are wont to occur in this Debate.

I begin with the first, and easiest part of my Task, namely, to assert God's
Foreknowledge, and Man's Free Will, out of the Scriptures. These are indeed two
several subjects, and might challenge each of them a distinct Head of
Discourse: yet I rather chose to manage them both in one, by linking Scriptures
together in such sort, that of each couple, the one shall make out Divine
Prescience, and the other Humane Freedom; and being considered together, shall
evince, that both these have oft-times been conversant about the same
particular event; that is, one Text shall prove God's Foreknowledge of, and
another shall evidence Man's Freedom in, doing or refusing the same individual
Action.

But first, that I may clear my way as much as I can, I must explain the Terms,
or give some account, at least, how I understand them. Some indeed except
against the word Prescience, and tell us, that God does not properly foresee
any thing, since he beholds all things as present; but this I count is
Criticism without Necessity; for the word is frequently used, as it is taken in
this Discourse, and is proper enough with respect unto us, and to such things
as are not yet in being. What shall be a thousand years hence, is indeed
potentially in God, but not yet actually existent: So that his knowledge of
such things, is not unfitly called Prescience, as also the respect and
consideration of somewhat that is distant, is called Providence. Now as God's
Omnipotence did vertually comprehend from Eternity, all the Creatures that were
to be produced in Time; So his Omniscience gives him an entire View and
Prospect of all their Actions. They cannot act but by a Power derived from him;
how then should they do any thing unknown to him? He knows what himself will
bring to pass in spite of all opposition; and he knows what Latitude he will
allow his Creatures in their Actions. Since therefore God Almighty knows his
own Will, and since Nothing can ever come to pass without his Will, either
positive or permissive; it must follow, that he sees and knows all things and
events, which are to come, and not yet actually existent, with equal certainty
as if they were present. And this is what I mean by Divine Prescience.

I must now fix my Notion of Free Will, and herein I shall carefully avoid all
School Controversies about it, or about Common and Efficacious Grace: As also
those Dominican Fancies about a thing they call Prove. Letters.
Next Power, which is next to none, and Sufficient Grace, which some think
altogether insufficient. These and such like questions I leave to be beaten
into Atoms between the Jesuits and Jansenists.

And whereas some contend, that it is in every Man's power to do what the
Gospel enjoins: For should God require of any man what is impossible to be done
by him, he must needs appear to be a hard Master.

Others deny that any man can, or ever will effectually believe and repent
without special Grace, which wherever it comes, makes a through work of
Conversion in the heart, and therefore can never be lost, nor the person in
whom it is finally miscarry.

Others again say, there is a sufficiency of Grace, which with pious endeavors
will bring a Man to happiness, yet under a possibility of Apostatizing, in
which case God may and does sometimes relinquish the Person to final
Destruction.

And others, to name no more, say, there is a Common Grace, or Universal Talent
given to all Men, which though of it self, it is by no means sufficient, yet upon
a conscientious improvement thereof, with earnest Prayer for further, daily
Supplies, it will please God to bestow such a Measure, as shall be sufficient
to Salvation; whilst those who were entrusted with the same stock, having laid
it up in a Napkin, are through their own Default, utterly ruined. Yet they add
withal, that there are a certain Number, more peculiarly called the Elect, whom
Efficacious Grace does seize upon, some in a high Carreer of Wickedness, others
at first even against their Will, though in the day of Gods Almighty Power, they
become a willing People, to that degree, that they desire nothing more than to
lay out their lives, to spend and be spent (as St. Paul said) for the
advancement of that Grace and Truth whereby they are subdued and purified: But
these (they say) are not the Rule and Measure of God's dealing with Mankind in
general, but are to be looked upon, as certain high and noble Instances of the
Freeness and Efficacy of Divine Grace, and of God's exercising an Almighty
Prerogative in choosing a Raging Persecutor, or some Atheistical Debauchee, to
be made a peculiar Favorite and chosen Vessel to himself.

Whereas (I say) there are these (and perhaps some other) Opinions, that are
wont to fall under consideration, when the business of Free Will is in debate;
I shall not trouble my self to determine which is best, nor is it material to
my design: It Is not impossible, but with a due Respect unto Persons, Times and
Circumstances, there may be something of Truth in them all, and each of them
perhaps may be good or bad, according as it is managed. Truth and Error I look
upon as Gold and Dross: The one is a pure and splendid thing, but may be
adulterated or abused, and seldom is without alloy; the other, though base and
ignoble, contains for the most part something of true metal, if duly separated
from the rest.

This only (under submission) I shall adventure to say as my own present
thoughts about this matter, and so proceed; namely, that most men, however
under a state of Nature, may do much moral good, which shall not pass
unrewarded, and something too (for ought they can know to the contrary) toward
acceptance with God. That many men through the Divine Goodness shall be saved,
that neither know punctually the time of their Conversion, nor certainly
whether they be converted or not. That few there are who attain to that
complete assurance, as to banish at all times, all manner of Dubitation. That
it is all men's duty to seek that they may find, and to wait upon God in the use
of those means appointed by him in his word; and we have his promise for
success. And, that no man can truly say now, or shall be able to plead at the
last day, that he has used his utmost endeavors, and found them unsuccessful.
These and the like considerations may be ground enough for men to be doing good
at present, and for their Relyance upon the Goodness of God for the future. But
on the other hand, since there is a spiritual as well as a fleshly Wickedness,
and Satan is transformed sometimes into an Angel of Light, and lest Man should
be lifted up with an apprehension of certain fine things that he can do; let
him remember, that it is God who works in him both to will and to do of his
good pleasure; that of himself he can do nothing, and that all his
righteousness is but filthy rags. And this will help to poise him at the
Center between the two Extremes of fainting and presuming, and will discover a
necessity of an humble attendance at the Throne of Grace, that God would supply
unto him those Divine Aids, and Spiritual Powers, by which he may be enabled to
encounter opposition, and find acceptance in Christ Jesus.

And herein perhaps may consist the narrowness of the way that leads to life.
For one man, supposing he can do nothing acceptable to God, resolves to take
his ease, until the Spirit, that Wind which blows where it list, breath upon
him; another thinks he is able and willing, to do all that God requires; he
admires his own good husbandry in the improvement of his Talent, and thanks
God, he is not like other men. Now the way lying in the middle betwixt these
Extremities, the least step toward a Carnal Liberty one the one hand, or a
Pharisaical Righteousness on the other, must needs be a deviation from the
right path, as this collateral Discourse is a digression from what I intend.
But I now return, and do say, that let men establish what Doctrine they please
concerning Grace, it will not import the matter in hand, since I shall confine
my Notion of Free Will to those things that are on all hands acknowledged to be
within Man's power, supposing only the ordinary concurrence of God's providence
thereunto.

I consider then, that Man above other Creatures has knowledge to judge and
distinguish of things commodious or inconvenient, beneficial or noxious to him,
in the concerns of his Life; and it would be a strange Solaecism in Nature, if
he had not the Liberty of choosing the one, and refusing the other. What does
it advantage a Man, to know the difference between a Sheep and a Wolf, if he
want the Power or the Will, to make a benefit of the one, and avoid the
mischief of the other? Nay I do not see, but this might render Man of all
Creatures most miserable, since his knowledge of Good could be no other to him
than Gall and Bitterness; whilst he finds himself fatally carried on to Evil.
And suppose he had been always predetermined to Good, his knowledge of Evil
then had been in vain, or rather indeed it had been impossible; since Man could
not have come to the knowledge of Evil, but by doing it. And what could Man
under a necessity of always doing good, signify, more than a good Watch? which
though it moves regularly, yet is it altogether involuntary, cannot do otherwise,
knows not that it moves at all; and consequently is incapable of Praise or
Encouragement, Reward or Punishment. Thus if we take away from Man his
Faculties of Judging and Choosing, we make the Lord of the Creation the most
contemptible thing in Nature, and put him under the Feet of those Brutes he was
made to rule over. So that without voluntary Agency, that is, without a Will
and the proper Exercise thereof, Man becomes little better than a Senseless
Machine.

But now on the contrary, we see plainly, that, by the good Providence and
Disposal of Almighty God, men have power to do many things, as namely, to
cultivate the Earth, to build Houses, to provide against Hunger and Cold, to
educate their Children, to exercise several Arts and Trades, for the Benefit of
Humane Life, and to manage all these according to certain Rules, Methods and
Observations, arising partly from Experience, and partly from Men's consulting
one another. I say, in all these, and a thousand more particulars, Men do
consider and deliberate, and then pursue their several Designs, some with
greater, others with a lesser share of Prudence, but each Employing his
Measure, and accordingly determining to choose this, and refuse the other.

In short, I conceive, that God having endued Man with an Understanding to
judge, and a Will to choose, and continually supplying him with power to act
according to his Nature, he does not ordinarily overpower, or impel his
Faculties, but leaves him to the free Use and Exercise thereof in things within
his proper Sphere. And this is what I mean by Freewill. Now I address to my
Province, which is to assert this, together with God's Foreknowledge of future
Events from the Scriptures.

The first pair of Scriptures that I employ for this Service, shall be out of
Exodus, Chap. 3.18. Chap. 3.19.
where Moses is appointed of God to go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Let us
go, we beseech thee, into the Wilderness, etc. It is not easily to be imagined,
but that Pharaoh had power to have granted this Request at first, and the very
Request it self does strongly imply a Liberty of granting it. No good Master
will require any thing of his meanest Servant, with intention to punish him
severely for not doing it, and yet secretly contrive means to prevent and
disable him, that he cannot do it. To say, that God should send Moses to make a
request unto Pharaoh, saying, Let us go, we pray thee, that he should destroy
him at last for refusing, and in the mean time should bind up his heart by some
irresistible influence, from all possibility of granting it: This would not
only excuse Pharaoh from the guilt of sin, but make an odious representation of
the Ever blessed God; as if his Wisdom were exercised in laying snares for the
innocent, and his power in their destruction. Should a Writing-Master guide his
Scholars hand, to make a blot, or some ill Character, and then beat him for it,
whereas being left to himself he would have done better, what could be thought
of such behavior in a Master? and how just would be the Scholar's indignation
against him?

The sinfulness of an Action consists in this, that it is voluntary, and
against the Command; the nature of a voluntary action is, that it is done out of
choice and deliberation, when otherwise it might be forborne. Now, either
Pharaoh sinned in detaining the People, or he did not; if not, wherefore was he
destroyed? Genesis 8.2
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? If he did, he acted out of
Choice, and consequently he might have dismissed the Israelites sooner, if he
had pleased. Hence it will also follow, that there could be no secret
Influence, nor any predetermining Concourse from God, to bind his Faculties, or
take away his Free-agency; only the Pride of his Heart, despising God's Message
to him, and his domineering Ambition to keep the People in Slavery, did
outweigh (in his unjust Balance) the other Motives he had to dispense with
them.

And herein consists the nature of Election, that of two things proposed,
with Motives on either part, a man freely chooses that which likes him best,
in his present Apprehension, though at the same time (if he thought good) he
might choose the other. Thus did Pharaoh choose to detain the People, there is
his Choice; yet before ever the matter was propounded to him, God himself says,
Exodus 3.19.
I am sure he will not let you go; here is Fore-knowlege: Therefore Divine
Prescience and Humane Liberty are consistent, and have been conversant about
the same individual Action.

But here an Objection may arise from the seventh Chapter, and the third verse,
where God says, Exodus 7.3.
He will harden Pharaoh's heart: From whence it might be supposed, that Pharaoh
could not act voluntarily, nor be said to have any real Freedom of Will. To
this I answer,

1. I will not deny, but that in consideration of Pharaoh's former Wickedness,
in dealing so barbarously with the People of Israel, God might sorsake him, and
give him over to hardness of Heart. But then,

2. I deny that this hardness of heart, by whomsoever, or in what manner so
ever it was wrought, could deprive him of the Liberty of doing a Civil Act
within his power. He might for some self End, or with some ill design, have
dismissed the Israelites, and yet still have retained his hard heart; it was
but a word speaking, and the business had been done. And it is observable, that
while the smart was upon him, he could say, Exodus 9.27, 28.
I and my People are wicked; and promised too, to let the Israelites go; but
still, as he found respite, (thinking perhaps the storm was over) he retracted.
On the one hand, there was the danger of perishing, or having at least) his
Kingdom ruined by those Judgments God sent upon him: On the other hand, there
was the lust of tyrannizing over an enslaved People, and the benefit of their
Labors in making Brick. These two weights being opposed each to other in the
Scales, sometimes the one, and then presently the other preponderates. And this
purely is deliberation, the result whereof is choosing, and choosing is the
undoubted property of a free Agent.

3. Concerning the hardening of Pharaoh's heart, the Apprehensions of Learned
Men are different; that which to me appears the most reasonable is to this
effect, namely, that this induration is not to be understood as any positive
Act, or immediate Efficiency from God, whereby Pharaoh's heart was made hard,
(much less his Will Predetermin'd) directly and properly, no more than it is to
be understood that our Saviors coming was directly and properly to fill the
World with Dissentions, because he himself says expressly, that Luke 12.51, 52.
He came not to bring peace on the Earth, but rather division. The primary
intention of the Gospel, no doubt, was Peace and Good Will toward men; but
meeting with various tempers, and sundry degrees of Corruption in the hearts of
men, it could not choose but occasion dissension and a sword upon the Earth. In
like manner the primary intention of God's Judgments, is to reform the World,
and bring men to Repentance, whilst in some Persons they have a quite contrary
effect. So that, as the Gospel of Peace was the accidental cause of War, so
might God's dealing with Pharaoh tend to harden his Heart, and yet to sosten a
less rebellious one, as the same Sun beam melts Wax and hardens Clay. And
as sin by the commandment becomes exceeding sinful, Romans 7.11, 13.
in so much that the Commandment it self, which was ordained unto life, is
found to be unto death: So Pharaoh's stubborness, under the Divine Hand,
becomes the more exceeding stubborn; and that Chastisement, which was ordained
unto Reformation, did the more effectually promote his destruction. Hence it is
highly probable, that, I will harden his heart, may import no more than this, I
will bring such things to pass, and in such a manner, as shall through his own
Corruptions, render him much more obdurate.

That the natural and direct tendency of God's dealing with Pharaoh was to
convince him, seems very apparent from these Considerations: 1. He orders Moses
to try him with Innocent Miracles, afterward with smarting ones, by such
degrees, till it come at last to the death of his Firstborn. 2. While the
Plagues lay heavy upon him, he gave some signs of a yielding and relenting
temper, but ever in the Intervals he contracted a greater obdurateness. 3. The
Judgments of God had their proper Effect upon the Egyptians, so far, that they
would gladly have the Israelites dismissed sooner, and at last, were not only
urgent to have them gone in haste, but willing to part with their Exodus 12.33,
35.
Jewels into the bargain. These considerations (I say) seem very much to favor
the forementioned sense of the Place, but whether that be the only true meaning
of it, I shall not contend, so long as I can make it good, that Pharaoh was a
Free Agent in that particular thing which was foretold by God Almighty.

The next double Testimony shall be out of Ezekiel. 3.4.
Ezekiel, where the Prophet is sent to the Israelites, and words put into his
Mouth, to warn and dehort them from their wicked ways, lest they should dye.
Hence I argue thus; either the House of Israel might have obeyed God's message
to them by the Prophet, or else not: If not, how shall we clear the sincerity
of God's dealings with them? Or will his message to them appear any more than a
Complement? Let us have a Care of intrenching upon Blasphemy. But, if they
might have humbled themselves at the Prophet's voice, as Nineveh did in the
like case, it will follow, that they were not by any previous necessity
divested of their Liberum Arbitrium, as is also evident from these words so
often repeated in the Prophet's Commission, Whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear? which is as much as to say, they have their free choice. And
what follows? Ezekiel. 3.7.
But the House of Israel will not hearken unto thee. God does not only afford
Liberty and Opportunity of Repentance, but he urges the same by strong
pleadings and inducements; and yet at the same time, he foresees a contrary
Event. And this is what I undertook to assert from the Scriptures.

Again, in the 5th. of Hosea, Hos. 5.5.
God foretells, that Israel and Ephraim shall fall in their iniquity, Judah
also shall fall with them; yet in the 6th. Chapter Hol. 6.1.
he exhorts to Repentance. This indeed might have its proper effect too, upon
some small remnant that should escape Ezekiel. 6.8, 9.
and remember God among the Nations whither they were to be carried captives.
But now there is the same means afforded to those that should fall in their
Iniquity, as to the few that should escape; nor does God's Foreknowledge of
the several Events impose a necessity upon either. He grants Liberty unto both,
which he knows a Remnant will make good use of, whilst the greater Number will
abuse it to their ruin. Thus it is evident, that Liberty and Prescience are
consistent.

It is moreover prophesied, that by Hosea 13.1.
reason of Idolatry, they shall be as Chaff driven with a whirlewind out of the
Floor, and as smoke out of the Chimney; yet afterward, we read in the same
Chapter, O Israel thou have destroyed thy self. We do not use to say, a man
destroys himself, that is unwillingly run down by external force, or some
inevitable necessity; nor can he that ruins himself charge the fault upon
another. If Israel destroys himself, he is surely the Agent of his own
destruction; and if so, he is either a Voluntary or an Involuntary Agent; if
Involuntary, he cannot be said to destroy himself, no more than a House burns
it self when fire is set to it by an Incendiary. An Involuntary Agent, as a
Sword or a Hammer, can only act as it is managed by Hands, and those governed
by the Will. It remains then, that Israel was the voluntary Agent of his own
Ruin; and Hosea 13.9.
since this is foretold of God by the Prophet, it must follow (if the
Scriptures be true) that Divine Prescience does not any way infringe the
Liberty, or Free-agency of rational Creatures.

God foresaw, that wicked Hands would be forward enough to deliver up the
Divine Person unto Death, who was the Act. 2.23.
Lord of Life; nay, his determinate Counsel did concur with his Foreknowledge,
so far as to let it proceed to Execution, as the Learned Mr. How observes. And
our Savior Mat. 20.17.
himself, not only describes particularly the manner and circumstances of his
own Death, when yet it was not near at hand, but is said also to Jo. 18.4.
know all things that should come upon him. Yet if the Actors of this
wickedness had been rightly informed what they were about, they would have left
their work for other hands. That Is very strange (says one of our Disputants)
here is an Event secured by the determinate counsel of God, here is the place
where, the manner how, and the Persons by whom it should be brought to pass,
described before hand by our Savior; can any thing that is so infallibly
certain admit of an If? Yes, in St. Paul's account it may, and he is a person
that deserves some regard. And indeed, his Assertion will appear highly
reasonable, when we consider the Princes of this World, so sadly misinformed as
they were, and imposed upon by all the wicked Artifice imaginable, yet we do
not find them very eager to be concerned in the Blood of that just person, when
the principal Agent pretends Mat. 27.24.
to wash his hands of it, and professes Luke 23.22.
he found no cause of death in him. And had it not been for the impetuous
Clamours of a wretched People, and the danger of a Tumult, it is probable that
the malicious contrivance of the Priests, and their sham Evidence, would not
have weighed against Pilate's Native Clemency. What must we then think had been
dove, in case of a right information? Why the Apostle tells us; 1 Cor. 2.8.
Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. This puts
it out of all doubt, that they were under no other force than the Result of
their own Deliberation. On the one hand, there was the meekness of the
Prisoner, the clemency of the Judge, and the disagreement of the Witnesses: On
the other hand, there was the influence of the Priests, the ignorance of the
Court, and cries of the Multitude; which kept the business for a while in
Equilibrio, but then the fear of a tumult superadded, cast the Scales. Nor were
they under any further Necessity of crucifying our Savior, by means of such a
Divine Foresight, that he should be crucified, than they would have been under,
in case it were to be supposed, that God had not so punctually foreseen, or
foretold the same.

There are many other places of Scripture, that do evidently prove there is in
Man a free Election. Solomon is commended for asking Wisdom, 1 Kings 3.1.
when he might have asked Riches, length of Days, or Revenge upon his Enemies;
and Ananias Act. 4.5.
is the more condemned for falsity about the price of the Land, because that
even after it was sold, it was in his own power.

Number. 30.1.
If a Wife make a Vow, it is left to her Husbands choice, either to establish
it, or to make it void.

Jos. 24.15.
Choose you this day whom you will serve.

2 Samuel 24.12.
God and say unto David, thus says the Lord, I offer thee three things; choose
thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.

These Scriptures are so clear, they need no Commentary, nor do they admit of
any Objection. And I think there is no less Evidence for Divine Prescience,
since all Prophecies and many other Places of Scripture, do either directly, or
by just consequence put it beyond Dispute, with all that acknowledge the
Authority of that sacred Book. I shall mention no more but this one, and
therewith close up this first part of my Undertaking: It is so direct and full
to the purpose, as if the Holy Ghost had designed it to remove all Scruple and
Hesitation about that matter. Isa. 36.9.
I am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and
from ancient times the things that are not yet done.

Had I Leisure now, or Opportunity, to consult the Fathers or Schoolmen; I am
inclinable to believe, I should have their general Suffrage in this matter; but
truly those Gentlemen are none of my Familiars, and and I was loath to trouble
them. Yet meeting by accident with two of them, which are esteemed no less than
Oracles, I made bold to ask them their Opinions in the case. I confess, I was
not displeased to find them so very civil, and favorable to the Notions, I had
already sormed, and in part written down, concerning this Subject. One of these
was the Learned Suarez, who first of all disputing copiously about Man's
capacity of acting freely, he brings it last to this issue: Metaph. Tom. 1. p.
338, 339.
Experimur enim evidenter, situm esse in nostra potestate aliquid agere vel
omittere, and ad hoc utimur ratione and discursu ac consultatione, ut in unam
partem potius quam in aliam inclinemur: Est ergo Electio positiva in nostro
arbitrio, alioqui fuisset nobis data superflue, haec deliberandi and
consultandi vis. For we find by evident Experience, that it is in our power
either to do a thing or leave it undone, therefore we reason, argue and
deliberate, in order to choose one thing rather than another, it is therefore in
our power to make a positive choice, or else we have this Capacity given us in
vain. This comes close to that point. And then in the next place, he does no
less vigorously maintain God's Fore knowledge of all Events and Actions,
whether voluntary, or contingent, the Sum of which is thus.

^om. 2. p. 92, 93.
God cannot (says he) be ignorant of what he himself does, or will do, because
he knows his own Will and his power to effect what he wills. Nor can can he be
ignorant of what his Creatures do now, or what they shall do hereafter, because
whatever is positively good in their Actions, is by immediate influence from
himself; and what there is of privation or defect, cannot be without his
permission, and therefore he cannot be ignorant of men's sinful and wicked
actions. He goes on to show, that unless God did foreknow from Eternity
whatever was, or is to come to pass in time, he could neither be omnipotent nor
immutable. Not omnipotent, because in reference to those things whereof he had
no foresight, his Providence and Government of Affairs must needs be defective.
Not Immutable, because something must daily occur to his knowledge which he
knew not before.

Atque hinc sequitur Deum habere hanc Scientiam Creaturarum quae fiunt in
tempore ex aeternitate sua, ut totam illam simul haebeat sine successione, quia
non potest in se variationem admittere; item quia non posset Deus habere
perfectam providentiam in rebus administrandis, nisi haberet omnium
praescientiam. Thus far that Eminent Schoolman.

The other is the Angelical Thomas Aquinas, as some are pleased to style him.
He in his Sum of Theology dispatches me in a few words. For having first
described Providence to be a respect to somewhat that is distant, according to
which the occurrences now present are to be ordered, which does therefore
necessarily include prescience: He says afterward, Providentia Dei est omnium
singularium, nec tamen a rebus excludit contingentiam, nec casum, nec fortunam,
nec liberum arbitrium: That the Providence of God extends to all particulars,
not excluding Contingency, Chance, Fortune, or Free Will.

Add hereunto, that it was allowed St. Augustine as a Maxim, that God by his
foreknowledge, does not necessitate, or constrain, the coming to pass of the
things foreknown by him. These Testimonies, as they are of unquestionable
Authority, so are they clear, direct, and full to the purpose; and this is all
I design for the first general Head.

I am now in the second place to attempt certain reasons, or considerations,
whereby to accommodate the difference, or at least to lessen the opposition,
that seems to be between Prescience and Free Will. The Heads to be insisted on
for that purpose are these three: Namely, The truth of the Holy Scriptures, The
Harmony of the Divine Attributes, and the Non-causality of Divine Prescience.

First then, I argue from the verity of the Scriptures; for I am not designing
to confute an A theist, writing only to such as do acknowledge the Truth and
Authority of those Sacred Letters; but chiefly (as I said before) for my own
satisfaction. Some young Divines indeed I have observed, who in their first
setting out to preach the Word, affect to preach altogether without it, and
seem to Triumph in dispelling the darkness of Atheism and Irreligion, by the
Gloworm-light of corrupt Nature. Others there are, that prove their Doctrines
out of Terence, Tully and Seneca; whether it is, because they have not read the
Bible, or that they preser the Authority of Heathen Writers before it, or that
they would be thought to be profoundly learned, I shall not dispute; but I find
other more experienced Workmen, who do not trouble themslves to dig below the
true foundation, but think the Rock of Ages safe enough for them to build upon.
Now, as that Comical sort of Preaching, to vulgar Ears, does rather Amuse than
Edify: So this Essay (which is not like to be regarded by the Learned) if it
should happen to take the Country air, would look very thin without
Scripture-Evidence. But if indeed the Scriptures do clearly speak the Substance
of what is herein contained, this ought to have the force of a Reason, with all
those that acknowledge the Authority of that Book. Nor will it be material to
object, that this Argument does not sufficiently make out the reasonableness of
what is here pleaded for: For as there are several Ranks of Priviledg'd things,
which will not condescend to Common Reason, so there are several degrees of
Reason also, of which the lower ought to yield to the Superior; and it is the
highest reason sure, that God is true, though every Man should be found a Liar.

I am by no means against it yet, that Atheism should be encountered upon its
own principles, if at least it can be said to have any principles at all; but
every Stripling is not a fit Champion for an overgrown Philistine: And I had
rather have that Province entirely lest to such as can manage it, than have the
Truth to suffer by weak Patronage As for those therefore, that expect better
proof than from the Word of God, and those natural consequences arising thence,
I shall leave them to the discipline of their own Consciences; for if they are
not convinced by what Bp. Wilkins, Bp. Ward, Mr. Boil, Dr. Cudworth, Sir Cha.
Wolsely, and some others have already said against Atheism, I shall never hope
to give them satisfaction.

But as for those two Gentlemen, betwixt whom the Controversy was starred,
upon which occasion I scribble down these hasty Notes, they are both of them (I
hope) serious Christians, not doubting in the least the truth of the
Scriptures, yet differing vastly in their apprehensions about this matter. One
of them is firm in the belief of Divine Prescience, but somewhat Hesitant as to
the business of Free Will: The other is so much a Free-willer, that he seems to
cashier Divine Prescience; For (says he) if God offer me any good thing, and
knows in the mean time I will not accept of it, I am nothing beholding to him
for his kindness. --

This manner of expression concerning God, is over-bold and fawcy; for we may
not speak of him with such a Liberty, as is allowable in other matters.
Besides, let us observe the consequence, and we shall find it to be this, that
either God Almighty has no knowledge at all of future Events; or else, that all
conditional Promises, throughout the whole Scripture, are no more than shadows;
the former of which consequences strikes at the Perfection of the Divine
Nature, and the latter blurrs the sincerity of the inspired Writings. To which
it may be added, that such Doctrine is false, and injurious to the Goodness of
God: For his Benefits offered to Mankind are not to be valued by his
Foreknowledge of Non-acceptance, but by their own intrinsic worth, and by
Man's Capacity of enjoying them if he will. And though God does assuredly know,
who will not accept of his kindness, yet he knows at the same time, the fault
is in themselves; nor is their refusal any further necessary from any such
Divine Foresight, than otherwise it would have been. So that some Persons will
indeed seem to have a great Veneration for the Scriptures, and yet own such
Principles as render a great part of them insignificant: For, if God's
Foreknowledge necessitate all Events, so that nothing could have fallen out
otherwise than it does; then all Divine Precepts and Rules of Life, all
Promises and Threatenings upon certain conditions, are no more but Cheats and
empty Formalities. But now, to those that sincerely acknowledge the Divine
Authority and Truth of the Scriptures, (as all Christians ought to do) the
Argument will lie thus: What ever is entirely true, is also harmonious and
self-consistent. But the Scriptures are true. Ergo, etc.

If it be urged, that the Scriptures, as proceeding from God, are indeed most
perfectly and entirely true, yet passing through the hands of so many Men, in
various Copies and Versions, from one Language into another, it cannot be, but
something of humane infirmity must stick to them. This indeed I freely grant;
and if any such thing can be made evident in the case before us, it will be
very fit to be considered. In the mean time, there can hardly any two things be
named that are more clearly and vigorously asserted in Scripture, than are
Divine Prescience and Free Will, as well in the places abovementioned, as in
diverse others. From whence it will follow, that if those places of Scripture be
genuine, and no way corrupted (which we must suppose, till the contrary be made
out) God's Fore knowledge and Man's Free-agency are not only true, but
perfectly harmonious, and consistent each with other, although our limited sight
and dazzled Eyes cannot fully enable us to behold their Agreement.

Nor need we wonder at it, when we consider, that not only in the Scripture,
but in Euclia's Elements, and many other Books approved in their kind, are
found diverse things, which a great number of Readers, though men of good Sense,
cannot easily understand or reconcile; and some things of that difficulty, that
the greatest Masters of Learning and Reason, have more than work enough to
overcome; of which, if need required, one might give particular Instances. Who
will believe that the least Diameter of a Needle's Point should be Divisible
into a Million (or rather infinite) Parts, and yet that a Circle, how large
soever, can touch a right line but in That is, the right line being drawn as a
tangent, but not through the Circle.
one point only? And since a Globular Body set upon a plain, can reach the same
but in one point, and a point is defined to be that, which has no part, would
it not be a strange Paradox to say, Eucl. def. 1 Lib. 3. prop. 36. Lib. 10.
prop. 117.
A Globe can touch a Plain in no part at all? Yet all this leans upon
Mathematical Demonstration.

It is easy to observe, that when any difficulty, or seeming opposition does
occur in Scripture, which common Readers cannot (and even Learned ones not very
easily) reconcile; two sorts of People, the Profane and Superstitious, take
hold of it to very ill purpose; the one apprehends it their Interest to have no
Religion at all, looks upon the Scripture as a State-contrivance to keep the
World in Order and Subjection, and hence they assume a lewd Liberty of turning
it into Burlesque and Ridicule; the other sort, being for the most part over
eagerly devoted to some Party, have a Religion made up of a few Fractions of
Truth, neglecting in the mean time the Sum and Substance. These men pursue, to
the best advantage of their Sect, that part of Scripture which has the kindest
Aspect upon their espoused Notions, and run it off from the main Body of Truth,
to that Extreme, that it becomes an Error in Doctrine, and perhaps too a Rent
in the Church. For the Body of Truth may not unfitly be resembled to the Body
natural, which cannot live in pieces.

That there are unchangeable Decrees of God, I do not doubt; but if that
Doctrine be so managed as to evacuate Men's Endeavors, this surely is an
unwarrantable Extreme. Justification by Faith is a great truth; but if it be
imprudently carried to that height, as to exclude, or make men neglect a good
Life, it will become a dangerous Error. That Christ died for all, is a
glorious Truth, as it is laid down in Scripture; but if some stretch that
Doctrine to the actual Salvation of all Men, and others thereupon put the whole
Business of Salvation within Man's power, these doubtless are vicious Extremes,
opening a wide passage for Pride or Profaneness. The one makes Religion
altogether vain, and the other makes the Grace of God not worth looking after.
So that whilst Men run into such violent Extremities, they seem to tear off
some particular Truths from their Unity with the whole, which from thence
forward turn into Corruption, whilst the main Body of Truth is deserted by
them, and becomes useless.

And this is the case not only of the less considering Sectaries, but even of
those who pretend highly to Philosophy, and aspire after the Reputation of
Wits: One whereof (sufficiently known) has improved three Syllables to that
height, as to render a great part of the Scriptures ridiculous, and the noble
Army of Martyrs no other than a Company of wilful and superstitious Fools, in
needlessly exposing themselves to flames and tortures. 2 Kings 5.19.
Go in pence, says the Prophet to Naaman; which single case he advances to a
general Dispensation for any Man to quit his Religion, as often as it shall be
difficult, and dangerous for him to profess it. And this I take to be the
Fountain Cause of all the Divisions that are, or have been among Christians;
namely, that Men will not read the whole Scriptures, and give each part its
just weight and measure, duly ballancing and comparing one thing with another;
but each Man according to his Complexion or Education, or perhaps some
predominant Melancholy, lays hold of that part that suits him best, and makes
up a Religion for himself, which is little more than the Result of his natural
temper.

Here I call to mind a passage of a Non-jurant, which I happened to be present
at. The Man was reputed among his Neighbors an honest plain Man, but somewhat
rash, and of no deep consideration, as may appear by the Story. The Discourse
fell out to be about Swearing, and the Person could not forbear to Declaim
bitterly against it, because it is said, Mat. 5.34.
Swera not at all. One of the Company urged that of the Hebrews, where the
Author speaking of God's confirming Hebr. 6.13, 16, 17.
his Promise made to Abraham, seems to intimate strongly the necessity of
swearing in some cases, not vainly, nor in common discourse, but in a solemn
manner, for the avoiding of Contention, and for confirming of some weighty
matter. And the Author does not only allege it, without any manner of Reproof,
as a practice amongst Men, who use to swear by the greater, and amongst whom an
Oath for confirmation is an End of Strife; but he adds further, that God
himself, the more abundantly to show the Immutability of his Counsel, does
condescend to that usage, confirming his promise by an Oath. To all which the
Person suddenly replied, the Author was a Liar in that thing: A decision
somewhat surprising, and no less than blashemy; yet had thus much of Ingenuity
in it, as to yield the force of the Argument on no easier terms to be avoided.

Thus If Men will needs imagine an Incongruity between Prescience and
Free Will, and so reject the one, though both are equally asserted in Scripture,
I cannot see how they can do it otherwise, than by the Non-jurants Argument.
But surely Men of Reason and Sedate Temper, will rather argue thus, that since
Prescience and Free Will agree in uno tertio, and that no less than the Word of
God; they must not only be agreed betwixt themselves, but both true. And
therefore if we cannot get them to fadge together in our Minds, the Reason must
not be any mutual jarring of theirs, but want of room in our Understandings. If
that Sacred Book were impartially read, and Religiously attended to, no
violence put upon it, but all its parts understood, (as they ought to be) in
Congruity with the main Bulk and Substance of the Doctrine therein contained,
it would put an End to this and many other Debates. The Magistrates Sword, and
the Peoples Conscience, the Prince's Prerogative, and Subjects Liberty; the
Divine Attributes, and the Essential Properties of Humane Nature; would all
enjoy their full Exercise and Latitude, without invading one another. And this
leads to the next thing I am to consider, Namely,

The Harmony of Divine Attributes. Where there are intestine Jarrs and
struggling Discord, there is no Unity, nor any thing like Perfection; but those
Natural Notions we have of the Being of a God, do at the same time, and with
equal Evidence, dictate to us his essential Perfection; therefore to talk of an
imperfect Deity, is so great a piece of Nonsense, as cannot sufficiently be
exposed; because there is nothing in the World to which it can be reduced, more
absurd than it self. Downright Atheism is indeed a monstrous thing, yet I
think it is capabable of a better Color, than having once acknowledged an
adorable Supreme Being, at the same time conclude him lame, or deficient. He
that looks about him into the World, and yet says in his heart, Psalm. 14.1.
There is no God, is properly a Fool, and that cannot make a rational
Inference, and from the things that are made, cannot so much as conclude there
must be a Romans 1.20.
Maker. And when both his Bible and his own Eyes may inform him, that every
House is built by some Man, yet Heb. 3.4.
(as if the World must build it self) so foolish is he as not to consider, that
he that built all things is God. But now, he that thinks God like unto himself
Psalm. 50.
, that is, subject to Failing and Imperfections, is styled Improbus, 16.21.
wicked or detestable, which seems to be the heavier charge of the two. And I
have heard of some of the Ancients, Plutarch I think it was, speaking to this
effect; I had rather Posterity should say, there never was such a Man, than
that Plutarch was an injurious and vile Person.

Now this Foundation, which is deep laid both in Scripture and Natural Reason,
namely; that God is every way perfect, is enough to build my whole Design upon:
He is perfect in Power, Chron. 20.6.
He does what he will both in Heaven and in Earth; perfect in Justice, Genesis
18.25.
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? perfect in Knowledge, Job 36.4.
Declaring the End from the Beginning. His Romans 12.2.
Will is perfect, his Psalm. 18.30.
Law is perfect, his 2 Samuel 22.31.
Work is perfect, all his Ways are Judgment. If the Streams be so clear, the
Fountain must needs be pure. But if any Man now will raise a Dispute amongst
the Divine Perfections (like that of the Disciples) which should be greatest;
or should give so much to one, as to leave nothing for another; he would make
strange work. Just as if some Man should be said to be a very prudent and just
Person in himself, yet when he comes to deal with his Neighbor, his Prudence
undermines his Honesty, and so he would become a Knave, or on the contrary,
should his Honesty out-go his Discretion, that would (in some degree) render
him a Fool. And this though a blunt Comparison, seems to be the very case in
Debate. We must however be careful to speak with Reverence and Decorum, even in
applying the most just Consequences of other Deuteronomy. 32.4.
Men's Doctrine unto the divine Majesty.

The Attributes we are concerned with in this matter are chiefly two; but by
consequence great many more; God's Wisdom, and his Goodness; the former implies
Knowledge, and that includes Prescience; the latter comprehends Justice, in
which Freewill is strongly employed. In reference to the first, take but away
from God his Foreknowledge of future Events, and you may almost as well
dethrone him; for besides that, it does clearly infer Ignorance and
Imperfection, whereby his Wisdon and Knowledge will come in Question; it
carries with it a kind of Impotency, for he that knows not of an Event before
it comes, may be surprised and defeated of his Expectation; and how should he
have power to have prevented what he knew not of before? Suarez is positive in
the place abovementioned, That had not God a Foreknowledge of all things, he
were not fit to govern the World. And as for the latter, take away from Man his
Free-agency, and you bring him under such a fatality, that he is in no sort
Master of his own Actions; and then says the Learned Dr. Cudworth,
Intellectual World.
You take away the foundation of distributive Justice: For what Equity can
there be in the Reward or Punishment of those things, wherein Man has no
choice, and which could not possibly have fallen out otherwise? So that here is
no denying of either, without rejecting one or more of the Divine Attributes,
and so rendering the Blessed God a lame and imperfect Being; as if he could not
be omniscient, but he must be Arbitrary; nor just, without being ignorant.

Besides, how can God be said to search the Heart, Romans 8.27.
and Jer. 11.20.
try the Reins, or to what purpose should he do it, unless he knows the bent
and tendency of Men's Minds, and what they will do before they act it? And how
can he suit his Providence to his blessed Romans 8.28.
Ends and Purposes, for the good of his People, if he knows not the Exigencies
that shall befall them? On the other hand, if there be no voluntary Agents in
the World, what need any Providence at all? General Laws might serve the turn,
it is but putting the several Parts and Wheels of the Creation together, and set
them a moving like a Pendulum, and they will drive on one another; and so
Epicurus his Doctrine comes in play, that God regards not particular things.
What can we expect but confusion and disorder, whilst we invade the Divine
Attributes, or labor to set them at odds one with another?

But now, if we lay aside all Perverseness and Prepossession, the Harmony of
the Divine Perfections will be a most pleasant object of our Consideration. God
does not impose a Necessity of sinning upon any Man, but he knows some Men will
be ready enough to sin, out of choice. He does not punish or reward in Men what
he acts himself, or what he causes them to act without the Intervention of
their Wills; but if some will be virtuous, and others vicious, when they might
be otherwise, God is just in punishing and rewarding, though not ignorant in the
mean time, who will deserve well or ill at his hands. In a word, God does know,
that Man is a Free-Agent, because he made him so, and does daily preserve him
in that Capacity; he also knows, that some Men will abuse their Freedom in
spite of all Invitations and Inducements to the contrary, unless he interpose
his Sovereign Power (as sometimes I conceive he does) to move them irresistably
unto good.

From what has been said, the Argument will lie thus. God is perfect in all
his Attributes, and harmonious in all his Actings, and Providence, throughout
the World: But the denial of Divine Prescience does infringe his Wisdom and
Power, and the Denial of Free Will does obstruct his Justice; therefore it must
follow, that Man's Freeagency is not only consistent with God's Foreknowledge
of future Events, but both of them are most certainly true.

The third thing to be considered, is the Non-causality of Divine Prescience.
At the time indeed when this Discourse happened, I was laughed at by one of the
Gentlemen, for using that as an Argument, which he would by no means admit for
a truth. But I do not look upon laughter as a sufficient confutation, and
oft-times those who carry things at highest, are furthest out of the way. I
shall therefore lay down this Proposition, and run the hazard of Proving it,
Namely, that

God's foresight of what I shall hereafter choose; has not any causality in
it, to determine my choice, nor to infringe at all my liberty of choosing. If I
can make this evident, it will be very material; for the main thing that seems
to bias and mislead Men's Minds in this matter, is an apprehension, that God's
Foreknowledge of any thing must needs cause the same, and that thence all
other inferior causes must be urged on by such a fatal Necessity, that the
Effect is put quite without the Verge of Liberum Arbitrium. But this I hope
will appear to be a great Extravagancy from the following Considerations.

Let us then observe first, that all Foresight or Prescience, is nothing else
but a sort of Knowledge, and Knowledge does suppose something to be known
antecedent thereunto. A Man cannot be said to know, but he must know something
that was in being before he knew it; and even the Objects of Divine
Foreknowledge have a virtual Existence in God, antecedent in order of Nature
thereunto; so that as to himself it is rather Intuition than Prescience, but
with respect unto us, and to the not-yet actual Existence of the Objects, the
word Prescience is proper enough, as was noted before. Knowledge then has its
dependence upon the things known, not they on it; and therefore strictly,
Knowledge, considered barely as such, is an Effect and no Cause at all. As for
Example, I know that the Sun warms and refreshes; but then there was a Sun in
being first, whose influence I have found to have this Effect upon me. I know
that the three Angles of every Triangle are equal to two right Angles, because
first, I have seen a Triangle, and then I have seen the Theorem demonstrated;
but my knowing it, is no cause why it is so. I deny not yet, that the knowledge
of one thing, is frequently the cause of another thing subsequent, and emergent
thereupon; but never of that particular thing known; for instance, my knowledge
of a high water makes me decline the Foord, and go about by the Bridge, but it
is not therefore the cause of the high water. I know that such a Man is crafty,
for which cause I take care, that he do not overreach me; but my Knowledge is
no cause of his craftiness. Rev. 2, 9.
I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews and are not; (says he
that holds the seven Stars in his right hand:) But if any Man will say, that
this knowledge was the cause of that blasphemy, he will go near to be a
Blasphemer himself.

Object. But here it will be objected, That these Instances are only of things
already in being, which are not like to be caused by a knowledge subsequent
thereunto; but the Question is about the knowledge of things to come; besides,
if Prescience be but a species of Knowledge, and that all Knowledge supposes
something to be known antecedent to it, as was intimated above, it seems there
may be a certain Prescience of a thing antecedent, or which is all one,
Foreknowledge of a thing past: But is not this a plain Contradiction?

This Objection will be easily answered, by considering the Nature of
Prescience a little more particularly. And first, there is a kind of
Foreknowledge of certain things, that Man is capabe of, as namely, Changes of
the Moon, Ecclipses of both the great Luminaries, various Phases, Conjunctions
and Consigurations of Planets, Occultations of Fixed Stars, with diverse other
Phenomenon: All these by Calculation, may be foreseen for many years, and
foretold even to a few Minutes. The King's Observer, (for Example) or any other
Curious Astronomer, knows of these Appearances before they come, and when to
watch them at the Observatory. But is there any Man so pleasant, as to say,
that the Astronomers Skill is the cause of an Eclipse? or, if Monsr. Hevelius
can tell when some of the fixed Stars will disappear, that therefore he hides
them cunningly, and will not let the World see them? Now why should not humane
Prescience, in its kind and degree, have a power of determining the Events
foreseen, as well as Divine? and what is the reason that this foresight has not
the least causality upon these Effects? I suppose it will be answered, because
they depend upon certain regular and constant Motions of the Celestial Bodies,
which have been ever since the World began; and the like Appearances that are
now, have been heretofore; and will be again, so long as the World shall
continue; so that this Foreknowledge is little more than Recollection of what
is past. For as it would have been a rare thing to have foretold an Eclipse
before ever there was any, so would it be an easy matter for a Man of ordinary
Skill, to predict those that shall happen unto the Worlds end, provided he were
furnished with an exact History of all those that have been from the Beginning.

Let us now examine whether these, or the like Reasons, may not be of force in
the business of Divine Prescience; and in order thereunto, let us suppose some
point of time, like that of the Julian Period, before the Creation, wherein the
World was not yet in being. There was then in God, (1.) The Power and Virtue of
educing this same World out of Nonexistence into Being. (2.) A Will to do it,
in such time and manner as seemed good unto himself. (3.) A perfect Idea or
Prospect of this great Work in all its parts and Succession, and all this from
Eternity: This Idea, or Eternal View of all Things and Actions, that have been,
or ever shall be, is what we call Divine Prescience; it was antecedent to the
actual Existence of the World, but subsequent in order of nature unto God's
Eternal Purpose of creating it. Now I appeal to the Reason of Mankind, whether
it is the Platform that builds the House, or whether we ought to refer the
cause of the Worlds production unto this Idea, or rather to the Concurrence of
Divine Will and Power.

If it be still urged, That God's Foreknowledge of Events must of necessity
produce the same, since what he foreknows is sure to come to pass. It may
easily be answered, that what God foresees, is indeed certain; but such
certainty does not consist in the foresight, but in the causes foreseen; and
though the effect will surely come to pass, yet not without its proper causes; of
which causes, foreknowledge can be none at all, unless it could be both the
Cause and Effect of the same thing, which is impossible.

Obj. But how can God's Foreknowledge be called an Effect, which does ever
suppose an antecedent Cause? For since you grant it to have been from Eternity,
if it be an Effect, it must be an Eternal One, whose antecedent Cause must
therefore be fetched from beyond Eternity. Nor have you yet sufficiently
explained how far, or whether you admit there may be such a thing, as
Foreknowledge of what is already past, which was objected before.

To this last part of the Objection I have already said, (if it be considered)
what amounts to a sufficient Answer; but yet I shall endeavor to be a little
plainer.

First then, that God did foreknow the things that are now past, as well as
what are to come, is by no means to be doubted; but to say, that he does now
foreknow what is already past, is Nonsense, because it inmplies the futurity
of what is elapsed; as if I should say, God fore knows the Deluge, or the
Building of Babel; this would be contradiction in point of time, as though the
things were yet to come, which are long since past; but it is proper to say, God
did foreknow them.

But Secondly, the Notion I aim at, will best be apprehended, by remembering
always to distinguish between the real and the vertual Existence of things; the
former is brought forth in time, and therefore I say, God did foresee from
Eternity; but I cannot say so of the latter, which being it self Eternal, can
admit no priority in point of time. As for instance, 10000 years ago the World
was not extant, and something doubtless will be hereafter, which is not now;
but there never was, nor ever will be any thing extant, but what is, or was,
Virtually, existant in God, and clearly visible to his all-seeing Eye from all
Eternity; therefore God's Omniscient View, or Idea of all things, being
antecedent to the Creation, but subsequent in order of Nature to the Vertual
Existence of the World, is Foreknowledge with respect to the one; but
Contemplation or Intuition in respect of the other. If we look forward to the
Creation, it is Prescience; but if we look back upon Eternity, it is the result
of Divine Will and Power, or it is God's beholding in himself the Platform of
his Design, which (as I said before) is an effect of the Divine Purpose, to
build a world: which Purpose is the highest Link in the Chain of Causality,
even as the first step of Solomon toward building of the Temple was this, ^
Rings 5.5.
Behold, I purpose to build an House unto the Name of the Lord my God. It is
true, that God is infinite and Eternal in all his Attributes, and so there can
be no Precedence amongst them in order of time, yet in order of Nature there
must be Priority, since God cannot be said to behold a pure Nothing, to see,
know, and behold, are Relative Terms, and do ever suppose something to be seen,
known, or beheld.

Thirdly, As for the other part of the Objection against an Eternal Effect, it
will lie as hard against our Blessed Savior, who is the Eternal Son of God,
the brightness of his Fathers Glory, the Express Image of his Person, and the
Effect of his Love to Mankind. These also are relative Terms, a Son supposes a
Father; an Image, or Copy, supposes an Original, yet none surely doubts the
Eternity of him who laid the foundations of the Earth, and whose Throne is for
ever and ever.

I put the Question even now, what the reason was, that the Astronomers Skill
and Foreknowledge of the Celestial Phenomema, had not the least influence to
cause the same? and I gave this Answer, because these Phenomena did depend upon
certain Motions of the Heavenly Bodies, which were regular, and had been from
the beginning of the World; and so it was but enquiring into these Motions, and
the Foreknowledge of Eclipses, Conjunctions, and the like, would follow by
consequence. Let it be now demanded, why Divine Prescience had not any
causality or influence upon the Creation? Hebr. 1. v. 3, 8, 10.
and I shall answer this Question just after the same manner; namely, because
the Creation did depend upon the Will and Purpose of God, which is the first
Mover, the Fountain-Cause of all things, and was from Eternity. Omnipotence it
self, and even infinite Goodness, would seem barren and unfruitful without a
Will to Act, for whatever God made in Wisdom, and rules by his Power, were
wrought after the Ephesians. 1.11.
Counsel of his own Will; nor is there any thing in Heaven or in Earth, that
can prescribe (in point of causality) unto the Blessed Will of God: It Is no
more then, but Gods beholding, or taking a View of his own Purpose, and the
Foreknowledge of the future World must follow by consequence, which
Foreknowledge is nothing else, but the Prospect of what was potentially
existent in himself, from everlasting, as has been said.

From the foregoing Discourse it may appear, that Divine Prescience, as such,
cannot in propriety of Speech be said to have created the World, nor to have
had any efficacious influence thereupon; and if we consult the Scripture, we
shall find the same yet more evident: There we find that God said, Genesis 1.3.
Let there be light, and there was light. That, Psalm. 33.6.
by the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, Heb. 11.3.
and all the host of them by the breath of his Mouth. Heb. 1.3.
That the Worlds were framed by the Word of God. Ver. 43, 44.
And that He upholds all things by the Word of his Power. Now whether we take
the Word of God for his Power, or for his powerful Command, or for the
manifestation of his Will, (as it is frequently used in Scripture under these
and sundry other acceptations) it will still come to the same thing, and what I
am pleading for; but I do not observe it ever taken for Prescience, nor will
the Bible (I think) afford an Instance of any Causality ascribed thereunto; but
on the contrary, many Scriptures do clearly evince Divine Prescience, and at
the same time ascribe the Events foreseen to other Causes, which must needs be
very much to the matter in hand, I shall mention two or three.

First, Our Savior Christ (as was noted before) is said to know all things
that should come upon him; and yet his being delivered unto death by the Jews,
is attributed to their ignorance; For had they known, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory.

Scondly, In the 29th. Chap. of St. Luke's Gospel, Ver. 43, 44.
our Lord Christ foretold (and therefore certainly he foreknew it) that Enemies
would cast a Trench about Jerusalem, that they would lay it even with the
Ground, and not leave one stone upon another. Should Prescience have these
dismal Effects, it might be thought to be a very malignant thing; and that
which belongs to God as a Divine Perfection, could not be cleared from being
the Cause of much Evil. But let us not charge God foolishly, since we are
informed of the true cause in the very next Words; namely, Because thou knew
not the time of thy visitation.

Thirdly, In the Prophecy of Plosea, it is said of Israel, Ephraim and Judah,
Chap. 5. Chap. 13.
that they shall fall in their Iniquity, and that they shall be as Chaff driven
with the Whirlwind out of the floor, and as smoke out of the Chimney. Was this
Foreknowledge the cause of that destruction? No; for it is presently added, O
Israel, thou have destroyed thy self.

Again, the Prophet Ezekiel is commanded to say unto the Prince of Tyrus, ^^^k.
28.
That Strangers, the terrible of the Nations, shall draw their Sword against
the Beauty of thy Wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness, and bring thee
down to the pit, etc. And shall this come upon him because God foresaw it? No;
but because thine heart was lifted up; and thou have said, I am a God.

Lastly, To name no more, St. Paul exhorting 2 These. 2.3.
to stedfastness in the Faith, foretells the Coming of the Man of Sin, which
would be after the working of Satan, with all Power and Signs, and Lying
Wonders; that there would be a falling away from the truth, and men should
believe Lies, that so they might be damned. Now should any Man to requite St.
Paul for his Care of the Church, as to lay the blame of all these sad
Consequences upon him, I know not whether would be greater, the Folly or
Wickedness of such a Charge; and it would be yet worse, to lay the fault upon
the Spirit by which he spoke, as coming near to Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost. But the Text carries the Cause along with the Effect, namely, Verse 2, 3.
Because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved, for
this cause God shall send them strong Delusions, etc. When truth has offered it
self by Miracies, and all possible demonstrations unto the minds of Men, and
will not be received, it is a signal piece of Justice, to give them over to
believe a Lie. But here first the true Physician of a Christian Soul
admonishes it is safety and it is danger; it is safety, not to be soon shaken;
and it is danger of being decieved: Now, if the Soul reject both the Physician
and his Advice, and having wilfully put it self into the Hands of an Ignoramus,
is destroyed by him; nothing in the World can be more ridiculous, than to blame
the timely Warning and Foresight of the good Physician.

Object. But as concerning these and other Prophetic Scriptures, I meet with
this Salvo, namely, That whatever God foretells, he does by his power enforce
the accomplishment and fulfilling of the same. For (say these Persons) though God
knows all things knowable, yet such Events as are contingent, or depend upon
the fluctuating, and undetermined Wills of Men, are never knowable till they
are brought to pass; and therefore God cannot foreknow them. But now, what God
will have brought to pass, and whereof he gives Notice to the World by his
Prophets, he does bend and impel Men's Minds to do them, and by an irresistible
influence bring them to effect.

This Argument indeed strikes home; the only danger is, that it goes too far;
and will prove what the Patrons of it seem highly to oppose. None can pretend a
greater concern for the Honor of God, than those that declaim against what
they call Horrendum Decretum; yet this Hypothesis of theirs will force them to
admit the very same thing, and will make God the author of Sin with an high
hand. For if in reerence to all such things as are foretold by prophecy, there
must not be admitted any thing contingent, nor purely voluntary, as falls out
in other affairs; but all such Events are brought about by absolute force; what
is this but a fatal and inevitable Decree? And how can second Causes fall under
any blame, since they are infallibly predetermin'd by God's Almighty Power?
Hence it will follow, that the Jews and the Roman Soldiers, were no more to be
blamed for their Injustice and Cruelty to the Blessed Jesus, than a Watch is
for going too fast, when the Spring is set too high, or made too strong for the
Movement. And if the fault be not in second Causes, it must of necessity lie
upon the first.

It will be in vain to allege, that they had been grievous Sinners formerly,
and therefore God justly gave them up afterward to hardness of Heart. For,
Rev. 13.8.
The Lamb was slain from the foundation of the World, though not actually, yet so
as to be the Object of Divine Prescience, unless you will say, he was slain
from the foundation of the World, and yet God knew not of it. It was then
foreknown unto God, that the Lamb would he actually slain, before they that
slew him had done good or evil. So that if God do enforce whatever he
foreknows, then they who crucified our Savior, were under a necessity of doing
it, from the foundation of the World; and they who shall be seduced by
Antichrist to believe a Lie, and so be damned, have been about sixteen hundred
years under a satal Decree of Damnation. And even Adam, who all Men grant to
have had Free Will, must have been under a necessity of falling; unless we
shall suppose, that when God foreordained his dear Son for a 1 Pet. 1.20.
Sacrifice, he did not know to what End. But the Lamb slain does suppose Sin to
be attoned, and that implies Sinners: Now there could not be Sinners, but some
Body must sin first, and that being the first Man Adam, must (by this Argument)
have sinned, not out of choice, but unavoidable necessity, which is a most
horrid and impious absurdity.

Thus we have at hand three pregnant Instances, which do mightily expose the
weakness of the Objection: The Sin of Adam, the Death of Christ, the
Destruction of Jerusalem. The first of these appears to have been certainly
foreknown unto God, and yet none denies that Adam had power to have stood
innocent. The second was so particularly foretold by our Savior himself, that
the very Persons were pointed out, who were the chief Actors in it; yet Had
they known, they would not have cruoified the Lord of Glory. The third likewise
was largely and punctually prophesied; yet had Mat. 23.36.
Jerusalem known in her day, the things which belonged to her peace, Christ
says, Luke 19.42.
He would have gathered her Children together, as the Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, but she would not. So that in these great Events, we
may easily discern a reserved condition, and an evident possibility of having
been otherwise, though they were all known unto God from the Foundation of the
World. For in case of right Judgment and Information (possible enough to have
been attained) Adam had not sinned, Christ had not suffered, Jerusalem had not
been ruined. They were all indeed foreseen in their Causes, and those Causes
were sure to produce their proper Effects so far as they were permitted; that
is, God foresaw, that Men left to their Liberties and their Lusts, would make a
false Estimate of things, and would be sure to act accordingly; but yet such
foresight had no Causality upon such Actions, as has been said; nor could
there be any inforcement from God upon such Events, whereby the Liberty of free
Agents was in the least diminished, if the Scriptures be admitted for truth.

But here I would not be misunderstood, as if I thought God to be an unactive
beholder of all those Transactions which are foretold by Prophecy: Surely he is
too much a Cause of all things, to be a Nude Spectator of any one Action; and
certain Events I grant to have been as well predetermin'd as prophesied, of
which I shall give Instance presently. When God purposes to have any thing
brought about, he can easily set Agents at work, and remove Impediments; he can
turn Men's Hearts like Rivers of Water, yet never so, as to put any
preternatural force upon the Will to do evil.

For the course of Divine Providence, (though invisible to us) I conceive to be
so laid, and things dependent (by God's disposal) in such a Series and
Concatenation, that various Causes and Contingents shall concur to operate upon
Men's Faculties, in such sort, as to make them willing to act their Parts,
(unknown oft-times unto themselves) in order to effect the Almighty's Purpose.
Upon which Account I am apt to believe, that even in reference to those Events
that are under a peremptory Decree, most of the Actors that bring them about,
are as much free Agents, as is the Husband man in his choice of a fit season to
plow his ground. But however, the things I mainly insist upon are these, that
since Men derive that strength from God, by which they Blaspheme his Name, and
violate his Laws, God must be the primary Cause of those Actions, but not of
the Will wherewith they are done. That he does not Enforce the Volitions unto
Evil, and yet he fore-knows them: And that in diverse Instances it does appear,
that those Events and Actions have been foreknown unto God, of which the
immediate Instruments have been free and voluntary Agents, as has already been
made evident.

There is yet another part of the Objection to be considered, namely, That
future contingents are not knowable. I confess, they are inscrutable to us, to
whom they are contingent, but to God there can be no such thing; for he that
makes any thing contingent unto God, leaves him obnoxious to Surprise and
Disappointment, and consequently under great Difficulty of Governing the World.
For the clearing of this point, let us lay down for a groundwork (what I hope
is not denied by any that I am concerned with, namely,) that God Almighty knows
most perfectly all things present; and let us see whether this will not both
infer the knowledge of things to come, and take away all contingency with
respect unto God. And by the way, let us observe the knowledge of Mankind,
which though very dim and imperfect, even in things now existent, and before our
Eyes, yet extends in some degree to things both past and future. The Historian
is acquainted with many revolutions of former Ages, and from a parity of Reason
may foresee some that are to come. The Physician, that understands in any
competent Measure the Nature of a Medicine, knows from whence it derives it is
Original, what are it is constitutent Principles, and how it will operate. The
Mechanist that understands an Engine, knows how it was made, the parts of which
it is composed, and what Feats it will perform. The Philosopher, that enquires
into the Reasons of Things, and the Agency of Bodies, with the various
Affections of Matter and Motion, can tell before hand the success of diverse
Experiments and Undertakings, which are in the dark to other People. And the
Astronomer can tell the future Appearances of Heaven, as was noted before. Now
if all this, and much more, result from Man's imperfect knowledge of a few
things, we must sure conclude something further from God's most perfect
knowledge of all things, especially if we add hereunto, the consideration of
his Dominion and Sovereignty over all Creatures.

The World is a great Machine or Engine, which God made at first, and still
upholds its Being and Motion by the Word of his Power: Not so much as an Atome
can stir but by Virtue derived from him. Shall we then think that the great
Operator knows not the parts of Acts 15.18.
his own Work, or can be ignorant of its Motions, or of the Influence that one
part has upon another? It is possible a Curious Artist may make a piece of
Watch work to represent all the visible Motions of the Heavens, and to measure
out time to an incredible degree of Exactness: The Maker of such a piece must
needs know it is Numbers, how long it will go, how one Motion depends upon
another, and one Wheel drives on another; nor can he be ignorant, that if he
suffer the springs to run down, and Wind them up no more, the Motions will
cease, and his Contrivance will become altogether useless: Or if by any other
means, he stop some of the Motions for a time, they cannot stir till he gives
them liberty, though the rest are going in the mean while. Thus the Divine
Architect, that framed the World, knows all it is Parts and Influences, all it is
hidden Springs of Motion, all the Causes of every Effect, with their Connection
and Dependence, and the Agency of every particle of matter throughout the
Universe. He knows for what duration he designed it is Motion and Existence, and
the time when Mat. 24.36.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away. Nor can he be ignorant, that if he withdraw
the Springs of Life, his supporting providence from any Creature, or from the
whole World, it must sink into a state of Inactivity or Annihilation. Now as it
would be an idle Fancy to think, that in such a Watch, there should start up
some new Motion, not designed, and unexpected by the Maker: So it is far more
extravagant to talk of any thing contingent in respect of God, in as much as
his Work is perfect, and he can command a punctual observance of those Laws and
Rules which he himself has given to the Creation, whilst Psalm 148.8.
Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, Stormy Wind fulfill his Word.

The Sum is this: God Almighty knows most persectly all things present; that
is, the hidden springs of Action, and all the latent causes now operating; the
Nature and Virtues of all things in being, with the utmost extent of their
powers and influence, are all manifest in his sight; but since natural things
do not work in an instant, their force and efficacy must extend to suture time,
if I may not say, till time shall be no more; for one part of Matter will still
operate upon another, whilst Sun and Moon endures. Now since God cannot know
perfectly the force of any Agent, but (at the same time) he must know also the
Effect it will have upon it is Patient, and how far again that Patient will
become active upon other things; it will follow, that if God did not know
things to come, he must of necessity be ignorant of a thousand things present;
for as the knowledge of Causes implies the knowledge of Effects, so does the
not knowing of Effects unavoidably infer the ignorance of Causes. And as he
that draws one Link of an extended Chain, draws the whole, and the Motion of
one of the Globuli, moves those that are contiguous, and those again others
indesinitely: So it is impossible to know any one thing perfectly without the
knowledge of more; and God's most perfect knowledge of all things present, must
imply the knowledge of all things future.

It may be said, That all this is true with respect unto inanimate Creatures,
but Man acts from an internal Principle, and being left to the Liberty of his
Will, may either act or suspend his Action; and besides, there are so many
things may happen to influence his Will, that it is very uncertain whether of
the two he will choose, until he have effectually chosen.

Uncertain doubtless it is to other Men, and oft-times to a Man's self, what he
will do in some cases; but unto God it cannot be so, for these two Reasons
especially:

First, The Heart indeed is so deceitful, that for a Man to find out the
Subtilties of his own, Jer. 17.9, 10.
is no easy disquisition; and it must be yet harder to know another Man's. But
1 Samuel 16.7.
God sees not as Man sees; he not only looks upon the heart, but he looks into
it; Heb. 4.12, 13.
He searches and tries it; He knows the most intimate Secrets of the Soul, and
is a discerner of the thoughts and intents; all Creatures are manifest in his
sight; all naked and open before his Eyes: It is impossible then they should
deceive him, or act beyond or contrary to his Expectation. For since words and
actions flow (as streams from a Fountain) out of the abundance of the Heart, it
would be strange that God should know so exactly what the Fountain-contains,
and yet be ignorant what Streams must issue thence.

Secondly, Since the Principles from whence all humane Actions do proceed, may
be reduced to two, namely, those of Nature and Grace, and God must know the
Efficacy of them both, in as much as the one proceeds from the work of his
Hands, and the other from the operation of his Spirit; it must follow that God
cannot be ignorant how far Truth or Error, Virtue or Vice, Equity or
Injustice, Reason or Fallacy, Religion or Interest will prevail upon any Man,
either in his Natural Capacity, or under such a Measure of Grace as he bestows
upon him for that purpose. For as he knows the force of natural Agents, and the
disposition of every Patient to receive, or to repel their Agency; so can he
not be ignorant of the Efficacy of that Virtue, which proceeds more immediately
from himself. All which amounts to thus much in short, that God Almighty is the
Fountain Cause and Sovereign Ruler of all things, both in the Kingdom of Nature
and that of Grace; and therefore must know the whole Series of Causality from
the beginning to the End. And since that which is an effect of one thing,
becomes the Cause of another; he must equally know the things to come as those
present; unless there be some Effects, which proceed not from any Cause at all.

Let us now consider the Nature of a Contingent, and what it is that should
make Men think it cannot be soreknown. A Contingent (besides the stricter
Notion as it signifies the effect of a voluntary cause) may be, as I apprehend,
more strietly taken, for the encountering, or meeting together of sundry
Effects, whose Causes do not appear to have had any Connection. As when a
Springtide, a Land-flood, and a Storm from the Sea, happening at once, do make
an Inundation. Or when a Traveller in his Journey meets with a shower. Or two
Friends setting out from sundry Ports, meet in a far Country, without designing
it, or knowing one of another. Now a high wind and a Spring Tide, a Journey and
a Shower, have each of them Causes sufficient to produce them, but they are
contingent each to other, as also in respect of us, who not knowing that such
causes were operating, could not foresee the effects. But the case is not so
with God, it is not yet come to that pass, that because Men cannot foresee
contingent Events, that therefore we must conclude, that God cannot do it
neither. For as Wind and Weather are in his Hands, and obey his Will, so
Voluntary good Actions flow originally from the Holy Spirit, and evil Actions
are permitted, as the Devils were to enter into the Swine: Nor can wicked
Agents go one hair's breadth beyond their appointed limits. And even permission
it self does imply Foreknowledge; for how can any one be said to have
permitted, what he knew not of before it was done? I hope, that to evade this
Argument there is none will say, that God gives to wicked men a general License
to do what they please, whilst he in the mean time knows not in particular,
what wickedness they will commit, until they have acted it. For besides, that
this Character is exactly suited unto Satan in his Kingdom of Darkness, it
destroys Divine Providence root and branch; for how can God limit, or overruled
to his own good Ends and Purposes, those Events whereof he has no particular
foresight? or how can he be said in such a case to govern the World at all.

But as concerning the Nature of a Voluntary Action, I have spoken before; I
shall only add in this place, that since God knows most perfectly the heart of
Man, and what causes are interested in forming of his Judgment; how far the
Will follows the Dictate of the Understanding, and of right Reason, or whether
it is captivated by Senfual Appetite, and by the lusts that war in his Members:
Since God (I say) does infallibly know the Springs of all Actlons, whether from
Sense, from Reason, or from Grace, and to what degrees any kind of External or
Internal force can bend those Springs; he must of necessity know what Man
(purely lest to his own Faculties) will do upon any occasion.

I have insisted longer upon this Objection, as also upon the Non-causality of
Divine Prescience, than some perhaps will think to have been necessary; but
because the sense of the Objection is said to come from Persons of very great
Learning and Reason, and I did my self hear it strongly urged, that Prescience
must needs cause the things Foreseen; I thought it not amiss to enlarge a
little upon both the Points, in order to clear them up to common
Understandings; but whether I have done it to Satisfaction, I must leave to the
Readers Judgment. The sum of what I have said in reference to this last
mentioned (which I discoursed of before) is this, that to affirm Divine
Prescience to have a Causality, in such sort, that the Events foreseen could
not possibly have fallen out otherwise, is Abusurd, and it is false. It is
Absurd because it puts the Cart before the Horse, and makes that to be a cause
which is purely an effect; and it is False, because it is contrary to the word
of Truth, contained in the Scriptures. I shall now conclude this part of my
Essay, with the words of the Schoolman; Suarez.
Neque hinc eriam fit, ut per hanc Praescientiam, Deus imponat necessitatem
aliquam rebus sic cognitis, quia haec Scientia, ut sic, non est earum causa. It
does not follow from hence, that God by his Foreknowledge imposes any
necessity upon the things so known, because this knowledge, as such, is not the
Cause of them.

But before I come to the last part of my Design, I must make a short
Digression, to prevent an Objection that may arise from what I said not long
ago, namely, That the Divine Will was the fountain Cause of all things, as
being the first Mover; for no doubt God is the first cause of all Motion, though
he never determines any, exerted by a free Agent to a wrong. Object; and all
things being wrought (as the Apostle says) after the Counsel of his Will. From
hence it may be urged, That though Divine Prescience have no causality, yet since
we grant that the Divine Will is the first cause of all things; nor can we
deny, that whatever God wills, he certainly foresees; does it not follow from
hence, that all things must come to pass according to the fixed Purpose and
Preordination of God, in such sort, that the Will of Man must needs be
overruled and predetermin'd, and consequently the free-agency of rational
Creatures wholly evacuated?

I answer, this will by no means follow, as may appear from the consideration
of the following particulars.

1. Though God foresees whatever he will have brought to effect, yet we cannot
say on the contrary, that he wills every thing he foresees. God, it is true,
wills even the sinful Actions, which he foresees, but with a will permissive of
them, not effective; perfectly knowing (as a Wise Man would shrewdly guess)
what Persons, so and so inclined, will do in such and such Circumstances, being
only Enabled, not Impelled, to act, and being left to follow their own
Inclinations. And so he may certainly foresee many things, which he never wills
by a positive and effectively determinative will. He equally foresees all
things that come to pass, otherwise he would be deficient in point of
Knowledge; but we must not say, he wills them Equally. For that would be to
approve of evil, and so he would be deficient in point of Goodness. For
instance, he predetermin'd Israel's Deliverance from Egyptian Bondage, and he
likewise foretold it: So that herein his Purpose and Foresight run Parallel.
But then he foretold Pharaoh's Obstinacy in detaining the People, at the same
time when he willed him to let them go; and herein his Foresight and express
Will are quite contrary. He wills, that Men should fear the Lord, and serve him
in sincerity and in truth; and not only so, but that they should do it out of
Josh. 24.14, 15.
free choice, arising from a true Judgment of things; yet he soreknows that
some will be Disobedient, and Iniquity shall abound Mat. 24.12.
. He wills, that his chosen People be with him, and see his Glory Jo. 17.24.
, and he knows it shall be so; he knows that others will dye in their Sins, but
he has sworn he wills it not Mat. 19.28.
. Whatever God has proclaimed, is an undoubted Object of Divine Prescience;
but every Object of Divine Prescience is not therefore preordain'd, nor
agreeable to his Will. Good things are equally the Objects of Divine Pleasure
and Foresight; but we cannot say the like of Evil. We may say indeed, that God
foresees an Evil Action, but we cannot say he would have it done, nor that he
has power to do it; for both these would imply a contradiction, since it is
purely inconsistent with the Divine Nature to have either Will or Power to do
evil.

A second Consideration is this, That though the Divine Will be truly and
unchangeably one and the same, yet is it distinguishable according to a
threefold difference of things about which it is conversant. As first, when God
designs to bring about some special act of his Providence in the World, as that
Promise made to Abraham, Genesis 12.7.
Unto thy Seed will I give this Land; in this respect his Will is Positive and
Irresistible, nor can all the Powers of Earth and Hell, put one Minutes stop
unto his Purpose or Decree.

But Secondly, when God commands any thing to be done by his People, as their
Duty, and for their Good, he deals not with them as inanimate Creatures, but as
rational Ones; he proposes unto them a Rule or Law, with the Benefit of
observing it; as for Example, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days
may be long in the Land, etc. But he does not enforce the observation of this
Law, upon all those to whom it is given; for so there would be no
Transgression. He propounds it to their choice, expecting a Voluntary Obedience
upon promise of a Reward, which reward cannot be commensurate to an Obedience
upon Force, which properly is no Obedience at all. In this sense therefore his
Will is Imperative, but not Irresistible; for the stiff-necked are said to
resist the Holy Ghost. Acts 7.51.


And Thirdly, when God forbids any thing to be done by us, that would dishonor
him, and destroy our selves, and yet we do it; or when he commands us any
thing, wherein we disobey him, his Will is therein only permissive. Thus Sin,
tho directly opposite to the Command, is permitted. And so God is said to have
Suffered the peoples manners in the Wilderness about forty years, Acts. 13.16.
as also in times past, he suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways Acts
14.^6.
. Not that their Ways were acceptable to him, or agreeable to his Will, (in any
other sense than that of permission) much less efficaciously influenced by him;
only they were suffered for a time to run their Course. For, having set before
them Life and Death, partly in his Written Law, and partly in their own
consciences, and having employed all suitable Means, Motives, and Reasonable
Inducements for their choosing of the one, and refusing of the other; according
to his primary Intention of good unto all Men: If nothing less than. Invincible
Grace will serve the turn, God is not obliged to save all those as it were by
Miracle, that will not be otherwise saved; and therefore permitting obstinate
Persons to reap the fruits of their own Works, his secondary intention takes
place, namely, the manifestation of his Power, Righteousness, and just Severity
upon impenitent Sinners, whereby also the preciousness of Grace and Mercy is
the more conspicuous to those that receive it.

Now, though I like not by any means, that distinction of the Divine Will into
Secret and Revealed, especially when these two are made to contradict each
other; as if it were God's Secret Will that Men should sin and be damned, when
his revealed Will bids them repent and be saved; this is to stem the Current of
Scripture, and in effect to make void both the Law and Gospel. I say, though I
approve not this, nor shall I borrow any of the School Distinctions; yet I
think the Scripture will allow us to say, that the Divine Will is either
Positive, Preceptive, or Permissive. By Positive I mean Irresistible, in
reference to what God does himself, or what he positively determines to be
done; Preceptive is with respect unto Laws, and Men's voluntary obedience
thereunto; Permissive in respect of Sin. And yet this is still the same most
blessed and unchangeable Will, as it is the same Sunbeams by which some sort
of Bodies are hardened, others melted, and a third calcined.

I come now to the last part of my Undertaking, which is to answer some of
those Objections, that are wont to puzzle diverse People about this matter; but
I have answered so many already, that have risen by the way, and have enlarged
beyond my expectation in what is past, that I would think, it should spare some
pains in the remainder. For the strength of what now remains, may be summed up
in a very few Objections, and answered (I hope) in not many words.

It is matter of easy Observation, that the Objectors do still suppose the
thing in Question, and what ought to be proved before the Objections can have
any force at all; as namely, that God's foreknowledge of the End makes void the
use of Means; whereas it is so far from doing that, that the use of Means and
second Causes, is therein supposed and employed, as the Foundation of such
Foreknowledge. For if it were possble, that the force and efficacy of Causes
could be uncertain unto God, the Foresight of Effects would be so too. Thus,
for example, if God foresee that such a Child shall live to be a Man of Eminent
Learning, does this Foresight give him leave to be idle, and become a Truant
every day? Now the Objectors, according to their manner of arguing; must answer
in the affirmative, and leave the Child to be made a Scholar by Miracle. But I
answer, No; for such a Foresight must have some Foundation; it does therefore
suppose, that God for his part, by his daily providence, will continue unto him
a competent measure of health, strength and capacity, and afford him fit means
and opportunities of becoming Learned; and that the Boy for his part, will
studiously employ and improve the same for the best advantage to that End. Let
us now see the full strength of what is wont to be objected in this matter.

Obj. If God's Foreknowledge does ascerrain the End, to what purpose is the
use of means? An Event can be no more than certain; and if God foresees that I
shall certainly dye within a year, all the Medicines in the World will not make
me live a day longer. But if he fort sees, I shall live twenty years, I shall
not only need no Physic, but I may for diversion, leap once a day into a
River, or into the Ocean, without any fear of drowning. I can neither fall
short of, nor go beyond that fatal Period which is fixed in Divine Prescience.

This Objection seems to make some little noise, and yet at most is but a
plausible kind of Fallacy, employed only by vulgar and unthinking heads, but
unworthy a Man of good consideration. It is indeed answered in what has been
already said; but I shall add something more in these few particulars. As first,

1. This sort of Reasoning resembles so much that of the Devil to our Savior,
that it may very well seem to challenge the same Author. If God forsees thou
shall live many years, thou may leap into the Sea, or throw thy self down
from a Precipice, (says the Objection) for thou must certainly live out thy
appointed time. Mat. 4.6.
If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down from this Pinnacle of the
Temple, (says the Devil) for he shall give his Angels charge concerning thee
Psalm 91.8.
. Now, as the ground of that Security against Dangers, and sundry Evils
mentioned in the 91st. Psalm, at ver. 8. is omitted in the Devil's Quotation:
So the ground of God's Foresight and cause of the Event foreseen, is omitted in
the Objection, namely, a prudent care to preserve life: And as the Son of God
was never like to fall down and worship the Devil, so any sober Man that lives
to a full Age, is not like to attempt desperate ways to destroy himself. The
Answer too, given by our Savior, is proper in this Case; Mat. 4.7.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: For if he foresees the End, he foresees
also the means conducing thereunto, which means God having graciously put into
thine own hands, why should thou tempt him to save thy life by Miracle, when
thou may preserve it by thy own Discretion? Thus we see, the Devils
Argument, and that of the Objection, run exactly Parallel.

Secondly, The Fallacy of this reasoning consists partly in joining a Truth and
a Falsity together, and make the one to infer the other, though there be no
Connection between them; and partly in leaving out the consideration of that
which must be supposed, to make the sense complete, whether the inference be
true or false: For instance, let this be the Argument in short: God foresees
the End, therefore it will so come to pass.

I say here, the Proposition is true, but the inference (without something else
supposed) is false; for if the illative Particle therefore, refer only to the
word foresees, there is no good consequence, since Forelight has not any
Causality, as has (I hope) been proved. That Divine Prescience does ascertain
the End, is true upon this Account, Necessitas consequentiae in ordine
probandi, non est necessitas rei ipsius in ordine causandi. Baxt. Meth. part 1.
page 45.
that it beholds the Causes wherein the certainty does consist, but that it
does so merely of it self, without supposition of Causes, and proper means to
effect that end, is false. God, by his Foresight, lays no necessity upon the
Event; but he foresees it in it is causes, of which humane Endeavors ordinarily
are no small part. Therefore the sense of the Argument must, in this manner, be
completed, before it can be made to conclude any thing.

God foresees the causes productive of such Effects, therefore such Effects
will follow; not from the foresight, but from the causes foreseen. Thirdly, Let
us suppose, that God foresees some strong Man, vigorous and healthful, shall
dye within a year, who according to the Course of Nature might live twenty. If
this be true, it must be true also, that intemperance, neglect of means, or the
like, must bring him to it: Some cause there must be; but naked Foresight is no
cause at all. Again, suppose God foresees, that such a person will live twenty
years. If that be true, then, that he should attempt every day to destroy
himself, must be false; for if God foresees the one, he foresees nor the other,
because they are inconsistent. He does not foresee contradictions to be true,
or things to be that will never be; as once a wise Critic would needs
maintain, that when Jonah was sent to preach unto Nineveh, God then foresaw,
that City would be destroyed in forty days, though it stood many years after. But
God does not foresee that Causes will produce such Effects as are improper and
impossible; not that Repentance will produce Destruction, nor that Poison,
Drowning, or Debauchery, will produce length of days, and virtuous prudence an
untimely End. In a word, Divine Prescience beholds not things in parcels, but
altogether in one View: Sees the Issues and Periods of all things, not without,
but in conjunction with the proper causes conducible thereunto.

Fourthly, It may not be amiss to remember, that as there are some true
Propositions, which by leaving out a word or two may be made false: So there
are others (and those of Divine Authority) which without something understood,
cannot be made out to be true. Of the first sort is this, Jo. 7.16. Jo. 12.44.
My Doctrine is not mine; and again, He that believes on me, believes not on
me. But this is the Devil's way of quoting Scripture, leaving out the Context
that should explain it, and in this manner too frequently do some Persons deal
with those Writings, they have a mind to cavil at. Of the other sort is this,
Jon. 3.4.
Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown; And 1 Cor. 6.9.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Now the
Divine Purpose for the Destruction of that City, and for excluding v. 10.
Fornicators, Idolaters, Thieves, Drunkards, Extortioners, and the like, out of
the Kingdom of Heaven, is denounced absolutely without any annexed Condition;
and yet all acknowledge, that such Threatenings are Conditionally to be
understood, and to be executed only in case of Impenitency: And thus it is in
our present case. That God Foresees the End, is true; but it is not the whole
Truth, nor to be understood exclusive of the Means. It is undoubtedly true,
that Christ foresaw the Destruction of Jerusalem; yet we must not thence infer,
that he foresaw it without any respect to Sin; for thus he complains, How often
would I have gathered your Children together, etc. and ye would not! How could
it be matter of Complaint that they would not, if the Peoples choice be not
implied? Either God Foresees, that Men will abuse their Liberty, or he does
not; if not, then neither is he Omniscient, nor are the Scriptures true; if he
does, then such Foresight is so far from taking away Men's Liberty, that it
confirms it; for Men cannot abuse their Liberty unless they have it; nor can
they use it, if the Objection have any force, which supposes. Men's endeavors,
and the use of Means to be in vain. Thus then I Sum up what has been said in
Answer to the Objection.

Acts 17.24, 25, 26.
God that made the World made all things therein, seeing he is Lord of Heaven
and Earth, and gives unto all Life, and Breath, and all things; and has made
of one Blood all Nations of Men to dwell upon the Earth, and Determined the
Times before appointed, and the Bounds of their Habitation. We ought not to
think, that the Godhead is like unto Stones, or stupid Earth, that he should be
ignorant either of his own Offspring, or of the Work of his Hands, or the
Bounty of his Goodness. And having graciously endued Mankind with the Light of
Knowledge, and with a Faculty of choosing things for his good, and avoiding
things hurtful; he does not extinguish that Sight, nor take away such power of
Election, unless it be, as a Punishment, for some grievous and long-continued
Provocation. But forasmuch as he beholds at once in his Omnisciency, the
Nature, Virtue, and Activity of all Creatures, with the Causes, Events and
Issues of all Things and Actions, from Everlasting to Everlasting; and since he
knows most perfectly the Heart of Man, the Bent of his Affections, his measure
of Grace, and prevailing Motives; he must of necessity Foreknow the various
Results of Man's choice and Liberty of Will, without the least obstruction to
the free Course and Exercise thereof. He Foresees the End, together with the
Means, and the Effect depending on its proper Cause. He foresees, that some Men
shall not live out Psalm. 55.23.
half their days, but they are such as are bloody and deceitful. He foresees,
that Prove. 10.27.
The Years of the Wicked shall be shortened; but then he shall fall by his own
wickedness. And to conclude, he foresees, that Prove. 11.5.
A righteous Man shall prolong his days; not by daily attempts to destroy
himself, but (as the Wise Man says) by the fear of the Lord, and in the way of
Righteousness.

Obj. One Objection more, and I have done. It has been often said in this
Discourse, that the Event Foreseen of God, is certain, and will come to pass;
and again, it has been asserted, that some Events, which have been Foreseen,
might possibly not have come to pass; how can these two Notions agree together?

I answer, first, that any thing can be certain and uncertain at the same time,
and in the same respects, is granted to be a contradiction; but a thing barely
Possible, which may either be, or not be; implies no contradiction at all. For
as there are many things Possible to be, which shall never came to pass
Actually; so other things shall Actually come to pass, which yet Possibly might
not be. Thus it is Possible, I may go to Rome, but it is a thousand to one, I
shall never come there; and if it Actually so fall out, yet that does not take
away the Possibility of going thither; for Learned Men say, White de Mucao.
Multa futura esse quae non crunt, and multa posse fieri quae non fient. On the
other hand, something will Actually (that is certainly) be done this day, which
possibly might be deferred till to morrow: Illud enim possibile est, quo posito
nullum sequitur inconveniens. But all this perhaps will better appear from the
consideration of these Particulars.

1. An Event may be certain with respect unto God, which is not so to us; for
nothing can be uncertain to him that is Omniscient; but to us, that know but in
part, almost every thing Future is obscured with some kind of uncertainty.

2. An Event may be certain in it self, on Supposition of certain Causes; and
yet supposing other Causes, it would fall out quite otherwise. So that

3. The certainty of a future Event is absolute in respect of God, Hypothetical
in respect of it self, but unknown or uncertain in respect of us. That is to
say, it can never so fall out, but that he who knows the whole train of Causes
leading to it, must of necessity Foreknow it. But it is the Causes (not the
Foreknowledge) which make it to be what it is; which being supposed, the Effect
certainly follows. Which Certainty extends not to us, who are ignorant of the
Causes. Let us see now, how this will appear by instances.

Suppose, the French King, before he dye, turns Protestant; whether it so fall
out or not, God knows; for (as Solomon says) Prove. 21.1.
The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord. If Conviction or Interest oblige
him to become a Protestant, the Effect will certainly follow; but this is
Hypothetical; that is, upon Supposition of prevailing Causes and Motives it
must follow. But to us there can be nothing of Certainty, whilst we are
ignorant of that Princes Intentions, neither know how it may please God to work
upon him hereafter.

The Captivity of the Jews was certainly Foreknown unto God, and, together with
a great Pestilence foretold by the Prophet Jeremiah, in a very remarkable and
particular manner: And afterward, says the Lord, I will deliver Zedekiah King
of Judah, and his Servants, and the People, and such as are left in this City,
from the Pestilence, from the Sword, and from the Famine, into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and into the hand of their Enemies, etc. And he
adds further, That their City shall be given into the hand of the King of
Babylon, and he shall burn it with Fire. Yet the same Prophet is sent to call
them to Repentance, to prevent even this very Captivity, and tells them, Jer.
7.5, 6, 7
If ye thoroughly amend Jer. 21.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
your Ways and your Doings; if ye thoroughly execute Judgment between a Man and
his Neighbor; if ye oppress not the Stranger, the Fatherless and the Widow,
and shed not innocent Blood in this place, neither walk after other Gods to
your hurt; then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the Land that I
gave to your Fathers, for ever and ever. We see here a reserved Condition, and
fair possibility of preventing that Eminent Captivity, so much noted in
Scripture, and so much Prophesied. God grant that we, by the same Method, may
earnestly endeavor to prevent another Captivity, which has (they say) been
Prophesied too, and which severely threatens England at this day.

I conclude with Adam's Transgression, beforementioned; which was most
certainly Foreknown unto God, forasmuch as 1 Pet. 1.10.
Redemption by the Precious Blood of Christ was Foreordained before the
foundation of the World; and it is no less certain, that Adam had Free Will, and
Power to have persisted Innocent, which surely amounts at least to a
possibility of not transgressing the Divine Command. And this consideration
alone is enough to answer the Objection, and to silence any Argument that can
be opposed in this matter.

I have now done; the Uses I propound to my self from this Discourse are
Specially these four: 1. To read the Scriptures Impartially, and to value them
Equally, upon the Account of that Sacred Authority stamped upon the whole, and
the Spirit that breaths in every part; not to build an Hypothesis upon some few
single Expressions, further than it may appear, to be consentaneous to the
integral Body of Truth contained therein. 2. In all mysterious Points, wherein
there appears a difficulty, either to affirm or deny, still to adhere to that
side which has the surer Evidence; and wherein the Word of God is clear and
unquestionable, to esteem that the strongest Evidence of all; and unto which
all Arguments from humane reason, and even Mathematical Demonstration, must
yield submission. 3. But in such matters, wherein there appears equal Danger in
both extremes, and wherein many Person have erred on either hand; to take the
MIDDLE WAY, and walk in it, with such Caution and Moderation, as to be Friends
with them that tread not the very same steps, and always ready to admit any
further discovery of Truth. 4. To represent the Ever-blessed God, in the best
manner that may be thought, and most worthy of so glorious a Being, clothed
with all Perfection, Beauty and Amiableness; not to render him Monstrous, like
armed Power without Benignity; nor Contemptible as an ignorant or defective
Deity; but especially to think of him according to the Notices he has given of
himself in his revealed Will; and not to imagine, that either his Essence, or
many times, his Operations can stoop to my little understanding.

And if I were fit to give Advice to others, it should be this, that no Man
presume to demolish the Divine Attributes, and out of the ruins thereof, to
erect unto himself some groundless Fancy, which like a Castle in the Air, has
nothing Solid to support it; as if God could not be just to his Creatures
without being imperfect in himself. Neither let any Man stand dismayed at the
Consideration of the Fatal Period; as if God could not foreknow the Events of
things, but either Divine Justice must be Arraigned, or Man Degraded to a
Machine; for as he that does Righteousness is Righteous, and by perseverance
therein shall undoubtedly be happy; so he that wilfully persisteth in evil
doing, is Wicked; and without Repentance, must expect to be miserable. But as
the former of these will look upon Divine Prescience as the Cause of his
Happiness; so neither can the latter blame it, as any occasion of his Misery.

Let no Man think to arrest Judgment, by absurdly charging his own
Prevarications upon Divine Perfection; as if a Man should urge, that because
God is perfect in all his Attributes, he was therefore obliged to be wicked in
all his Actions: Who would not blush at the Impudence and Absurdity of such a
Plea? Prescience is a Perfection which God cannot want and preserve his
Divinity; but to make it a Cause of Man's Misery, were to make it an
imperfection. It is no less essential to the Divine Nature than Omnipresence;
and those that will dare to Retort their wickedness upon God, may make this
Attribute as Criminal as the other. For if Men will not trust God with the
Foreknowledge of evil Actions, lest that should infer a necessity of sinning,
the next thing (and with equal reason) will be to seclude Divine Presence from
the inspection of wickedness, lest God should that way become accessory
thereunto. If a naked Foreknowledge of Evil, be any cause of it, why not actual
Presence at the Evil committed?

But the Scripture does better inform us, concerning the Causes of good and
evil, and of Man's Happiness and Infelicity, than the shallow reasonings of some
Persons, who yet pretend to be wise above others. There we are taught, that
Man's happiness depends upon the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, freely offered
to reasonable Creatures, and willingly accepted by them. That the Soul, not by
any blind fatality, but by rational inducements and the use of proper Means,
being convinced of the Evil and Danger of Sin, and directed the way to
Salvation, is brought to such a Belief of the Gospel, and such a voluntary
Obedience thereunto, as may render the Person acceptable with God through the
merits of our Blessed Savior; Ephesians. 1.7.
In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins,
according to the riches of his Grace.

And then the cause of Man's Sin and Misery does consist, not in Divine
Prescience, but in the Prevalency of Corruption and Temptation, arising partly
from an Original Taint, and partly from a wilful Pursuit of irregular Appetite
after the pleasures of sense; by which means, the Affections being besotted,
and the heart hardened against Reasons without, and Motions within, there is at
last an inveterate and habitual Malignity brought upon the Soul. * But let no
man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with
Evil, neither tempts he any man. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own Lust and enticed, Jam. 1.13, 14.

These are such causes of Good and Evil, that a diligent observer may easily
see and feel their Efficacy; but how a naked Prescience should operate, what
others do, I know not. I can by no means understand. But this I conclude for
certain, that God is Righteous in all his ways, both with respect unto the
causes of Good and Evil, and their Rewards or Consequents. His Judgments will
one day appear to be according to Truth, without the least diminution of his
other perfections; namely, Unto them that are contentious and obey not the
Truth, but obey Unrighteousness, Indignation and Wrath; but to them who by
patient continuance in in well doing, seek for Glory and Honor and
Immortality, Eternal Life, Romans 2.7, 8.

FINIS.

