ORIGIN against CELSUS: Translated from the ORIGINAL INTO ENGLISH.

Origin against Celsus: Translated from the ORIGINAL INTO ENGLISH.

By James Bellamy, Gent.

Nec Verbum Verbo curabis reddere, fidus Interpres.

Horat. de Art Poet, LONDON, Printed by B. Mills, and Sold by I. Robinson, at
the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Translator's PREFACE TO THE READER.
THAT Translations of Learned Authors in general, especially if they be
carefully undertak'n, and prudently managed, are of great Use to the Public, I
think, after all that has been said against 'em, no Person can reasonably deny,
or even call into question. For as the same Reasons which may be assigned, for
the Commendation of a Fountain of Water, may as well be brought in Praise of
the Streams, which proceed from it, so far as they are properly conveyed: So I
think, the very same Arguments which are used in Favor of any Learned
Original, will equally serve, to justify, and recommend a Translation of it,
so far as it answers its principal End, in conveying to our Minds the true
Sense of the Author.

And though I think, I may say, without the Suspicion of Vanity, that I have, in
some measure employed my Time and Strength, in the Study of the Learned
Languages, and that I highly value 'em, as the happy Vehicles of solid and
useful Learning; yet the bare Language in which a Book is writ (let it be never
so much extolled, as being learned, and copious, or esteemed for its Antiquity,
native Majesty, and inimitable Sweetness) is, I confess, one of the least
Things, which will ever recommend it to my Esteem, and Perusal.

For I humbly conceive, that in all our Studies we should not so much nibble at
Words, which are, as it were, but the Bark of the Tree of Knowledge, as aim at
the Improvement of our Reason, which is a strong Reflection from the Deity, and
affords abundant Matter of agreeable Entertainment, to them, who are so happy,
as to be distinguished from the Generality of Mankind, by a wonderful
Penetration of Soul. And if an Author, by his natural Capacity, and acquired
Abilities, does make a more than ordinary Figure in the intellectual and
learned World, is an Honor to the Age in which he flourished, and perhaps
equally the Wonder and Envy of succeeding Ages, I think, the more Reasons may
be assigned, why he should be clothed in the English Language, which is most
familiar to us, and is allowed by all capable Judges, to be very expressive,
copious, and charming. For certainly it is Pity, that such immense Treasures of
Sense and Learning should be confined, to those few Persons, in a comparative
Sense, who happen to understand the Language in which he writes, and like the
vast Mines in Peru and Mexico, serve chiefly for the Convenience, and Delight
of those, who are Foreign to us, both by Blood, and by Religion.

And I have often thought, and it is the Opinion of many Persons, who are far
more capable of judging than my self, that 'twou'd conduce very much to the
Honor of the BRITISH NATION, to have the Fathers of the Three First Centuries,
those Heroes of Antiquity, and Pillars of the Christian Church, translated into
the Language of our Country, and clothed in so Modern and so Charming a Dress,
if it be possible, that many of both Sexes, whose Genius and Education does not
lead 'em, to the Study of Greek and Latin, may be induced to read 'em, and to
square their Lives by those excellent Rules of Virtue, and Piety, which they
have laid down, for the Conduct of Others, and of which they were in their
several Ages, and are still, in some Sense, living, and highly honorable
Examples.

And since, by the Policy of a Neighboring Nation, the Language of Lewis the
XIVth has already obtained that UNIVERSAL MONARCHY, to which he seems to
aspire, and since, many excellent Translations, of which the French may justly
boast, have invited and almost constrained, many ingenious and polite Persons,
to learn and admire their Language, and so perhaps they have been unhappily and
insensibly won over to their Corrupt Religion and Slavish Principles of
Government, I think, it is not a little strange, that we, who are so prone to a
Fantastical Imitation of 'em, should so much abound, in Unnecessary and
Trifling Originals, and give so little Encouragement, to the Translation of
those Ancient Authors, whom, in Spite of all our Ignorance and Prejudice, we
must acknowledge, to have been remarkable for their Learning, and whose
Labors, since they were generally approved, and highly admired, in the Early
and Pure Ages of the Church, and since they strangely confounded the Whole
Heathen World, one would think, might very well serve for our Confirmation, and
delightful Entertainment. And though we deservedly pay a most profound Respect to
the Greek and Hebrew Text of Scripture, as claiming in a strict Sense the
Venerable Title of the Word of GOD, and challenging in a special Manner the
Time, and Strength of those, whom God and Men have thought fit to employ, in
the Explication and Defense of the Sacred Oracles; yet it is an extraordinary
Happiness, which we in these Nations enjoy, that we have such excellent
Translations of the Bible, and even the common People (who have precious and
immortal Souls, as well as others, and want more Helps, for the regular and
comfortable Discharge of their Duty) are so far from being commanded by their
Ministers, to avoid 'em, as being dangerous in unskillful Hands, and an
imperfect Rule, both of Faith, and Manners, that they are strictly enjoined,
and with all imaginable Tenderness entreated, to read 'em, with the greatest
Seriousness, Industry, and Pleasure.

And if we have just Cause, to return God our most humble and hearty Thanks,
for raising up, and inclining some proper Persons, to undertake so important
and so difficult a Work, for affording such Measures of his gracious
Assistance, as were necessary, to support, and encourage 'em in it, and to
bring it at last to a most honorable and happy Accomplishment, I think, the
Translations of any pious, rational, and learned Authors, whose Labors have a
tendency, to lead us, into the true and deep Sense of the holy Scriptures, and
to furnish us with proper Weapons, to encounter the inveterate and most
formidable Adversaries of the Christian Religion, must be very desirable, and
attended with no small Advantages.

I confess, I am highly sensible, that Translations do frequently abound with
Faults, and perhaps with sueh as are notorious, which should a Person undertake
to justify, he would expose himself, to the Scorn, or Pity of the learned
World, and to the Censure even of the injudicious, and illiterate.

But this, if it be a solid Objection against bad Translations, (which I hardly
believe it is, since they may have many great Defects, and yet the Translator
should be esteemed, and rewarded for his good Will to the Public, and that
Measure of Industry, and Skill in the learned Languages, which appears in his
Work, though he deserves far less Esteem, than one, who happily accomplishes some
accurate Composition, or more complete Translation,) I say this, if it be a
solid Argument against bad Translations, will not hold against such as are good,
and so apparently and so highly useful, that should any one exclaim against
'em, he would but betray his Folly, and provoke the Laughter, or silent Scorn,
of those, who are not as remarkable Triflers as himself.

For if no Translator must appear in the World, who is not so industrious, and
so correct, that he almost seems to be free, from those Faults, to which the
Frailty of humane Nature renders Mankind unavoidably subject, if the Taste of
Readers is so nice, as to disrellish the the most exact Translations, that are
extant, by Reason of many great Defects, which insensibly creep, into the best
humane Compositions, then the same Argument which is used against Translations,
will equally overthrow the most learned and useful Originals that ever were,
and even the sacred Oracles of the supreme and all-wise Being.

For though I think it is ridiculously objected against us, by the Atheists, and
Deists, that some Faults have been found, in the best Versions of the Holy
Scriptures, and that the sacred Original Text it self through the long Tract of
Time in which the Books of the Old and New Testament were committed to Writing,
through the Ignorance, and Carelessness, and perhaps Design of some Transcribers,
is liable to some few Exceptions; yet if we must reject and despise all
Translations, because some are bad, and the best imperfect, I fear, we must
immediately throw up our Bibles themselves, and grope after Truth, by no better
Help, than that of the dim Light of Nature.

For all the Versions of the Holy Scriptures are allowed to be the Works of
Men, who were not immediately inspired by the Spirit of GOD, though we have
Reason to believe, he was pleased to afford 'em more than ordinary Direction,
and Influence, in an Affair which had so great a Tendency, to the Welfare of
the Christian Church, and even to the happy and timely Conviction and
Conversion of the most hardn'd Infidels, into whose Hands the Scriptures may
fall, from Time to Time, and in which they made their serious, earnest,
frequent, and more solemn Addresses, to Almighty God, for all that gracious
Assistance, which he saw was necessary or convenient for 'em.

All the Versions, and the Septuagint it Self, (for correcting which, and
comparing it with the Alexandrian Manuscript, the World is beholden to the
Incomparably Learned, Indefatigable, and Judicious Dr. Grabe) all the Versions,
I say, were the Works of uninspir'd Persons, who were liable to many gross
Defects.

Nay, the Greek and Hebrew Text of Scripture, those sacred and refreshing
Fountains of living Water, have been shamefully polluted, by humane Additions
and cursed Innovations, though God in his wise and holy Providence has preserved
'em, in all the Ages of the Church, so far uncorrupted in Spite, of all the
Wit, Malice, and unwearied Industry, of Men, and Devils, that they carry the
lively and honorable Stamp of a divine Authority, and are still what they
always were, a perfect Rule, both of Faith and Manners.

If then, we pay a more than ordinary Deference, to the sacred Originals of the
Holy Scriptures, and if the small Errors, in a comparative Sense, which are
found in all the Versions that were ever extant, ought by no means to shock our
religious and firm Belief of the Divine Inspiration of those sacred, and most
valuable Records, then I think, it is sufficiently evident, that Translations,
in general, are of excellent and continual Use, and the Badness of some, and
the Imperfections, which unavoidably attend 'em all, is no solid Argument
against those which are good, or even such as are bad, if the Original was an
Author who deserved to be translated, and so far as the Translator discovers
his Affection, and does real Service to the Cause of Piety, Sense or Learning.

Another Objection that may be brought against Translations is this, that the
injudicious, and illiterate should not dare to intrude into those venerable
Mysteries of the Empire of Reason, and Learning, which some are apt to imagine,
it is their Prerogative, to consult, and to understand, and the entire
Reputation and Advantage of which they think is a Debt, that ought only to be
paid to Persons of their Character, and Distinction.

But many, who assume to themselves, the Title of Persons, who are profoundly
learned, especially such whose Talent lies chiefly in torturing such Words as
very seldom occur in Authors, whose Heads are living Dictionaries, or rather
Libraries, the faithful but trifling Repositories of senseless Criticisms,
which how great Satisfaction soever they may perhaps afford, to these eager and
eternal Hunters of mere Words and Phrases, are of little use; I say, many such
Persons have a much smaller Share, of solid Reason, than they whom these
Tyrants in the Empire of Learning would have to lie prostrate at their Feet.

Besides I cannot for my Life conceive, why any Persons how learned so ever they
may esteem themselves to be, how knowing soever they may be accounted by
others, who have gone in the same tedious, if not unprofitable Track of Study,
and what Skill soever they may really have, in reading uncommon and almost
obliterated Characters, or comparing almost an infinite Number of Worm-eaten
and voluminous Manuscripts, I say, I cannot conceive, why such Persons should
desire, and endeavor to engross all the Learning in the World to themselves,
make it serve like the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, to amaze, but not instruct, or
reform Mankind, and prevent the Generality of Men, from making Enquiries into
Truth, which these fond Admirers of themselves represent, as a Thing that is
vastly beyond their Reach, and the Honor of Knowing, which ought by no means
to be prostituted to 'em.

For my Part, I confess, I could never justify, nor easily extenuate the
common Practice of the Popish Priests, who forbid the Laity, to read even the
Holy Scriptures, which (if they are not rendered a mere Nose of Wax, by their
Humane Traditions, and wrong Interpretations,) are able, under the Influence of
the Holy Spirit, to make the injudicious and illiterate, so wise as to secure
the Salvation of their Souls, (though not fit to dispute, or manage an Intriegue,
with subtle and designing Jesuits) and can warm their Hearts, with a much
deeper Impression of the near Relation in which they stand both to GOD, and and
to their Neighbor, and of those prudent Methods, which they ought to take, to
perform their Duty, in the most pleasant and profitable Manner, than some, of
the most learned Doctors of the Sorbon can modestly pretend to have.

And whether such Persons of Intriegue don't discover as much Ignorance, as
Antichristian Pride, in taking these irregular Measures, to gain the Esteem,
and command the Purses of the People, to support the Interest and raise the
Reputation of the Church of Rome, which stands in Need of many pious Cheats to
keep up it is Aspiring (and yet perhaps sinking) Hierarchy, is a Matter, that
deserves to be taken into our serious and most deliberate Thoughts.

And though I firmly believe, that our Blessed Savior has appointed an Order of
Men, which shall continue, even to the End of the World, to preach his Gospel,
and administer his Holy Sacraments, and I earnestly desire, that my Tongue may
cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, if I don't prefer 'em before Multitudes of
those, who, through the Influence of Satan, the cursed Policy of the Church of
Rome, the Disorder of their Bodies, their wretched Ignorance of the happy
Settlement of the sacred Canon, or the Reputation they expect to gain, by
affecting to make high Pretenses, to new Light, and immediate Inspiration; yet
I am far from thinking, that the Christian Religion was designed to feed the
boundless Ambition, and in so extravagant a Manner to raise the Reputation, and
support the External Grandeur of the Clergy.

And if the Scriptures should be frequently and seriously considered by all, to
whom its Precepts, Promises, and Threatenings are directed, if the designing
Priests of the Church of Rome are guilty of a notorious Crime, in pretending,
that the common People should n't dare, to intrude into those Sacred Mysteries,
that are contained in 'em, if they ought to lie always open for the Information
and Conduct of those, who most need their Assistance, then no pious, rational,
and learned Authors should be denied the Laity, but, like the Public Service,
which they pay to Almighty God, should be offered to their Consideration, in
that Language which is most familiar to 'em.

I don't affirm, that they who would hinder Persons of mean Capacities, and
inconsiderable, acquired Abilities, from enjoying the Satisfaction, and reaping
the Advantage of learned Authors, are as guilty, as the Romish Priests, who
deny the People, that Word which alone is able, by the Blessing of Almighty
God, to make 'em holy in this World, and completely and eternally happy in the
World to come; though I think, that they, who are eminent for Learning, may, with
a much better Grace, affirm, that it is their Prerogative, to consult learned
Authors, than the Popish Clergy can pretend, that the common People must be
blind Votaries to the Church of Rome, that they must not understand the
Language, in which their Divine Service is performed, and their Religion, and
by consequence their Everlasting Salvation, must depend on the Qualifications,
and Intention of those, who officiate for 'em.

But if it is the Duty of the common People to read the Word of God, and to
perform all their Acts of Devotion, in the Language of their Native Country, if
they, who are unable, to understand the Sacred and Original Text of Scripture,
should have the Bible translated into a Language, that is familiar to 'em, this
seems to me, to be a solid Argument, to prove, that any useful Original which
they don't understand, in the Language in which the Author writ, should be
clothed in such a Dress, as may render it intelligible, and easy to 'em.

For my part, I am far from being bigoted to any ancient Authors, though I hope,
they will be ever valued, in Proportion to that Vein of Sense, Learning, or
Piety, which often runs, as it were, through the whole Body of their Discourse.

I am not such a Slave to Antiquity, as to judge it a Crime, to read the
Writings of those Modern Authors, in which any Thing in its own Nature
valuable, does occur, and Sir William Temple, in his Essay upon Ancient and
Modern Learning, as Ingenious and Polite a Person as he was, and as much as I
am charmed with his Writings, does pay, I think, too great a Deference to the
Ancients, and give too mean a Character of the Modern Heroes.

But whether Ancient or Late Authors do deserve the Preference, that the
Encouragement of Translations should be any Hindrance to the Reputation, and
successful Progress even of Ancient Learning, is, what I confess, after mature
Deliberation, I am not able to conceive.

For as for those, who are entirely, and perhaps culpably ignorant of the
Heroes of Antiquity, and have no Skill in any of the Learned Languages, it is
impossible, that Translations should lessen their Esteem for those Authors, who
bear the awful Stamp of very distant Periods of Time.

Nay, this is so far, from being the true State of the Case, that I do not see,
it is possible for the common People, to have any high and well-grounded
Respect, for the genuine Monuments of Antiquity, but by Means of those very
Translations, which they, who make the Objection, do most severely condemn.

It Is true, they may hear it reported, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
were very pious, rational, and learned Writers, but their Knowledge, or rather
Opinion, is not the natural Result of their own Examination, and Judgment,
and, by Consequence, the Esteem which they have, and express for 'em, must be
highly irrational, or at best uncertain, and extremely superficial.

But when any of the Ancient and Learned Authors are, as it were, raised from
the dead, and clothed in a Language, which they perfectly understand, and they
have carefully perused a Translation of 'em, by one, who, as they have Reason
to believe, did perfectly understand the Language, in which the Author writ,
and was Master of the Subject, and whose Fidelity they have scarce a Temptation
to suspect, they then begin, to entertain a very honorable Opinion of 'em, and
thank the Translator, for saving 'em the Pains, of understanding, and
consulting the Original.

And as for those, who have Skill, in the learned Languages, I don't see, that
a Translation of any Ancient and Considerable Authors can do 'em any real
Prejudice. For certainly the Translator must be void even of common Sense, and
very illiterate himself, if he desires 'em to pay a greater Regard to the
Translation, than they ought to pay to the Original.

This would be, to prefer the Stream before the Fountain, from which it
proceeds, which would be monstrously absurd, and cannot fairly be supposed, in
so Judicious and Learned an Age as this. And one, who understands the
Languages, is so far from being hindered hereby, from the Study of 'em, or
discouraged from paying 'em a due Respect, that a Translation, if it be but
tolerably performed, is a Help to him, in consulting the Orinal, and tends, to
cultivate his Skill, in the learned Language, in which the Author writ.

Besides, we must consider, that no Translator, who has common Sense, will
desire, that they, who are profoundly learned, should lay aside the Original,
for the Sake of a Translation; but only allow some Time, and take Pains to
compare 'em, and see whether he has hit on the true Sense of the Author, and if
he has really done so, the Translation must be valued of Course, unless the
Original be esteemed for nothing, but the Words; which I believe, no rational
Person will ever be tempted to imagine.

I shall say no more of the Benefit and Necessity of Translations in general;
but offer something concerning that Author, whom, I have, in Part, translated,
with a due Regard, I hope, to the Glory of God, and the Public Good, though
whether I have performed well, or not, I must leave to the Judgment of the
Learned, at whose Bar I shall think it an Honor to be arraigned, if I have
been guilty of any gross Defects, and whose Friendly Censures, I shall
willingly, and even thankfully undergo.

That ORIGIN flourished in the Third Century, and in the Infancy, if I may so
say, of the Christian Church, is so generally known, that it seems almost
needless, to mention it.

And since we deservedly, and cheerfully pay a Deference, to the living
Monuments of Antiquity, and especially to those Pious and Learned Writers, who
lived in the Early and Pure Ages of the Church, partly through a natural
Curiosity, to know the Names, Characters, and Works of the most Eminent
Persons, who flourished in such distant Periods of Time, partly through a Sense
of those Miraculous Methods, which the Great God was, as it were, obliged to
take for the Support and Encouragement of the Church, during its Minority, and
partly from a just and deep Conviction, of the Eminent Piety, Profound
Judgment, and Universal Learning of many of the Primitive Fathers, I think, a
more than ordinary Veneration should be paid, to the Memory of the Deceased
ORIGIN, and especially to his Books against the Ingenious and Learned CELSVS,
which are a lively Picture of his Capacious and Exalted Genius.

Need I say any Thing in Commendation of his Piety, or rather, will not every
Thing, that I can say, fall vastly short of the Dignity of the Awful Subject?

Will it not in some Sense, and in some Measure, lose its native and almost
unsullied Luster, by the faint Encomiums of the most elevated Mortals, who are
inspired with a tremendous Sense of his Majestic Simplicity, and irresistible,
and almost inimitable Charms?

A Piety, which was so sincere, and so impatient of Restraint, that it is
reported of him, that when his Honored Father was suffering under the Emperor
DECIVS, he would, even in his tender Years, have saluted the Flames of
Martyrdom, with the greatest Readiness, and even Triumphant Joy, had not his
Dear and Honored Mother, by her maternal Authority, Arts of Persuasion, and
innocent Methods of Female Policy, clipped the fluttering Wings of his
humbly-aspiring Soul.

A Piety, discovered, by denying even the lawful Appetite of his sordid Flesh,
and looking with a generous Disdain on the outward Grandeur, and perishing
Vanities of this lower World.

A Piety, which was seen, by his Leaving, or, in a comparative Sense, Despising
the School of Plato, that Celebrated Heathen Philosopher, for the Sake of the
meek and persecuted JESUS. In a Word, a Piety, which appeared in the Tenor of
his Life, and Conversation, the Strictness of his Moral Virtues, and Christian
Graces, in the flaming but just Zeal he showed for the Cause of Christ, the
exact Care, and extraordinary Vigor, which runs through the Body of his most
Excellent Applogy, and the prudent Measures, which he took, to win others, to
the sincere Belief and regular Practice of that Holy Religion, which was so
constantly, so cheerfully, and so brightly exemplified in himself.

Need I say any Thing of his Sense, who could n't content himself, without the
severe Study of Philosophy, and the sublime Notions of the Divine Plato, in
particular, and familiarly conversed with the most judicious Philosophers among
the Pagans, and greatly improved the refined and useful Knowledge; which he
eagerly imbibed, from those Stars in the Firmament of Learning, by lighting his
Torch, if I may so say, at the dazzling Rays of the Sun of Righteousness.

Need I say any Thing of his Learning, who, on that Account, was justly the
Wonder, and has too often been the Envy of the Heathen and Christian World, who
by reason of his solid Sense, and uncommon acquired Abilities, was inclined,
and qualified, to take an unconfined Range, through the immense Spaces of the
Intellectual Ether, who by the Number, and Choice of the Books he published
(of which Eusebius gives us an Account, in his Ecclesiastical History)
discovered at once the Regularity, and almost infinite Compass of his Studies,
and by his Travels into Foreign Countries, was fully acquainted with the
Posture of Affairs, both in the Christian Church, and in the Learned World?

I cannot but take Notice, by the Way, that if ORIGIN had been so mean a Man, or
his Works so dangerous, as Cardinal Baronius, Cardinal Noris, Gretzerus the
Jesuit, and some others represent him, I wonder, that Pope Anastasius, a whole
Council, the forementioned Persons, and the whole Justinian Age, should so
violently oppose him.

I confess, after all that I have said, which is little, if compared with what
I could easily offer, in the Praise of ORIGIN, I dare not say, that St. Hierom,
that very Learned Father, and afterward the Justinian Age, and many Others
since, had no Color of Reason, for what they alleged against him.

Indeed, the Wisdom of God does very plainly appear, in so ord'ring Matters,
that even some of the Sacred Penmen of Holy Scripture, and the Brightest Lights
that ever shone in the Glorious Orb of the Church of God, had some Defects, to
allay their intrinsic and apparent Worth, and prevent that Excessive
Veneration, which would otherwise have been paid 'em, by reason of their
Natural and Acquired Accomplishments, the Honor they reflected on the Ages, in
which they flourished, and the extraordinary Service, they did the Cause of
Christ, and the Common Wealth of Learning.

But as the Translators of the Bible would have been unjustly treated, had they
been reproached with even seeming to countenance, the false Notions of Things,
which the Generality of the Jewish, and many of the Leaders of the Christian
Church, are known to have entertained, or had they been upbraided, as if they
approved of David's Murder and Adultery, and St. Peter's most shameful Denial
of our Blessed Lord: So I may rationally expect, that the Reader will be so
just and candid, as not to imagine (as great a Man as ORIGIN himself was, and
as great a Hero of Antiquity, and Christianity, as I know he was) that I Am so
very ignorant, as to agree with him, in those Opinions, or Practices, which are
evidently, and greatly liable to censure.

As for his Notion, that the Devils may be recovered; I must confess, it seems
to me to be both a false, and dangerous Position; false, because there is no
Color for it, that I can see, in the Word of God; and dangerous, because it
has a Tendency to encourage Persons to go on in Sin, in Hopes, that even the
Fire of Hell will be at last extinguished, and be but a Second Purgatory. We
know, that no less a Person, than the Late Most Reverend Archbishop of
Canterbury has publicly appeared in its Defense, and has offered such
plausible Arguments, that perhaps it may seem difficult to confute His Grace.

But as I have much more Reason to doubt, of my own Salvation, than of the
Eternal Happiness of that singularly Pious, as well as incomparably Rational,
and very Learned Prelate, so I am fully satisfied, that ORIGIN will be a Star
of the First Magnitude, in the superior Orbs, and though his Notions might in
some Respects be peculiar to him, and justly deserve our Censure; yet the chief
Thing in us, which the Great God regards, and on which he will put
distinguishing Marks of his Favor, through all the Revolutions of Eternity, is a
regular and steady Course of sincere and unaffected Virtue, and Piety.

As for Offering Sacrifice to Idols, which Petavius the Jesuit, and other
Learned Men, do seem inclined to charge on ORIGIN, and Epiphanius thought fit
to relate, in his Book of Heresies, it is observed by the late Learned
Fredericus Spanhemius, in his Ecclesiastical History, that that Act was never
charged upon him, even by the Justinian Age, in which he was more generally,
and more violently opposed than ever.

But be that Matter as it will, St. Hierom himself, who strongly opposed his
Errors, had no small Veneration for him, on the Account of his Piety, Sense,
and Learning.

And the Late Reverend Dr. Stilling-fleet in his Origines Sacrae, does
frequently quote, and honorably represent him to the World, as many of the
greatest Lights of the Christian Church, and of the Learned World had done
before him.

But I Am sensible, 'twill be readily objected against this Translation, that we
abound already with Defenses of the Christian Religion, which are much more
useful, than ORIGIN, who makes it his Business, to confute Celsus, who was a
Heathen Philosopher.

It Is true, we have Grotius de Veritate Christianae Religionis, the Learned
Apology of the late Reverend Bishop of Worcester, the most Admirable Sermons of
the Famous Dr. Bentley, preached at the Lecture of the Honorable Robert Boil,
Esquire some incomparable Sermons published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dr.
Blackhall, Dr. Stanhope, and Mr. Clark, Chaplain to my Lord Bishop of Norwich,
the Learned Dr. Owen's Comment on the Epistle to the Hebrews: And I could
hardly discharge my Conscience, should I forbear to mention Mr. Baxter's
Reasons of the Christian Religion, in Honor to the Memory of so Great, and
especially so Good a Man. We have the Rational, and Learned Dr. Parker's
Demonstration of the Law of Nature, and Demonstration of the Divine Authority
of the Scriptures; and many Excellent Authors, who have united their Forces
against the most Formidable Adversaries of our Common Faith.

But certainly, it is impossible, to be too well furnished with Reasons of the
Hope that is in us, and we ought to be so far from Slighting either the Ancient
Apologies of Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Tatian, Arnobius, Lactantius, and the
like, or even the Modern Dcfences of the Christian Religion, that I think, we
should deeply lament that we have no more, and that those which we have, are no
better understood, and it highly becomes us, to make a thankful and due
Improvement, of those many Excellent Helps, which God, in his infinite Wisdom,
and Goodness, sees fit to afford us.

I can think but of one Objection more, and that is this, that by Publishing
this Translation of ORIGIN, I do expose the corrupt Principles of Celsus to
more public View.

It Is true, I do so. But certainly the Truth is so safely guarded, by its
Native Purity, and so well recommended by the Evidence that attends it, that
it is so far from being afraid of the Light, that it desires nothing more, if I
may so say, than to make its most open, and undisguis'd Appearance in the
World; and if the Objection has any real Force, 'twill hold, as well, though not
equally against Origin himself, for writing against Celsus, which plainly
supposes, that all the Learning, Wit, and Malice of that Arch-Fiend of Hell
must be diffected, as it were, and laid open to View, which though they are the
rankest Poison, will never be able to infect us, if we have but the Blessing of
Almighty God, on so Excellent an Antidote at hand, as the indefatigable, and
almost inimitable Labors of that Pious, Rational, and Learned Father, who
opposed him.

I shall say no more in Defense of a Translation of ORIGIN, but humbly submit
my mean Performance, to the Censures of this Judicious, and Learned Age, and
publish it as a public, though unworthy Tribute of Praise, to the great Author
of my Being, and Fountain of all my Happiness; and as some, though but a small
Recompense, to my Dear and Honored Father, for the prudent Methods he has
taken, the Pains, and Charge he has been at, and the great Readiness and
unusual Joy, which he has always expressed, in Procuring, and Continuing to me,
so far as it lies in his Power, under God, the extraordinary, but not duly
improved Advantage of a Liberal Education.

I have frequently read the Eight Books of Origin against Celsus, as they
offered themselves to my Consideration, in the Greek Original, the French
Translation of the Learned Monsieur Bouhereau, and the Latin Version, and am
not conscious to my self, of any wilful and gross Defect.

And after many Solemn Supplications for Divine Assistance, many tedious, and
yet pleasant Hours, which I have employed about it, many kind Directions, and
Encouragements, from Persons of no mean Rank for Piety, Sense, Learning, and
Extraction, and many earnest Desires, that the Glory of God may be my principal
Aim, and in a word, after having performed, what lies within the Compass of my
small Ability, to cloth it, in such a Dress, as may recommend it to the World,
I say, such as it is, I humbly expose it to all Learned, Judicious, and Candid
Persons, and submit it to the Censure of the Critics.

And if this First Essay shall meet even with a tolerable Acceptance from the
World, I design, God willing, to take the first Opportunity, to translate the
Two following Books.

That the Advantage, which the Reader may reap from ORIGIN, may be equal, or
superior, to the Painful Pleasure, which I took, in Translating him, that his
Belief of the Christian Religion, may be daily confirmed, and that he may at
Length enjoy that inconceivable Happiness in the Future World, of which many of
the Primitive Fathers are now partaking, and of which, I firmly believe, that
the Pious and Incomparable ORIGIN has no small Share, is the Sincere Desire, of

The Unworthiest Servant of our Common Lord, James Bellamy.

Origin against Celsus: Translated from the ORIGINAL INTO ENGLISH.

Book the First.

ORIGEN's Epistle Dedicatory TO Ambrosius.
WHen false Witness was brought against our Blessed Savior, he held his Peace,
and when he was accused, returned no Answer, being fully persuaded, that the
Tenor of his Life and Conversation among the Jews, was the best Apology that
could possibly be made in his Behalf. But you, Virtuous Ambrosius, were pleased
to desire me, for Reasons best known to your self, to vindicate the Christians
from those foul Aspersions, which Celsus has publicly cast upon 'em, as if a
Confutation of him were not legible in the Things themselves, and what he
offers might not be deservedly rejected, as wanting even the Appearance of
Truth to recommend it to the World. To show that our Savior held his Peace
when false Witness was brought against him, I need only at present, produce the
Testimony of St. Matthew, which is confirmed by what St. Mark the Evangelist
relates. St. Matthew has these Words, Now the Chief Priests, and Elders, Mat.
26. v. 59.
and all the Council sought false Witness against Jesus, to put him to Death,
but found none. Yea, though many false Witnesses came; yet found they none. At
last came two false Witnesses, and said, this Fellow said, I am able to destroy
the Temple of God, and to build it in three Days. And the High Priest arose,
and said to him, answerest thou nothing? What is it which these witness against
thee? But Jesus held his Peace. We read in another Place of the same
Evangelist, that our Savior returned no Answer to the Persons who accused him.
And Jesus Mat. 27. v. 11.
stood before the Governor, and the Governor asked him, saying, art thou the
King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him; thou say. And when he was accused
of the Chief Priests and Elders, he answered nothing. Then says Pilate unto
him, hear thou not how many Things these witness against thee? And he
answered him never a Word, insomuch that the Governor marvell'd greatly. And
indeed it could n't but be admired by Persons who were least capable of
Reflection, that when he had so fair an Opportunity to free himself from the
heavy Charge that was brought against him, to enumerate, or at least, modestly
insinuate his shining Characters, and to commend the higher Powers, as being
ordam'd of God, and by these innocent and politic Methods to procure the
Judge's Favor, I say, that when he had so fair an Opportunity to do all this,
he should be so far from embracing it, as to look upon his most violent
Accusers with a truly-generous Disdain.

That the Judge seemed willing to acquit him, had he made his Apology, is plain
from the following Words, Whom Mat. 27. v. 17.
will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ? And
those Words, He knew that for Envy Ibid. 18.
he had delivered him. So that the holy and spotless Jesus was scarce ever free
from unjust and severe Accusations, as long as the perverse Dispositions of
Men, whose Minds were corrupt, and whose Lives were often stained with the most
gross Enormities, did remain the same as they have been in all the Ages of the
World.

And even now he holds his Peace, and makes no verbal Answer, but the
unblemished Lives of his sincere Followers are his most cheerful and most
successful Advocates, and have so loud a Voice that they drown the Clamours of
his most bigoted and most zealous Adversaries. I will, therefore, be so bold
as to say, that by Publishing this Apology, I shall seem to lessen the Force of
those powerful Arguments in Defense of the Christian Religion, which are drawn
from the holy Lives of its pious Votaries, and are plain Appeals even to Sense
and common Observation. But that I might not seem backward in obeying the
Commands you have laid upon me, I have endeavored, according to my present
Abilities, to give a full, or at least, a sufficient Answer to all the material
Objections which Celsus has brought against us, which, in your Opinion, my Dear
and Respected Ambrosius, do strike at the Fundamentals of the Christian
Religion, but, I verily believe, will never shock the Faith of one, who by the
Grace of God does live in the Profession of it with some measure of Sincerity.
And God forbid that any of us should have so embraced the Gospel (which is so
lively a Declaration of his Love to perishing Sinners through the Merits of our
Blessed and All-sufficient Redeemer) as to be in Danger of receiving any bad
Impressions from Celsus's Discourse, or the Writings of any other Ingenious and
Learned Person, who holds the same Wicked Principles.

For St. Paul reckoning up those things, which are apt to separate Mankind from
the Love of Christ (all which his Love to 'em did, and will at last
effectually, and most gloriously overcome) don't say that erroneous Discourses
should be any, much less a principal Cause of this unhappy Separation. Observe
first he says, Who shall separate us from the Love Romans 8. v. 25.
of God? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or
Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? (As it is written, for thy sake we are killed
all the Day long, we are accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter,) Nay, in all
these Things we are more than Conquerors through him that loved us. Then
reckoning up another Set of Things, which usually shock Men's Faith and Virtue,
he says, I am persuaded, that neither Ibid 38.
Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things
present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature
shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. And there is just Ground even for us, who fall vastly short of the
extraordinary Seize of that great Apostle of the Gentiles, to say, Who
shall separate us from the Love of God? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or
Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? But the Apostle who
thought this too mean a Boast, for those who had arrived to so remarkable a
Pitch of Virtue, as that to which he had attained, professes, That in all these
Things he was more than a Conqueror; which Words have a peculiar Weight and
Emphasis. And therefore, when he and the rest of his Noble Class come to make
their Boast, they proceed to the second Set of Things, which are here
enumerated, and can say with a holy Triumph, That neither Death, nor Life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come,
nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall separate us from the Love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

So that I confess, I have no great Opinion of that Man's Christianity, whose
Faith is in the least liable to be shocked, either by this Book of Celsus, or
the Writings of any other Person of the same unhappy Stamp. For really I Am at a
Loss to know in what Class of Christians I should rank that Man, who is not
Proof against all the bitter but unjust Reproaches, with which Celsus has
loaded the Followers of our Blessed Lord. But because the common Sort of People
are in no small Danger (as you imagine, my Dear Ambrosius) of turning Apostates
from the Faith, since perhaps they may be shocked by what Celsus has offered
against the well-grounded Principles of our holy Religion; and I hope will be
no less confirmed in their Judgments, by what I shall seasonably produce in its
Defense, provided I am able to confute his Errors, I resolved to obey your most
just Command, and to return an Answer to the Book you were pleased to send me,
the very Title of which, viz. A True Relation, will hardly pass for such with
them, who are no great Proficients even in the Philosophy of the Heathens.

St. Paul knowing there were many Things in the Greek Philosophy that were not
in themselves contemptible, but had by Accident a malignant Influence on the
Minds of Common People, representing Error under the plausible Appearance of
solid and most important Truth, has these very Words, Beware Colos. 2. v. 8.
lest any Man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain Deceit, after the
Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. But
this is more than I think, any judicious Person will allow the Book which I am
just going to answer. For the Apostle calls the forementioned Things by the
Name of Vain Deceit, perhaps in Contra-Distinction to a certain Kind of Deceit
which is not vain, but innocent and useful, which the Prophet Jeremiah
considering, made bold to apply the following Words to the Great God himself; O
Lord, thou have deceived me, and Jer. 20. v. 7.
I was deceived; thou art stronger than I, and have prevailed. But, in my
Opinion, what Celsus published does want even that plausible Appearance, to
render it worthy to be called deceitful, which is to be found in the Writings
of those eminently-learned Persons, who were the Heads of the various Sects of
Philosophers among the Pagans. And as in Geometry, 'tisn't sufficient that what
is offor'd for a Demonstration, be in it self false and dangerous, but it must
have some Color of Truth, or it can never deceive, and engage even the most
faint Endeavors of one, who would improve in that entertaining and useful
Science: So those Discourses, which deserve the Character of Vain Deceit, must
have some Affinity with those rational Arguments, that are frequently made Use
of by the Heads of the several Sects of Philosophers.

When I had proceeded in my Answer to Celsus, as far as the Place where he
personates the Jew discoursing with our Blessed Savior, I thought, 'twou'd be
proper to put this Preface before my Book, that so any One into whose Hands it
may accidentally fall, may plainly see, that I didn't principally intend it for
those Christians, who are fully satisfied in their Judgment, but either for
them who are entire Strangers to the Excellency of the Christian Religion, or
for them who are weak in the Faith, as the Apostle calls 'em. Him that is weak
in the Faith Romans 14. v. 1.
receive.

I must add one Thing here; and that is this, that I have a different Design in
answering Celsus in the gross, from what I had in Answering the Beginning of
his Book. For at first, I designed no more than to mention some of the
Principal Heads, and content my self with a mere Compendium, But after mature
Deliberation, I thought, it would be much more proper, to gather my Discourse, as
it were, into a perfect System or Body. Then I was satisfied from the reason of
the Thing, that I should be at a needless Expense both of Time and Pains, and
contented my self with what I had writ, against the Beginning of the Book,
which Celsus published.

But in the remaining Part of my Apology, which (if I may modestly say it of my
own Performance) is much more elaborate, I determined to bend all my Forces
against him, and to return a full Answer to every Thing that seemed to be
material, and even to some of his most trifling Objections. I must, therefore,
desire my Reader to discover a more than ordinary Candor in passing his
Judgment on what I have done, especially on that Part of my Apology, which
immediately follows this Epistle. And if the other Parts should have no better
Effect upon him, I hope, he will there also be extremely favorable in the
Sentence, which he may pass upon me.

And, if you, Virtuous Ambrosius, desire a more complete Answer to Celsus, than
that which I shall give him at present, I must refer you to them, who have a
far greater Share of Judgment, than that to which I lay my most humble Claim,
and are better qualified for the due and honorable Management of so difficult
a Province. However that Person seems to me, to be in a safer and much more
desirable Condition, who having met with Celsus's Performance, and being
furnished by his own Experience with a warm and effectual Apology for that
excellent Religion which he professes, and endeavors to practice to the utmost
of his Power, is so well-guarded by the Spirit of God, who dwells in the Heart
of every sincere Follower of the Blessed JESUS, that he can look with a holy
Contempt on the false Representations, and most p^^usible Arguments of the most
Celebrated Heretics that did ever appear in the World.

Origin against Celsus:
CHAP. I.
THE first Charge which Celsus brings against the Christians, is, Their holding
Cabals, contrary to the Law of the Land in which they lived, and to which, as
he thinks, they ought to be entirely subject. He distinguishes Meetings into
Public and Private, the Public Meetings which were established by Law, and
the Private and Separate Meetings which were kept up by Schismatics. And his
Design herein is to cast Reproach on the Love Feasts of the Christians (which
were appointed to prevent a common and threatening Danger, and were far more
binding, than the sacred Tie of mutual Oaths can be supposed to be) I say, he
reproaches 'em, as if they manifestly and grossly interfer'd with that due and
indispensible Loyalty, which, as they were Subjects, they owed, and ought, as
he imagines, to pay the National Establishment.

Since, therefore, he makes his Boast that he has the Law on his Side, and
would intimate, that the separate Meetings of the Christians did countenance
and promote Schism and Sedition; I answer, that as a Stranger, who has his Lot
providentially cast among the Scythians, who are governed by most wicked Laws,
and has not a fair Opportunity to make a safe Escape, would be esteemed by that
ignorant and unciviliz'd People, as an Enemy to their Constitution, and a
Favourer of the Sectaries, if he didn't comply with the Canons of the Church,
but might still urge weighty and unanswerable Arguments to justify his
Separation: So the Christians might lawfully dissent from the Established
Religion, which introduced Image Worship, and a whole Rifraff of the
Mock-Deities of the Heathens, and abounded with more horrid Impieties than were
ever practiced by the most barbarous Nations of the World.

For as the Inhabitants of a City may lawfully defend themselves against a
Prince, who has made an unjust Descent upon their Native Country: So the
Christians might warrantably violate the Laws of Satan, that great Usurper, to
free themselves and Others from his worse than Scythian Tyranny.

CHAP. II.
THEN Celsus goes on, and asserts, That Judaism, with which the Christian
Religion has a very close Connection, has all along been a barbarous Sect, though
he prudently forbears to reproach the Christian Religion as if it were of a
mean and unpolished Original; since he had commended the Barbarians, as being
the Inventers of several excellent and very important Maxims, and he adds, That
those Things which were indeed invented by the Barbarians, have been improved,
and more accomodated to Moral Virtue by the Greeks. Now I think, I may justly
take this Advantage in Defense of the Christian Religion from the very
Concession which Celsus makes, to observe that one who leaves the Opinions and
the Learning of the Greeks, and embraces the Doctrine of our Blessed Savior,
don't only assent to those Truths and useful Rules, which it recommends to his
Consideration and Choice, but the more he is versed in the forementioned Sort
of Learning, the more he is confirmed in his Judgment, and borrows from the
Christians wherever he perceives that the Greeks themselves are defective. To
this I might add, that the Christian Religion may justly boast of a peculiar
Demonstration, such a One as is truly Divine, and vastly exceeds all the Logic
of the Greeks. The Apostle calls it A Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power.
A Demonstration of the Spirit, in as much as the Spirit of God does in a secret
but powerful Way, convince the Reader of the Truth of the Scripture-Prophecies,
efpeally of those, which have an evident and near Relation to the expected
Savior of the World. And of Power, in as much as Miracles have been wrought to
attest the Truth of the Christian Religion, some remarkable Footsteps of which
do remain at this very Day, among those, who do what lies in their Power, under
the Guidance and Influence of the Spirit of God, to live up to its holy
Precepts.

CHAP. III.
THEN Celsus having spoke of the Private Meetings of the Christians, in which
they exercised themselves and instructed one another in their particular Way,
and having confessed that one very politic Reason might be assigned for what
they did, viz. The Preventing of that severe Penalty, to which their Practice
rendered 'em extremely liable, compares the Danger that threatened them with the
Difficulties, and Calamities, to which Socrates and Pythagoras, and other
Heathen Philosophers exposed themselves, by maintaining the Reputation, and
promoting the Interest of that comparatively-vain Philosophy, of which, they
were the admired and truly-learned Professors.

But to this I answer, That the Athenians soon repented of what they had done
to Socrates, nor did they long retain their Spite against Pythagoras. For the
Pythagoreans had Schools for a considerable Time in that Part of Italy, which
went by the Name of Greece the Great. But the whole Roman Senate, the Emperors
during the several Persecutions, the Soldiers, the common People, and even
they, who were nearly related to the Christians waged open War, as it were,
against the Religion which our Blessed Savior introduced, and would easily,
and quite have stopped its happy Progress, if a Divine and Miraculous Power had
not seasonably interposed, and made it overcome the whole habitable World, who
exerted all their Malice, and used their utmost Endeavors toward its sudden
and entire Extirpation.

CHAP. IV.
NOW let us see how Celsus reproaches the practick Part of our Religion, as
containing nothing, but what we have in common with the Heathens, nothing that
is New, or Truly-great.

To this I answer, That they who bring down the just Judgments of God upon
their Heads by their notorious Crimes, would never suffer by the Hand of Divine
and Inflexible Justice, if all Mankind had not some tolerable Notions of Moral
Good and Evil.

Therefore we needn't wonder, that God, who is the common Father of his
Creatures, should plant in the Minds of Men those natural Principles, which the
Prophets, and especially our Blessed Savior does so frequently impress upon
the Minds of Men, that So every one might be left without Excuse at the Day of
Judgment, having had the Sense and Substance of the Law engraved upon his Heart
in very legible Characters.

This was obscurely represented to us by the Scripture, which speaks of God's
Writing the Two Tables of the Law, as it were, with his Finger, and his giving
'em to Moses, and acquaints us, that they were afterward broke by the
Wickedness of them, who made the Golden Calf (as if it had been said, that they
were broke by the Sins of Men) and that when the Law was writ the second Time
on Tables of Stone, he delivered 'em to Moses, to signify, that the Law which
was defaced by the Original Apostasy, should be re impressed on the Minds of
Men by the Preaching of the Gospel.

CHAP. V.
THEN Celsus speaking of Idolatry, does himself advance an Argument, that tends
to justify and commend our Practice, when he says, That the Christians cannot
think those to be Gods, which are made by the Hands of Men, and very often of
such as are wicked, and unjust, and wallow in all manner of Debauchery.
Therefore, endeavoring to show in the Sequel of his Discourse, that our Notion
of Image Worship was not a Discovery that was owing to the Scriptures; but that
we have it in common with the Heathens, he quotes a Passage in Heraclitus to
this Effect, That they who pay Divine Worship to inanimate Creatures, do just
as if they should address and invocate the Walls.

To this I answer, That since I have already granted that some common Notions
of Moral Good and Evil are originally implanted in the Minds of Men, we needn't
wonder that Heraclitus and Others, whether Greeks or Barbarians, have publicly
acknowledged to the World, that they held the very same Notion which we
maintain.

And Celsus quotes a Passage in Herodotus, to show, that the same Notion, which
Heraclitus held, did obtain among the Persians. And I could quote a Passage in
Zeno Citiensis, who in his Book called (...), says, That the Building of
stately Temples is altogether needless, and indeed ridiculous, since no Piece
of humane Architecture, how pompous soever it may be, is truly sacred, and
valuaable in the Nature of the Thing it self. It Is plain, therefore, that this
practical Notion is engraved in Divine and Legible Characters on the Minds of
Men.

CHAP. VI.
THEN Celsus says, That all the Power which the Christians had, was owing to
the Names of certain Demons, and their Invocation of 'em; though I cannot well
conceive, what should induce, or even tempt him, to talk at so extravagant a
Rate.

I suppose, he obscurely hints at the Account we have, of some who cast out
Devils. But this is a most notorious Calumny, for the Power which the
Christians had, was not in the least owing to Enchantments; but to their
Pronouncing the Name of JESUS, and making Mention of some remarkable
Occurrences of his Life.

For by these, and no unlawful Means, have Demons been frequently
dispossessed, especially when the Person who pronounced that sacred Name, did
it with a becoming Disposition of Mind, and with a most lively Faith. Nay, the
Name of JESUS has had such Power over Demons, that sometimes it has proved
effectual, though pronounced by very wicked Persons. To this our Savior seems to
have a Reference, when he says, Many shall say to me in that Day, in thy Name
we have Mat. vii. V. 22.
cast out Devils, and in thy Name have done many wonderful Works.

And I know not, whether Celsus did omit this Passage through Ignorance, or
rather through a voluntary and malicious Oversight.

CHAP. VII.
THEN he accuses our Savior himself, as if he wrought Miracles by the Help of
Magic, and foresaw, that many other Persons would do the same Things, by their
Skill in that Hellish Art, boasting that a Divine Power did attend 'em, and,
for that very Reason, did exclude 'em from the Number of his Followers and
Favorites.

And he makes Use of this Argument against him, If, says he, there was just
Ground for his rejecting the forementioned Persons, then he was a wicked Man,
being guilty of the same Fault, which he charged on them, and if he was not a
wicked Man, then neither did they deserve a Mark of Infamy, who according to
his own Confession, were to do the same Things that he did himself.

But though we should grant, that it is difficult for us to determine precisely,
by what Power our Savior wrought his Miracles; yet it is very plain, that the
Christians made use of no Enchantments, unless the Name of JESUS, and some
Passages of the Holy Scriptures were a kind of Sacred Spell.

CHAP. VIII.
THEN Celsus frequently and severely reproaches the Christians, with keeping
their Opinions secret.

To this I answer, That they are more known, and more generally published, than
the admired Speculations of the Philosophers themselves, even almost to the
utmost Limits of the whole habitable World. For who, in a comparative Sense, is
ignorant of our Savior's Nativity, and Resurrection, and the Day of Judgment,
in which he will reward the Righteous, and punish the Wicked, according to
their Works? And are not many thousands of the very worst of Infidels
acquainted with the Doctrine of the Resurrection, who turn it all into Banter
and Ridicule? So that the Charge was altogether ungrounded, and by Consequence
unjust. But if there be some Arcana Imperii in the Christian Religion, which
are not fit to be communicated to the Vulgar, it cannot be denied, that there
are the same in Philosphy. For even the Philosophers held some Opinions which
they kept more secret. Some of Pythagoras's Pupils relied on his bare
Authority, and were satisfied with an Ipse dixit; Others were more privately
taught, and instructed in those Things, which ought not to be prostituted to
vulgar and unsanctify'd Ears. And many Rites in the Religion both of the
Greeks, and Barbarians, are concealed from the Notice of the Vulgar.

CHAP. IX.
BUT Celsus seems with Abundance of Earnestness, to plead for them, who laid
down their Lives in Confirmation of the Christian Faith, when he says, I would
not persuade any one to renounce his Religion, by reason of the Dangers to
which it may expose him; nor would I have him even seem to leave it; where he
tacitly condemns all them, who are Christians in their Hearts, and yet
publicly disown their Religion.

Here I may take Occasion to charge him, with the gross Inconsistency of his
Discourse; for in some Places of his Book, he talks like a zealous Follower of
the admired Epicurus, but here, that his Accusation may carry the more
plausible Appearance, he dissembles his Opinions, and seems to hold, that there
is in Man, besides his Body, which is material and earthly, another and much
nobler Substance, that has an Affinity with God himself, and says, That they,
who have Souls duly disposed, do, as far as the Frailty of their Nature will
admit, aspire to a Participation of the Nature of God, to which they are so
nearly allied, and are never more highly pleased, than when they are seasonably
and solidly entertained with Discourses concerning the Supreme and Adorable
Majesty both of Earth and Heaven.

Observe, a little before he said, He would not persuade any one to renounce his
Religion, by reason of the Dangers, to which it may expose him, nor would he
have him even seem to leave it; and yet he is grossly guilty of the same Fault
himself, which he severely condemns in others. For he knew very well, that if
he had openly professed he was an Epicurean Philosopher, his Accusation would
be little regarded by them, who live in the firm Belief of an overruling
Providence, though indeed they may differ from one another in their Sense and
Explications of the Principles, which they are known to hold.

By the Way I Am informed, there have been two Persons, who went by the Name of
Celsus, and both of 'em were Philosophers of the Epicurean Sect; One who lived
in the Reign of the Emperor Nero, and another, who lived in the Reign of the
Emperor Hadrian, and some Time after. The latter of these is the Person, with
whom I am at present concerned.

CHAP. X.
AND he continues his Discourse, and advises us to embrace no Opinions, but
under the Conduct of impartial Reason, on the Account of the many and gross
Errors, to which the contrary Practice will shamefully, and unavoidably expose
us.

And he compares those Persons, who take up any Notions without due
Examination, to the designing Priests of Mithras, Bacchus, Cybele, or Hecate,
or any other Mock-Deity of the Heathens. For as these Impostors having once got
the Ascendant over the common People, who were grossly ignorant, could turn and
wind these harmless Cattle, as their Interest or Fancy might direct: So, he
says, the very same Thing was known to be the common Practice of the Christians.

Some of 'em, says he, neither examining what it was that they believed; nor
caring to be examined, would use this Expression, don't examine into Matters,
but believe; and thy Faith will infallibly save thee, and would frequently say
with an Air of affected Gravity, that the Wisdom of this World is very
dangerous, and mischievous, but Folly is a most admirable and useful Thing.

To this I answer, that if all Men could conveniently leave the Concerns of
Life, and had Leisure and Inclination to bend their Minds to the Study of
Philosophy. I should heartily wish, that this might become a Universal
Practice, though (to speak modestly, and to keep within due Compass) I think, I
may safely say, that the sublime Doctrines of the Christian Religion, the short
Hints of the Jewish Prophets, our Savior's Parables, and abundance of other
Things that are Simbolically delivered, and proposed with the Sanction of a
Law, are not more involved, and attended with greater Obscurity, than many of
the Opinions which are advanced and maintained by the Philosophers themselves.
But if the Method which I have mentioned, and before recommended, be
impracticable, partly by Reason of Men's natural Incapacities, who, for the
most Part, are very unfit to apply their Minds to Learning, and partly by
Reason of the necessary and unavoidable Cares which attend Humane Life, what
better Way could any one have contrived, and taken, more suited to the Genius,
and outward Circumstances of the common People, than that which our Blessed
Savior took, for the Conversion of a degenerate World? And as for the vast
Numbers of Persons, who have left those horrid Debaucheries, in which they
formerly wallow'd, and have professed to embrace the Christian Religion, I ask,
which of the two Methods conduces most to their Advantage, and has the most
natural and remarkable Tendency to the general Benefit of the Humane Race, to
reform their Manners, from a Sense of those most grievous Torments, which the
just God will be, as it were, constrained to inflict upon the wicked, and of
that bright and massy Crown, which waits for the Righteous, and which they will
receive, when this frail and short Life is ended, though they don't stand to
examine the Grounds on which their Faith is built, according to the strict
Rules of Art, or to defer their Conversion, 'till they have a fair Opportunity,
and Capacity, to apply themselves to rational, and learned Studies?

For Experience may convince us, that very few, in a comparative Sense, will
advance even so far as this, and reap the Benefit of yielding a naked, but
well-grounded Assent to the Truths of the Christian Religion; but instead of
that, the greatest Part of Mankind are fully bent upon a vicious Course of Life.

CHAP. XI.
THE Love of God therefore, in sending his Son into the World, does very
plainly appear, in accommodating Matters to the Circumstances of Humane Life,
that so the Gospel might be of more general Advantage to the World, and this is
none of the least Powerful Arguments, to prove that our Blessed Savior had a
Divine Commission: For, if a Man, who has any Manner of Religion, will readily
acknowledge, that a Physician, who recovers sick Persons, is sent from God,
though the Cure does extend no farther than the Bodies of his Patients, much more
must we ackowledge, that our Savior was indeed sent by the Father, who has
recovered so many Thousands of Persons from spiritual, and more dangerous
Distempers, has improved the Faculties of their Minds, and prevailed with 'em,
to depend upon the Will, and Providence of God, to refer all their Actions to
the pleasing of him, and to use their utmost Care, lest they incur his just and
severe Displeasure, by Thought, Word, or Deed; and since our Adversaries are
continually making such a Stir, about our taking Things on Trust, I answer,
that we who see plainly, and have found the vast Advantage, that the common
Sort of People do manifestly, and frequently reap thereby, who make up by far
the greater Number, I say, We, who are so well advised of these Things, do
professedly teach them to believe, without a severe Examination, who cannot
neglect their worldly Business, and spare Time enough, to make long and exact
Enquiries into the Grounds of our Holy Religion.

And our Enemies themselves, though they wo'n't confess it, do the very same
Thing, by which we incur their Censure. For when any one of them, does first
devote his Time and Strength to the Study of Philosophy, and either by some
unexpected Accident, or the Tutor, who is first recommended to his Choice, is
determined to fall in with a particular Sect; don't he take it for granted,
that he has pitched on the most happy Method? For he do'sn't stay 'till he has
heard, and weighed the Arguments, that may be brought for one Sect, and against
another, and so at last choose to be a Stoic, Platonic, Peripatetick, or
Epicurean Philosopher, or the like. For, it is by a certain Impulse, in which
Reason is little or not at all concerned, that the Preference is frequently
given to the Stoic Philosophy, for Instance, and the Platonic is despised, as
being less sublime than the rest; and the Peripatetick, as giving too great an
Indulgence to humane Frailty, and representing, more than any other Sect, those
Things to be truly good, which are generally, but very unjustly reputed to be
so.

And there are some, who being, as it were, thunderstruck, at the very mention
of an overruling Providence, by reason of its unequal Distribution of its
Favors, as they imagine, do rashly deny that there is any such Thing, and
fondly embrace the corrupt and wild Notions of Epicurus. If, therefore,
according to the Dictates of Reason, we must join our selves to some Sect of
Philosophers or other, either among the Greeks or Barbarians, without weighing
all the Arguments which may be brought on either Side; how much more just and
reasonable is it, that we should believe him who is GOD over all, and our
Blessed Savior, who teaches, that this God alone is to be worshipped, and that
we should raise our Minds above those Things, which can hardly be said to have
a true Existence, or at best are very improper Objects of Divine Adoration?

It Is true, that only one, who makes Use of Reason and severe Study in
examining the Principles he holds, is capable of building his Faith on rational
Demonstration.

But since we are forced to take many Things on Trust, even in the most common
and necessary Affairs of Humane Life, is it not highly agreeable to the
Dictates of solid Reason, that we should immediately and firmly believe in God,
and in him alone? Who is there that goes by Sea, marries, performs the Conjugal
Act, or sows his Ground, that will not hope the best, though nothing is more
common than to meet with frequent and great Disappointments?

And if in our ordinary and daily Concerns, we overlook the uncertain Events of
Things, and are encouraged by the pleasing Prospect which our Faith and Hope do
already give us, how much more Reason is there for one, who puts his Trust in
God, to expect the desired Success of any important Action, than there is for
one who goes by Sea, or is employed in any worldly Affair, I say, how much more
Reason is there for such a One, to place his entire Confidence in God, the
glorious Creator of the spacious Universe, and in our Blessed Savior, who in
his infinite Wisdom, thought it fit to recommend his excellent Doctrine to the
whole habitable World, by suffering for Mankind not only cruel Persecutions,
but also a Death, which in some Sense, was highly ignominious, and by his own
most Heroic Example, at once taught and encouraged the first Publishers of the
Gospel boldly to encounter the greatest Difficulties, and the most apparent
Dangers, if they might but be honorably and happily instrumental to save
precious and immortal Souls.

CHAP. XII.
THEN Celsus says, If they will return a solid Answer to some pertinent
Questions, which I shall fairly propose to 'em (not as if I were unacquainted
with the Opinions, which they hold, but because I love to cherish the tender
Concern, which I naturally have for the Good of Mankind in general) 'twill be
very well. But if they refuse to comply with this most reasonable, and highly
necessary Request which I make to 'em, and run into their Common Cant, and say,
Don't examine into Matters, but believe; sure it is fit at least, that they
should be so civil, as to tell me what Notions they advance, and whence their
Original was derived.

To which I answer, that those Words, Not as if I were unacquainted with the
Opinions which they hold; do not a little savor of his usual Presumption.

For if he had read the Prophets, which are full of very obscure Hints,
mystical Representations, and Expressions, that every One don't easily, or
perhaps tolerably understand, and if he had carefully, and heartily read the
Parables, that are scattered up and down in the Gospels, and those Parts of
Scripture, which contain the Jewish Law and History, and if having read the
Writings of the Apostles without a Tincture of Prejudice, he had put himself in
a Capacity of understanding their genuine Meaning, and full Design, he
would not, with such an Air of Confidence, have boasted, that he was perfectly
acquainted with all the Opinions which the Christians hold.

For no Divine, even among our selves, whose constant, laborious, and almost
entire Employment it is, to be conversant with those sacred Writings, does dare
to talk with such an Air of Vanity. Nor do any of us pretend to a perfect
Acquaintance with the Opinions of Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, or the Stoics,
when even they, who have undertak'n to interpret the Writings of these famous
Philosophers, are so unhappy as to differ among themselves, and quarrel with
each other.

But perhaps Celsus might borrow this bold Expression from some ignorant
People, who were not sensible, that indeed they knew nothing at all, and I Am
apt to think, that these were the profound Doctors, if the Truth was known, to
whom he is indebted for that comprehensive Knowledge, of which he makes his
Boast.

And to me, he seems to do just like one, who traveling into Egypt (where the
learned Clergy talk very Philosophically concerning their sacred Rites, but the
common People are wonderfully pleased with hearing some dark Fables related to
'em, the rational Account of which they don't in the least understand) does
immediately hereupon imagine, that he is perfectly acquainted with the Learning
and Religion of the Egyptians, though he never conversed in a familiar manner,
with any of their Priests, or with any Persons that, explained to him what is
signified by their mysterious Hieroglyphics. And what I have said of the
Egyptians, may as well be said of the Persians, Syrians, Indians, and all other
Nations that veil their Religion, as it were, with significant, but very
mysterious Ceremonies.

CHAP. XIII.
BUT since Celsus has laid this down as one of the Maxims of the Christians,
that the Wisdom of this World is very dangerous and mischievous; but Folly is a
most admirable and useful Thing: I answer, he don't fairly represent the Words
of the Apostle Paul, which run after the following Manner, If any Man among you
seems to be wise in this World, let 1 Cor. iii. V. ^8.
him become a Fool that he may be wise, for the Wisdom of this World is
Foolishness with God.

He don't simply say, that Wisdom is Foolishness with God, but prudently
confines his Discourse to the Wisdom of this World, and don't simply say, If
any Man among you seems to be wise, let him immediately become a Fool; but If
any Man among you seems to be wise in this World, let him become a Fool, that
he may be wise.

By the Wisdom of this World, I understand that vain Philosophy, in a
comparative Sense, which the Scripture does so justly, so frequently, and so
severely condemn. And so Folly is a most admirable and useful Thing, not
strictly considered, but in this limited Sense, when a Person becomes a Fool in
the Esteem of this vain and degenerate World.

It Is just the same Thing, as if any one should say, that the Platonicks, who
believe the Immortality of the Soul, and the Doctrine of its Transmigration,
have embraced ridiculous Opinions; that is, they are such in the Judgment of
the Stoics, who endeavor to overthrow it, and of the Peripateticks, who
insult over Plato, as if he were a Madman; and of the Epicureans, who reproach
them that believe a God, and an overruling Providence, as being the unhappy
Authors of all the wild Superstition, that was ever brought into the World.

And if there were Occasion, I could make it appear, that though it is much better
for them, who have Opportunity, and Capacity, to build their Faith on rational
and convincing Arguments, than to take Things on Trust; yet our Blessed Savior
would have Persons of mean Capacities, and under some peculiar Circumstances,
to believe without a severe Examination, since otherwise we cannot suppose, that
the Gospel would be of any Advantage to 'em. So much is intimated by St. Paul
in the following Words, After that in the 1 Cor. i. V. 21.
Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
Foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe.

Hence it is plain, that in the Wisdom of God the World ought to have known
him, and because they so grossly failed herein, it pleased God to save them who
believe in the forementioned Way, viz. By the Preaching of a Doctrine, which
was Foolishness in the Judgments of many thousands, even of judicious and
learned Persons. St. Paul himself was not ignorant of this, when he used these
Words, We preach Christ 1 Cor. i. V. 25.
crucified, to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness; but
to them who believe, both Jews and Greeks, the Wisdom of God, and the Power of
God.

CHAP. XIV.
AND since Celsus has reckoned up several Nations who agree in their Opinions,
and (I know not for what Reason) leaves out the Jews, as if they held none,
that did bear the least Resemblance with those which the rest of the World
maintained, I would ask him, why he believes the Accounts which are given by
the Historians, both among the Greeks and Barbarians, and disbelieves what is
frequently, and credibly related in the Jewish History.

For if all other Historians have given a faithful Account of the Antiquities
of the several Nations from which they sprung, why should the Jewish Writers be
the only Persons in the World suspected of gross Deceit? And if Moses and the
Prophets have said many Things in Favor of the Jews, may not the very same
Thing be charged upon all, or far the greatest Part of profane Historians.
Must we give Credit to the Annals of the Egyptians, which represent the Jews as
a strange Sort of People, and believe, that all that the Jews say against the
Egyptians, viz. That they treated 'em in a most barbarous Manner, and for that
Reason were justly and severely punished by God, is a ridiculous Fable? I might
say the same Thing of the Assyrians, who, if we may believe their own
Historians, were anciently engaged in long and bloody Wars with those of the
Jewish Nation. And the Jewish Writers (for perhaps I should be thought to speak
from Prejudice, if I should call 'em Prophets) make frequent Mention of their
Wars with the Assyrians.

See therefore, how Celsus is led aside by Prejudice which he is so ready to
charge others with, when he readily believes some Nations to be extremely wise,
and highly esteems their Histories, as being entirely authentic, and condemns
those of other Nations as being false, and void even of common Sense.

CHAP. XV.
Observe his Words,

IT IS an Opinion, says he, that is generally received by the Ancients, in which
not only some few wise Men, but entire Nations, and those not a little
remarkable for Sense and Learning, have readily and unanimously agreed.

He took special Care not to reckon the Jews among the wise Nations of the
World, as if they were vastly inferior in respect of Wisdom to the Egyptians,
Assyrians, Indians, Persians, Odrysae, Samothracians, and the Eleusinii.

But how much does Numenius the Pythagorean deserve to be preferred before him,
who has made his Name immortal by his uncommon Eloquence, has taken such Care
in his impartial Enquiries into Truth, and heaped up so many good Authorities
to confirm his excellent and elaborate Notions? This learned Author in his Book
(...) speaking of those Nations, that held God to be incorporeal, has reckoned
the Jews among 'em. He also makes mention of some Passages in the Writings of
the Prophets, which he takes in an Allegorical Sense.

It Is reported also, that Hermippus in his first Book (...) acquaints us, that
Pythagoras borrowed his Philosophy from the Jews, and taught it to the Greeks,
and there is extant Hecataeus's History of the Jews, wherein he does so highly
commend the Wisdom of that People, that Herennius Philo in a Book, that he has
writ concerning 'em, seems inclined to think it spurious, and afterward says,
that if it be really genuine, it is probable, he was inwardly a Convert to the
Religion which they profess.

But I wonder in my Heart how it comes to pass, that Celsus should reckon up
the Odrysae, Samothracians, Eleusinii, and Hyperborei, as being famous at once
for their Wisdom, and Antiquity, and make no mention of the Jews, for the
Egyptians, Phoenicians, and Greeks, do by their own History, give sufficient
and ample Testimony to the Antiquity of that People, which, I thought, 'twas
needless for me to produce. For any one, that reads Josephus's two Books of the
Jewish Antiquities, may see there a long Catalogue of Authors, who confirm the
Truth of this Matter by their concurring Testimony. And Tatian, who writ after
him, has made a learned Discourse against the Gentiles, wherein he quotes
abundance of Authors, who have writ concerning the Antiquity of the Jews, and
of Moses in particular.

So that Celsus seems to me to talk at this extravagant Rate, rather from
implacable Malice, than out of Zeal for Truth, designing to reproach the
Christian Religion (which has so close a Connection with that of the Jewish
Nation) on the Account of its Original, which he supposes to be late and mean.
And he says, that the Galactophagi of Homer, the Druids of the Gauls, and the
Getae (who agreed with the Jews in some Opinions, but have no Writings extant,
that I know of) are remarkable for their Wisdom and Antiquity. But he levels
all his Malice at the Jews, and will neither allow 'em to be wise nor ancient.

Then giving us a Catalogue of wise and ancient Persons, who were useful to
their Contemporaries by their bright Example, and to Posterity by their
admirable Writings, he has purposely left Moses out of the Number of Men
remarkable for their Wisdom, though Linus, who is put at the Head of 'em, has
left behind him no Laws, nor Books, for the Regulation of Societies, or
Reformation of Manners, whereas Moses's Laws are diligently observed by an
entire and populous Nation, by whose Means they have been diffused, almost
through the whole habitable World.

Take Notice therefore, of the unaccountable Malice by which Celsus is acted,
who says nothing of Moses, but mentions Linus, Musaeus, Orpheus, Pherecydes,
Zoroaster the Persian, and Pythagoras, with abundance of Honor, as having
given wise and wholesome Precepts to Mankind, and taken prudent and due Care to
transmit 'em to Posterity by their Writings, which are extant at this very Day.

And I suppose, he designedly omitted to speak of the ridiculous Fables
(especially in the Writings of Orpheus) which attribute humane, and even
exorbitant Passions to their pretended Deities.

CHAP. XVI.
THEN he finds great Fault with the Mosaical History, and cannot bear, by any
Means, that it should be taken in an Allegorical Sense. But one might ask this
mighty Man (who calls his Book by the Name of A True Relation) how it comes to
pass, that he is able to discover the most profound Mysteries in the strange
Accidents, which according to his own admired Poets and Philosophers, have
befallen his Gods and Goddesses, which have been polluted with Incest, have
contended with their Fathers and made 'em Eunuchs, and done many immodest
Actions of the like Nature (which might be mentioned, if Occasion offered) but
when Moses don't say any Thing that is comparable to this, of the great God
whom he adored, or of the Angels, or of Men (for he don't represent even them,
as making such a bold Attempt as that of Saturn against his Father, or that of
Jupiter against Saturn, or that of the Incest, which the Father of the Gods and
Men committed with his Daughter) Celsus treats even the famous Lawgiver of the
Jews, as a notorious and shameful Impostor, and takes the People, who are
governed by his Laws to be weak, and extremely credulous. Here he seems to me
to act like Thrasymachus in Plato, who will not suffer Socrates to state his
Notion of Justice, but says, Have a Care how you say, that Expediency, or
Decency, or any such Thing is Justice. For reproaching, as he thinks, the
Mosaic History, and blaming them severely, who take it in an Allegorical
Sense, though he acknowledges, that of the two they are more pardonable, than
they who literally interpret it; and having formed his Accusation to his Mind,
he would deny us the just Liberty of making our own Apology.

But we openly challenge any Person who may espouse his Cause, to set Author
against Author, and may address our selves to him after the following Manner,
Pray Sir, be pleased to produce the Poems which were writ by Linus, Musaeus,
and Orpheus, and the History which was published by Pherecydes, and compare 'em
with the Laws which Moses gave to the Jewish Nation; Examine which have the
greatest, and most general Influence on the Minds of Men, and impartially
consider how few of the Writings of those celebrated Authors, which you have
reckoned up, had any tolerable Effect, especially on the common People, since,
according to your own Confession, they were designed for them, who were capable
of understanding Allegories. Whereas Moses acted the Part of a Skillful and
Divine Orator, who makes use of Expressions that admit of different Senses,
neither giving the Laity among the Jews a Handle for the least Irregularity in
their Morals, nor wanting Matter for the sublime Speculations of those who are
more judicious, learned, and inquisitive.

And I don't see, I confess, that the Works of your Poets, with all their
Wisdom, are preserved, what Service soever they might do the Public. But the
Books of Moses have prevailed with them, whose Opinions and Customs, are vastly
different from those which obtain among the Jewish Nation, to believe, that
according to the Account he gives, the Laws which are contained in 'em, were
given him by the great God himself, the glorious Creator of the spacious
Universe. For 'twas agreeable to the Dictares of his infinite Wisdom, that
since it was his Will to give Laws to the World, they should carry along with
'em that Force and Efficacy, without which 'twas impossible for 'em so readily,
and so universally to obtain.

This, I say, not examining at present, what has an immediate Relation to our
Blessed Savior; but contenting my self with what relates to Moses, who, though
he came infinitely short of the Holy and Unspotted JESUS, did vastly excel your
most Celebrated Heroes, whether Poets, Historians, or Philosophers.

CHAP. XVII.
THEN Celsus being desirous, and even eager, to cast an oblique Reflection upon
the Account, which Moses gives of the Creation of the World, according to whom
it wants a great Deal of the Duration of Ten thousand Years, discovers himself,
though he does what he can, at the same time, to conceal, or dissemble his
Opinion, to be one of them, who hold the Eternity of the Material World.

Any judicious Person may justly, and easily infer this from that Passage of
his, There have been, says he, in all Ages of the World, many Conflagrations,
and Inundations, the last of which was Deucalion 's Flood, and that is of no
early Date.

Let him therefore, especially since he blames the Christians, for not building
their Faith on rational and solid Grounds, acquaint me, what Demonstrative
Arguments do of Necessity induce him to believe, that There have been several
Conflagrations and Inundations, and that Deucalion 's was the latest Flood, and
Phaeton's Conflagration the latest that has ever happened. And if he refers me
to Plato's Dialogues concerning those Matters, I shall return him the following
Answer, that we have Reason to believe, that the virtuous and refined Soul of
Moses, which was raised above all sensible Objects, and all created Beings, and
had its entire and firm Dependence upon God, was filled with the Holy Spirit,
who enabled him to set Divine Truths in a much clearer Light than Plato, or any
of the ancient Sages, whether Greeks or Barbarians.

But perhaps he may demand of us, what rational Grounds we have for such a
Belief as this. If so, let him first give us his Reasons for the Opinion which
he holds and advances, even without the Shadow of a Demonstration, and then,
I Will undertake, that he shall soon be acquainted with the Grounds, on which our
Faith in this Affair is built, though I cannot but take Notice, that sorely
against his Will, he confessed the World was of a modern Date, and not of the
Duration of Ten thousand Years, when he said, That these remarkable Events were
esteemed ancient by the Greeks, because the Conflagrations and Inundations have
been Means to bury in Oblivion, many considerable Events of much greater
Antiquity.

But let him, if he pleases, support his fabulous Account of Conflagrations and
Inundations, by the Authority of the Egyptian Doctors, who, in his Opinion,
were the wisest Men that were ever born into the World, some Footsteps of whose
profound Wisdom may be seen, in their paying Divine Worship to the Brute Beasts
themselves, and in those very Arguments, which they bring to justify and
recommend the Symbolical Rites, that are made use of in the RELIGION of their
Country.

The Egyptians forsooth, who endeavor to give some Color of Reason for their
mystical Ceremonies, by their Theological Speculations, must pass for Men of
most admirable Wisdom, but one, who in Observance of the Jewish Law, refers
every Thing to the Blessed GOD, of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all
Things, is more ignorant (if we may give any heed to Celsus, and Men of his
unhappy Principles,) than they, who don't only dishonor the Deity, by paying
divine Adoration to Creatures endu'd with Reason, but even by paying it to
those which are inanimate, under a Pretense of I know not what imaginary
Transmigration of the Soul, which they make to descend from Heaven, and pass
into the Bruits, even into those of 'em, which are of the most savage and cruel
Disposition.

And it seems the Egyptians, who hide their Religion under the sacred Veil of
significant, but obscure Figures, do challenge from us the profoundest
Reverence, but Moses forsooth, who has writ a faithful and useful History of
the Jewish Nation, and left 'em wholesome Laws for the Regulation of their
Conduct, both in a private and public Capacity, has only, in the Judgment of
Celsus, and the Epicureans, amused 'em with empty and ridiculous Fables, that
will not admit, even of an Allegorical Interpretation.

CHAP. XVIII.
THEN he says, That Moses having borrowed his Opinions from this wise and
eloquent People, meaning the Egyptians, got himself a prodigious and
unaccountable Name. To which I answer, that it is no Wonder at all, if Moses
borrowed some Notions from the Wise Men that lived in Egypt before him, and
introduced 'em, with some little Difference, or great Improvement among his
Countrymen the Jews.

And without all doubt he deserves to be blamed severely, if he has advanced
such Notions as bear neither the Characters of Truth, nor Wisdom, but if he has
embraced and taught those Opinions, which, according to Celsus's own
Confession, are both true, and wise; I cannot conceive that he has done any
Thing, whereby he might justly incur his Censure.

I wish, with all my Heart, that Epicurus, and Aristotle, who does not so
directly, and so grossly deny an overruling Providence as the other does, I
say, I wish, with all my Heart, that they and the Stoics, who hold that God is
corporeal, had been instructed in that Heavenly Doctrine, that was delivered by
Moses, that the World might not so much abound, as it does, with Authors that
absolutely deny a Providence, or confine it within very narrow Bounds, or
introduce a corporeal and corruptible Principle, insomuch that the Stoics hold
God himself to be nothing more than Matter, and are not ashamed to acknowledge
that he undergoes the various Changes to which Bodies are subject, or that if
he is so happy as to be incorruptible, it is for no other Reason, but because
there is no Object from without, that has any Power to corrupt him.

But the Jewish and Christian Doctrine, which preserve the pure Nature and
Immutability of God inviolable, is esteemed impious by Celsus, because it is
most directly repugnant to those extravagant Notions, which greatly derogate
from the infinite Honor, that is due to the Supreme and Adorable Majesty, and
teaches us when we address the Throne of Grace, to say, Lord, thou Psalm. cii.
v. 27.
art always the same, and represents God acquainting us, that he never Mal.
iii. v. 6.
changes.

Then Celsus, not condemning Circumcision, which is in use among the Jews,
says, They borrowed that Custom from the Egyptians, and gives greater Credit to
the latter than he does to Moses, who assures us, that Abraham was the first
Person, who brought Circumcision into Use. And Abraham's Name, and his great
Familiarity with God, is not only mentioned by Moses in his Writings, but also
by the Magicians themselves, who in the Formularies of their own horrid
Devotion, have this Expression, The God of Abraham, signifying thereby the
Intimacy, that there was between the great God himself, and this
eminently-virtuous, and holy Man.

For it is on this Account they perform their Magical Operations in the Name of
The God of Abraham, though they are far from knowing who this Abraham was. The
same may be said of Isaac, Jacob, or Israel, which, though they are Hebrew Names,
are frequently made use of by the Egyptians themselves, who pretend they can do
prodigious, and even miraculous Things by the Help of Magic.

But it is not my Business at present, to give any farther Account of
Circumcision, which began at Abraham, and was abolished by our Blessed Savior.

'Twill be more to my Purpose, to answer the severe Accusations, which Celsus
brings against the Jewish Religion in general, who thinks he gains his Point,
and effectually overthrows Christianity, if he can but make a successful
Attempt against the Jewish System, on which the Doctrine of our Savior is
acknowledged to be most evidently built.

CHAP. XIX.
THEN he says, That a Company of Men, that looked after Sheep, and Goats, being
left to the Conduct of Moses, were so grossly deceived by him, that he made 'em
believe, there was no other God but one.

Let him show therefore, since he thinks they did, without just Cause, oppose
the Worship of a Plurality of Gods, I say, let him show, whether, on rational
Grounds, he can establish the Polytheism both of the Greeks and Barbarians. Let
him show the Substance and Essence of Mnemosyne, on whom Jupiter begat the
Muses, or of Themis, on whom he begat the Hours, Let him show the Subsistence
of the Graces, which are always represented Naked.

But I Am confident, he will never be able to prove from the Things themselves,
that the Gods of the Greeks, which have Bodies attributed to 'em, do deserve
the Name of Deitys. For what Reason can be given, why we should believe, that
the Fables of the Greeks concerning their pretended Deities, have any more
Truth or Sense contained in 'em, than those of the Egyptians, For Instance,
whose Language is unacquainted with Mnemosyne, the Mother of the Muses, or
Themis, the Mother of the Hours, or Eurynome, the Mother of the Graces, and the
like?

What is there in all these empty Fictions, that deserves to be compared with
the Evidence, and Weight, which that one Argument, drawn from the entire
Harmony of the seemingly-clashing Parts of the spacious Universe, does carry
with it, to prove the perfect Unity of God.

For it is impossible in the Nature of the Thing, that a Piece of such Divine
Architecture, all the Parts of which (how numerous soever, and how distant, and
different soever from each other they may be) have so admirable an Agreement,
and so manifest, direct, and constant a Subserviency to the Advantage and
Ornament of the whole, should be made by several Hands, as it is not rational to
think, that the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies are caused by several Souls,
since there is no Need of any more than one, which making the vast Expansam to
move from East to West, contains within it self all those lower Things, which,
though they are not in themselves complete, do nevertheless conduce to the
wonderful Harmony, and by Consequence the surprising Perfection of the
Universe. For every Thing which is circumscribed by the World is a Part
belonging to it, but God is not properly a Part of any whole, of what Kind
soever it may be. For Absolute Perfection is inseparable from the Nature of
God, whereas all the Parts of the Universe, how agreably soever they may strike
upon our wondering Senses, and entertain even our Nobler Powers, are naturally,
evidently, and in a comparative Sense, very grossly imperfect, and if we carry
our Speculations a little farther, perhaps we shall find, that as God is not a
part of the Universe: so neither in Propriety, and Strictness of Speech, can he
be called a whole, since we must unavoidably suppose a whole to be composed of
Parts; and at least, it is most highly irrational to think, that the great God
has Parts, any one of which has not an equal Virtue, and Dignity with the rest.

CHAP. XX.
THEN Celsus says, That these Men who looked after Sheep, and Goats, were
unhappily prevailed with to believe there was no other God but one, whether
they called him the Most High, or Adonai, or the Majesty of Heaven, or Sabbath,
or whether they were pleased to give any other Name to the World, which was the
Boundary of their real Knowledge.

He adds, It Is no great Matter by what Name the great God be called; whether
with the Greeks they call him Jupiter, or with the Indians, or Egyptians, call
him by any other Name.

To which I answer, that this Discourse of his does naturally, and unavoidably
lead me to a difficult and important Question concerning the true Nature of
Names, whether, as Aristotle thinks, they depend entirely on Institution, and
Choice, or whether, according to the Opinion of the Stoics, they have their
Foundation originally laid in Nature, Words being first formed on the Model of
Things themselves, in Imitation of which, Names, and the Elements of Etymology
were happily introduced into the World, or whether, as Epicurus thinks, who
differs from the Stoics, they have their Foundation partly laid in Nature, and
are partly owing to Accident, and Contrivance, the first Men having
undesignedly affixed such and such articulate Sounds to such and such Objects,
of which they had formed, and would convey an Idea.

If therefore, I can make it appear, that some Names have a natural, and by
consequence an inseparable Efficacy, (such as the Wise Men among the Persians,
or the Brachmans, or Samanaei of the Indians, or the Wise Men of any other
Nations do constantly make use of) and if I can prove, that the Art which is
commonly called by the Name of Magic is not absolutely incongruous to Reason,
as the Followers of Aristotle and Epicurus think it is, but has certain stated
Rules, as they that are skilled in it do know, and can easily demonstrate, I
say, if I can make this appear, I think, I may then safely affirm, that the
Name Sabbath, Adonai, and other Names, for which the Jews have so profound a
Veneration, were not designed to denominate any created Beings, much less those
of an inferior Order, but do contain some sacred Mystery, which has an
immediate Reference to the great and adorable Creator of the Universe. These
Names therefore, have an Efficacy, when they are duly pronounced by any Person
whatsoever.

There are other Names, which, being pronounced in the Egyptian Language, are
prevalent with certain Demons, whose Power is limited to such or such a
Sphere, and others, which being pronounced in the Persian Language, are
prevalent with other Demons.

And I might instance in several Nations of the World, that use other Names,
applying 'em in very different Senses, and so we shall find that the
terrestrial Demons, which have particular Places assigned 'em, have Names
given 'em, according to the Language which the People speak. Any Man of Sense
therefore, one would think, that bestows but the least Thought on this
important Subject, will scruple to make use of Names foreign to the Things
which they represent, least he should unawares, be guilty of the same Fault
with them, who use such improper and harsh Expressions concerning God himself,
that they don't at all stick to give him the false, and vile Appellation of
inanimate Matter, or run into the Error of those unhappy Persons, who greatly
derogate from the infinite Honor which is due to the supreme and original
Cause, and disparage true Virtue, and Piety, by mis-applying the Sacred Name of
Summum Bonum, to a little glittering, but perishing Dust, or a happy
Constitution of Body, or that which is falsely, but too commonly called an
Honorable Descent, Noble, Princely, or Royal Blood. And surely the Danger of
mis-applying the Name of the Aweful Majesty of Heaven, or the Chief Good, is at
least equal to that of changing the stated Names, which are used in Magic and
have a Mystical Sense, and giving the Names of Superior Powers to infernal
Spirits, and on the contrary, those of infernal Spirits to Superior Powers.

I need not say, that at the very mention of Jupiter is understood the Son of
Saturn, and Rhea, the Husband of Juno, the Brother of Neptune, the Father of
Minerva, and Diana, and the Person that committed Incest with his Daughter, nor
need I say, that at the mention of Apollo, is understood the Son of Jupiter,
and Latona, the Brother of Diana, and Brother to Mercury by the Fathers side,
or need I speak of many other Things that were related by the Ancient Heroes
(whom Celsus has, with so much Honor enumerated) or contained in the old, and
admired Theology of the learned Greeks.

Pray how comes it to pass, that Jupiter is called as he is, and that the Son
of Saturn and Rhea is not the Name that is given him? The same Question may
properly enough be asked, concerning the rest of the Riffraff of the Heathen
Gods.

This Consideration, I think, has a manifest Tendency to favor, and justify
the Practice of those Persons, who have some mystical but solid Reason for
using the Name Sabbath, or Adonai, and some other Names when they speak of GOD,
since they who understand any Thing of the true Nature of Names, will easily
find that some sacred Mystery is veiled under the Names which are given to the
Angels, one of whom is called Michael, another Gabriel, and another Raphael,
each having a Name affixed to him by the Father of Spirits, agreeable to the
Nature and Extent of that honorable Work, in which his great Creator has
thought fit to employ him.

And the Virtue which accompanied the Pronunciation of our Savior's Name, and
by which cruel and obstinate Demons were frequently, and publicly
dispossessed both of the Minds and Bodies of Men, must, I think, be resolved,
at least in some Measure, into the natural Efficacy of Names. I might add one
Thing here, and that is this, that they who are skilled in Enchantments, tell
us, that if they make use of such and such Words in the Original Language, the
End proposed will certainly be obtained, but if the very same Words be changed,
and others be made use of, which convey the very same Idea, they will
immediately, and strangely lose their extraordinary Virtue.

So that the Power which they have, is not owing to the Things of which they
are the external Signs, but to certain unknown Properties, that belong to the
Names themselves.

CHAP. XXI.
THIS may serve as an Apology for the Christians, who willingly, and even
triumphantly embrace Death it self in the most horrid Shapes, rather than call
God by the Name of Jupiter, whatever Intention or Mental Reservation they might
have, or give him those Names which are used in the Languages, and adapted to
the Religions of other Countries. For either they call him by the general Name
of God, or they bestow such Epithets as these upon him, The Creator of the
World, the Former of Heaven and Earth, or might express themselves by the
following Periphrasis, He who has sent some wise and virtuous Men into the
World, whose Names being honorably blended with his own have a strange and
even miraculous Power.

Here I might enter into a long Discourse, in Opposition to them, who eagerly
contend for the promiscuous Use of the most sacred Names.

For if Plato be so much, and not undeservedly commended, who brings in a
Person upon Philebus's calling Pleasure a Goddess, making use of the following
Expression, For my part, Protarchus, I have a profound Veneration, even for the
Names of the Gods, which like themselves, I esteem, sacred and inviolable; how
much more ought Christians to be commended, who make Conscience of applying
those Names to God, which are unhappily, but too commonly, borrowed from the
empty and ridiculous Fables of the Poets? But so much of this Matter for the
present.

CHAP. XXII.
LET us now see how Celsus loads the Jews with Reproaches, which don't well
suit with his horrid Presumption, in professing that he was perfectly
acquainted with the Opinions of the Christians. They give themselves, says he,
to the Worship of Angels, and to Magic, following therein the Precepts of
their celebrated Moses.

Let him therefore, since he is so well acquainted with the Jewish and Christian
Doctrine, show where there is any Precept in all the Pentateuch, that can be
brought in Favor of Angel-Worship, and acquaint us how it is possible, that
Magic should be in Vogue with a Nation that observes the Law of Moses, who has
left the following Words upon Record, Regard not them Lev. xix V. 31
that have familiar Spirits, neither seek after Wizards to be defiled by 'em.

CHAP. XXIII.
THEN Celsus undertakes to show, That the Jews by reason of their monstrous
Ignorance, tamely suffered themselves to be led aside into great, and very
pernicious Errors.

I confess this might with Justice have been alleged against the Jews, with
respect to their denying our Blessed Savior to be the true Messiah, who had
the plain Testimonials of a Divine Commission, and was so frequently, and so
evidently foretold by their own celebrated Prophets.

But not being desirous to entertain the least Thought concerning that Matter,
which he knew would not serve his Cause, he supposes the Jews to be most grossly
deceived, in a Case wherein the contrary is extremely evident.

CHAP. XXIV.
LEaving then what immediately relates to the Jews to another Opportunity, he
enters into a Discourse concerning our Blessed Savior, as being the Head of an
Vpstart Sect, who from him are called by the Name of Christians. He says, That
our Savior appearing in the World, and introducing his Doctrine but a few
Years ago, was (for what Reasons he knows not) taken by the Christians for the
Son of God, in a strict and proper Sense.

To which I answer, that when our Savior did so lately introduce his Doctrine,
it should meet with such wonderful and happy Success, that almost in every Part
of the whole habitable World a great Number both of Greeks and Barbarians, of
learned and unlearned Persons, should so readily, and even triumphantly forsake
the Religion in which they were born, and bred, and to which they were
pre-engag'd by many other strong, and almost indissoluble Ties, and on a sudden
discover so extraordinary a Zeal for a new Religion, as to be willing to
sacrifice their Reputation, their Fortunes, and even their Lives for the
Profession of it, (which can hardly be said of any other Doctrine, which has
all external Advantages to recommend it.) I say, when the Posture of Affairs is
such, we must be strangely blinded by the Force of Prejudice, it we don't
observe a more than ordinary Appearance of the Providence of God, in so sudden,
so remarkable, and so blessed a Change as this.

I think, I may safely say (not to speak from Prejudice, but as one who desires
and endeavors to make impartial Enquiries into Truth) that a skillful
Physician cannot recover his Patients even from their bodily Diseases without
the Blessing of Almighty God upon the proper Methods he prescribes.

And if any one can cure the more fatal Distempers of the Soul, can suddenly,
and in a considerable measure, dispossess those rooted and dangerous Vices,
that have for a long Tract of Time usurped and maintained a Dominion there, can
free it from its former, and in some Sense, Native Intemperante, Injustice,
Contempt, and Profanation of holy Things, and, as a Proof of his Skill, can
instance in an hundred Persons, whose Manners he has been happily, and greatly
instrumental to reform, I presume, you will not say, that this can be done
without a seasonable, and more than common Interposition of the Providence of
God.

If then any Person, who weighs these Things in the Balance of his serious and
deliberate Thoughts, will of Necessity acknowledge, that much of the Natural,
and all the Moral Good, of which the whole World can boast, is owing to some
higher Cause, than a General Concourse of the Supreme and and All-wise Being,
how much more justly, and more eminently may this be said in Commendation of
our Blessed Savior, if we compare the Course of Life which his Followers once
ignorantly and unhappily led, with the Tenor of their future Conversation, and
consider how willingly, and even greedily they devoted themselves to
Debauchery, Fraud, and Avarice, before they made a Profession of that holy
Religion, which the Blessed Jesus introduced into the World, (which in the
Judgment of the Epicureans was a Notorious Cheat, and the greatest Plague with
which Mankind could possibly have been infected) but in Process of Time were
illustrious Examples of the contrary Virtues, insomuch that some of 'em from a
sincere and vehement Desire of attaining to an extraordinary Degree of Purity,
and of Devoting themselves more entirely to the Service of God, did abstain
from the lawful Delights of Sense, and those rational Entertainments which
Marriage it self affords.

And any one who examines into these Matters, with that Diligence and Exactness
which is requisite, will easily perceive, that our Savior, with a Greatness of
Soul that was peculiar to him, attempted what was vastly beyond the Sphere of
mere humane Nature, and that the Event did most remarkably answer his Design.

For when every Thing looked with an unfavourable Aspect, on so great, and
seemingly so bold an Undertaking, and threatened, that the Gospel should be
confined to a very narrow Compass, when the Roman Emperors in their successive
Reigns, the Governors of Provinces, and Generals of Armies, the Magistrates of
particular Cities, the Soldiers, and the common People, in a Word, when all
Persons that were in Places of Authority, or had any Interest, and Influence,
declared open War against the Christian Religion, I say, even then, under all
those evident and great external Disadvantages, it bore the sacred and
undeniable Marks of a Divine Original, approved it self to the Consciences of
the most wicked Men, forced its Way, in Spite of the united Malice, and most
vigorous Efforts both of Earth and Hell, gained ground by the most violent
Opposition, and being superior to all its Enemies, which were neither few, nor
contemptible, and having a wonderful Power over the Minds of Men, all Greece,
and a great Part of the most barbarous Nations, became Trophies of Honor to
the Immortal Memory of its God-like Founder.

CHAP. XXV.
AND since the greatest Part of the World are entirely ignorant of the Arts and
Sciences, and have but a small Measure, and scarce any Glimmerings of Reason,
'twas morally impossible, but that among such vast Numbers as embraced the
Christian Religion, the Irrational and Illiterate should greatly exceed those
in Number, who had rendered themselves famous for their Sense and Learning.

But Celsus, not being willing to consider this as he ought, speaks with the
highest Contempt of the Sun of Righteousness himself, who condescends to shine
promiscuously on the greatest, and the meanest, and to enlighten, and warm with
his refreshing Rays, the most eminent Saint, and the vilest Sinner, and he
looks on this extraordinary Condescension, as an Argument of prodigious Folly,
and unmanly Self-Debasement, as if it were not one of the highest Flights of
Majestic Simplicity, that could possibly be discovered by an Incarnate God.

But Celsus himself cannot say, with all his Prejudice, and Malice, that all who
ever embraced the Doctrine of our Blessed Savior, were dull and stupid to a
Proverb, and the only Persons in the World who were so, since it seems he is so
just, and so gracious as to acknowledge, that some few may be found among 'em,
who are very severe in their Morals, and are capable of understanding
Allegories.

CHAP. XXVI.
BUT because he personates a Jew (in Imitation of a Professor in the
University, who makes his young Pupil declaim, that he may use himself to the
Art of Rhetoric) I say, because he personates a Jew, entertaining our Savior
with Discourse that is very childish, and unbecoming the Gravity, as well as
supposed Sense and Learning of an old Philosopher; Let me examine, according to
my weak Ability, what it is that he supposes him to say, and make it appear, as
I think I can easily do, that the Jew don't strictly, or even tolerably observe
his Character.

Celsus introduces him, making his Address to our blessed Savior, and
pretending to convince him of several Points, and the first Thing of which he
endeavors to convince him, is, that the Account of his being born of a Virgin
is an empty and ridiculous Fable.

Then he reproaches him with being born at an obscure Village, and having a
Woman to his Mother, that got her Livelihood by going out to Service, who, he
says, being convicted of Adultery, was divorced from her Husband, who was a
Carpenter by Trade.

Then he says, That after this Indignity wandering from Place to Place, she was
privately brought to Bed of our Savior, and that he being forced by reason of
Want, to work in Egypt, and having learned there some of those Arts, for which
the Inhabitants of that Country are so Famous, returned into his Native
Country, and swelling with a vain Conceit of the Miracles he should do, gave
out that he was God.

But for my Part, I must confess, to me, who do with a silent but deep Regret,
pass by even the weakest Arguments that are offered by our Adversaries, and
naturally affect to trace Things, especially such as are of the last
Consequence to the Souls of Men, 'till I come by slow Degrees, to their true
Originals, I say, to me these Things are so far from giving an unhappy Shock,
that they are no small Confirmation of that important Truth, that our Blessed
Lord is the very Person, whom the Prophets foretold to be the Son of God, and
the Savior of the World. I cannot deny, but that commonly a Man's Descent from
rich and honorable Parents, and Enjoyment of the Advantage of a liberal
Education, does not a little conduce to blazon his Name, and command Reverence
from Persons of an inferior Rank: But when one who labors, in the greatest
Degree imaginable, under the contrary external Inconveniences, can spread his
Fame to the most distant Regions of the World, in Spite of his mean Extraction,
and the fond Opinions which are too often received by aspiring Mortals, and
climb the higher up the steep Ascent of Honor, by reason of the violent
Opposition which is made against him, who, if he has any Spark of humane Nature
left, can forbear to admire a Soul of the same Rank of Beings with himself, so
strangely elevated beyond the common Pitch, and so nearly approaching to the
Deity, so capable of forming well-laid, deep, and truly generous Designs, and
of crowning all by a happy and answerable Execution?

If we make a serious and narrow Enquiry into the Matter, shall we not be ready
and even constrained to think thus with our selves, was it possible, that one
who was born of poor and ignoble Parents, and was not instructed in the Liberal
Arts, and Sciences, whereby he might have been rendered capable of insinuating
himself into the People, and of engaging their Affections, and their Purses in
his Service, should so work upon the Passions of Men, by an invisible Power,
and the naked Evidence of Truth, as almost universally to gain their Credit and
Esteem, though the Doctrine which he introduced was in a great measure new, a
Doctrine, which, without derogating in the least from any of the Jewish
Prophets, did abolish the Mosaic Dispensation, and make void the Laws of the
Greeks, especially those, which had an immediate Relation to Religious Worship,
in which they were so grossly ignorant?

Is it not strange, and even prodigious to a Miracle, that one who even
according to the Confession of his Enemies, was so meanly born, and bred, and
by consequence was very unfit to manage an Intriegue, which requires a Chain of
Thought, and continued Thread of Artifice, should so move the secret Springs of
humane Souls, and so powerfully incline 'em against their strongest
Inclinations, by encouraging the righteous with a pleasing Prospect of a
glorious and eternal Reward in the World of pure and perfect Spirits, and by
representing to the wicked, as in a Glass, those dreadful Torments which they
must expect to suffer, when they shall fall into the Hands of the living God, I
say, is it not strange, and even prodigious to a Miracle, that such a one,
should not only engage ignorant, and illiterate Persons to embrace his
Doctrine, but also a great Number of the rational and learned World, who, under
the sacred Veil of naked Truths could discern unfathomable Depths of
supernatural Wisdom, displayed with all the Art that a God could show?

I remember Plato relates a Story of one that was born at Seriphos, who
upbraiding Themistocles, a Famous General, said, that the Reputation he had
happily established was not owing to his Merit, but his happ'ning to be born at
a famous City of Greece, whereupon Themistocles, who was sensible, and
gratefully acknowledged, that the Place of his Nativity had no small Tendency
to render his Name immortal, returned him this judicious and diverting Answer,
If I had been born (said he) at Seriphos, I shou'dn't have been so famous as I
am, but if you had been born at Athens, you would never have become
Themistocles. Now our Savior, who is upbraided with being born in a Village,
and that not of Greece, or any celebrated Country, and having a poor Woman to
his Mother, that got her Livelihood by her Labor, and leaving his Country, by
reason of Want, was forced to work in Egypt, I say, our Savior, who, if I may
accomodate the foregoing Instance to our present Case, was of a meaner
Extraction than the forementioned Person, that was born at Seriphos, did as it
were, give a happy Shock to the whole habitable World, and made a greater
Impression upon the savage Dispositions of Men, I scorn to say, than
Themistocles the Athenian; but a greater than even Pythagoras, or Plato, or any
of the Wisemen, Princes, or Emperors were ever known, or reported to have
made. What Person then, unless he loves to dwell upon the Superficies of
Things, will not stand astonished when he considers that our Blessed Savior
surmounted all the Difficulties, which lay in the Way to his growing
Reputation, and seemed to threaten that his Name should, as it were, sleep in
Everlasting Silence?

CHAP. XXVII.
IT seldom happens that any one Person is famous for many Things at once, for
One is famous for Wisdom, another for Military Discipline, and some of the
Barbarians for their Skill in Magic, and several others for some few supposed
Perfections, which perhaps do scarce deserve our Notice.

But our Savior was very remarkable for the best Sort of Wisdom, for
Authority, and for working Miracles, not to mention those other innumerable
Excellencies that adorned his Person, and might sufficiently recommend him to
the World.

He did'n't act like a Tyrant, who, by the Help of a prevailing Party, takes
Occasion to violate the known Laws of the Land in which he lives, nor like a
Robber, who comes with Armed Men, against them who innocently pass by the
King's Highway about their necessary Affairs, or like a Wealthy Man, who, by
the Help of Bribes, induces Persons to come over to his Interest, whether by
right or wrong, or like many others that might easily be mentioned, whose
Proceedings do manifestly deserve our Censure, but like one, who came to teach
an ignorant and degenerate World, what Thoughts they should entertain of God,
and how they might so regulate their Morals, as to maintain an humble and
familiar Correspondence with his Blessed Majesty.

And as for Themistocles, and several other Persons, who gained a more than
common Reputation, and did real and extraordinary Service to their Native
Country, this must be said, to draw a Shade over their greatest Glory, that
every Thing seemed to smile on their just and honorable Attempts, and as it
were, pave the Way for their glorious Victories, and immortal Triumphs. But as
for our Blessed Savior, besides what I have already said (which upon the first
View, one would think, was enough to have eternally concealed, or shamefully
fully'd the Name of the greatest Hero that the World could ever boast of) the
ignominious Death, which he suffered on the Cross; if he had had the fairest
Character, would have given his Followers just Cause to suspect him of being a
vile Impostor, if we may give any Credit to our Adversaries, or at least have
drawn a most dismal Veil over the few bright, and entertaining Scenes of the
most Aweful Tragedy, that was ever acted.

CHAP. XXVIII.
AND it is Matter of Wonder, that our Savior's Disciples, who, in the Judgment
of our Enemies, were not Eyewitnesses of the Truth of his triumphant
Resurrection, and saw nothing but what was common and even contemptible in his
Person, shou'dn't be afraid to imitate him in his Sufferings, to encounter the
most imminent and threatening Dangers, and leave their Native Country, to
publish the Doctrine which their crucified, but blessed Lord had taught 'em.

For I believe that no Person, who, laying aside his Prejudice, examines these
Matters duly, will say, that they would ever have undergone the Fatigue of
Ttinerant Preaching, if they had not been fully persuaded of the vast
Obligations that lay upon 'em, both from Reason, and Gratitude, not only to
conform their Manners to the holy Precepts of the Christian Religion, but also
to do what lay in their Power, to bring many others under the same honorable,
and happy Bonds, when, as Matters went at that Critical Juncture, they were
sure to incur the Displeasure of the Heathen World, who were zealous for their
ancient Laws and Customs, and could not endure the least seeming Innovation,
especially with respect to the pompous Ceremonies of their religious Worship.
But all these Difficulties were light, and trivial, in the Esteem of those, who
had Courage, not only to prove to the Jewish Nation, that our Blessed Savior
was frequently, and expressly foretold by their own Prophetic Oracles, but also
to make it appear to others, as Occasion offered, that this very Person was the
true Messiah, who was crucified but the other Day, and willingly, and even
cheerfully laid down his precious Life for the whole Race of Men, after the
same manner, though with unspeakable Advantage, in which some others have
sacrificed all that is near and dear to 'em, for the good of their Native
Country, to free it from a raging Pestilence, a threatening Famine, or some
violent impending Tempest, that greatly endangers Ships, and puts a Stop even
to Navigation, which is so, convenient, and necessary, for promoting an
advantageous Trade into Foreign, and very distant Parts.

For there are some secret Reasons in Nature, which very few understand, why
the Death of one virtuous Man, who readily suffers the greatest Evils that can
possibly befall him, for the real and perhaps lasting Welfare of the Place of
his Nativity, should destroy, or at least severely check, the usurped Power of
those infernal Demons, who are the Cause of Plagues, Famines, Storms, and the
like evident and great Disorders, which frequently happen in the World. And I
would fain know of them, who don't believe, that our Savior died for the
general Benefit of the humane Race, whether they will not give easy Credit to
many Histories that are extant, both of the Greeks and Barbarians, which
furnish us with frequent, and remarkable Instances of Persons, who have freely
laid down their Lives for the public Good, and whose Death has been happily
instrumental to purge away those threatening, and grievous Calamities, that
infected Cities, and perhaps whole Nations, or whether, on the Supposition that
these are Matters of Fact, it be in the least improbable, that one, clothed
with humane Nature, should be nailed to a Cross, to destroy the Works of the
Devil, who before did often, and too successfully, exercise a Tyrannical Power
over the Bodies, and Souls of Men.

Our Savior's Disciples observing these Things, and many Others of the like
Nature, with which in all Probability, their prudent, and indulgent Master
thought fit to acquaint 'em, and being filled with the Spirit of God (for they
were not inspired with their unusual Courage, by the Virgin which the Poets
speak of, but by the true Wisdom of God) they made haste Through the wide World
their Fame to spread. Hom. Il. Lib. 5. v. 2


CHAP. XXIX.
BUT it is Time to return to the Jew, whom Celsus personates, who says, That the
Virgin Mary being big with Child, was divorced by her Husband the Carpenter,
for committing Adultery with one Panthera, a Soldier, and being got with Child
by that scandalous Wretch. Let us see therefore, whether the Inventors of this
Story don't give a false, and obscure Account of the Matter, and whether by all
that they have to say, they are able to overthrow the Doctrine of our Savior's
miraculous Conception by the over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost? For so
surprising a Passage as this is, might very easily be falsify'd, and 'twas
possible, they might deny the Truth of it, though they were inwardly convinced,
that our Savior was not conceived in the common Way of humane Generation. And
methinks, it would not have been incongruous at all, that they who didn't
believe, or rather would not acknowledge the Miracle, should invent a Fiction,
to serve their malicious and base Design.

But to invent one, that was so far from having a plausible Appearance, that
'twas a great, and notorious Untruth, was to discover their Weakness to them,
who are able to distinguish Truth from Falsehood.

For does it stand to Reason, that one, who was so useful to the World in
general, and expressed a most tender Concern, both for the Greeks, and
Barbarians, that they might reform their Manners, from a Sense of a Future, and
Aweful Judgment, and do what lay in their Power, to gain the Favor of the
Blessed God, the Creator, and Supreme Disposer of the Universe, I say, does it
stand to Reason, that such a one, so serviceable to promote the Glory of God,
and the Welfare of precious and immortal Souls, should be so far from being
born in a miraculous Way, as to be of a base, and illegitimate Extraction?

I ask the Greeks, and particularly Celsus, (who, whether he be a Platonist or
no, thinks he has sufficient Authority for what he says, if he does but quote a
Passage out of the learned Plato,) whether it be not a Reflection upon one, who
holds the Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls, and by Consequence, that
every Body has a proper Soul to act, and animate it, to deny that our Savior
was born in a lawful Manner, who engaged in so difficult and important a Work,
instructed so many ignorant and seduced Persons, and happily, and suddenly
recovered 'em from that Deluge of Immorality, in which they had been so long,
and so deeply plunged. Is it not more rational to think, according to the
Opinion of Pythagoras, Plato, and Empedocles, (on the Testimony of which
learned Authors, Celsus himself does very much rely) that there are some secret
Reasons, why every Soul should have a Body appropriated to it self, that is a
fit Receptacle for it, and suited to the good, or bad Qualities, which it had
in its State of Pre-existence? Is it not just, and reasonable, that a more than
humane Soul, that does more Service to the World, than many Thousands of others
(to say no more, lest my Discourse should be thought to savor of Prejudice)
should be united to a Portion of Organized Matter, that is more excellent than
the Generality of Bodies are?

For if those Souls, which by the Virtue of some secret Causes, are of too
noble a Nature, to be united to an inanimate Creature, and are not worthy to
animate a Body, that is completely formed, have one that is adapted to 'em, the
Head of which being disproportionable to the rest of its Members, does in a
great Measure hinder the free Exercise of Reason, and others, that are more
perfect, act a Body that is more duly disposed, and so others, according to the
several Degrees of their native, or acquired Excellencies, are sent into more
or less perfect Bodies, why may not a particular Soul assume a Body in a
miraculous Way, a Body, that has something in common with the rest of Men, that
may render it fit for humane Conversation, and something wherein it differs
from 'em, that may in some Measure, secure it from the sad Contagion of a
neighboring, and distempered Mind. In short, if we give any Credit to them,
who are skilled in Physiognomy, such as Zopyrus, Loxus, Polemon, and others,
who have directly handled that difficult Subject, and pretend to find out
extraordinary Mysteries, by observing the Rules which that Science proposes,
what Absurdity is there in asserting, that all Bodies are suited to the
Qualities of the Soul that acts 'em?

Is there then the least Probability, that a Soul, so excellent in it self, and
formed for such great, and truly-generous Designs, as the Humane Soul of our
Blessed Savior, should animate a Body, which, as Celsus represents the Matter,
was begotten in Adultery, by a wicked Soldier, on the Body of a lustful
Female? One would rather think, that a Madman, or a Person, who proved a
constant Plague to the Age, and Place he lived in, or a Teacher of
Intemperance, and Injustice, and an impudent Encourager of all Manner of Vice,
should owe his Birth to so impure a Copulation, and not a Teacher, much less an
eminent Practicer, of Temperance, Justice, and all other Virtues.

CHAP. XXX.
THIS was plainly foretold by the Prophet, and exactly agrees with the promised
Sign, that we read of in the Prophecy of Isaiah, where it is said, That our
Blessed Savior would, by the Course of his Actions, make good his Name, and
prove himself to be Emmanuel, God with us.

And I think it may not be improper, to mention the Prediction of the
forementioned Prophet, that our Savior should be born of a Virgin, which
Celsus takes no Notice of, though he pretends to be perfectly acquainted with
what the Christians hold, either not having read it, or cunningly concealing
his Knowledge, lest he should unawares overthrow his own beloved Opinions, and
advance any Thing to the Prejudice of the Cause, which he espouses, and uses
his utmost Endeavors to maintain.

The Words of the Prophecy are these, Moreover the Lord spoke again to Ahaz,
Isaiah vii. V. 10.
saying, ask thee a Sign of the Lord thy God, ask it either in the Depth, or in
the Height above. But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord,
and he said, hear ye now, O House of David, is it a small thing to weary Men?
But will ye weary my God also? Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a
Sign, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and call his Name
Emmanuel.

That Celsus discovered his Malice, in not mentioning the foregoing Prophecy,
I gather, from his passing over it in a profound Silence, when he quotes some
Passages in St. Mathew's Gospel, and particularly makes mention of the Star,
that appeared at the Nativity of our Blessed Savior.

But if the Jew, whom Celsus personates, being used to make critical Remarks on
Words, should tell us that the Word, which is translated Virgin, should be
rendered Young Woman, I answer, the Hebrew Word (...), which the Septuagint
translate Virgin, though Others favor his Meaning of the Word, is understood of
a Virgin in the Book of Deuteronomy. If a Damsel (that Deu. xxii V. 23.
is a Virgin) be betrothed to an Husband, and a Man find her in the City, and
lie with her, then ye shall bring 'em both out to the Gate of the City, and ye
shall stone 'em with Stones that they dye; the Damsel because she cried not,
being in the City, and the Man, because he has humbl'd his Neighbor's Wife. So
thou shall put away evil from among you. But if a Man find a betrothed Damsel
in the Field, and the Man force her, and lie with her, then the Man only that
lay with her shall dye. But to the Damsel thou shall do nothing, there is in
the Damsel no Sin worthy of Death.

But not to dwell too long upon the Hebrew Word, which perhaps few Persons
understand, I shall endeavor to prove from the Context, that, according to the
Prophetic Oracle, Emmanuel was to be born of a Virgin.

The Lord said to Ahaz, ask thee a Sign of the Lord thy God. either in the
Depth, or in the Height above, Then it is said, that this Sign was to be given,
Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son. But what Sign could a young
Woman's Conceiving be, if it was not meant of a Virgin? And to which of the
two, is it most proper to attribute the Conception of Emmanuel, that is, God
with us, to a young Woman with Child, in an unlawful, and dishonorable Way, or
to one, who had not lost her Virginity? Certainly, it is most agreeable to the
Dictates of Reason, to suppose, that so extraordinary a Person was conceived by
the latter, in a strange, and even miraculous Way.

And if the Jew lays such a mighty Stress upon those Words, Ask thee a Sign of
the Lord thy God; I should be glad to know, what Person was born, in the Reign
of Ahaz, of whom it might be said, This is Emmanuel; which being interpreted,
is, God with us. And if no such Person can be found, I think, we may fairly
understand this Text of our Blessed Savior, who, as the Scriptures acquaint
us, was to be born of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh, and the
following Words, In the Height above, or in the Depths below, have a manifest
Agreement with what is said of our Savior, He that descended, is the same that
Ephesians. iv. V. 10.
ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all Things.

CHAP. XXXI.
THIS I say to a Jew, who, if he observes his Character, must give his ready,
and firm Assent to the Truth of the Jewish Prophecies. And I ask Celsus, and
those of his Party, did the Prophets foresee Things to come, or did they not?
If they did not foresee 'em, what should make 'em speak with such an Air of
Assurance, and how comes it to pass, that the whole Jewish Nation has all along
looked upon their Prophecies, as divinely-inspir'd Oracles? And, since I am
naturally led, into a Discourse concerning the Jewish Prophets, I hope, that
what I shall offer on this important Head, may not only, by the Blessing of
Almighty God, be of some Use to the Jews, who believe that they were
divinely-inspir'd, but also to as many of the Greeks themselves, as act upon
ingenuous Principles. For they must acknowledge, that the Jews had true
Prophets among 'em, unless we could suppose 'em, to have a sufficient Warrant,
for violating their divinely-instituted Rites, and paying Divine Worship, as a
just Tribute to the Mock-Deities of Foreign Nations.

I prove my Assertion thus, We read in the Jewish Law, That other Nations Deu.
xviii. V. 10.
hearkened to Observers of Times, and to Diviners. But to the Jewish Nation
it is said, As for thee, the Lord thy God has not suffered thee so to do. Then
it follows, The Lord thy God will raise up to thee a Prophet of thy Brethren.
If therefore, while other Nations had Men among 'em, who foretold future
Events, whether by the flying or singing of Birds, or by a narrow Inspection
into the Entrails of Beasts, or by the hollow Voices, that were formed in the
Bellies of certain Persons, or by the Childaean Horoscopes, the Jews, (who had,
in common with others, a Curiosity to know what should come to pass) were
forbid to take the forementioned Methods, and had no Prophets of their own,
who were acquainted with Futurities, they would immediately have entertained
mean Thoughts of their own Religion, as bearing no undeniable Characters of its
Divine Authority, and have rejected all their Prophets down from Moses himself,
insomuch that we have Reason to believe, they would never have committed any
Thing that was delivered by 'em to Writing, but either have had Recourse to the
Heathen Oracles, or have practiced something in Imitation of 'em, in their
Native Country.

And it was not in the least absurd, that the Prophets, for the Satisfaction of
some Persons, who desired it, should prophesy concerning Matters, that seemed
to be of mean Importance, as Samuel did, concerning some Asses that 1 Samuel ix.
V. 20.
were lost, and Ahijah, concerning the Death of Jeroboam's Son. 1 Kin xiv V. 12.


And indeed, if they had no Prophets among 'em, how could any, that were
zealous for the Jewish Law, reprove them, who consulted the Heathen Oracles? As
we read, that Elijah reproved Ahaziah, saying, is it because there is not a God
in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal-zebub the God of Ekron? I think then,
that I have sufficiently proved, not only, that our Savior was to be born of a
Virgin, but also that there were divinely-inspir'd Prophets, to whom the Jewish
Nation might have frequent, and satisfactory Recourse.

These didn't only, in the general, foretell some Things, that would come to
pass, with reference to our Blessed Savior, and the remarkable Revolutions of
Empires, and Change of the Face of Affairs in the Jewish Nation, and Conversion
of the Gentiles; but, sometimes, did more particularly foretell some Things, as
that the Asses, which Kish had lost should be found; and that Jeroboam's Son
should dye: And I might give many Parallel Instances, that we meet with in the
Holy Scriptures.

CHAP. XXXII.
I Have this to say farther to the Greeks, who wo'n't believe, that our Savior
was born of a Virgin, that the Creator of the World, if he pleases, can make
every Animal bring forth its young, in the same wonderful manner, that is
observed of some inanimate Creatures, and nothing hinders, but he may cause, if
he pleases, the like unusual Productions in the World of Men.

For among Animals, there are some Females, that bring forth their young,
without any previous Copulation with the Males, as, for Instance, the Vultures,
which propagate their Kind in this uncommon Way, as the best Writers of Natural
History do acquaint us. What Absurdity is there then, in supposing, that the
All-wise God, designing to bless Mankind, with an extraordinary, and
truly-divine Teacher, should so order Matters, that our Blessed Savior should
not be born, in the ordinary Method of humane Generation?

And the Greeks themselves do readily acknowledge, that some Men have come into
the World, without the Conjunction of Man and Woman. For if the World had a
Beginning, as many of 'em grant it had, then the first Man was not produced in
the common Way, but, according to them, by the Spermatick Virtue of the Earth,
which, to me seems much more strange, and unaccountable, than our Savior's
Nativity, if we do but follow the Dictates of impartial Reason, since the Way
in which he was born, has some Resemblance with the usual Method of carnal
Copulation.

And, since I Am concerned with the Learned Greeks, it may not be improper, to
make my Appeal, even to their own Histories, that it may appear to the World,
that Others, as well as the Christians, must, upon their own Principles,
acknowledge the Possibility of so extraordinary a Production, against which
they so loudly exclaim. Now some of their Modern Authors tell us, that Plato
was born of Amphictione, without the Conjunction of Ariston, who was forbid to
touch his Wife, 'till she should be delivered of a Son, whom she should
conceive by Apollo.

This is a mere Fable, I confess, invented in Favor of a Person, whose
uncommon Seize made 'em inclined to think, that even his Body was of a
Divine Original, since they thought, 'twas fit, that the Bodies of those
Persons, who are not on a Level with the rest of Men, should have some
honorable Mark, by which they may be distinguished from Vulgar Mortals.

And because Celsus's Jew continues his Discourse with our Blessed Savior, and
ridicules the Fiction, as he is pleased to call it, of his being born of a
Virgin, and ranks it among the Fables of the Greeks, concerning Danae,
Menalippe, Auge, and Antiope, I answer, that such pityful Drollery as this,
would look with an agreeable Air, in a Merry Andrew, who gathers a Mob about
him, and plays his Monkey-Tricks on a Stage, but don't at all become one, who
would treat of Matters of great Importance, with that Gravity, and Seriousness,
which the Nature of the Things may justly challenge from us.

CHAP. XXXIII.
THEN Celsus, making mention of some Things, relating to our Savior's Going
into Egypt, refuses to give Credit to those Parts of the History, which contain
any Thing, that is supernatural, as the Angel's warning Joseph, the reputed
Father of our Lord, and don't examine whether his Leaving Judaea, and Going
into Egypt, will not admit of an Allegorical Sense; but invents an Occasion for
his literal Going thither, and believing, and acknowledging, in some measure,
the Truth of our Savior's Miracles, (which caused Abundance of People, to
flock to him, esteeming him to be the true Messiah) but endeavoring to show,
that they were wrought by the Help of Magic, and were far from being Proofs of
a Divine Commission, he says, That having been privately educated, he was
forced to work in Egypt, and having learned those Arts, for which that Nation
is so famous, he returned into his own Country, and gave out that he was God.
But for my Part, I cannot conceive, that a Magician would so industriously
promote a Religion, which teaches us, to have a strict Eye to the Day of
Judgment, especially when we take any serious Affair in Hand; nor, can we
think, that he would take such Care, to inculcate that aweful Solemnity, upon
the Minds of his Apostles, whom he designed to employ, in the Promulgation of
the Gospel, were he a Person of so infamous a Character. For either they
wrought Miracles, or they did not. It Is absurd to suppose, they did no Miracles
at all, but barely relying on the Authority of a Doctrine, which did not, like
the Logic of the Schools, recommend it self to carnal Reason, had the Courage
to promote a new discountenanced Religion. And if they wrought Miracles, does
it stand to Reason, that a Company of Magicians should agree, to expose
themselves to imminent Danger, and the greatest Inconveniences imaginable, to
promote a Doctrine, that condemns the Use of the very Art they practiced? But
'twou'd be Loss of Time, to confute this Discourse of Celsus, which has
nothing, but perhaps a little witty Drollery, to recommend it to the Palate of
the unwary, and less judicious Reader.

CHAP. XXXIV.
HE goes on in the same Comical and Bantering Strain; If the Mother of Jesus,
says he, was a Celebrated Beauty, and for that Reason, the Great God was
pleased to admit her to his passionate Embraces, one would think, that so
excellent a Being is of too pure a Nature, to be captivated by the Charms of a
frail, and humane Body, however he could not have made Choice of a more improper
Person; viz. One, who had neither a Great Fortune, nor Noble Birth, to
recommend her; but led so obscure a Life, that she was scarce known by those,
who were her nearest Neighbors.

CHAP. XXXV.
HE continues his Raillery, and says, That when her Husband, the Carpenter,
came to hate her, and sue for a Divorce, all that she had to plead in her own
Behalf, was ineffectual, to redress her Grievances, nor did the Great God see
fit (as much as you would make us believe, he loved her) to engage his Power,
to protect her from threatening Danger, even in her Native Country. Therefore
none of these Things, says he, have the least Reference to the Kingdom of the
Blessed God. But this Language, is just like that, of a Company of Persons,
scolding in the open Streets, who vent their Passion, without the least Regard
to the Rules of Justice, or Civility.

CHAP. XXXVI.
THEN taking some Things out of St. Mathew's Gospel, or perhaps out of some of
the other Evangelists, concerning the Dove, that descended upon our Savior, at
his Baptism, he would fain have the whole Account, to pass for a false, and
trifling Story. And having said enough, as he imagines, to prove, that our
Savior was not born of a Virgin, he continues his Discourse, but don't treat of
Things, in the Order of Time, in which they came to pass, (for inveterate
Malice can never endure, to be confined to a regular Method) and talks, like
those shatter-brain'd Fellows, whose Heat, and undue Passion, does so transport
'em, beyond the Bounds of Reason, that they don't stick, to say whatever comes
into their Minds, and so are hindered, from managing, in a becoming Way, the
several Heads of severe, but unjust Accusation, which they bring against their
Adversary, with an Air of Vanity, and Insolence. For had'n't he been greatly
wanting, in the pretended Method he observes; he would have traced the History
from its very Original, since his Intention was, to expose it to Contempt. But
on the contrary, the Mighty Celsus, who boasts so much of his comprehensive
Knowledge, after he had finished his Discourse, concerning our Savior's Birth,
immediately passes on, to the Descent of the Holy Spirit, at his Baptism, in
the Resemblance of a Dove. Then he finds Fault with the Prophecies concerning
his Incarnation. After that, he returns to what immediately followed his
Nativity, viz. To give an Account of the Star, that appeared, and the Wise Men,
that came from the East, to worship him. But any diligent Reader, may save me
the Labor, of showing, how confused Celsus is, throughout the whole of his
Book, and this one Thing is sufficient, to convince any Person, who loves
Exactness of Method, that 'twas a Piece of Arrogance in him, to give his Book
the Title of A True Relation, and was a Strain of Vanity, perhaps beyond most
Philosophers, that ever went before him.

Plato says, That it don't become the Character of a Man, famous for Wisdom, to
be positive in Matters, which are involved in very great Obscurity. And
Chrysippus, after he has given the Reasons, that induced him to be of this, or
that Opinion, does modestly refer us to those Persons, who are able to give a
more clear, and exact Account. But this mighty Man, being much wiser, I
suppose, than Plato, Chrysippus, and all the Greek Philosophers, gives his Book
the engaging Title of A True Relation, which suits well enough, I confess, with
his Boasting, that he didn't want to be informed of the Opinions, which the
Christians held.

But that it may not be thought, that I pass by what he says, for Want of being
in a Capacity, to return him a proper, and sufficient Answer: I have resolved
to examine every Material Article, though I cannot observe so strict a Method, as
I would, but am forced so far to comply, even with the Folly of my Adversary,
as to trace him through the Labyrinth of his confused Discourse.

Let us see then, what he has to offer, against the Descent of the Holy Spirit,
on our Blessed Savior, in the Resemblance of a Dove.

CHAP. XXXVII.
THE Jew, whom Celsus personates, directs his Discourse to our Savior, in the
following Words; You pretend, says he, that a Bird appeared to you, at your
Baptism; but can you produce any credible Person, that was present, to see it;
Or, heard the Voice from Heaven, (by which, you say, you were declared, to be
the Son of God) besides your self; and (if we may take your Word) another
Person of the same pityful Class?

But before I return him a direct and full Answer, I must beg Leave, to make
one Remark, that it is very difficult, and in some Cases, impossible, to give
evident, and undeniable Proofs, of the Certainty of undoubted Matters of Fact.

Suppose any One should say, there never was such a Scene of Action, as the
Trojan War, grounding his bold Affirmation, on the seeming Impossibility, of
some of the material Circumstances, which attended it; and not conceiving, how
there should be, In rerum natura, such a Person, as Achilles is represented to
us, the Son of Peleus, and Thetis, the Goddess of the Sea; or Sarpedon, the Son
of Jupiter, or Ascalaphus, and Jalmenus, the Sons of Mars; or Aeneas, the Son
of Venus; how could we convince him of his gross Mistake, when so many Fables,
being interwoven with the Body of the History, are so readily, and so
universally believed? Or suppose, any Person should call into Question, the
Story of Oedipus, and Jocasta, and Eteocles, and Polynices, their Sons, by
reason of what is confidently related, concerning the Sphinx, a certain
Monster, that was half a Virgin, how could we demonstrate, that the whole
Account is true?

I might say the same, concerning the second Theban War, which was continued,
by the Posterity of them, who had lost their Lives in the first (though that be
more free from the Appearance of Fiction, than the former Story) and concerning
the Return of the Heraclidae to Peloponnesus; and I might instance in many
other Things, of the like Nature, which are recorded in the Histories of the
Greeks. But he who reads 'em, without a Tincture of Prejudice, and with a
sincere Desire, that he may not be deceived, will judge, how far he is
required, to yield his ready, and firm Assent; what Passages he must take in an
Allegorical Sense, and what he must reject, as being writ in Favor of some
particular Persons, and will endeavor, to find out the true, and full Meaning
of those, who were the Original Authors of these Stories, which the Greeks, who
are a learned Nation, do so generally believe. I would lay down this
Praeliminary, with respect to the entire, and amazing History of our Savior's
Life, as it is impartially related in the Gospels, and I don't mention this, as
if I would have the more intelligent; and learned Sort of People, to take
Things on trust, but to show, that the Reader has great Need of Candor, joined
with a severe Application, and must penetrate, if I may so say, into the very
Spirit of the Authors, if he would take their Writings in their true Sense, and
utmost Latitude. I answer then, in the first Place, that if the Person, who
rejects the Account, that is given, of the Spirit's appearing to our Savior, in
the Resemblance of a Dove, was a Follower of Epicurus, Democritus, or
Aristotle, there would be some plausible Ground for his Incredulity, because
then, I confess, he would observe his Character.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
BUT Celsus, with all his Wisdom, seems to me, to have quite forgot, that all
this while he was speaking, in the Person of a Jew, whom we must suppose, to
yield a firm Assent, to many Passages in the Prophets, that would sooner be
liable to shock our Reason, than any Thing related in the History, of which, I
am now discoursing. For one might ask this pretended Jew, who wo'n't believe,
that the Holy Spirit appeared to our Blessed Savior, in the Resemblance of a
Dove; Pray Sir, how will you be ever capable, of giving evident, and undeniable
Proof, that God spoke to Adam, Eve, Cain, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, as
your Scriptures do plainly assert he did? And, to set History against History,
I would address this Jew after the following Manner; Dear Sir, you cannot be
ignorant, that Ezekiel, who is one of your own celebrated Prophets, has these
very Words, The Heavens were opened, and I saw Visions of Ezekiel. i. V. 1.
God; and he adds, This was the Appearance, Ezekiel. i. V. 28
of the Likeness of the Glory of the Lord, and he said to me.

Now if those Things, that are related of our Savior, must be acknowledged to
be false, because, as you think, they have not sufficient, extrinsick Evidence,
to recommend 'em to the World; since you affirm, They were seen, and heard, by
no Person but himself, and another, of the same pityful Class; Have we not more
Reason to suspect, that Ezekiel imposed upon us, when he said, that the Heavens
were opened to his View? And though the Prophet Isaiah says, I saw the Lord,
sitting upon a Throne, high, and lifted up, above it stood Isa. vi. V. 1.
the Seraphims, each one had six Wings; Pray Sir, what rational Assurance have
you, that he really saw, this entertaining, and amazing Sight? You believe that
these Things are true, and come from the Spirit of God, who neither can be
deceived, nor will deceive us, and are persuaded, not only, that the Prophet
saw 'em, but also that he was Divinely-inspir'd, when he committed these Things
to Writing.

But I ask, which of these three, is it most fit we should believe, Ezekiel;
Isaiah, or our Blessed Savior? The two former did nothing, that deserves to be
compared, or even mentioned, with what the latter has done, whose Power was not
only most gloriously displayed, when he appeared, and dwelt on Earth; but
shines with a happy, and remarkable Luster, at this Distance of Time, in the
Conversion, and exemplary Reformation of those, who believe in God through him.
And that all those wonderful Effects, which we frequently see, are owing to his
infinite Power, I infer from hence, that as he said, and, as constant
Experience may convince us, the sincere Laborers are few, in a Mat. ix. V. 37.
comparative Sense, and yet the Harvest of Souls is great; that is, vast
Numbers ibid. V 38
are, every where, almost continually, brought into God's Threshing-Floor, if I
may so say, I mean, the visible Church.

This I say to a Jew, not as if I had the least Design, to derogate from the
Honor, which I am sensible, is due to Ezekiel, and Isaiah, (for that would be
very inconsistent, with the Profession, which I make, of the Christian
Religion, which is built on the Jewish Prophets, as well as on our Savior's
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone) but I would Ephesians.
ii. V. 20.
convince him, if it be possible, upon the Principles, in which we both agree,
that we have far more Reason, to give Credit to the Report of our Blessed
Savior, who is reported to have seen, and heard such Things, and, for ought we
know, did acquaint his Disciples, with the Vision which he saw, and the Voice
which he heard from Heaven.

Perhaps, it may be objected against us, That even they, who have given us an
Account, of the Holy Spirit's Appearing in the Resemblance of a Dove, and of
the Voice, that came from Heaven; had not these Things, so much as from our
Savior's Mouth, since, even according to our own Notions, the same Spirit,
which inspired Moses, to write a History of what passed for many Ages, before
ever he was born, even from the Creation of the World to the Time of Abraham,
who, in some Sense, was the Father of the Jewish Race, might also immediately
reveal the strange Passages, which happened at our Savior's Baptism, to the
four Evangelists.

But to this I answer, that one, who is favored, with what the Scriptures call
the Gift of Wisdom, can easily account for the Opening of Heaven, and assign a
Reason, why the Holy Spirit appeared, to our Blessed Savior in the Resemblance
of a Dove, rather than in the Shape of any other Animal. However, these are
Niceties, that are foreign to our present Purpose.

All therefore, that I shall do at present, shall be to show, that Celsus did
not only want the Innocence of the Dove, but even the Subtilty of the Serpent,
when he put such Discourse as this, into the Mouth of one, whom he calls a Jew,
who, if he be not false to his Pretensions, must believe several Things, that
are much more improbable, than any Thing related in the History, of which, I am
now discoursing.

CHAP. XXXIX.
I Remember, in a Disputation, I had with some Celebrated Jewish Doctors, and
before a great Deal of Learned Company, who were at once Witnesses, and Judges
of what I said, I used this Argument against 'em; Pray Gentlemen, let me know,
said I, since two Persons have appeared, upon the Stage of the World, who are
confidently reported, to have done such Things, as were vastly beyond the
Sphere of Nature; viz. Moses, the Lawgiver of the Jews, who has writ the
History of what he did; and JESUS, our Master, who has not left behind him, in
Writing, an Account, of any of the Actions which he did; but has the concurring
Testimony of the four Evangelists; I say, let me know, on what Grounds, you can
justify the vast Difference, which you make between 'em, that we must believe,
forsooth, that Moses delivered nothing, but what was true, though the Egyptians
reproach him, as one that dealt with the Devil; but must look upon our Savior,
as a vile Impostour, on the Account of the severe Accusations, which you bring
against him. We see, that both these Persons, have their Authority supported,
by the Testimony of a great Body of People, Moses has his supported by the
ready, and joint Testimony of the Jewish Nation, and our Savior his by the
General Suffrage of the Christians, who don't deny Moses, to be a Prophet sent
from God; but confirm the History of our Savior, even by the Sacred, and
Undisputed Authority of your celebrated Moses. If therefore, you desire us, to
justify our Conduct, in paying so awful a Regard to our Blessed Savior, do you
first assign some Reasons, why you believe in Moses, who came into the World,
many Ages before the incarnate Jesus, and then, it may be time to acquaint you,
with the rational Grounds, on which our Faith is built.

But if you refuse to give us any Reasons, why you believe in Moses, neither
shall we think fit to acquaint you, with those we have, for believing in our
Savior, or if you are not able to offer any Demonstrative Arguments in favor
of your justly celebrated Moses, be pleased to hear, what Arguments we can
bring, even from the Law, and the Prophets, to prove, that our Jesus is the
true Messiah. And which is something strange, those very Arguments, which we
bring from the Old Testament Writings, to prove, that our Savior had a Divine
Commission, do, at the same Time, prove, that Moses and the Prophets were
Persons, who were immediately inspired. But to return.

The Law, and the Prophets, abound, with as strange Stories, as that of the
Dove, that appeared to our Savior, at his Baptism; and the Voice, that came to
him out of Heaven; and that it was the Spirit of God, that appeared to him, in
the Resemblance of a Dove, does, I think, at least seem highly probable, from
the Consideration of the Miracles, which our Savior wrought, which Celsus
says, he did, by the Help of Magic, which he had learned in Egypt.

Here I think, it may not be improper, to mention, not only the Miracles of our
Savior; but also those, which were wrought by the Apostles, who were, every
Way, qualified, for that great Work, in which, their Master did engage 'em. For
if their Ministry had not been accompanied with Miracles, they would never have
been able, so happily to prevail with their Hearers, to renounce the Religion,
in which they had been born, and bred, and to embrace a new, discountenanced
Doctrine, the Profession of which, would expose 'em to the greatest Dangers,
even to an ignominious, and painful Death, and some remarkable Footsteps of
that Holy Spirit, who appeared to our Savior, in the Resemblance of a Dove, do
remain among Christians, to this very Day. They disposses Demons, perform many
wonderful Cures, and sometimes, when God sees fit, they foresee, and foretell
future, distant, and very contingent Events. And therefore, let Celsus, and his
Jew, ridicule us, as much as ever they please, yet it is plain, and I think,
undeniable, that many Persons have embraced the Christian Religion, in Spite of
all the Force of Prejudice, the Spirit of God making so sudden, and so powerful
an Impression on their Minds, whether in a Dream, or Vision, or some other Way,
that instead of being implacable Enemies to Christianity, as once they were,
they have cheerfully, and even triumphantly, laid down their Lives, for the
Sake of their Profession, and sealed the Truth with their warmest Blood.

If I should only relate those Things, that have fallen, within the Compass, of
my own personal Knowledge, and frequent Observation; I should furnish Infidels,
with abundant Matter of Laughter, who would be ready to suspect us Christians,
as we do them, of inventing Fictions, to support a bad, and sinking Cause, though
the Searcher of Hearts can bear me Witness, that my Design, and Endeavor, is
not to maintain our Religion, by fabulous, and ridiculous Narrations; but by a
Variety of proper Evidence, to recommend it to the World, as being derived from
no other, than a Divine Original.

And since it is a pretended Jew, who calls in Question, the Descent of the Holy
Spirit, upon our Savior, in the Resemblance of a Dove, one might well demand,
who is it, that says thus in Isaiah's Prophecy, Now the Lord God Isa. xlviii V.
16.
has sent me, and his Holy Spirit; which Words are ambiguous, and may either
signify, that the Father, and the Holy Spirit, sent our Blessed Savior, or,
that the Son, and Spirit, were both sent by the Father, the latter of which two
Interpretations, seems to me, I confess, to be true, and genuine, and because
our Savior was sent first, and then the Holy Spirit, that the Prophecy might
be fulfilled, the Accomplishment of which, was reserved for Future Ages, for
that Reason among others, I judge it is, that Things are related, as they are,
by the Evangelists.

CHAP. XL.
AND since Celsus's Jew does, in some sort, acknowledge, that our Savior was
baptized by John the Baptist, I would produce the Testimony of a Famous Author,
who lived quickly after, I mean Josephus, who in the 18th Book of his Jewish
Antiquities, says, That John the Baptist was invested with Authority to
baptize, and promised Remission of Sin to them, that came to his Baptism.

The same Author, though he don't believe, that our Savior was the true Messiah,
and when he enquires into the Cause of the Taking of Jerusalem, and the
Destruction of the Temple, don't ascribe this grievous, and surprising
Calamity, as he ought to have done, to the Crucifixion of our Blessed Savior;
yet is fore'd: to make some slender Approach to Truth, and to acknowledge, that
'twas a remarkable Judgment, which God sent upon the Jewish Nation, for killing
James the just, (who was Brother to Jesus, who is called by the Name of
Christ,) and was, without doubt, a very virtuous, and pious Man.

This James was the same Person, St. Paul, that sincere Follower, and eminent
Apostle of our Blessed Lord, tells us, that he went to visit, because he was
the Brother of Christ, which Title was proper for him, not so much by Reason of
their being, in a peculiar Sense, of the same Flesh, and Blood, as on the
Account of the admirable, and manifest Agreement both of their Doctrine, and
their Morals.

If then the forementioned Author says, That the Destruction of Jerusalem, was
owing to the Barbarous Death of James the just; how much more Reason is there
to believe, 'twas really, and principally owing to the Crucifixion of our
Blessed Savior, whose Divinity, is so frequently attested, by so many large,
and united Bodies of Men, that consist of such Persons, as have left their
vicious Practices, devote themselves to the Service of their great Creator, and
liberal Benefactor, and in all their Actions, have a most serious Regard to his
Honor, and Interest in the World.

And though the pretended Jew should make no Apology for the Prophet Ezekiel, and
Isaiah, since we meet with Passages in their Writings, and in the rest of the
Prophets, which are no less strange, I am sure, than those which are related in
the Gospels, concerning our Blessed Savior; viz. That the Heavens were opened,
and that he heard a Voice from thence; I shall endeavor to show, that all, who
believe an overruling Providence, acknowledge, there have been praeternatural
Visions, and such wherein future Events, relating to the Affairs of humane
Life, have been more clearly, or more obscurely represented to the warm
Imagination; I say, I shall endeavor to show, that the Assertors of Providence
acknowledge, that such Visions have been seen, by Persons in their Sleep; and
that it is no difficult Matter to conceive, upon this Hypothesis, that the same
Impressions may be made on the Imagination, when a Person is awake: Whether
they be designed by God, for the private Benefit of some particular Persons, or
to promote the spiritual Advantage of Mankind in general, and as in our Sleep,
though there be nothing to strike upon our Sense of Sight, or Hearing, yet we
strongly imagine, that we see such Objects, and hear such articulate Sounds,
when it is our rational Faculty, that is all this while at Work, and undergoes
these various, and strange Sensations: So there is no Absurdity, in supposing,
that the same Thing might happen to the Prophets, when we read, that the
Heavens were opened to 'em, that they saw strange Sights, and heard the Voice
of the great God himself.

For my Part, I don't suppose, that the visible Heavens were opened, and, in a
literal Sense, were cleav'd asunder, to give the Prophet Ezekiel an Occasion,
for writing as he does.

And I am fully satisfied, that they who read the Gospels, with any Measure of
Judgment, will not understand our Savior's Vision, in the gross Sense of the
Words of Scripture, though I am not a little sensible, that the ignorant Sort of
People, who, at every Turn, and to support an idle Whimsy of their own, will
allow the Frame of Universal Nature, to be shak'd from off its Hinges; and
imagine, that so vast, and compact a Body, as that of the Heavens, was rent in
two; will be offended with any Discourse in Divinity, that does in the least,
interfere with the literal, and most obvious Sense of Scripture.

But one who dives to the Bottom of Things, will find, that, according to the
Account, we have, in Holy Writ, there is a certain, Divine Knowledge, which
none, but a few, happy Persons have, (as Solomon says, Thou shall find the
Knowledge of the Lord) Prove. ii. V 5.
and that the several Branches of it, are such as follow; viz. A Sight, adapted
to the Contemplation of Objects, that are beyond the Sphere of unassisted
Nature, such as Cherubims, and Seraphims; a Hearing, suited to the Perception
of Sounds, vastly different from those, which are formed in the Air; a Taste,
that can relish the living Bread, that came down from Heaven; a Smell, that can
distinguish that Heavenly Perfume, of which, the Apostle speaks, when he says,
We are unto God a sweet Savor of Christ; and a Touch, of which, 2 Cor. ii V.
15.
St. John speaks, when he says, Our Hands have handled of the Word of i. John i
V. I.
Life.

The Blessed Prophets therefore, being Partakers of these Divine Sensations,
and seeing, hearing, tasting, and smelling, in a Way that is perfectly
supernatural, we must understand these Things, in the same Sense, in which we
must take that Place in Ezekiel; where he is said, to have eat the Book that was
delivered him.

In this Sense it was that Isaac smelt the sweet Savor of the Divine Garments
of his Son, and pronounced this Blessing upon him, See the Smell of my Son is
as the Smell of a Field, which the Lord has blessed. And after the same Manner,
our Savior touched the Leper, which I think, must be understood of a
Spiritual, rather than a Corporeal Touch, that he might not only cleanse him,
as some think, from his bodily Distemper, but chiefly, that he might purge him
from the viler, and more dangerous Leprosy of Sin. And after the same manner,
John the Baptist bears Witness in the following Words, I saw the Spirit
descending from John i. V. 32.
Heaven, like a Dove, and it abode upon him, and I knew him not; but he that
sent me to baptize with Water, the same said to me, upon whom thou shall see
the Spirit descending, and remaining, the same is he, who baptizes with the
Holy Ghost; and I saw, and bare Record, that this is the Son of God. And the
Heavens were opened to our blessed Savior, when there was no Person present,
as far as I can gather from the Account, which we have in Scripture, to be an
Eye, and Ear. Witness of what happened to him, except John the Baptist.

But our Savior foretold his Disciples, that they also should see the Heavens
opened, saying, Verily, Verily, John i. V. 51.
I say unto you, that hereafter you shall see Heaven open, and the Angels of
God ascending, and descending upon the Son of Man.

And, in the foregoing Sense, we must understand that Place of Scripture; where
it is said, that St. Paul was carried up to the third, or highest Heaven, which
before was opened to him, since we are well-assur'd, he was one of the sincere
Followers, and most eminent Apostles of our Blessed Lord. But as for those
Words, Whether in the Body, 2 Cor. xii V. 3
or out of the Body, I cannot tell, God knows; it is not my Business at present,
to insist upon 'em.

CHAP. XLI.
GIVE me leave to add one Thing here, and that is this, that Celsus, without
any Warrant from Scripture, or Reason, as far as I can see, imagines, that our
Savior did acquaint his Disciples, with the strange Things that had happened
to him, that the Heavens had been opened, and that the Spirit of God, had
descended upon him at the River Jordan.

But this mighty Man, with all his Wisdom, seems not at all to have considered
the Incongruity of such a Supposition, with the General Practice of our
Savior, who forbad his Disciples, to make mention of the Vision, which he saw
upon the Mountain, 'till he should rise from the Dead. And Nothing was more
common, as appears from the Gospels, than for our Blessed Savior, to do what
lay in his Power to avoid all Talk, that was in favor of himself. Therefore he
says, If I bear John v. V. 31.
Witness of my self, my Witness is not true. And because he industriously
avoided every Thing that savored of Self-Applause, and had rather that his
Works should praise him, and demonstrate to the World, that he was the true
Messiah, the Jews said to him, If thou be the Christ, do thou tell us plainly.
And because the Jew, whom Celsus personates, speaking of the Appearance of the
Holy Spirit, to our Savior, in the Resemblance of a Dove, says, There Is no
Body, to attest the Truth, of what happened to you, besides your self, and
another Person, of the same pityful Class, I think it will be seasonable, and
highly necessary, to show, that he talks in such a manner, as is very
unsuitable to the Character he bears. And this is evident, from the different
Regard, which the Jews pay to Christ, and to John the Baptist, both with
Respect to their Persons, and their Sufferings, which to me is a sufficient
Argument, that, after all the Pretensions which he makes to Knowledge, he
could not personate a Jew, discoursing consistently with our Blessed Savior.

CHAP. XLII.
THEN Celsus, (I don't well know how, but I suppose, purposely) overlooks one
of the most cogent Arguments, that can be brought, in Favor of our Blessed
Lord; viz. His being foretold by the Jewish Prophets, by Moses, and those who
succeeded him, and even by some, who lived long before him. I presume, 'twas for
this politic Reason, because he knew very well, that he could not return any
tolerable Answer to a Proposition, to which both the Jews, and the greatest
Heretics did assent, who all agree, that many of the Prophecies of the Jewish
Prophets were accomplished, in the Person of him, whom we believe to be the
True Messiah.

And perhaps, he had never read the Prophecies, but had heard a general, and
loose Report concerning 'em. For if he had known, that there have been several
Prophets, who have foretold our Savior's Appearance in the World, certainly he
would never have put these Words, into the Mouth of a Jew, (which I think,
would much better have become a Samaritan; or a Sadducee,) viz. My Prophet said
formerly in Jerusalem, that the Son of God would come to reward the Righteous,
and to punish the Wicked.

For surely, there have been more than one Prophet, that have prophesied of our
Blessed Savior, since even the Sadduces, and the Samaritans; who own no more
than the Pentateuch, cannot but see, if they are not wilfully blind, that Moses
himself has prophesied concerning him, and it is impossible, the Prophecy should
be published at Jerusalem, since the Name of no such Place was known, for many
Ages after Moses.

By the Way, I wish with all my Heart, that all our implacable Adversaries;
unless it should please God to convert 'em, were as ignorant as Celsus, not
only of the true, and full Sense of the Things, of which the Scripture treats;
but also of the very Letter of it, that so their Discourses, not having that
Color of Reason, which sometimes they have, the common People might not so
much, as for a short Space of Time, yield, even the weakest Assent to any
Thing, they are able to produce against us.

Besides no Jew, but one, who is brought over to the Religion which we embrace,
will acknowledge, that the Prophets foretold, that the Son of God was to come
into the World. What the Jews say is this, that the Messiah is to come, and in
their Disputations with us, the first Question almost which they ask, is, Who
is this Son of God, of whom you talk so much? intimating to us, that they don't
believe, that any such Person was ever intended by the Prophets.

For my Part, I firmly believe, that the Person, of whom there are so many
Predictions, in the Writings of the Jewish Prophets, is the Son of God; but I
cannot, for my Life, conceive, how a Jew, who denies this plain Assertion, can
consistently with his Character, make use of the following Words, My Prophet
said formerly in Jerusalem, that the Son of God was to come into the World.
Then Celsus adds the following Words, To reward the righteous, and to punish
the wicked. And, as if this was all that was foretold, and there were no
Predictions, concerning the Place of our Savior's Nativity, or the unjust, and
barbarous Treatment, which he met with, at the Hands of his own Countrymen the
Jews, or his Resurrection from the dead, or the Miracles he performed; he says,
Why should this Prophecy be appropriated to you, when the same Thing may be
said of many Persons, that lived before, and after you, with more reason, than
you can say it of your self? and seeming to insinuate, that there were
abundance of Persons, to whom this Prophecy might fitly be applied, as well in
all respects, as to our Blessed Savior; he says, Several Enthusiasts and
Impostors have claimed the venerable Title, of the Son of God, and have said,
that they came down from Heaven: though I know not, what Ground he could have,
for using this Expression, since the Jews do strongly deny, that our Savior
was the Son of God. To this I answer, that several Prophets have prophesied in
a different manner, concerning the Messiah, some by obscure, and almost
unintelligible Hints, others by Allegories, and some in the plainest, and most
express Terms imaginable. And because Celsus discovers his Malice, and
excessive Heat, in the Sequel of his Discourse, where the Jew, speaking to
those of his own Nation, that were converted to the Christian Faith, has the
Confidence to say, That the Prophecies which are applied to our Savior, may be
otherwise, and much better accommodated; I think, it may not be improper at
present, to instance in some few of 'em, which are most considerable. And here
let any Person employ his utmost Skill, I defy him to shock the Faith of any
judicious, and established Christians.

As for the Place of our Savior's Nativity, it is said, That a Ruler shall come
forth from Bethlehem, in the following Words, But thou, Bethlehem Mica. v. V. 2.
Ephratah, though thou be little among the Thousands of Judah; yet out of thee
shall he come forth unto me, who is to be Ruler in Israel; whose Goings forth
have been from of Old, from Everlasting.

This Prophecy cannot, with any Show of Reason, be applied to those Enthusiasts
and Impostors, as Celsus calls 'em, who say, they came down from Heaven, unless
it plainly appears, that they were born at Bethlehem, or as the Words may be
rendered, came forth from Bethlehem, to be Rulers of the People. As for our
Savior's being born at Bethlehem, if any Person be dissatisfied with the
Prophecy of Micah, and the Account which is given by the Evangelists, let him
only consider, that the Cave, in which he was born, and the Manger, in which he
lay, are to be seen at the fore mentioned Place to this very Day. And this is a
Truth so well known, and so credibly attested, that even they, who are
Strangers to the Christian Religion, are frequently heard to say, Here is the
Cave, in which, that JESUS, who is worshipped by the Christians was born.

And it is my Opinion, that before our Savior did make his Appearance in the
World, the chief Priests, and the Teachers of the People, openly confessed, and
taught, that the Messiah was to be born at Bethlehem; and that even the common
People among the Jews were acquainted with this Prophecy, which was delivered,
in express, and very familiar Terms. Hence it came to pass, that Herod,
enquiring of the chief Priests, and Scribes, where the Messiah should be born,
received this Answer, that he should be born at Bethlehem, in the Land of
Judaea, which was honored, by being the Place, from which no less a Person
than King David himself did spring. Besides we read in St. John's Gospel, that
the Jews said, that Christ was to be born at Bethlehem; which was in the Native
Country of the forementioned King. But when our Savior was come into the
World, those Persons, who left no Stone unturned, to oppose the Religion, which
he introduced, did no longer teach, that the Messiah was to be born at
Bethlehem, plainly showing, they belonged to the fame wretched Fraternity, with
them, who prevailed with the Soldiers, (who were appointed to guard the
Sepulcher, and were Eyewitnesses of his triumphant Resurrection) to say, His
Disciples came by Night, and stole Matthew ^xv* i. V. 13. V. 14.
him away, while we slept; and said to 'em, If this come to the Governor's
Ears, we'll persuade him, and secure you. Such is the Power of Prejudice, and
the Love of Opposition, that it often happens, that we cannot discern the most
apparent Truths, and are loath to endure the Shame, which attends a Recantation,
of those false, and dangerous Principles, which we have once embraced, and I
think, it is every jot as easy, to leave any bad Habit, that we have unhappily
contracted, though it be, as it were, rooted in our very Nature, as to leave the
Opinions, which we formerly held, and which were very dear, and extremely
familiar to us.

It Is well known, we do, with a Kind of secret Reluctance, forsake those
Houses, Cities, and Villages, which by our long, and delightful Continuance in
'em, have rendered themselves familiar, and even natural to us. And if it was
not for unaccountable Prejudice, even the common People among the Jews,
would not shut their Eves, as they manifestly do, against the glorious Light of
Scripture-Prophecy, nor deny the extraordinary, and often miraculous
Circumstances, which attended the Life, and Death of our Blessed Savior. But
that Prejudice is one of the greatest Infirmities, which our Minds can possibly
labor under, is plain to them, who consider, that it is with no small
Difficulty, and Regret, that we leave the Opinions, which we received by
Tradition, from our Parents, though perhaps, they may be such, as on mature
Deliberation, do cover us with the deepest Shame, and fill us with Vexation,
and Confusion.

So talk to an Egyptian, 'till your Heart do ache, and your Breath fails you,
yet he will be so far from renouncing his Religion, that he will persist in it,
if it be possible, with greater Obstinacy than before, and rather dye, than be
guilty of so horrid a Profanation, as he accounts it, to eat, and pollute the
sacred Flesh of Animals.

I thought it necessary, to dwell the longer on this Subject, that so we may
return a solid Answer, to them, who, perhaps may not stick to say, If the
Prophecies have so plain a reference, to your Savior, as you say they have,
how comes it to pass, that the Jews, whose Wisdom you so highly value, don't
embrace the Christian Religion, as well, and as readily as you, and regulate
their Practice, by those Precepts, which Christ, in some Sense, has left behind
him?

But let none reproach us, as if we were so wretchedly ignorant, as not to
discern the Sophistry, of so weak an Argument, (since some, and I hope, many of
us can make it appear upon Occasion, that Christianity is built on the most
rational, and solid Grounds,) or reflect upon us, as if we were accountable,
for the monstrous Blindness, and extravagant Practice of the Jews.

CHAP. XLIII.
I Might, if 'twere necessary, instance in another Prophecy, that was writ,
many Ages before the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, in which Jacob
prophesies concerning all his Children, and speaking concerning Judah, has
these remarkable Words, The Scepter Genesis xlix V. 10.
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, 'till
Shiloh come, and unto him shall the Gathering of the People be. Now any one,
who reads this Prophecy, which is of greater Antiquity, than their celebrated
Moses, (though perhaps some Infidels may suspect it) cannot but wonder, how Jacob
could foretell, that the Rulers of the Jewish Nation, which consisted of no
less than Twelve Tribes, should come of the Tribe of Judah.

This we see has been so evidently, and so remarkably verified, that the whole
Body of the Jews, do take their Name from the forementioned Tribe, which held
the Reins of Government in their Hands, and managed 'em as they pleased, and
it is Matter of Wonder to all, who are not biased by Prejudice, that the
forementioned Patriarch, should not only foretell, that the governing Power
should be lodged in the Tribe of Judah, but also, that it should come to a
Period, at a prefixed Time, as the following Words import, The Scepter shall
not depart from Genesis xlix V. 10.
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, 'till Shiloh come, etc.

And he is come, for whom the Supreme Authority was reserved, I mean, the
Messiah, by whom the True Glory of the Tribe of Judah, was advanced to its
greatest Height, he, I say, who was the Prince, whom God had promised, who
might have laid a fairer Claim to that Title, The Desire of Nations, than any
Person who ever went before, and I may safely say, than any who ever did, or
will succeed him. For all Nations almost have believed in God through him, and
have placed their Confidence in his Name, according to that Prophecy in Isaiah,
In his Name shall the Gentiles trust.

This is he, who proclaimed Liberty to them, who were held fast in the Bonds of
Sin, and Satan, as all Men naturally are, and said to them, who were covered
with spiritual Darkness, be ye Light in the Lord, according to that Famous
Prophecy, I will preserve Isa. xlii. V. 6, 7.
thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the People, to establish the Earth, to
cause to inherit the desolate Heritages, that thou may say to the Prisoners
go forth; to them that are in Darkness, show your selves. And the vast Number
of Persons, who flocked from all Parts to our Blessed Savior, did abundantly
make good the Words which follow, They shall feed in the Ways, and their
Pastures shall be in all high Places.

CHAP. XLIV.
BUT because Celsus, who pretends, he don't want to be informed, of what the
Christians hold, reproaches our Savior, as if either he was not assisted by
his Father, or was unable to help himself, when he came to suffer; I must add
one Thing here, and that is this, that the Prophets foretold his Sufferings,
and the Reason why he underwent 'em, that they should conduce to the Advantage
of Mankind in general, that he should even sacrifice his Life for 'em, and be
treated for their Sakes, as a condemned, and most vile Malefactor. They also
foretold; that the Gentiles; who had no true Prophets, should acknowledge him,
to be sent from God, and that he himself, with respect to his outward
Appearance in the World, should be a mean, and very contemptible Person. The
Words of the Prophecy are these, Isa. lii. V. 13. 14 15.
Behold my Servant shall deal prudently; he shall be exalted, extolled, and be
very high. As many were astony'd at thee, (his Visage was so marred, more than
any Man, and his Form more than the Sons of Men) so shall he sprinkle many
Nations, the Kings shall shut their Mouths at him, for that which had not been
told 'em, shall they see, and that which they had not heard, shall they
consider. Who Isa. liii. V. 1. 2,
has believed our Report? and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? For he
shall grow up before him, as a tender Plant, and as a Root out of a dry Ground;
he has no Form, nor Comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no Beauty
that we should desire him. He Is despised, and rejected of Men, a Man of
Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief: And we hid, as it were, our Faces from him,
he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he has born our Griefs, and
carried our Sorrows: Yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted. But he was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our
Iniquities: The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we
are healed. All we like Sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his
own Way, and the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all. He was oppressed,
and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his Mouth: He is brought as a Lamb to
the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb; so he opens not his
Mouth. He was taken from Prison, and from Judgment, and who shall declare his
Generation? For he was cut off out of the Land of the living, for the
Trangression of my People was he stricken.

I remember, I made use of this Prophecy, in a Disputation, which I formerly
had, with some Jewish Doctors, and one of 'em returned the following Answer,
that we must understand it, as relating to the whole Body of their own Nation,
whose Dispersion, and many other Calamities, were Means, to gain Proselites to
their Religion. And he explained those Words, He has no Form, nor Comeliness;
and those Words, That which had not been told 'em shall they see, and that
which they had not heard, shall they consider; and those Words, He was wounded
for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities; I say, he explained
'em all, in Favor of the Sense, which he had given 'em. On the contrary, I
offered several substantial Arguments, to prove, that this Prophecy must be
understood of a single Person, and by Consequence is not to be referred to an
entire Nation, or great Number of People. I asked of whom those Words were
spoke, He has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows; and those Words, He was
wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities; and those
Words, By his Stripes we are healed. For they are plainly meant of those
Persons, who, whether Jews or Gentiles, were cured of their spiritual Diseases,
by the Sufferings of our Blessed Savior, to whom the Propher, inspired by the
Spirit of God, accommodates these several, and extraordinary Characters.

But that which most perplexed 'em was that Expression, For the Transgression
of my People was he stricken. For if this Prophecy has a Reference, to the
whole Body of the Jews, it is difficult to make Sense of the foregoing Words. We
must, therefore, understand 'em, of some single Person, and not of the whole
Jewish Nation, and who can that Person be, but our Blessed Savior, by whose
bloody Stripes all they, who believe in him, are immediately, and will at
length be completely healed; I say, who, but our Blessed Savior, who has
spoiled Principalities, and Powers, that usurp, and too long maintain a
Tyranny, over the Souls of Men, and has made a Show of 'em openly, upon his
HONORABLE CROSS. But the crit^cal, and full Examination of this Prophecy, I
shall reserve to a more proper Place, though I thought, 'twas necessary for me,
to dwell a little upon it, on the Account, of what Celsus's Jew thought fit, to
object against us.

CHAP. XLV.
ONE remarkable Thing that has led Celsus, and other Infidels, into gross
Mistakes, in this important Affair, is their not knowing, or, at least, their
not considering, that the Prophets speak of a twofold Coming of the Messiah;
his first Coming, at which he was to appear, clothed with all the innocent
Infirmities of humane Nature, and str^^ling with the pressing Inconveniences
of a mean, and despised Condition, that so, living among Men, he might the more
feelingly instruct 'em, in those Moral, and Divine Truths, which were
important, and highly necessary, and inculcate upon 'em that aweful Account,
which they must shortly give, when they shall be summoned, to appear, before
the Bar of God; and his second Coming, at which he will appear, free from the
least Allay, even of natural Imperfection, and shine with the united, and
unfully'd Rays, of his Original, and in some Sense, naked Divinity. 'Twou'd be
tedious, to relate all the Prophecies, that have an immediate, and manifest
Reference to our Blessed Savior. I shall, therefore, at present confine my
self, to that which we meet with, in the Forty fifth Psalm, which is entitled,
A Song of Loves, and where our Savior is expressly called by the Name of GOD.
The Words are these, Grace is poured into thy Lips, therefore Psalm, xlv, V. 2,
3.
God has blessed thee for ever. Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most Mighty,
with thy Glory, and thy Majesty, and in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because
of Truth, and Meekness, and Righteousness, and thy right Hand shall teach thee
verrible Things. Thine Arrows are sharp in the Heart of the King's Enemies,
whereby the People fall under thee. Thy throne, O God, is for ever, and ever:
The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter. Thou love Righteousness, and
hate Wickedness, therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee, with the Oil of
Gladness, above thy Fellows. Where take Notice, that the Prophetical Psalmist,
making his Address to God, Whose Throne is for ever, and ever, and the Scepter
of whose Kingdom is a right Scepter; says, that this Person was anointed by
God, who was his God, and that he was anointed, above his Fellows, with the Oil
of Gladness, because he loved Righteousness, and hated Wickedness.

I remember, that once I horribly baffled a Jewish Doctor, with this very
Prophecy, who being at a grievous Loss, to know what Answer he should give me,
had seasonable Recourse to a pityful Evasion, which was suitable enough, to the
false Principles, he endeavored to maintain; viz. That those Words, Thy
Throne, O God; is for ever, and ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
Scepter, were spoke of the Great God himself; and those Words, Thou love
Righteousness, and hate Wickedness, therefore God, even thy God, has anointed
thee with the Oil of Gladness, above thy Fellows; must be understood of the
Messiah.

CHAP. XLVI.
CELSVS's Jew continues his Discourse, with our Blessed Savior, and says, If,
as you your self acknowledge, every Person, who comes into the World, by the
general Concourse of Providence, is a Son of God; What special Prerogative is
there, which you can justly claim? To which I answer, that they, who are no
longer acted by a Spirit of Bondage, as St. Paul expresses it, but choose
Virtue, for its intrinsic Worth, may, in a less noble Sense, be called, the
Sons of God. But there is a vast Disproportion, between those, who are the Sons
of God, as they are imperfectly endu'd, with Moral, and Christian Virtues, and
our Blessed Savior, who is the inexhaustible Fountain, from which their
borrowed Good does entirely, and will for ever flow. The Words of St. Paul,
which I just now referred to, are these, Ye have not received the Spirit of
Bondage, again Romans viii. V. 15.
to fear, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father.

The Jew continues his Discourse, in the following Words, Abundance of Persons
will find Fault, with your pretended Savior, for applying those Prophecies to
himself, which, they think, may, at least as justly, be applied to them. To
this I answer, that I am apt to think, that Celsus didn't know of any Persons,
who rivaled our Savior, in his Miracles, and justly claimed the Title of Sons
of God, or The Power of the Supreme Majesty. But because the sincere, and
strong Affection, which I have for Truth, will not suffer me, to pass by any
Thing, that even seems to oppose the Christian Cause, I readily acknowledge,
that before our Savior's Incarnation, there was a certain Person, whose Name
was Theudas, who appeared among the Jews, pretending to be a mighty Man, after
whose Decease, his deluded Followers were soon dispersed. Some Time after, in
the Days of the Taxing, (during which, as far as I can gather from Scripture,
our Blessed Savior was born) one Judas of Galilee, drew after him, a
considerable Number of weak, and credulous Jews, who, affecting Novelties,
cried him up, as a Man, endu'd with more than ordinary Wisdom, and was no
sooner brought to condign Punishment, but his Doctrine came immediately into
Disrepute, or, at best, was only secretly maintained, by some few Persons, of
mean Rank, and Figure. And after our Savior appeared, upon the Stage of the
World, one Dositheus, a Samaritan, endeavored, to persuade his Countrymen,
that he was the very Person, to whom the Prophets had so plain a Reference,
when they foretold the Coming of the Messiah, and some few Persons, I confess,
there were, who seemed heartily to embrace his Doctrine.

Here, I think, it will not be improper, to mention that wise Expression of
Gamaliel, which we meet with, in the Acts of the Apostles, to show, beyond all
Contradiction, that the forementioned Persons, were not intended in the
Promise, which God gave, of sending the Messiah, and that neither of 'em
deserved the honorable Title, of The Son, or Power of God; but that of all the
Men, who ever appeared, and made a Figure in the World, our Blessed Savior was
the only Person, who could justly claim it. If this Counsel, said he, or this
Work be Acts. v. V. 38.
of Men, 'twill come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it,
lest happily ye be found, even to fight against God.

There was also one Simon, a Magician, of Samaria, who endeavored by his
Magic, to draw People after him, and for some Time he was not without his
Followers, but I believe, there are now scarce thirty Simonians in the whole
habitable World: Nay, perhaps I have exceeded the Number, since there are only
a few near Palaestine, and that Doctrine, which they embraced, did never
obtain, in any other Parts, though its Author did fondly imagine, that it would
soon, and easily reach, and happily engage, the most distant, and barbarous
Nations in it is Favor. For they who know any Thing, of their celebrated Simon,
owe their Knowledge, entirely to the Account, which we have of him, in the Acts
of the Apostles. So that, were it not for the Christians, his very Name would,
before this Time, have been buried in oblivion, and 'twas sufficiently evident
from Experience, that he bore none of the shining Characters, of one, who had a
Divine Commission.

CHAP. XLVII.
THEN Celsus's Jew, not keeping to the sacred Text, says, That our Savior
boasted, that some wise Men of the Chaldaeans, being moved, by a secret
Persuasion, that he was born, came to pay Divine Worship to him, in his
Infancy, and that when they had acquainted Herod, the Tetrarch, with it, he
ordered his Officers, to kill all the Infants, that were about that Age,
imagining, that our Savior would inour the same Fate with them, and thereby be
prevented, from ever coming to the Crown. Take Notice, how grossly the Jew is
mistaken here, who confounds the wise Men, and the Chaldaeans, not discerning,
that, for any Thing that appears to the contrary, they might be of Different
Countries, and Professions, and notoriously Falsifying the Account, which we
have of this Matter, in the Gospels. And I know not how it comes to pass, that
he don't think fit, to acquaint us, that the Star, which they ^aw in the East,
was the Ground of their secret Persuasion, that the Messiah was then born into
the World. Let us see therefore, what matter of Discourse this Subject will
afford us.

I confess, it is my Opinion, that the Star, that appeared, at our Savior's
Nativity, was entirely new, and vastly different, from those which are commonly
seen, whether in the superior, or inferior Orbs, and I am inclined to think,
it might be much of the same kind, with those Comets, that appear for a Time,
and have different Names assigned 'em, by the Greeks, according to their
different Figure. And I build my Opinion upon the following Grounds. It has
been observed by Learned Authors, that when any considerable Alteration has
happened, in the Face of Affairs, such Stars have exposed themselves to View,
as did presage some strange Revolutions of Empires, some dreadful Wars, or some
such Accidents as these, which put the whole World into a terrible, and unusual
Commotion. I have also read, in a Treatise concerning Comets, writ by Chaeremon
the Stoic, that sometimes they have presaged very happy Events, and he
produces several Instances, from very credible Historians, to make good the
Assertion, which he there lays down.

If then, at the Establishment of some new Monarchy, or before some remarkable
Scene of public Affairs does begin to open, these Comets, or Stars of the like
Nature, do appear; it is no Wonder at all, that a Star should be seen, at the
Nativity of our Savior, who was designed by the Allwise God, to make so
sudden, so great, and so happy an Alteration in the World, to publish a new,
unadorned, and discountenanced Doctrine, not only to the Jews, and Greeks, but
also to a vast Number of the most distant, and barbarous Nations of the World.

And this I may safely say, in Favor of the Christian Religion, that we don't
meet with any, or at least with no Scripture-Prophecy, concerning the
Appearance of such a Star, at such a Time, for Instance at the Establishment of
such a Rising Empire, but the Star, that graced our Savior's Nativity, was
foretold by Balaam, as Moses gives us an Account. There shall come, says
Numbers xxiv. v. 17
he, a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel. But here I
must argue with the Greeks, and Jews, and therefore shall be obliged, to
dispute against each Sort of Persons, from very different Topics. To the
Greeks, I have this to offer, that the Magicians, who converse with Demons,
and do, with a most Horrid Solemnity, invoke their seasonable Assistance, for
the most part attain the End, which they propose to themselves, unless a Divine
Power interfere, that is Superior to the Demons, or some Name be mentioned,
that has a greater Force, than those Names, which are appropriated by 'em to
the Art they practice. But if that should happen, then all their Magical
Operations are unavoidably lost, and they are, as it were, dazzl'd, and
confounded with the bright Rays, of the Sun of Righteousness.

It seems to me, therefore, to be highly probable, that when our Savior was
born, and a Multitude of the Heavenly Host (as St. Luke does credibly relate
the Passage) praised God, saying, Glory to God in the highest, Peace on Earth,
and good Will toward Men; Luke ii. V. 14.
the Demons were shocked, and all their Hellish Measures most strangely
disconcerted, not only by good Angels, who came down from Heaven, to celebrate
the Nativity of our Blessed Savior, but also by the Humane Soul of the Holy
and Spotless Jesus, as being a happy Instrument of the Deity, which dwelt in so
glorious, but inconceivable a Manner, even in his Humane Nature. The Wise Men,
therefore, being desirous, to perform their usual Operations, and failing in
what they endeavored to effect, we may naturally suppose, inquired into the
Reason of their bad Success, and were sensible, that something extraordinary
must occur, to defeat their raised Expectations, and exceed the Power of the
Demons, and when they saw a Sign in the Heavens, they had a natural Curiosity,
to know its Meaning, and having perhaps consulted the Prophecies of Balaam, and
this Prophecy of the Star, of which, Moses gives us an Account, and
particularly those Words, I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold Numbers
xxiv. V. 17
him, but not nigh; from hence they might frame this rational Conjecture, that
the very Person, at whose Birth, 'twas prophesied, that a Star should appear,
was then actually born, and having a just Notion, that he was far Superior to
all their Demons, they came to pay him, the just Tribute of Divine Adoration.

They steered their Course, therefore, to Judaea, being persuaded, that some
great Prince was born, but ignorant of the Nature of his Kingdom, and the Place
of his Nativity, and when they were happily come, to the Place where the young
Child was; they offered Presents to him, that were lively Representations of
his Divine, and Humane Nature; viz. Gold, an Emblem of his Royal Power,
Frankincense, to note to us his Divinity, and Myrrh, to signify his bitter
Passion.

CHAP. XLVIII.
SINCE therefore, 'twas the Savior of Mankind, that was come into the World,
who was God, and by Consequence, above the Angels; (though they are frequently
employed as ministering Spirits, in the Behalf of Men) the Worship which the
Wisemen paid him, was abundantly recompensed, by the Warning, which the Angel
gave 'em, that they shou'dn't return to Herod, but depart into their own
Country another Way. And it is no Wonder at all, that Herod should seek to
destroy the Infant-Saviour, though Celsus's Jew seems to doubt very much, of the
Truth, of what we think was plain Matter of Fact. For Malice is so foolish, and
so daring a Thing, that 'twill contend for the Victory, with the Providence of
God it self. This Passion had so far the Ascendant over Herod, that he was
fully persuaded, that the King of the Jews was born, and acted unaccountably,
whether his Notion were true or false, and was so weak, that he didn't discern,
that either our Savior was the very Person, whom the Prophets foretold, to be
the true Messiah, and so would infallibly possess the Throne; or, on the
contrary, was a mere Impostor, and by Consequence, there was no Ground for him,
to disturb the Peace of his Mind, by any jealous Surmises. He resolved to
destroy him, being hurried by his unruly Passion into the grossest
Inconsistencies, and stirred up without Doubt by the Devil, who, apprehending
our Savior to be an extraordinary Person, and a most formidable Enemy to his
usurped Dominion, employed all his Wit, Malice, and Industry against him. But
the Angel warned Joseph, to go with the young Child, and his Mother into Egypt.
And how improbable soever, this may seem to be, on the first View; yet the due
Series of Events, was very critically observed by Providence.

In the mean Time, Herod issued out Orders, that all the Infants, that were in
Bethlehem, from two Years old, and under, should immediately be put to Death,
expecting that he, who was born King of the Jews, would share in the same
common, and approaching Calamity.

For he didn't discern that invisible, and kind Hand of Providence, that takes
Care of them, who are the proper Objects of its most watchful Protection, and
upon whose Safety, the Good of Mankind does so evidently, and so greatly
depend, and among which honorable Number, our Blessed Savior deserves to be
esteemed the Chief, as being one, who vastly, and indeed, infinitely surpassed
all other Men, in real, and intrinsic Dignity.

For he was not sent into the World, to be an Earthly King, as Herod falsely
imagined; but to enter on the Possession of such a Glorious Kingdom, as it
became the Great God to bestow, on one, who was to procure a Happiness for his
Subjects, that consists not entirely, or chiefly, in Things, which are in
themselves indifferent, and frequently prove pernicious to the Owners, and was
to govern 'em by such Laws, as are truly Divine, and so to take the most proper
Methods, to render 'em completely, and for ever happy.

Therefore denying, that he was an Earthly King, and showing, that his Kingdom
was of a spiritual Nature, he says, If my Kingdom were of this Joh. xviii. V 36.
World, then would my Servants fight, that I shou'dn't be delivered to the
Jews; but now is my Kingdom not from hence.

CHAP. XLIX.
IF Celsus had been aware of this, he would never have talked so weakly, and so
impertinently as he does. If, says he, Herod was afraid, that when you came to
a fit Age to reign, you would dispossess him of his Kingdom, why didn't you
reign, when you were grown up to Years of Discretion, and Maturity? On the
contrary, though you pretend to be the Son of God; yet you are forced to go about
like a Slave, and a Vagabond, and to sneak like a Malefactor, not having a
Place, whereon you may comfortably lay your Head.

But it is far from being an Argument of a sordid Spirit, for a Person to use
innocent, and common Prudence, that he may happily avoid the Dangers, with
which he is surrounded, not from a slavish Fear of Death, but a sincere, and
vehement Desire, with Submission to the Will of God, to prolong his Life, that
he may be farther serviceable to the Public, 'till a fair Opportunity, to lay
down his Life, for the Promoting of the True, and Best Interest of Mankind,
does happily present it self.

That this was our Savior's Case, is plain, to one, who is acquainted with the
Design of our Blessed Lord, in those grievous Sufferings which he underwent, of
which, according to my weak Ability, I have already, and I hope sufficiently,
discoursed.

CHAP. L.
THEN that Celsus, with all his Knowledge, didn't so much as hit upon the exact
Number of the Apostles, may be gathered from the following Words, Being
attended; says he, with Ten, or Eleven Wicked Publicans, and Mariners, he went
up and down with 'em, begging his Bread, from Door to Door, like a base, and
most miserable Creature.

Let me therefore examine, what he says, and return him such an Answer, as I
judge convenient. It Is plain then to those, who read the Gospels, with any
tolerable Care, (which I Am apt to think, my bold, but blundering Antagonist
never did) that our Savior chose twelve Apostles, and that there was but one
Publican among 'em, I mean St. Matthew; and by Mariners, as he promiscuously
calls 'em, I suppose, he may mean James and John, because they left their
Father Zebedee, to follow their Blessed Lord. For as for Peter and Andrew, that
got their Livelihood by their Nets, they were not so properly Mariners, as
Fishermen, as the Scripture calls 'em.

We'll also suppose, that Levi the Publican was another, to whom he might have
a Reference, though according to some Copies, that we have of St. Mark's Gospel,
he was no Apostle.

As for the rest of that honorable Fraternity, we know not what Employments
they were, by which they got their Maintenance, before they espoused the
Interest of our Blessed Savior.

CHAP. LI.
SO that I may safely say, that it is plain to them, who examine into these
Matters, with that Judgment, Care, and Impartiality, which is highly requisite,
that the Apostles were acted by an extraordinary, and supernatural Power, when
they published the Christian Religion to the World, and made the carnal, and
haughty Minds, of some of the worst of Men, submit to the commanding Authority
of the Word of God.

For this wonderful Effect was not owing to the Charms of humane Eloquence, the
Exactness of their Method, or those other Artifices, with which the Logic, and
Rhetoric of the Greeks, do frequently, and perhaps, more than sufficiently,
furnish too many subtle, and designing Persons.

I am of the Opinion, I confess, that if we could suppose our Savior, to have
made Choice of Persons, qualified with the brightest humane Accomplishments, to
preach the Gospel, such as had the general Character, and Reputation, of Men of
profound Wisdom, and universal Learning, who, by the Help of sublime
Speculations, polite Language, and a graceful Elocution, could win upon the
Audience, and make the several Passions of their Hearers, serve their sordid,
and vainglorious Purposes, I say, if our Savior had taken this Method, he
might justly have been blamed, for using the same carnal Policy, that was too
apparent, in the Heads of the several Sects of Philosophers, and his Doctrine
would have wanted those legible Characters of its Divinity, which were stamped
upon it, had it been maintained by sprightly Fancy, proper, and elegant
Language, and harmonious Cadencies, and the Assent given to it, would too
nearly have resembl'd that, which is given to the Opinions of the Philosophers
among the Pagans, and would manifestly have had its Foundation laid in the
Wisdom of Men, rather than the irresistible Power of God.

Now what Person, who looks on these Fishermen and Publicans, who were not so
much as taught, the very first Principles of Humane Literature, (as the Gospels
acquaint us, and as Celsus is ready enough to believe) and yet had such a
Presence of Mind, that they were able, not only to discourse to their
Countrymen the Jews, concerning Faith in Christ, but also to preach the same
Doctrine to other Nations, and were favored with most wonderful Success, I
say, what Person who looks on these Fishermen and Publicans, will not presently
enquire, whence they derived this uncommon Power of Persuasion, and
acknowledge, that our Savior's Promise in the following Words, Come after me,
and I will make you Fishers of Men; was evidently, Mat. iv. V. 19.
and remarkably accomplished, in that Divine Power, which accompanied the
Preaching of the Apostles?

'Twas this, to which, St. Paul has so plain a Reference, when he says, My
Speech, aad my Preaching was not 1 Cor. ii. V. 4.
with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom; but in Demonstration of the Spirit, and
of Power, that your Faith shou'dn't stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the
Power of God.

For as the Prophetical Psalmist speaks, who foretold the Preaching of the
Gospel, The Lord gave the Word, great was the Company of those that published
it; Ps. lxviii. V. 11.
and as it is foretold in another Place, His Word runs very swiftly. Ps.
cxlvii V. 15.


We see, that The Voice of the Apostles was heard through all the Earth, and
their Doctrine, and Fame too, was spread to the most distant Regions. They
also, who hear this Doctrine, are filled with the Spirit of God, who
accompanies the Preaching of it, as abundantly appears, by the Disposition of
their Minds, the Tenor of their Conversations, and their vigorous Defense of
the naked Truth, even to the apparent Hazard of their Fortunes, their
Reputations, and their Lives, though it cannot be denied, but ought to be deeply
lamented, that too many who have taken upon 'em the Ministerial Function, after
all the Profession, which they make, of believing in God, through Christ, and
after having seemed to be wonderfully attracted by the bright, and almost
irresistible Charms of Gospel Grace, it is to be feared, did never feel the
saving Impression of it on their Hearts, attended with a suitable Influence on
their Lives, and Conversations.

And though I have already mentioned that Expression in the Gospel, according to
St. Matthew, The Harvest is great, but the Laborers are few. Pray ye therefore
the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth more Laborers into Mat. ix.
V. 37.
the Harvest; I think it may not be improper to repeat it, to show, that our
Savior's Foreknowledge of the Entertainment, which his Doctrine would meet
with in the World, was a Divine Proof of its future, happy, and more than
ordinary Effect upon the Minds of Men; a Doctrine, the good Success of which
was far from depending on the Assistance of the most Learned Doctors, but was
owing to that Divine, and Miraculous Power, that accompanied the Apostles in
their SACRED MINISTRATIONS.

CHAP. LII.
AND because Celsus represents 'em, not only as a Parcel of ignorant Fellows,
but also as a Club of most scandalous Creatures, vile Publicans, and Mariners;
I answer, it seems he assents to some Passages in the Gospels, whereby, he
thinks, he can support his Cause, but rejects, when he thinks fit, the
Authority of the Evangelists themselves, that he may not be obliged to
acknowledge, and reverance th^se Characters of Divinity, which are so legible
in their Writings.

But when he sees, with what Faithfulness they relate, even those Things, that
seem to lessen their Esteem, and manifestly exposed 'em to the greatest
Dangers, he ought certainly to believe the rest, as being divinely inspired,
and by consequence, infallibly true, and of the highest Importance to us.

Barnabas, I confess, in his Catholic Epistle, (from whence it is probable,
that Celsus has borrowed his disadvantageous Remarks upon the Apostles of our
Blessed Savior) says, That Jesus chose such Persons to the Apostolical
Function, as were wicked to the last Degree. And in the Gospel according to St.
Luke, St. Peter says to Jesus, Lord depart from me, for Luke v. V 8.
I am a sinful Man. And St. Paul, in one of his Epistles to Timothy, says, This
is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that Christ Jesus came 1 Timothy 1. V. 15.
into the World, to save Sinners, of whom I am chief; though at last he became a
most Eminent Apostle.

And I know not, whether Celsus's Memory, or his Judgment, is most defective,
when he makes no Mention of St. Paul, who, next to our Blessed Savior, was the
most remarkable Founder of the Christian Churches. But it is probable, he
thought it would not serve his Cause, and that, if he had taken Notice of him,
he had obliged himself to have given a rational, and distinct Account, how a
Person, who once persecuted the Church of God, spit his Venom, and employed his
most vigorous Endeavors, in Opposition to the Christians, insomuch that he
thirsted for their Blood, was so strangely altered on a sudden, that he spread
the Gospel from Jerusalem to Illyricum, endeavoring to avoid building on the
Foundation, which another had laid, and making it his Choice, and Business, to
preach to them, who had never heard the glad Tidings of Salvation by a
Crucified Redeemer.

CHAP. LIII.
WHAT Absurdity is there then, in supposing, that our Savior, being desirous
to show Mankind, what Sovereign Remedies he had, and was willing to apply to
the distempered Souls of Men, should make Choice of Persons, that were
notoriously wicked, and work such a sudden, and surprising Change upon 'em,
that by the Purity of their Lives, they became very honorable Examples to
them, who were afterward converted by their Ministry?

If they, who have reformed their Manners, must be upbraided with the Crimes,
which they formerly committed, then we may as well bring in a most heavy Charge
against Phaedon himself, even after he had devoted his Time, and Strength, to
the Study of Philosophy, because History acquaints us, that Socrates took him,
from a Place, where Debauchery was practiced, without Fear, or Regret, and put
him upon rational, and learned Studies, in which, in Process of Time, he was
far from being a mean Proficient.

We might also condemn Philosophy, it self, by Reason of the extravagant
Courses, which Polemon the Successor of Zenocrates had formerly taken. But in
Truth, this Consideration does greatly brighten, and recommend their Character,
that by the Help of so Divine a Thing as Philosophy, they could be brought to
resolve on a virtuous, and severe Course of Life, in Spite of those bad
Impressions, with which they were forced to struggle, and over which they did,
with no small Difficulty, obtain an honorable, and happy Conquest.

And I scarce know, whether the Greeks can produce any Instances of this kind,
in any other Persons, besides Phaedon and Polemon, or at best, they can name
but very few Persons, who ever left their Intemperance and Debauchery to apply
their Minds, to the entertaining, and useful Study of Philosophy.

But in the School of Christ, besides the twelve Apostles, who had the Honor
to be contemporary with him, we see daily, a far greater Number of Persons,
that become virtuous, and pious, and join in a Blessed Chorus, acknowledging,
with the deepest shame, and Sorrow, the many false, and almost fatal Steps,
which formerly they took. We our selves (says the Apostle) were sometimes Tit.
iii. V. 3, 4.
foolish, and disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures,
living in Malice, and Envy, hateful, and hating one another. But after that the
Kindness, and Love of God our Savior, toward Man appeared, not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by
the Washing of Regeneration, and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed
on us abundantly. For as the Prophetical Psalmist speaks, He sent his Word, and
healed 'em, and delivered 'em Psalm. cvii. V. 20.
from their Destructions. I might add, that Chrysippus, in a Book which he has
writ, Entitled, The Art of Curing the Disorders of the Humane Passions,
endeavors to lay down proper, and effectual Rules, for the Management of
those, which disturb the Peace of the Mind, and to that end, he argues upon the
Principles of several Sects of Philosophers, not examining, which of 'em are
most agreeable to Truth, and has the following Words. If, says he, Pleasure be
esteemed the chief Good, the Passions may, and ought thus to be cured, and if
there be three Kinds of Good, they are to be cured after this different Manner.

Now they, who find Fault with the Christian Religion, do wilfully Neglect, to
consider, how many unruly Passions are successfully governed by it, what a Stop
it puts to that rapid Torrent of Vice, and Immorality, which is too visible in
the World, and what extravagant, savage, and even Diabolical Tempers it has
frequently, happily, and very suddenly conquered. Certainly, it ought to raise
their Admiration, and constrain 'em, to make the most thankful Acknowledgements
to Almighty God, to consider, what vast, and apparent Advantage the Public
reaps, from those proper, and most excellent Methods, which our Savior took,
for the Reformation of Manners, and one would think, that if they will not allow
Christianity to be the True Religion; yet they must confess, that it conduces
very much to the true Interest of Manking, and which is more, has an Immediate,
and Principal Regard to their better, and immortal Part.

CHAP. LIVE.
AND our Savior has so effectually consulted, even the Temporal Advantage of
his Followers, that he would not have 'em to be rash, and precipitate, but gives
'em this necessary Lesson, When they persecute you in one City, flee unto
another; and teaches 'em by his own Example, not to run into needless Dangers.

Celsus takes Occasion, even from hence, to form an Accusation against him, in
the Person of a Jew, in the following Words, You run up and down, with your
Disciples. But as for the Charge, which is here brought against our Blessed
Savior, we meet with a Parallel Case, even in the Histories, which the Greeks
have published. For Aristotle, that Famous Philosopher, when he saw, he should
be condemned, as a wicked Person, by reason of some peculiar, and in some
Sense, dangerous Notions he advanced, which, as the Athenians thought, did give
too great Encouragement to Licentiousness, took an Opportunity to go from
Athens, and removed his School to Chalcis, making the following Apology, to
some of his Acquaintance, Let us leave Athens, (says he) that we may not suffer
it, to be in the Power of the Athenians, to re-act that horrid Impiety, which
they plainly discovered, by their ill Treatment of so great a Genius, as the
World knows Socrates to have been, and to commit, a most grievous Offense
against so sacred a Thing as Philosophy.

CHAP. LV.
CELSVS adds, That our Savior, running up and down with his Disciples, was
forced to beg his Bread, like a sordid Wretch.

But pray let him inform us, where he has raked up all these scurrilous
Expressions. I confess, we read in the Gospels, that certain Women, that were
cured of their Infirmities, among which was Susannah, did readily distribute
some Part of their Substance, to furnish the Disciples, with what was necessary
for the Support of Life.

But pray, what Philosopher, who employs his Time, and Strength, with some
Regard to the Benefit of his Relations, and Friends, and indeed of Mankind in
general, would refuse to have his Wants supplied? Or, did it become the
Philosophers, to accept the seasonable, and generous Assistance of their
Friends, and others; but argue a base and sordid Spirit, in our Blessed Lord,
or those who became his Followers?

CHAP. LVI.
THEN the Jew, whom Celsus personates, continues his Discourse with our
Savior, in the following Words, What Necessity was there, that, when you were
an Infant, you should be carried into Egypt, to avoid being killed? For surely,
it didn't become a God, to be afraid of Death. An Angel, it seems, was
dispatched from Heaven, to bid You, and some of your nearest Relations, betake
your selves to Flight, lest you should be found, and be put to Death. But
could not Almighty God, who, as we are told, did employ his Angels for your
Direction, and Assistance, preserve his Son, as easily in Judea, as in Egypt?

Celsus thinks, that there was nothing extraordinary in the Humane Body, and
Soul of our Blessed Savior, and ridiculing his precious Blood, that was shed
upon the Cross, he says, 'twas not

Such Blood as from the Immortal Gods does Hom Il. Lib. 5. V. 34^.
flow.

But we, who give Credit to our Savior, when he gives a Testimony of his
Divinity, in the following Words, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; John
xiv. V. 6.
and in other Parallel Places, and when he bears Witness to the Truth of his
Humanity, in the following Expression, Now ye seek to kill me, a Man, who has
told you the Truth: I say, we, who believe John viii. V. 40.
our Savior, when he speaks thus of himself, do assert, and maintain, that he
had Two Natures, the one Divine, and the other Humane, and that since he came
into the World, with an Intention to live, in some respects, like the rest of
Men, 'twas highly incongruous, that he should run upon a Precipice, and be fond
of Misery, and Death.

'Twas fit, he should be directed, and governed by them, to whom the Care of
his Education did belong, and that the Angel's Orders should be strictly, and
religiously observed, and the same Angel which said at first, Joseph, thou Son
of David, fear not to Mat. i. V. 20.
take unto thee, Mary thy Wife, for that which is conceived in her, is of the
Holy Ghost; said afterward, Arise, and take the young Child, and his Mother,
and flee into Egypt, and be thou there, until I bring thee Word, for Herod will
seek the young Child, to destroy him.

And I see nothing in this whole Account, that even seems to shock our Reason,
and destroy our Faith. For we read elsewhere, that Joseph was warned by God in
a Dream, and that such Apparitions as these have been, is a Truth, in the firm
Belief of which, Experience it self may, I think, sufficiently confirm us. What
Absurdity is there then, upon the whole, in supposing, that our Blessed
Savior, who assumed the Humane Nature, should act with the Prudence of a Man,
in endeavoring to keep out of the Way of impending Calamities, not as if he
could not have avoided 'em by his Infinite Power, without taking such Measures
as he did; but because 'twas consistent with the Will of God, and with the
Nature of Things, that his Life should be preserved, In the Use of Means, and
not by a Continued Course of Supernatural, and Miraculous Events.

'Twas more agreeable to the Dictates of Infinite Wisdom, that our Savior
should be carried by his Parents into Egypt, and that he should tarry there,
'till they heard of the Death of Herod, than that he should stay in his Native
Country, and yet be preserved, from the Evils to which he was exposed, being
better armed than with Pluto's Helmet, and secured from the Rage of his
malicious Enemies, by their being struck, like the Sodomites of old, with
sudden Blindness. For such a Series of miraculous Appearances, had been very
unsuitable to his great Design, of acquainting the World, as a Man authorized
by the Testimony of God himself, that the TRVE SON of GOD, the ETERNAL WORD,
the WISDOM, and POWER of GOD, did gloriously, though wonderfully reside, in the
Humane Nature of the INCARNATE JESUS.

But it is not my Business at present, to speak fully of the Two Natures, that
were united, in the Person of our Blessed Savior, since there is a Particular,
and if I may so say, a Domestic Dispute between us, concerning that Difficult,
and Important Point.

CHAP. LVII.
THEN Celsus's Jew, as if he had been educated in the Schools of the Greeks,
and instructed in their Learning, says, That the Ancient Fables, that attribute
a Divine Original to Perseus, Amphion, Aeacus, and Minos, though they be not in
Strictness true; yet do display the Actions of these Persons, as being great,
and wonderful, and above the Sphere of Humane Nature. But for your Part, what
did you ever say, or do, that was worthy of Admiration, though you were openly
challenged, to give convincing Proofs, that you were the Son of God.

In Answer to this, I need only ask the Greeks, whether they can show, that any
of the forementioned Persons, did any extraordinary Service to the World, or
performed any great Exploit, to induce future Ages, to believe the Truth of
those Fables, which represent 'em to us, as being derived from a Divine
Original.

But I defy 'em, to instance in any of the Actions of these Fabulous Heroes,
that deserved to be named, much less compared, with what our Savior did;
unless they will refer us to their own Fables, and Histories, and have us to
believe 'em, without any more ado, and disbelieve our Histories, of the Truth,
and Importance of which, we have all the Evidence, that we can reasonably
desire.

We say, and know, that the Divine Power of our Blessed Savior, has been
sufficiently seen, and happily felt, through the whole habitable World, where any
Churches are founded, that consist of Persons, reclaimed from many exorbitant
Vices.

And the Name of JESUS, at this very Day, composes the ruffl'd Minds of Men,
dispossesses Demons, cures Diseases, and works a meek, gentle, and amicable
Temper, in all those Persons, who make Profession of Christianity, from an
higher End, than their worldly Interest, and sincerely believe, what it teaches
us, concerning God, and Christ, and a Future Judgment.

CHAP. LVIII.
THEN Celsus, foreseeing, how many remarkable Actions, that were performed by
our Savior, might be mentioned by us, to his Honor, a few of which, I have
related, makes as if he granted the Truth, of what is writ, concerning the
Diseases, that were cured, the Dead that were raised to Life, and the few
Loaves, with which a great Multitude was fed, and of which many Fragments did
remain, and those strange Accounts we meet with in the Gospel-History, and
immediately adds the following Words, Well, let us suppose, that you really did
these Things you talk of. But in the same Breath, he quite unravels what he had
said before, and sets them on a Level, with the Operations, that are performed
by Magicians, who pretend to do mighty Things, and having studied Magic in
Egypt, get a little Money out of People's Pockets, by practicing their Art in
the open Forum, ^ispossessing Demons, curing Distempers, calling back departed
Souls, and representing to the deluded Sight, a Table spread with imaginary
Dainties, and Animals, that seem to move of their own Accord, but have no
inward Spring of Life, and Motion.

His Words are these, Pray must we esteem the Persons, who perform these
wonderful Operations, to be the Sons of God, or must we not rather esteem 'em
to be vile Wretches, that are well-vers'd, it seems, in a Diabolical Art?

You see here, that he allows an extraordinary Power in Magic, though by the
Way, I Am much mistak'n, if he is not the very Person, who writ several Books, in
which, he directly maintains the contrary.

And yet, because he thinks, it may serve his Cause, he compares the Actions of
our Blessed Savior, with the Operations of Magicians. Indeed, there had been
some Ground, for making this invidious Comparison, if our Savior had made such
a Vain Show of Miracles, as the Magicians do.

Their Design also, whatever Wonders they may effect, by the Assistance of the
Devil, is not to reform the Manners of Men; nor have such Vain Amusements the
least Tendency, to beget in Persons a True Fear of God, and so to regulate
their Actions, that they may be honorably acquitted, when they shall be
summoned, to appear before his Awful Bar.

The forementioned Persons, don't so much as aim at any Thing of this Kind,
and if they did, of all Persons in the World, they would be most unfit for so
great an Undertaking, since they themselves, are guilty of the most notorious
Crimes. Whereas our Blessed Savior, who designed by his Miracles, to reform
the Manners of them, who were Eye -- Witnesses of what he did, gave not only
his Followers, but all Mankind, a Bright Example of Unaffected Virtue, and
Piety, that they, who were to publish his Excellent Doctrine, might at once be
directed, and encouraged, to acquaint their Hearers with the Mind of God, and
that the forementioned Persons, being more convinced by the Native Beauty, of
the Christian Religion, and the Holy Lives of their Teachers, than by the
Miracles that were wrought, might in all their Actions, have a sincere, and
sacred Regard to the Honor of God, and the Interest of their Dear, and Ever
Blessed Redeemer.

Now, if the whole Course of our Savior's Life was such, as I have represented
it, without using any Artifici^l Colors, and Bold Figures to emblazon it, as
we know, is too frequently the Case of many, of the feigned Heroes of
Antiquity; how absurd a Thing is it to compare it with the cursed Operations of
Magicians, and is it not highly agreeable to the Dictates of impartial Reason,
to believe, that he was GOD, as he himself assures us, and condescended to
assume the Hamane Nature, for our Common, and Everlasting Benefit.

CHAP. LIX.
THEN Celsus, confounding Things at a most miserable Rate, and borrowing, what
is peculiar to one Sect of Christians, that he may, the more successfully,
reproach the whole Body of 'em, says, Certainly, a God would never have such a
Body as yours, that is so contemptible, as being liable to so many, and so
considerable Imperfections.

In Answer to this, we say, he assumed A Humane Body, (being conceived in the
Womb of the Blessed Virgin,) which rendered him capable of Suffering, and
Dying, in some Respects like the rest of Men. In this Sense, we may truly say,
he was a miserable Person, Being tempted in all Heb. iv. V. 15.
Things, as we are, yet without Sin. For with us, it is beyond all Doubt, that
He committed no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth, and that God did 1
Pet. ii. V 22.
deliver him up as a Spotless Sacrifice, for the Sins of an Apostate World.
Then Celsus says, the Body of a God, would never have been formed like yours.
But he cannot deny, that if our Savior was born, as we say, he was, then even
his Body had, in some Sense, a Stamp of Divinity upon it, and might be called
the Body of the Great God himself. On the contrary, he disbelieves, and
ridicules the Account, we have, of our Savior's Conception by the Holy Ghost,
and thinks he was begotten in Adultery, by one Panthera, a Soldier, on the
Body of her, whom we call the Blessed Virgin, and that made him say, the Body
of a God, would never have been formed like yours. But I think, I have said
enough on that Head already, to satisfy any Impartial, and Candid Reader.

CHAP. LX.
CELSVS goes on, neither says he, Does the Body of God stand in Need of such
Food, for its Nourishment, and Support, as that with which yours is supplied;
as if he could show out of the Four Evangelists, not only that he ate, but also
by what Food his frail Nature was maintained. But be it so, I grant he ate the
Passover with his Disciples, and not only made Use of the following Words, With
Desire, Luke xxii V. 15.
I have desired to eat this Passover with you; but did actually partake, of
what was provided for him. I grant also, that being thirsty, he drank at
Jacob's Well. But what is this to the Purpose? It Is said expressly, he ate Fish,
even after he was risen from the dead. And this agrees very well with what we
say, viz. That he assumed a Real, and not a Fantastical Body, and was
conceived in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin.

Then Celsus says, A God had no need of such a Voice, nor such Methods of
Persuasion. But this, I think, is one of the most frivolous Objections, that he
could possibly have raised against us. For I might tell him, that Apollo, one
of the Gods of the Greeks, who goes under the Name of Pythian, and Didymae^n,
made use of such a Voice, when the Oracle was given by the Pythian Priestess,
or the Priestess of Miletum. And yet the Greeks don't take Occasion from hence,
to call in Question, much less to deny, the Divinity of Apollo, or any other
God, who gave out Oracles, at some convenient Place.

Now how much more, did it conduce to the Spiritual Advantage of the World in
General, that God should reveal his Will in the Person of our Blessed Savior,
who spoke with such Authority, and Power, that he made a secret, but
irresistible Impression upon the Minds of Men.

CHAP. LXI.
THEN Celsus, whose wicked Opinions, and Practices, render him hateful to that
God, who is a Lover of right Reason, and unaffected Virtue, reproaches our
Savior in the following Words, All his Miracles discovered him to be a Person,
hateful to God, and a notorious, and vile Impostor. But if we critically
enquire into the Nature of Things, and the Signification of the foregoing
Words, we shall find, that in Propriety, and Strictness of Speech, no Person,
how wicked soever he may be, can have this Character given him, that he is
hated of God. For the following Expression carries Abundance of Truth, as well
as Weight in it; viz. Thou love all Things that Wis. xi. V. 24.
are, and hate nothing, which thou have made; for never would thou have
made any Thing, if thou had hated it.

If we meet with any Expressions in the Writings of the Prophets, that seem to
intimate, that God hates his Creatures, we must interpret 'em by this general,
and necessary Rule, that the Scripture, when it speaks of God, does often
cloth him, as it were, with those very Passions, which are frequently working
in Humane Breasts.

But to what Purpose is it, to return an Answer, to a Person, who even in a
Discourse, Entitled, A True Relation, takes the Liberty, to give Vent to his
Passion, in most unjust, and severe Invectives, and to treat our Blessed
Savior, as if he were, like him, a Notorious, and Vile Impostor.

For such Language, as he gives him, don't become a Man, who pretends to
Reason, and Demonstration, though he discovers at once, his Want both of Sense,
and Breeding. On the contrary, he ought to have fairly stated the Controversy,
which there is between us, to have examined Matters, with the greatest
Impartiality, and Exactness, and should have avoided, as much as might be, all
needless, and ridiculous Digressions, and Tautologies.

But because Celsus's Jew, does no longer continue his Discourse with our
Blessed Savior, I shall draw my first Book to a Conclusion, and if God will
grant me the Knowledge of his Truth, which is able to overthrow, though not
wholly to extirpate Error, according to that Expression, Destroy 'em by thy
Truth, I shall return an Answer, to what Celsus offers, as personating a Jew,
directing his Discourse to those of his Native Country, who are supposed, to be
unhappily, as he imagines, brought off from Judaism, to an open Profession of
the Religion, which we embrace.

Origin against Celsus: Translated from the ORIGINAL INTO ENGLISH.

Book the Second.

Origin against Celsus:
CHAP. I.
MY First Book in Answer to Celsus's Discourse, Entitled, A True Relation,
ending where he ceases to personate a Jew, discoursing with our Blessed
Savior, and being swol'n to a convenient Bulk, I resolved to compose a second,
and therein, I shall endeavor to confute, what the same pretended Jew has to
offer, to those of his own Country, who are inwardly persuaded of the Truth,
and Excellency of the Christian Religion.

And I confess, I cannot but wonder, that since Celsus was so fond of speaking
in the Person of a Jew, he didn't make him direct his Discourse to the
Gentiles, rather than to his own Countrymen. For 'twou'd have carried with it,
a far more plausible Appearance, if it had been directed by him, to those, who
embraced the Religion which we profess, and were Gentiles, like our selves. But
it seems, this mighty Man, with all his Knowledge, to which he makes such great
Pretenses, did not know, or at least, does seem to me, not duly to consider,
the Nature of that Figure of Speech, which we make use of, when we speak in the
Person of another.

Let us see therefore, what he says, to those Jews, who embraced the Christian
Religion. He says, That suffering themselves, to be most shamefully deluded by
our Savior, they left the Religion of their Ancestors, and altered both their
Name, and their Course of Life.

But he don't consider, that the Jews, who believed in our Blessed Savior, did
not totally renounce the Law of their justly-admir'd Progenitors, and
Forefathers; but lived in the Observance of it, deriving their Appellation,
from a Word, that denotes the Poverty of the mere Letter of the Law.

For Ebion in the Hebrew Language, signifies Poor, and the converted Jews, were
called by the Name of Ebionites. And St. Peter himself, for a considerabe Time,
observed the Jewish Rites, that are prescribed by the Law of Moses, as not
having yet learned, even from our Blessed Savior, to ascend, as it were, from
their literal to their spiritual Meaning, as we have the Matter related to us,
in the Acts of the Apostles. On the Morrow, as they went on their Journey, and
drew Acts 1. V. 9, etc.
nigh unto the City, Peter went up upon the Housetop to pray, about the sixth
Hour. And he became very hungry, and would have eaten; but while they made
ready, he fell into a Trance, and saw Heaven opened, and a certain Vessel
descending unto him, as it had been a great Sheet, knit at the four Corners,
and let down to the Earth; wherein were all Manner of Four-footed Beasts of the
Earth, and Wild Beasts, and Creeping Things, and Fowl of the Air. And there
came a Voice to him, rise Peter, kill, and eat. But Peter said, not so Lord,
for I have never eaten any Thing, that is common or unclean. And the Voice
spoke to him again the second Time, what God has cleans'd, that call thou not
common.

You see here, that St. Peter himself, that Eminent Apostle, is represented to
us, as retaining the Jewish Distinction, between Clean, and Unclean Meats; and
it is plain, from what follows in the History, that nothing less than a Vision
could engage him, to preach the Doctrine of Faith in Christ to Cornelius, who
was not descended from the Israelites, and to his Friends that attended him.
For he being a Jew, and observing the Traditions of the Jewish Church, had a
contemptible Notion of the Gentiles.

And the Apostle Paul, in the Epistle to the Galatians, acquaints us, that St.
Peter, for Fear of displeasing the Jews, refused to eat with the Gentiles. For
before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles; but when
they were come he withdrew, and separated himself, Gal. ii. V. 12.
fearing them which were of the Circumcision. And the other Jews dissembled
likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their
Dissimulation. And it was not, I think, wholly incongruous, that they should
comply in some measure, with the Jewish Rites, who were entrusted with the
Apostleship of the Circumcision: For they, who seemed to be Pillars, gave Paul,
and Barnabas, the right Hand of Fellowship, the former Persons directing their
Course to the Circumcision. But need I say, that they who preached to the Jews
withdrew, and separated themselves from the Gentiles, when the Apostle Paul
himself became a Jew to the Jews, that he might win upon 'em. We read
therefore, in the Acts of the Apostles, that he offered an Oblation upon the
Altar, to show that he had not altogether renounced the Jewish Law, in which he
had been educated, and of which he was once so passionate an Admirer.

Had Celsus known all this, he would never have introduced a Jew, addressing
himself to those, who were converted from Judaism to the Christian Faith, in
the following Manner. What is the Matter, says he, my dearly beloved
Countrymen, that you have on a sudden renounced the Religion of your Fathers,
and Ancestors, and suffered your selves to be so shamefully deluded by your
pretended Savior, as to be prevailed with to alter your Name, and Course of
Life.

CHAP. II.
BUT because I have already mentioned St. Peter, and the rest of those, who
preached the Doctrine of Faith in Christ, to the Circumcision, I think, it may
not be improper, to quote a Passage of our Savior's in St. John's Gospel, and
a little to explain it; I have says he, many Things, yet John xvi. V. 12, 13.
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear 'em now. But when he (the Spirit of Truth)
is come, he will guide you into all Truth, for he shall not speak of himself,
but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. Now I ask Celsus's Jew, what
were these Things, that our Savior had to say to his Disciples, which, under
their present Circumstances, they were not in a Capacity to relish? Was not
this his Desire, viz. to instruct 'em, since they were Jews, and by
Consequence, acquainted with the Letter of the Mosaic Law, I say, to instruct
'em, in the true Sense of the Law, which the Types, and Ceremonies, under the
Legal Dispensation, did but imperfectly represent, and to give 'em a new Light
into those good Things to come, of which, the various Rites concerning pure,
and impure Meats, and Drinks, concerning Festivals, New Mons, and Sabbaths,
were all but obscure, and in themselves, very mean, and contemptible Shadows?

These, without Doubt, were the Things, which their Blessed Lord, would have
communicated to 'em. But knowing very well, how difficult a Thing it is, to
disengage the Mind, from those Notions, which I had almost said, were of as
early a Date, as its own Original, and are daily more deeply rooted, in our
very Nature, by the strong Prejudices of our Birth, and Education, and
especially, when one looks upon 'em, as having the Awful Stamp of a Divine
Authority, and by Consequence, as being too important, and too true, to be
called in Question, or but slightly regarded; knowing, I say, and considering,
how difficult a Thing it is, to convince Persons, under such unhappy
Circumstances, and to persuade 'em, that the Ceremonial Law was Loss, and Dung,
in Comparison of the True Religion, he prudently waited for a more convenient
Time, and differed his Discourse, 'till after his Bloody Death, and triumphant
Resurrection.

And indeed, if he had talked to them, of Things, that exceeded the Bounds, of
their present, and narrow Capacity, he might have shocked their Faith in him,
as the SON of the LIVING GOD.

And I leave any one to judge, whether this be not the most natural Sense of
the following Words; I have yet many Things to say unto you, but ye John xvi.
V. 12.
cannot bear 'em now. For there were several Explications to be given of the
Law, with Respect to its Spiritual Meaning, which even our Savior's Disciples
at that Time were not duly disposed to hear, because they had been born, and
bred among the Jews, and since their Religion, consisted very much of those
Things, which were Types, and Shadows of the Gospel Dispensation, I Am inclined
to think, that it is upon that Account, that our Savior makes Use of the
following Words, When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all
Truth, as if he had V. 13.
said, he shall lead you into the true, and full Sense of those Things, viz.
Types, and Figures, which you were conversant with, and whereby you imagined,
you paid God, the true Worship, which was due to him, and required by him.

And the forementioned Promise, which our Savior made to his Disciples, was
abundantly, fulfilled to the Apostle Peter, when the Spirit of God showed him
in a Vision, all Sorts of Animals, Birds, and Four-footed Beasts, and creeping
Things, and said to him, Rise, Peter, kill, and eat. And indeed, at that
Juncture of Time, he was so fond of his former Religion, that he returned this
Answer, even to the Voice, which he heard from Heaven, Not so Lord, for I have
never eaten any Thing, that is common, or unclean. But at length, his
Understanding was enlightened, as appears from the following Words, What God
has cleans'd call not thou common.

And after that Instructive Vision, the Spirit of Truth, leading Peter into all
Truth, acquainted him with those Things, which he could not bear, while our
Savior was present with him in the Flesh. But I shall have Occasion hereafter,
to speak of those, who adhere, to the litteral Sense of the Mosaic Law.

CHAP. III.
MY Business at present is to show, that Celsus betrays his wretched Ignorance,
in representing a Jew, addressing himself to those of his Native Country, who
were converted to the Christian Faith, in the following Words, What Is the
Matter, my dearly beloved Countrymen, that you have renounced the Law of your
Fathers?

For how can they be said to renounce the Law of their Fathers, who severely
blame Persons for not adhering to it. Tell me, says the Apostle, ye that desire
to be under the Law, do ye Gal. iv. V. 21.
not hear the Law? For it is written, that Abraham had two Sons, and so on to
those Words, Which Things are an Allegory.

And how can they be said, to renounce the Law of their Fathers, who are
continually making mention of it, as if they were proud, of showing the
honorable Regard, which they still pay to it, and argue after the following
Manner, Say I these Things as a Man, 1. Cor. ix. V. 8.
or says not the Law the same also? For it is written in the Law of Moses, thou
shall not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox, that treads out the Corn. Does God take
Care for Oxen? Or, says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no
doubt, this is written.

And how confused is Celsus's Discourse, and how does it want, even a plausible
Appearance, to recommend it to the World, when he talks after the following
Manner. Some of you, says he, have forsak'n our Excellent Religion, under a
Pretense of giving Allegorical, and Mystical Explications of the Law. Others of
you are great Admirers of a spiritual Sense, as you are pleased to term it, and
yet are diligent Observers of those outward Ceremonies, which make so
considerable a Part of the Religion which we embrace. There remain some others,
who adhere to the literal Sense of Scripture, thinking, that Abundance of
spiritual Matter is wrapped up, in the very Letter of the Law, and profess, that
Jesus of Nazareth was the Person, who was foretold by the Jewish Prophets, and
at the same Time, observe the Precepts of Moses, and the Traditions of their
Ancestors.

But how could it be expected, that Celsus's Jew, should give us a true, and
clear Account of Matters of this Nature, since in the Sequel of his Discourse,
he mentions several very great, and notorious Heresies. And there were some
Jews, who turned their Backs, as he says, upon the Creator of the Universe, and
didn't know, that the believing Israelites did live, in the strict Observance
of the Law of their Fathers.

For his Design was not, to act the Part of an impartial Enquirer into Truth,
who readily submits to the Evidence, which it carries with it, but to vent his
Malice, and right, or wrong, to make a Vigorous Opposition to the Christian
Religion, and as he vainly thought, to expose it to the highest Contempt
imaginable.

CHAP. IV.
THE Jew continues his Discourse, 'Twas but the other Day, says he, that we
severely punished the Person, who led you aside, like a Company of silly Sheep,
and by Consequence, 'twas very lately, and on a sudden, that you renounced the
Law of your Fathers.

But to this I have already returned a sufficient Answer. What he adds, I
confess, carries with it a much greater Force, With what Face, says he, or
Color of Reason, can you despise those Sacred Rites, which not long ago, you
held in very great Esteem, and especially, when the Law of Moses, is the
Foundation, on which, the Doctrine of your Jesus is built, as you your selves
acknowledge?

That the Christian Religion, is founded on the Jewish Law, and Prophets, as
well as upon Christ, and his Apostles, is, what, I readily confess. But we must
also consider, that they naturally lead us to the Mystery, which was hid from
Ages, but is now made manifest, Ephesians. iii. V. 9.
by the Appearance of our Blessed Savior.

And we don't despise the Law, because we have a clearer Revelation; but
instead of that, have the greater Veneration for it, and endeavor to show,
what Depths of Divine Wisdom there are, even in the Legal Dispensation, which
the Jews themselves know little, or nothing of. And why should we think it
strange, that the Gospel should be founded on the Law of Moses, when our
Savior speaking to those, that refused to believe in him, has the following
Words, Had ye believed Moses, ye John. v. V. 46.
would have believed me, for he wrote of John. v. V. 46.
me; but if ye believe not his Writings, how shall ye believe my Words? And the
Evangelist St. Mark begins his Gospel thus, The Beginning of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as it is written Mark i. V. 1.
in the Prophets, Behold, I send thy Messenger before thy Face, which shall
prepare thy Way before thee; intimating to us, that the Gospel is founded on
the Scriptures of the Old Testament it self. I cannot conceive therefore, what
Celsus's Jew proposes to himself, when he says, If any Person has foretold,
that the Son of God, was to come into the World, he was one of our own
Prophets, and inspired by that God, in whom we believe.

And I would fain know, how it tends, in the least, to the Prejudice of the
Christian Religion, that John the Baptist, who was the Forerunner of our
Savior, was a Jew. For it don't follow, that because he was so, therefore all
who embrace the Christian Religion, whether Jews, or Gentiles, must observe the
Letter of the Jewish Law.

CHAP. V.
THEN the pretended Jew tells us, That our Savior was punished by his own
Countrymen, according to the Demerit of his horrid Crimes. But I think, I have
said enough already, in Answer to so pityful a Cavil, and therefore, sha'n't do
him the Honor, to imitate him, in his frequent, and needless Repetitions.

Then he laughs at the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and of a Future Judgment,
at which the Righteous will be rewarded, and the Wicked punished; I say, he
laughs at it, as being, in his Opinion, most highly ridiculous. And he says,
That the Christians say nothing, even on these important Subjects, as they are
pleased to call 'em, but what was said long before; imagining, that this is an
effectual Argument, to overthrow the whole Superstructure of Christianity.

To this I answer, that our Blessed Savior, perceiving how little Conformity
there was, between the Lives of the Jews, and the Doctrines, even of their own
Celebrated Prophets, thought fit to teach 'em, by Parables, that the Kingdom of
God should be Mat. xxi. V. 41.
taken from 'em, and given to the Gentiles.

And we see this Prophecy, most evidently, and remarkably fulfilled, in the
Age, in which we live. For the present Jews, not enjoying the Benefit, of that
supernatural Light, which is highly necessary, to the right Understanding of
the Scriptures, abound, to their great Shame, with extravagant, and innumerable
Fancies: Whereas the Christians are happily led, into the Spiritual Knowledge
of the Truth, which alone is able, at once, to enlighten, and elevate the Mind,
and don't live after the Manner of the Jews, as Members, of an Earthly
Republic, but like worthy, and honorable Citizens of that Heavenly Jerusalem,
of which their Pompous Worship, and external Grandeur, is a very imperfect
Emblem.

This is evident, in as much as they penetrate, into the deep Mysteries of the
Law, and are able, to give a rational, and intelligible Explication of 'em, to
any Persons, who may modestly desire it.

And suppose I should grant, that our Savior himself went so far, as to
observe the various Ceremonies, relating to the Jewish Sacrifices, this I
think, would be no solid Argument, against our believing, that he was the SON
of GOD.

He is the SON of that ADORABLE MAJESTY, who gave the Law, and from whom the
Prophets did receive their Commission, and we, who are Christians, and Members
of the True Catholic Church, don't wilfully transgress the Law, but rejecting
the Fables of the Jews, employ our Time, and Strength, in searching into the
Spiritual, and Mystical Sense, which we think, the Law, and the Prophets do
admit of. For it is plain, that they themselves would not have us rest, in the
litteral, and most obvious Sense of the Words, that are made use of, in the
important Messages, they deliver from Time to Time, since it is their common
Practice, to usher in their Prophecies, with some such Introduction as this, I
will open my Mouth in a Parable: I will utter dark Sayings of Old; and when
they speak of the Commands of the Law, as being obscure, and impossible to be
rightly understood, without Divine Assistance; they put up this earnest
Petition to Almighty God, Open thou mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous
Things, out of thy Law. Ps. cxix. V. 18.


CHAP. VI.
AND by the Way, since I am speaking of the Manner of Expression, which the
Prophets used, I may safely challenge any Person, to instance in any Words, of
our Blessed Savior, that were vain, or even seemed to have the least Tincture
of Pride, and Ostentation. And how can he be accused of Haughtiness, and
Arrogance, who had abundant Reason, to use the following Words, Learn of me,
for I am meek, and lowly of Heart, and ye shall find Rest to your Souls? Mat.
xi. V. 29.


He, I say, who after he had supped with his Disciples, laid aside his
Garments, and took a Towel, and girded himself, and poured Water into a Basin,
and washed their Feet, and reproved one of the Company, who would not suffer him
to do it, and said, If I wash thee not, thou have no Part with me. He who said
to his Disciples, John xiii. V. 8.
I am among you, as he that serves: Luke xxii V. 27
To proceed, let any one show, if he can, that our Savior did ever advance any
single Position, that was false, and let him explain the Nature of a great, or
small Untruth, if his Inclination prompts him, to prove him a notorious Liar,
though to speak properly, I think, there are no Degrees of False-hood, and on the
contrary, any true Proposition is as much a Truth, as the most important
Article of the Christian Faith. But why should I talk as I do? Let any one, and
particularly, the pretended Jew whom Celsus personates, make it appear to the
World, by solid Reason, if he can, that our Blessed Savior was ever guilty of
the least Impiety.

Was it a Crime, to abolish the Circumcision of the Flesh, the Ceremonial
Distinction of Meats, and the carnal Observance of Feasts, New Mons, and
Sabbaths, that his sincere Followers might have their Minds gradually raised,
to the spiritual, and full Sense of the Law, which alone is worthy of the
Infinite Purity, and great Design of the Supreme Majesty, who gave it, though
'tisn't in the least incongruous, that a Minister, and even an Apostle, should
still be a Jew to the Jews, that he might gain the Jews being under the Law, as
it were, to gain them who were under the Law?

CHAP. VII.
THE Jew adds, that Abundance of Persons, besides our Savior, have led such
aside, as tamely suffer themselves to be deceived, and are even fond of
Delusion.

I answer, let him instance in any one Person, if he can, who ever gave such
useful Precepts to the World, as our Blessed Savior has left upon Record, and
taught 'em a Doctrine, which had as great a Virtue, to reform the Manners of
Men, as that which accompanied the successful Preaching of the Gospel.

Then he says, the Christians find Fault with the Jews, for not believing, that
Christ was God.

But this I have already answered, and showed, in what Respects, we own our
Savior to be GOD, and in what Sense, we believe he was a Real Man.

CHAP. VIII.
CELSVS's Jew adds the following Words, How can any one imagine, that we, who
all along declared to the World, that God would send a Person, to punish the
disobedient, and rebellious, should treat him so basely, when he came, in
Compliance with the Will of God, and to accomplish such great Designs. But it is
hardly worth my while, to return an Answer, to so ridiculous a Question.

For it is just as if a Person should say, how is it possible, that I, who
always preached up the Doctrine of Temperance, should be guilty of Debauchery,
or, that I, who in Discourse, did always vindicate the injured Rights of
Justice, should ever be guilty, of violating its Sacred Rules? And as nothing
is more common, than for Persons to talk, in the Praise of Virtue, and yet be
openly guilty, of the most scandalous Vices: So the Jews, who make the
Prophetic Oracles the Matter of their continual Boast, do yet shut their Eyes,
against the glorious Light, of those Scripture-Prophecies, which are evidently
accomplished, in the Person of our Blessed Savior. And if I may ascribe their
Blindness, to some other Cause, besides the wretched Degeneracy of Humane
Nature, which they plainly discovered, I may safely say, that 'twas directly
foretold, by the very Prophets they so much admire.

For Isaiah says expressly, Hear ye indeed but understand not, and see ye
indeed, but perceive not, make the Heart of this People fat. Now let any Person
acquaint me, what it is, that the Prophet intends, by these, and the like
Expressions. It Is plain, they saw our Savior, but wilfully shut their Eyes,
against the piercing Rays of the SUN of RIGHTEOUSNESS, and heard him discourse
to 'em, but could not comprehend, that his humane Nature was the living Temple
of the Deity, which was going to forsake their Nation, and to engage all its
infinite Perfections, in the behalf of the believing Gentiles.

And it is Matter of Fact, and a Thing very Remarkable, that since the
Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, the Jews have been left by God, and that
the Beauty, and Glory of their Religion, is, in a Manner, entirely defaced and
lost, insomuch that there is scarce one Sign of the Divine Presence among 'em,
except the severe Judgments, which do so justly befall their Nation.

They have neither Prophets, nor Miracles, to attest the Truth of their
Religion, whereas the Christians, even at this Distance of Time, have a Power
of working Miracles, conferred upon 'em, some of which are not inferior to
those, which were wrought, when our Savior was on Earth.

CHAP. IX.
THEN Celsus's Jew breaks out into the following Expression, How can any one
imagine, that we should treat a Person so ill, that was foretold by our own
Prophets, unless we had a Mind to enhance our Crime, and so to aggravate our
most deserved Punishment?

To this, I answer, that at the final Judgment (which is one of the Articles of
the Christian Faith) the Jews will be punished, in a more dreadful Manner, than
the rest of the World, not only for rejecting the Messiah, which was a horrid
Crime, but also for their barbarous, and almost unaccountable Carriage, toward
the Prince of Peace.

Nay, even at this Day, (so remarkably does the Vengeance of God pursue 'em!)
they are the most miserable People, upon the Face of the whole habitable World.
For what Nation is there, besides that of the Jews, that is banished, from
their Metropolis, and denied the Liberty, of serving God, according to the
Religion of their Fathers, and Ancestors, in their Native Soil? These are some
of those grievous Calamities, to which, their own Crimes exposed 'em (For no
History can parallel their Villainies) and especially those horrid Barbarities,
which they exercised, toward our Blessed Savior, who came into the World, to
save 'em, from Sin, and Hell.

CHAP. X.
THE Jew adds, How could we look upon him as GOD, who on the one Hand, did none
of those Mighty Things, which he pretended to effect, and on the other, was
convicted, and condemned to a severe Punishment, was forced to abscond, that he
might not be taken, running, like a Vagabond, from Place to Place, and yet was
at last apprehended, and betrayed, even by one of his most eminent Followers,
who of all Persons in the World, one would think, might have had the Grace, to
espouse his Master's Cause? Was it in the least suitable to the Majesty, and
Wisdom of a GOD, to flee, like a guilty Wretch, and to suffer himself to be
apprehended, and forsak'n by his intimate Friends, who esteemed him their Lord,
and Savior, THE SON OF GOD, AND THE TRUE MESSIAH?

To this I answer, that we are not so ignorant, as to call THE BODY of our
Blessed Savior, which was material, and sensible, by the VENERABLE NAME of
GOD. Nay, we don't attribute so much as this, even to the holy and spotless
Soul of JESUS, with respect to which, he uses the following Words, My Soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death. When we meet Mat. xxvi V. 38.
with such Words as these, in the Writings of the Prophets, Behold I am the
Lord, the God of all Flesh: Or, Those Jer. xxxii V. 27.
Words, Before me there was no God Isa. xliii. V. 10.
formed, neither shall there be after me; the Jews acknowledge, that it is the
great God himself that speaks, but he makes Use of the Prophets, as
Instruments, to communicate his Will to Men, and the Greeks confess, that it is
a God, that speaks the following Words, by the Mouth of the Pythian Priestess,

I can the numerous Sands with Ease recount, Herod. Clio.

Fathom the Sea, and understand a Mute.
After the same Manner, we say, that it was GOD, the ETERNAL WORD, the SON of
the EVER-BLESSED GOD, that made Use of the humane Nature of the HOLY JESUS, as
a proper Instrument, when he spoke the following Words, I am the Way, the John
xiv. V. 6.
Truth, and the Life. I am the Door, I am the Living Bread, that came down John
x. V. 7.
from Heaven. And I might instance John vi. V. 15.
in many other Expressions to the same Effect.

We blame the Jews therefore, and I think not unjustly, for not acknowledging
our Savior to be God, of whom the Prophets do so frequently produce their
concurring Testimony, that he is the POWER of the ETERNAL FATHER.

'Twas to him the Command of God was directed, which we read of, in the Account
that Moses gives us, of the Creation of the World, Let there be Light, Genesis 1.
V. 3.
let there be a Firmament, and the like. 'Twas to him he said, Let us make bid.
V. 6.
Man, in our Image, after our Likeness. ibid. 26.
And the ETERNAL WORD did every Thing, according to the Command of God.

And this is not a Conjecture, formed in our own Fancies, but we build our
Faith, in this important Affair, on the concurring Testimony, of those very
Prophets, who are readily owned, and extremely admired by the Jews themselves.
For we are told expressly, He commanded, and they were created. Now, what
created Being, how noble soever, could execute the Command of the ETERNAL
FATHER, with Respect to the Creation of the World, who, but he, who was the
ETERNAL and LIVING WORD?

CHAP. XI.
BESIDES it is plain, from several Passages in the Gospels, that he, who spoke
those Words, by the Mouth of the Blessed Jesus, I am the Way, the Truth, and
the Life; was not circumscribed, within the narrow Limits of his Humane Nature.

John the Baptist foretelling, that in a short Time, the Son of GOD should make
his Appearance in the World, speaks of him, as a Person, that was Omnipresent.
There stands one among John 1. V. 26. 27.
you, says he, whom ye know not, he it is, who, coming after me, is before me.

Now is it probable, or even possible, he should apply these Words, to our
Savior's Body, or his Humane Soul? And our Blessed Lord himself, raising the
Minds of his Disciples, to more sublime Thoughts of the SON of GOD, makes use
of the following Expression, Where two or three are gathered Ma. xviii V. 20.
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of 'em.

There Is another Promise, that is much of the same Import, which he makes to
his Disciples, Lo! I am with Mat. 28. V. 20.
you always, even to the End of the World. I hope the Reader will not
misunderstand me, as if I said any Thing, that might in the least interfere,
with that intimate, and glorious Union, that there is, between the Humanity of
the incarnate Jesus, and the Misterious Person of the ETERNAL WORD.

For if St. Paul teaches us, that He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit,
1. Cor. 6. V. 17.
certainly they that understand this Doctrine, will readily allow, that there
is a closer, and more Divine Union, between the WORD, and its assumed Humanity.
And our Blessed Savior did abundantly discover, that he was no less than the
Power of God, by the frequent, and uncontested Miracles, which he wrought, even
in the Presence of the Jews, though they professed, to entertain a most
unaccountable Notion, (I cannot imagine, for my Part, that it should ever enter
into any Man's Mind) that he cast out Devils, by Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils, and Celsus, we know, ascribes 'em to the Power of Magic.

But our Savior abundantly confuted this Absurd Conceit, by showing, that the
Kingdom of Satan was going to suffer a most violent Shock, as evidently appears
to them, who read the Gospels with any tolerable Share of Judgment.

Let Celsus show, if he can, wherein our Savior failed in his great Design, to
destroy the Works of the Devil, and bring convincing Proofs of the Truth, or
even Probability of what he offers. But this, I Am apt to think, is what he will
scarce be able to perform, since the Objections, that he raises against us, are
founded, for the most Part, on some Matters of Fact, which are grossly
misunderstood by him, or some Passages in the Gospels, which are shamefully
misapplied, or some fabulous Accounts, which are owing to the unhappy, but
fruitful Invention of the Jews.

CHAP. XII.
BUT because Celsus's Jew affirms, that he was convicted, and condemned, after
a Legal Process, I desire to know, how this can be proved to be true, when it is
plain, beyond all Contradiction, that his Enemies were very zealous, in
suborning false Witnesses against him. Perhaps they would fain make us believe,
that our Savior was convicted, because his Accusers took great Advantage
against him, by that innocent, and just Expression of his, I am able to destroy
the Temple of Mat. xxv V. 6. 1
God, and to build it in three Days. It Is true indeed, he spoke these Words, of
the Temple of his Body, but they, not knowing his Design, imagined, that they
had a Reference to their Material and Pompous Temple, for which they plainly
discovered a far greater Veneration, than for that Glorious, and Adorable
Temple, wherein the ETERNAL WORD, the TRVTH, and WISDOM of GOD did Personally,
though Mysteriously reside.

But since Celsus's Jew insults over us, because our Savior was taken, I grant
he was, but this ought to be considered, that it was not done, without his own
Consent.

For when his Time was come, he surrend'red himself, as an easy Prey, into the
Hands of his barbarous Enemies, and abundantly made good the Character, which
is given him, in the Holy Scripture, and particularly in the following Words,
Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the Sins of the John i. V. 28.
World. This is no more than what the Evangelist tells us, Jesus therefore
knowing, says he, all Things, that should Joh. xviii V. 4, etc
come upon him, went forth, and said unto 'em, whom seek ye? They answered him,
Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says unto 'em, I am he. And Judas also which betrayed
him, stood with 'em. As soon then as he had said unto 'em, I am he, they went
backward, and fell to the Ground. Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And
they said Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he. If
therefore ye seek me, let these go their Way. And when one of his Disciples
stood by, and smote the Ear of the High-Priest's Servant, he said, Put up thy
Sword into its place. For all they that take the Sword shall perish by the
Sword. Think thou, that I cannot now pray unto my Father, and he shall
presently give me more than twelve Legions of Angels. But how then shall the
Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?

Now if any Person should be so weak, as to imagine, that these are only
Fictions of the Evangelists, have we not Reason, on the contrary, to think, our
Adversaries have been grossly guilty of that Practice (with which they charge
the Christians) that so they might vent their implacable Malice, against all
those, who profess to be the Followers of the Blessed Jesus, and to believe,
that those Things are most certainly true, which are related by Persons, whose
Integrity does abundantly appear, from the Consideration of the dreadful
Calamities, to which they knew their Religion did so manifestly expose 'em?

For we cannot conceive, that the Followers of our Blessed Savior should
embrace the most shameful, and painful Death, with undaunted Courage, and
heroic Constancy, had they been the scandalous Inventers of the History, which
they transmitted to Posterity, but on the contrary, we must esteem 'em to be
Persons, who were fully persuaded, in their own Minds, of the Truth, and
Importance, of what they published to the World; since they knew, by
Observation, and Experience, that Scorn, and Infamy were the shocking
Attendants, and Persecution, and Death almost the natural, and unavoidable
Consequence of the glorious Profession, which they made of the Name of Jesus.

CHAP. XIII.
WHAT the pretended Jew says farther, viz. That our Savior was betrayed by his
own Disciples, he might learn from the Evangelists, with this little
Difference, that whereas they acquaint us, that he was betrayed by Judas, he
chooses to speak in the Plural Number, that his Objection may seem to have the
greater Force, but hasn't the Curiosity. I will not say the Conscience, to
enquire narrowly, into the Account, which we have of Judas, whose Heart was
miserably divided, between his Master, and his Lust, and governed at once by
extravagant, and very different Passions. For that infamous Traitor gave a Sign
to the Persons that came to apprehend him, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that Mat
xxvi V. 48.
^^me is he, hold him fast. So that it seems, he retained something of the
Respect, which formerly he paid his Master, since otherwise he would have
betrayed him openly, and without that flattering Ceremony, and most horrid
Solemnity.

We have Reason therefore to believe, that our Savior's most excellent, and
awakening Discourses had made some faint Impression, even upon the Mind of one,
who was so unaccountably swayed by a covetous Disposition, that he had the
Impudence to betray his Lord, and would not stop, 'till he had shamefully
completed the most villainous Design, for the Accomplishment of which, all the
Devils in Hell did ever lend their Assistance. Therefore the Evangelist tells
us, that Judas when he saw he was condemned, Mat xxvi V. 3.
repented himself, and brought again the thirty Pieces of Silver, to the Chief
Priests and Elders, saying I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent
Blood. And they said, What Is that to us? See thou to that, and he cast down the
Pieces of Silver in the Temple, and departed, and went, and hanged himself.

Now if Judas, whose Custom we may suppose it was, to apply to his private Use,
the Money that was collected, for the Relief of the Poor, was so far penitent
at last, as to return the thirty Pieces of Silver, to the Chief Priests, and
Elders; I think, we may rationally conclude, that the Instructions of our
Blessed Savior had wrought, in some Measure, on this most hardened Wretch,
that he could not erase 'em, out of his faithful Memory, and fail entirely in
his Respect for the meek, and spotless Jesus. But those Words, I have sinned in
that I have betrayed the innocent Blood, are a plain, and open Acknowledgment
of his horrid Crime, and you may partly judge, what a lively Sense he had, of
the great Injustice, and Ingratitude, that appeared in what he had so lately
done, since Life it self was grown a Burden to him, he felt an unusual Horror
of Conscience, and was forced to arraign, accuse, and condemn himself.

We have here likewise a remarkable, and standing Instance, of the happy
Effect, which our Savior's Instructions had, upon the vilest Wretch, that ever
breathed in the common Air, that though he added the Worst of Treasons, to his
Cheating the Poor; yet some Sparks of Ingenuity were remaining, in a Person,
who was little better than a Devil in an Humane Form.

Indeed it is possible, after all I have said, that Celsus's Jew may give no
Credit, to the Account, which we have in the Gospels, of the Treachery of
Judas, and will hearken to that Part alone, that acquaints us, that one of our
Savior's Disciples did betray him, and will take the Liberty, to say more than
the Holy Scripture does affirm, viz. That he committed that horrid Crime, with
the full Bent of his Will, and without the least Remorse.

But it is very unreasonable, that a Person should believe, or disbelieve the
Scripture-History, as he is led aside, by the unhappy Biass of his depraved
Affections.

And our Adversaries themselves, if they have any Shame in 'em, must, I think,
in some Measure, be affected, if they will but read the Hundred and Ninth
Psalm, which directly, and entirely relates to Judas. It begins after the
following Manner, Hold not thy Psalm. cix. V. 1.
Peace, O God of my Praise. For the Mouth of the Wicked, and the Mouth of the
Deceitful are opened against me.

It Is prophesied there, that Judas should be degraded from the Apostolical
Function, on the Account of the horrid Crime he should commit, and that another
should supply his Place, which is intimated to us in the following Words, Let
another take his Psalm. cix. V. 8.
Office.

And supposing our Savior had been betrayed, by one his Disciples, who was, if
it had been possible, more wickedly disposed than Judas, and his Master's most
sweet, and heavenly Instructions had not made the least secret Impression upon
his hardened Mind, how would this in the least reflect on the Holy Religion,
which the Blessed Jesus introduced into the World?

What relates to his being apprehended by his Enemies, has been already
considered, and I have showed, that he made a willing Surrender of himself,
into the Hands of those Blood-thirsty Wretches, to set us a Bright Example of
Submission to the Will of God, under the darkest Dispensations of his wise, and
holy Providence.

What the Jew adds, I confess, does seem to me to be very childish, and
ridiculous. A good General, says he, who commands a numerous, and
well-disciplin'd Army, was never known to be betrayed by his Soldiers. Nay, the
Ringleader of a Company of High-way-Men, though the merest Rogue in Nature, and
though his Followers be the most contemptible, and cursed Crew that ever was in
the World; yet needn't fear being betrayed, since they esteem him the fittest
Person for the Accomplishment of their base Designs. But as for your Pretended
Savior, he was betrayed by his own Disciples, not having so great an Interest
in 'em, as a good General in his Soldiers, or the Ringleader of a Company of
High-way-Men in his vile Accomplices.

On the contrary, many Instances might be produced from History, of Famous
Generals, and Ringleaders of High-way-Men, betrayed by those, who were under
their Command, even after they had received from 'em, all the Assurances of
their inviolable Fidelity, which they could reasonably desire.

But suppose 'twere otherwise, I appeal to common Sense, whether it could be
fastened on our Blessed Savior, as a just Reproach, that he was shamefully
betrayed by one, who was engaged, by all the Sacred Ties of Duty, and
Gratitude, to be devoted to his Service, who certainly, if he had not been
possessed by the Devil, could never have formed so cursed a Design, much less
have ever brought it to so dishonorable an Execution?

I ask Celsus, who pretends to no mean Skill in Philosophy, whether 'twas
Plato's Fault, that Aristotle, after he had been his Pupil, for twenty Years,
did publicly declare, that he rejected his Tutor's Notion, of the Immortality
of the Soul, and esteemed his Conceptions, as no better than Philosophical
Chimera's, and vain Amusements.

I ask him, whether Plato's Philosophy lost any of its native Sublimity, and
all his Notions were false, the very Moment his Pupil did oppose him; or
rather, since Plato was plainly in the right, at least in the Opinion of a
Platonist, whether Aristotle, as Learned as he was, didn't discover too much of
Malice, and Ingratitude.

Chrysippus also, in several Places in his Writings, does condemn the Opinions
of Cleanthes, though 'twas owing to him, that in his younger Years, his Mind was
seasoned, with wholesome, and excellent Instructions.

Besides, Aristotle is supposed to have studied Philosophy in the School of
Plato, for twenty Years, and Chrysippus studied the same excellent Science for
many Years, in the School of Cleanthes: Whereas Judas had not continued three
Years with our Blessed Savior, when he so shamefully betrayed him.

And if we read the Lives of the Philosophers, we shall meet with frequent
Instances, that, in some Respects, resemble the Horrid Treachery of Judas.

We shall find, that the Pythagoreans built Tombs, for such Persons as left the
Study of Philosophy, and betook themselves to a different, and less-useful
Course of Life.

But I suppose no Person, will be so weak, as to take Occasion from hence, to
reflect on the Doctrine of Pythagoras, or the solid Arguments which his
Followers used in its Defense.

The Jew adds, that Having many Things to say, with respect to our Savior,
which are far from being fairly represented by his Disciples, he chose to pass
'em over in a profound Silence.

But I ask, what Truths are these, that are misinterpreted by the Evangelists,
and which he forbears to mention? Must not this pass for a Rhetorical Flourish,
to make us believe, he was furnished with a great Stock of Arguments, against
our Blessed Savior, when most, if not all, that he could possibly say, if it
was true, and material, was borrowed, from those very Gospels, which sometimes
he so much despises.

CHAP. XIV.
THEN Celsus finds Fault with our Savior's Disciples, for saying, That he
foreknew, and foretold all the remarkable Things that ever happened to him.

But we doubt not in the least, but we can easily prove, by an Enumeration of
Particulars, (let Celsus say what he pleases to the contrary) that our Savior
foretold several Things, that should befall his Disciples, some considerable
Time before they came to pass.

What a wonderful Instance of this, is that which St. Matthew gives, Ye Mat. x.
V. 18.
shall be brought before Governors, and Kings for my sake, for a Testimony
against them, and the Gentiles. I might quote many other Places, where our
Savior does expressly foretell the grievous Persecutions, that should be the
too common Lot of Christians.

Now what Religion is there, in the whole habitable World, that wants the
Advantage of a TOLERATION, except that which our Savior introduced? So that
there is no Ground, for that foolish Plea, which our Enemies make Use of, that
he saw, what bad Entertainment, false, and corrupt Notions would naturally meet
with in the World; and therefore, to raise his Reputation, and promote his
Interest, did only foretell those Things, which any Child might have known
would befall him.

But if Persons would unavoidably be brought before Governors, and Kings, for
holding false, and wicked Notions, one would think that the Epicureans, who
disbelieve an overruling Povidence, should be brought before 'em, as soon as
any Persons in the World, or the Peripateticks, who think, that the Prayers,
which are put up, and the Sacrifices, which are offered to the Gods, are wholly
insignificant, and little Arts unworthy to be practiced by those, who pretend
to the Sense, and Learning of Philosophers.

But perhaps our Enemies may object, That the Samaritanes are persecuted on the
Account of their Religion.

To this I answer, that they are condemned to dye, for circumcising themselves,
in direct Opposition to the Law, which permits none but Jews, to observe this
celebrated, and Ancient Rite. And we don't find, that the Judge leaves it to
their Choice, whether they will obstinately persist, and dye, or renounce their
Religion, and so be publicly acquitted, but if they are found to be
circumcised, immediately they must suffer Death.

The Christians are the only Persons in the World, who, though they are
persecuted, according to our Savior's Prediction, Ye shall be brought before
Governors, and Kings for my sake, are entreated, to the last Breath they draw,
to renounce the Christian Religion, and sacrifice to Idols, and so to put
themselves directly into a safe, and happy Condition, with respect to their
outward Circumstances.

See therefore, with what Authority our Blessed Savior spoke the following
Words, Whosoever shall confess me, Mat. x. V. 32, 33.
before Men, him will I confess, before my Father, which is in Heaven, but
whosoever shall deny me before Men, him will I also deny, before my Father,
which is in Heaven.

Take Notice, that this was spoken by him, a considerable Time before the
Thing, that he speaks of, was true in Fact. Perhaps such a Thought as this, may
be ready to dart into your Mind, that he builds Castles in the Air, and what he
prophesies don't look at all, as if the Event would be answerable. But if you
can exercise a little Patience, you will say thus to your selves, if our Blessed
Savior did readily foretell, that Governors, and Kings, would use their
utmost Endeavors, to extirpate the Religion, he introduced into the World, and
if the Event has fully answered his Prediction, certainly we have all
imaginable Reason to believe, that he received such a Power from God, as was
necessary, to make his Doctrine obtain, so Universally as it did, and that he
knew very well, that all the Difficulties, that lay in the Way to its
Reception, should be happily, and easily surmounted, by the help of Miracles.
And who, without a Transport of Holy Admiration, can set our Savior before his
Eyes, expressly foretelling, That the Gospel of the Kingdom should Mat. xxiv V.
14*
be preached in all the World, for a Witness unto all Nations; and see the
Prediction in due Time fulfilled, the Gospel being preached to the Greeks; and
Barbarians, to the Learned, and Unlearned, and the whole habitable World being
brought, as it were, under its honorable, and happy Yoke?

Besides let the Pretended Jew, who don't believe, that our Savior foretold
those Things, which, we see, did afterward befall him, I say, let him
consider, that when the City of Jerusalem was in all its Glory, and the Pompous
Ceremonies of the Jewish Religion were solemnly performed in it, he foretold,
that it should be invaded, and ruined by the Romans.

I suppose, no One will take the Liberty to say, that they who were his
Familiar Friends, and constant Hearers did satisfy themselves. with teaching
(Viva Voce) those Things, which are the Subject Matter of the Gospels, without
leaving behind 'em a History, of the most remarkable Transactions of our
Blessed Savior.

St. Luke has the following Words, When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with
Luke 21. V. 20.
Armies, then know that the Desolation thereof is nigh. Now at the Time when
these Things were writ, there was no Suspicion of a Siege, or any grievous
Calamity, that threatened the Jewish Church, and State. 'Twas in the Reign of
the Emperor Nero, that the Romans made their first Attack, on this Onceglorious
City, and it was not taken, 'till the Reign of the Emperor Vespasian, whose Son
Titus Vespasian did utterly destroy it.

This was a just, and heavy Judgment of God upon 'em, for killing James the
just, as Josephus would fain have us to believe, whereas in Truth 'twas owing
to the horrid Crime they committed, in embruing their cursed Hands in the
bloody Death of our Blessed Lord.

Celsus therefore, might every Jot as well have granted, that our Savior knew
what Accidents would befall him, and yet have talked with the highest Contempt
of his Divine Praescience, as grant, that he was capable of working such
Miracles, as he wrought, and at the same Time affirm, that he was a Notorious
and Vile Impostor. And he might with all his Learning have shown, that the
Augurs and Auspices foretold Future Events, by the Flying of Birds, and by the
Intrails of Beasts. But he was loath, it seems, to make this Concession, whereas
he does in some sort acknowledge, that our Savior wrought many Miracles, and
yet asserts, he did 'em by the Help of Magic.

Phlegon was much more ingenuous, who in the 13th and 14th Book of his
Chronicon, acknowledges, that our Savior foretold Future Events, and says,
they exactly answered his Prediction, though I observe, that he seems sometimes
to confound our Blessed Lord with the Apostle Peter.

And as it were, in Spite of Prejudice, he draws this natural Conclusion, That
since the Founder of our Holy Religion, and many of his Followers were able to
foretell many future, and remarkable Events at so great a Distance of Time,
which exactly answered their Predictions, we must suppose, that they were acted
by a more than Ordinary Power.

Then Celsus says, That our Savior's Disciples not being able to conceal those
Things, which were exposed to Public View, thought that the best Game they had
to play, was to give out that their Master foresaw, a long Time before, all the
Accidents that did afterward befall him.

But either he didn't know, or at least seems to be ignorant, that our Blessed
Savior used the following Words to his Disciples, All ye shall be offended
because of me this Night; which Mat. 26. V. 31.
we know happened accordingly, and was no false Prophet, when he said to Peter,
Before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice. Ibid. V. 34.


Now if they had not been Men of undoubted Integrity, but had designed to impose
on our Credulity by false Narrations, they would certainly have discovered so
much of Worldly Policy, as to have said nothing at all of Peter's Denying his
Blessed Lord, whose Cause he had so resolutely promised to maintain, and never
to have mentioned the Offense which even some of the Disciples took, at the
mean Condition in which our Savior condescended, and thought fit to appear;
and if these Things, which seem to represent the Followers of our Blessed Lord
to a great Disadvantage, were not related in the Gospels, how could Celsus, or
any other Person, have taken Occasion from thence to cast a Reproach on our
most Holy Religion?

But they were not unwilling, that latest Posterity should be acquainted with
their Failings, since they were well assured, that this would not in the least
hinder the happy Progress of the Everlasting Gospel, or give the Reader any
just Occasion, to be guilty of the like Irregular Practices.

What Celsus adds is ridiculous to the last Degree, The Disciples got this
published, says he, to secure the Reputation of their Master, and it is as if to
prove that a Man is just, I should instance in several Acts of Injustice that
he has done, or to prove that he is free from Passion, I should show that he has
been guilty of Murder; or, to prove that he is immortal, should expose his dead
Body to View, and after all, put People off with this frivolous Pretense, that
he foresaw whatsoever should befall him.

But here it is apparent, that he grossly misapplies the Instances, which he is
pleased to produce. For there is no Absurdity at all, in supposing that our
Blessed Savior should propose himself to us, as a Bright Example of Moral
Virtue, and yet teach us, to sacrifice our Lives, and all that is dear to us,
for the Sake of the Religion we embrace.

Consider also, that the Death which he suffered, is of General, and Universal
Advantage, as I think, I have sufficiently proved already. And though Celsus does
fondly imagine, that it makes very much for the Cause which he espouses, that
we don't deny, that our Savior suffered in the most notorious, and shameful
Manner; yet this is for Want of knowing the SACRED MYSTERIES, that are
contained in the Passion of our BLESSED LORD, as St. Paul observes, and the
several Predictions, which are left upon Record by the Inspired Prophets,
concerning this difficult, and important Affair.

Besides he seems not to know, that there was a Celebrated Heretic, who denied
that the Sufferings of our Savior were real.

This made him say, You don't pretend, that his bitter Passion was only in
Appearance, but, without mincing the Matter, you hold that he suffered, in a
strict, and proper Sense.

For our Parts, we think, it is a Notorious Heresy, to maintain that our
Savior's Sufferings were only in Appearance, since we must then affirm, as the
necessary Consequence of the forementioned false, and dangerous Position, that
his Resurrection, as glorious as we suppose it to be, was a mere Deceptio
Visus. For he that really dies, if he rises again, must be really risen, and on
the contrary, he that died but in Appearance, can only seemingly rise.

But because Infidels endeavor, to expose the Doctrine of the Resurrection of
our Savior, to the last Degree of Profane Contempt, I shall take Occasion to
mention here, what Plato relates of Er, the Son of Armenius, Plato's Common
Wealth l. 10.
who at the End of twelve Days rose out of his Tomb, and told several
remarkable Transactions, that to his certain Knowledge had passed in the World
of Spirits.

And I might mention the Story, which Heraclitus tells, of a Woman, who
continued a considerable Time without any Sign of Life, which I think, does
evidently, and not a little, serve my present Purpose, since it is with Infidels
I Am now engaged.

And many pregnant Instances might easily be produced from History, of Persons
who have appeared the Day after their Decease.

Is it then any Wonder at all, that one, who in the whole Course of his Life
did so many Actions, which nothing short of a Divine Power could possibly
enable him to perform, who wrought Miracles, to attest the Truth of his
Doctrine, which were so surprising, and so open to the View of his most
implacable Adversaries, that Celsus himself has not the Face to deny, that they
were true in Fact, though indeed he ascribes 'em to the Power of Infernal
Demons, I say, is it any Wonder at all, that so Divine a Person as our Savior
was, should have something that was remarkable in his Death, and that his Holy
Soul, having freely, and even cheerfully left his Body for a Time, should
return to it, as soon as ever it had performed the entire Duty of a Disunited
Spirit?

Our Savior has the following Words, No Man takes it from me, speaking of his
Life, but I lay it down of John 10. V. 18.
my self, I have Power to lay it down, and I have Power to take it up again.

And perhaps the Reason why his Holy Soul made Haste, to leave his Body, might
be this, that his Legs might not be broken, as those of the Thieves were, who
were crucified by his Sides.

Then came the Soldiers, and brake John 19. V. 32.
the Legs of the first, and of the other, which was crucified with him. But
when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they broke not his
Legs.

So that I have answered that Objection of Celsus, how will you persuade us,
that he could foretell these Things?

As for that other, How will you ever make us believe, that a Dead Person is
immortal? We say 'twou'd seem no Wonder at all, if People would but take us
right, that he that died was not strictly immortal, but he that rose from the
Dead. Nay, we say, that our Savior was not immortal, with respect to his
Humane Nature, before his Body was separated from his Soul. For no Person who
is to dye, can properly be said to be immortal, but then he is truly immortal,
when he is for ever loosed from the Bands of Death.

Christ being raised from the dead, dies Romans 6. V. 9.
no more; Death has no more Dominion over him; whatever some Persons may
affirm, who don't understand the Meaning of these mysterious Words.

CHAP. XV.
WHAT Celsus adds, is no less ill-grounded, than what goes before; What God,
says he, or Demon, nay, what Man of Common Sense, will not take the most
proper Methods that he can, to avoid the Evils he foresees will befall him, and
especially, when he knows he can easily prevent 'em, if he will?

But Socrates was well-acquainted with the Nature of the Poison, that was given
him, and if he had but followed the Advice of Crito, he had escaped out of
Prison, and secured his Person, from the great Inconveniences, to which he was
exposed, and yet he chose rather to dye, than to act in the least unbecoming
the Character of so Celebrated a Philosopher.

So Leonidas, the Lacaedemonian General knew very well, that he, and his
Company should dve at Thermopylae, yet preferring his Honor to his frail, and
mortal Life, he said, Come, let us dine like those, who are to eat their Supper
with the Dead.

They who will take the Pains, to consult Historians, may find abundance of
such Instances as these. What Wonder is it then, that our Blessed Savior
didn't use all possible Endeavors, to avoid those Evils, which he knew would
befall him, when a far inferior Person, I mean the Apostle Paul, foreseeing
what Things he should suffer at Jerusalem, encountered the greatest Dangers,
and sharply reproved the Cruel Kindness of those, who with Tears in their Eyes,
endeavored to prevent him, from the happy Execution of his great Designs.

Nay, many at this very Day, who are not ignorant, to what dreadful Calamities
the Profession of Christianity will expose 'em, and that if they would openly
renounce it, they should be immediately discharged, and have their Goods
restored; I say, many at this very Day, despise Life with all its native, and
gaudy Charms, and embrace Death it self, even approaching to 'em, in the most
frightful Shapes.

What Celsus adds, is as ridiculous as what went before, If, says he, Judas 's
Treason, and Peter 's Denial of his Master were foretold by Christ, one would
think, they should for that Reason, have had an Aweful Sense of His Divinity,
and thereby have been effectually secured from offering such base Affronts, to
their supposed Rightful Sovereign, and most Liberal Benefactor.

But here Celsus, with all his Wisdom, does unawares most grossly contradict
himself, because if our Savior was GOD as well as Man, then the Events of
Things could not but exactly agree with what his Infinite Mind foresaw
concerning 'em, and by consequence, the one must Vnavoidably betray, and the
other by a sad, but Fatal Necessity deny him. If Matters could have happened
otherwise, if Judas had not betrayed, nor Peter denied him, being sufficiently
forewarned of the Folly, and Danger of committing such horrid Crimes, his
Veracity might easily have been called in Question. For if our Savior foresaw,
as we say he did, that Judas should betray him, he also foresaw that Corruption
of his Nature, that that inclined him to his Treachery, and if he foresaw, that
St Peter would deny him, he also foresaw his Infirmity, that was the unhappy
Cause of his committing so base a Crime, and this was consistent enough with
his permitting him, to be surpised into a gross Act of Sin.

And what does Celsus's Jew propose, I wonder, when he says, They betrayed, and
denied him, throwing off all manner of Respect to him, whom they owned to be
their Lord, and Master? For I have already shown, that Judas himself, as vile a
Wretch as he was, retained some respect for our Blessed Savior, even in that
horrid Instant, in which he inhumanely betrayed him. And the like may be said
of St. Peter, who, after he had shamefully denied him, went out, and wept
bitterly; as St. Matthew acquaints us.

What the Jew adds is very ridiculous, and childish, If a Person, says he, does
once discover the Snares, that are laid for him, and detect his Adversaries,
they commonly desist from their malicious Purpose. For the contrary is most
evident, from the Experience of all Ages of the World. Then as if he were
drawing to a Conclusion, he says, We mustn't imagine, that these Things came
e're the more to pass, because he foretold 'em, but rather infer from what I
have said, that he never did foretell 'em. For it is absurd to suppose, that
either Judas would ever have betrayed, or Peter have denied him, had they been
forewarned, and appriz'd of his Prediction.

But since I have already overthrown the Principles, on which his Discourse is
founded, the Conclusion which he draws, viz. We mustn't imagine, that these
Things came to pass, because he foretold 'em, must fall to the Ground of Course.

We say the Events happened, as Things in their own Nature possible, and since
they came to pass, we see the Predictions verified. For the Truth or Falsehood
of Prophecies is best known by the Event. Therefore what he says, viz. That
they didn't come e're the more to pass, because he foretold 'em, but we must
rather infer from what I have said, that he did never foretell 'em. For it is
absurd to suppose, that either Judas would ever have betrayed, or Peter have
denied him, had they been forewarned, and appriz'd of his Prediction. This I
say, is most apparently false, and his Inferences are not just.

Then he says, that If our Savior was GOD, and really foretold these Things,
as You are apt to imagine, they must necessarily come to pass, so that a God is
supposed to force his Disciples to be wicked, with whom he seemingly expressed
so endearing a Familiarity, when on the contrary, he of all Persons should have
been highly serviceable to all Mankind, and especially to his intimate
Acquaintance, and might have had so much Policy, one would think, as to affect
those Persons, who espoused his Cause. Besides is it usual, for Men to betray
their Friends, to whose Table they are welcome, and where they are civilly, and
perhaps very plentifully entertained? Yet here no less a Person than a GOD is
supposed to be betrayed. Nay, a GOD (which greatly aggravates the Matter) is
supposed most grossly to entrench on the sacred Laws of Civility, and common
Friendship, and by his Divine Prediction, to make his Disciples themselves turn
Traitors, and Cowards.

I shall return an Answer to this long Invective, rather in Compliance with the
strict Injunctions, that are laid upon me, than for the sake of any Force, that
I discern in the Objection.

Celsus entertains a fond Conceit, that whatever is foretold by a GOD, does
therefore come to pass, because it was foretold by him.

But here I must beg Leave to differ from him, and am, I confess, of the
Opinion, that he who foretells Future Events, is not properly the Cause of their
Coming to pass, at the predicted Time, but that on the contrary, he foresees,
that Things will happen so or so, whether ever they be foretold or not. And I
don't think that his Praescience, even upon the Supposition that he is GOD, does
in the least interfere with the Possibility of Future Events to happen, or not
to happen, according to the natural, and regular Course of Things, as if barely
on that Account, they must infallibly answer his Prediction.

CHAP. XVI.
HERE I might produce Abundance of pregnant Instances, from the Sacred
Scriptures, and from the Histories of the Greeks themselves, to show, that
Future Events are not owing to Predictions, but fall out always in such a Way,
as perfectly agrees with the Liberty of the Humane Will. And either my Notion
of this Matter is just, or what the Greeks call (...), will be no Sophism at
all, though the contrary be very apparent, to any Learned, and Judicious Person.

To render this Matter as intelligible as may be, I shall instance in the
Prophecies concerning Judas, which the Sacred Scriptures do furnish us with,
and shall produce one remarkable Instance of the Truth of my Assertion, from
the History of the Greeks, viz. The Answer of the Heathen Oracle to Laius.

By the Way, I shall here take it for granted, that the Oracle was true, since
I think, I may make the Supposition, without doing the least Prejudice to the
Subject, which I have now in Hand. The Author of the Hundred and ninth Psalm,
speaking in the Person of our Blessed Savior, has the following Words,
concerning that Traitor Judas, Hold not Psalm. cix. V. 1.
thy Peace, O God of my Praise, for the Mouth of the Wicked, and the Mouth of
the Deceitful are opened against me. And if you take diligent Notice, you will
find, that throughout the Psalm, the Prediction must be understood, in a Sense
consistent with the Crime of the Traitor, and his deserving all those heavy
Curses, that are there mentioned by the Psalmist.

Let 'em fall upon him, says he, by ibid. 16.
a Spirit of Prophecy, because he remembered not to show Mercy, but persecuted
the poor and needy Man, that he might even slay the broken in Heart. It Is
plain, he might, if he would, have remembered to show Mercy, and was not
forced, to persecute the poor, and needy Man, though he misemploy'd that Power,
which God Originally gave him, and actually betrayed his Master, and so
rendered himself most justly obnoxious to those dreadful Curses, which are
mentioned in that famous Prophecy.

And as for the Answer, that the Oracle returned to Laius, which I mention in
Favor of the Greeks, it is related by one of their Ancient Tragoedians to this
Effect.

Seek not vain Man in Spite of Destiny, Eurip. Phoenis.

The blessed Fruit of Marriage to enjoy,
Too soon alas! thou wilt find it prove thy Bane,
For he who to thy native Heat his Life will owe,
With Death it self shall ill-requite thy Pains,
And dreadful Mischiefs on thy Household bring.
Here it is plain, that Laius was under no Necessity of begetting an unhappy
Son, but if due Care were wanting, a Tragical Scene would present it self, and
Oedipus, and Jocasta, and their two Sons, would suffer all those grievous
Calamities, which as the History acquaints us, did afterward befall 'em.

The same Sophism is frequently made Use of as an Argument against taking
Physic, for the Recovery of our Bodily Health, and Strength; If God has
decreed, says one, that I shall be effectually cured of my Distemper, I shall
certainly recover my former State of Health, whether I use any Remedies or no;
and if he has decreed, that I shall not be recovered from it, whatever
Medicines I may take, 'twill infallibly remain upon me, therefore whether he
has decreed my Recovery or not, the Endeavors of the Physician are equally,
that is to say, entirely useless.

And the Sophism in the Case of Laius, is very Comical, and runs after the
following Manner, If the Fates have decreed, that I shall have a Son, I shall
certainly have him, whether I am ever concerned with any Woman or no; and if
they have decreed, that I shall never have a Son, I shall never have one,
whether I live in the Use of Means or no; and therefore whether they have
decreed, that I shall have a Son, or have determined the contrary, no carnal
Copulation will ever have the desired Effect.

But as it is highly absurd to refuse Physic, which is the usual, and proper
Method, for the Recovery of our Bodily Health: So it is no less absurd, to
abstain from Carnal Copulation, if a Person be desirous of a Child, since it is
the ordinary, and proper Method of Humane Generation.

These Things I mention, because the profound Celsus has the following Words,
If Christ was God, and did really foretell these Things you talk of, they must
infallibly come to pass, at the predicted Time. For I deny, that they must
Necessarily come to pass, since 'twas possible for 'em to have had a quite
contrary Event. But if he only means, that Divine Praescience does, in some
sense, necessitate the Event, I readily grant it, and this I think, I may
vigorously maintain, and at the same Time assert, that 'twas very possible,
that Matters might have happened otherwise. But I think, he is far from proving
what he boldly asserted, viz. That on the Supposition of the Divine Praescience
of our Savior, 'twill Naturally follow, that he made his Disciples turn
Traitors, and Cowards, and so was justly chargeable with their aggravated Guilt.

It Is true, that since the Heart of Judas was, as it were, Open, and
Transparent to his All-piercing Eyes, our Blessed Lord was fully appriz'd of
the Hellish Design, which he had formed, and plainly perceived, that the
Respect which he had for his Master, was not sufficient, to secure him, from
the Fatal impression of a covetous Disposition. This made him say those Words,
with an Eye to Judas, he that dippeth his Hands with me in the Dish, the same
shall betray me.

Take Notice farther of the Absurdity, and Falsehood, of what Celsus says, It Is
unusual, says he, for Persons to betray their Friends, to whose Table they are
welcome, yet here even a God is supposed to be betrayed.

On the contrary, it is too well known, that Persons, who have been engaged, by
the most Sacred, and endearing Ties, have often and most shamefully betrayed
their intimate Friends, and liberal Benefactors.

The Histories both of the Greeks, and Barbarians do furnish us with abundant
Instances of the forementioned Practice.

This is what the famous Poet, who dwelt at Paros, and is so much admired for
his Iambick verses, reproaches Lycambe with. For speaking of his intrenching on
the Laws of civil conversation, he says,

Thou have dissolved the Sacred Band of Archilochus.
Friendship, and art Notoriously guilty of the basest Treachery.

But for the fuller Confirmation of my Argument, I shall refer the Reader to
them, who have applied their Minds, to the Study of History, both Sacred, and
Profane.

Then Celsus, as if he had undeniable Arguments, for what he offers, has the
following Words, Nay a GOD (which highly aggravates the Matter) is supposed, to
entrench upon the Rules of Civility, and common Friendship, and to make his
Disciples turn Traitors, and Cowards.

But this is more than he can ever prove, unless we must allow the Consequence,
which he draws, to be Natural, and just, which I am sure is so very weak, that
any Child almost would see through it, and be ready to expose it.

CHAP. XVII.
THEN says Celsus, If your Savior suffered freely, in Obedience to his
Heavenly Father, it is plain, that since you say that he was GOD, and that his
Sufferings were entirely voluntary, you must acknowledge, 'twas impossible,
that in the midst of his supposed Agonies, he should have had so quick a Sense
of Pain.

But here, though he don't perceive it, his Words imply a plain, and very gross
Contradiction. For he will not deny, that our Savior suffered freely, in
Obedience to his Father, and then certainly he must feel some Pain, which is
inseparable from the Notion that we have of Suffering; since it is very
ungrateful to Flesh and Blood, as he cannot but know, and is not easily
reconciled, even to the calm Dictates of impartial Reason. And if he thinks
that all Sense of Pain is immediately excluded, where there is a partial, or
even an entire Consent of the Humane Will, why does he acknowledge that our
Savior ever suffered? In Truth he had not resembl'd us in all Things, Sin only
excepted, had he assumed the Humane Nature, without those many Infirmities, and
Miseries, which are its common, and almost inseparable Attendants.

So that after his Voluntary Incarnation, he was under some Sort of Necessity
to suffer, and in some Respects, the Calamities to which he was exposed, were
occasioned by the Malice, and unwearied Endeavors of his cruel Enemies.

And indeed, as I have already shown, if he had not given his Consent, it had
been impossible, that One who was GOD as well as Man should suffer, but he
willingly, and even cheerfully embraced the most painful, and shameful Death,
from a deep, and most affecting Sense of the vast Advantage, that would redound
from it, to a degenerate World.

Then Celsus granting what he would seem to deny, has the following Words, Pray
why does he make such horrid Complaints, and so earnestly desire, that his
Sufferings may be prevented? For he says, Father, if it be possible, let this
Cup pass from me.

But here Celsus does plainly, and not a little discover his impotent Malice,
against the Blessed Founder of our most Holy Religion. For instead of admiring
the remarkable Integrity, which appears in the Writings of the Evangelists,
(who might, if they had pleased, have omitted this Passage, which he thinks
does make so much for the Interest he espouses, but were induced by several
very urgent Motives, to relate it) I say instead of admiring the Sense the
remarkable Integrity, which appears in the Writings of the Evangelists, he
takes their Words in a Sense, in which they never understood 'em, and adds some
Things, that are owing to his own Invention, and takes no Notice of what
immediately follows, from whence he might have learned, how submissive our
Savior was, to the All-disposing Will of his ETERNAL FATHER. Nevertheless,
says he, not as I will, but as thou will. And Celsus seems to have never read
those other Words, (which plainly show, how submissive a Temper our Blessed
Lord discovered, under all the grievous Calamities, which his Father was
pleased to bring upon him,) I mean those Words of St. Matthew, Nevertheless if
this Cup cannot pass Mat. 26, V. 42.
from me, not my Will, but thine be done.

Here Celsus acts the Part of those, who horribly pervert the Scriptures, and
are not ashamed, to do it in the most open Manner.

Our Adversaries frequently take Notice of those Words, I kill, and reproach us
with 'em, but they wilfully Deuteronomy. 32, V. 29.
overlook the following Words, I make alive, which Passage of Scripture plainly
intimates to us, that though God does destroy all them, who live in a Course of
Rebellion against him, and are horrid Plagues to their Native Country; yet at
length he will make 'em Partakers of a Spiritual, and Glorious Life, such a one
as will make 'em trample upon this lower, and perishing World, with the
greatest Disdain imaginable.

They take Notice of those Words, I will smite him, but the following Isa. 57,
V. 17.
Words, I will heal him, are wholly disregarded.

Here God is represented to us, as acting the Part of a most Skilful Physician,
who makes grievous, and often deep Incisions, into the Flesh of his Patients,
not with a Design to do it any Prejudice, or put 'em to any needless Pain, but
to remove the Cause of their Bodily Indisposition, and that which keeps them in
a low, and langushiing Condition.

They take Notice of those Words, He makes sore, but those Words, and binds up,
are not mentioned by 'em.

So Celsus dwells on those Words of our Savior, Father, If it be possible, let
this Cup pass from me; But don't mention the least Syllable of the following
Words, which plainly discover the entire Resignation of our Blessed Lord to his
Father's. Commanding, and all-disposing Will.

Here a large Field of Discourse presents it self, which would be of
considerable Service, to those, whom St. Paul calls perfect, We preach Wisdom,
says he, to them that are perfect.

But this I shall reserve to a more convenient Season, and a more proper Place,
and only perhaps just touch upon it, as I pass along.

I have already, and I think more than once observed, that sometimes our
Savior's Expressions must be understood of the Person of the (...), the first
born of the Creation, as for Instance, when he says, I am the Way, the Truth,
and the Life, and sometimes must be restrained to his Humane Nature, as when he
says, Ye seek to kill me, a Man that has told you the Truth, which I have heard
of God.

So in the Case which is now before us, we must understand him speaking as a
Man, discovering at once the Weakness of the Flesh, and the Willingness of the
Spirit, the former in those Words, Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass
from me, and the latter in those Words, Nevertheless not my Will but thine be
done. And it is observable, that he begins with those Words, which are a plain
Indication of the Weakness of the Flesh, and concludes with those, which
discover the Willingness of the Spirit, and the latter are oftnest repeated by
him.

Besides, it is worthy of our Notice, that he don't absolutely pray, Let this
Cup pass from me, but expresses a most profound Submission to his Father's
Will, in the following Words, If it be possible.

I am not insensible, I confess, that some Interpret those Words after the
following Manner, that our Savior foreseeing what Calamities would befall the
City of Jerusalem, and not only so but the whole Nation of the Jews, on the
Account of that unjust and barbarous Treatment he should meet with at their
Hands, had such a tender Compassion, for this sinful, and miserable People,
that he desired to be excused from Suffering, that he might prevent 'em, from
being forsak'n of God, and exposed to those threatening Calamities, which he had
in View.

And then it is as if he had said, since the Jews, upon my Suffering, will be
sadly left by that God, who once took 'em into his special Protection, and put
'em under so happy a Government, as that of a Theocracy, I desire, if it be
possible, that this Cup may escape me. Besides if our Savior's Sufferings put
him to no Pain at all, as Celsus would fain have us to believe, it was
impossible they should, upon our own Hypothesis; I should be glad to know, how
he could set his Followers a bright Example, of Patience under the most
grievous Sufferings, for the Sake of their most Holy Religion.

CHAP. XVIII.
THEN Celsus's Jew accuses our Savior's Disciples of Imposture, You impose on
us, says he, with a Company of Old Wives Fables, and han't the Sense, to give
'em the least Color of Reason, to recommend 'em to the World.

To this I answer, the Evangelists could easily have omitted these Things, if
they had pleased, and then there had been no Room for this horrid Slander. For
how could our Enemies, unless they would invent Fictions, out of their own
fruitful Brain, reproach us, with such, and such Expressions of our Savior,
during his most bitter Passion, if the Evangelists had suffered 'em, as it
were, to sleep in an eternal Silence?

And Celsus was not sensible, that 'twas morally impossible for 'em, to allow
'emselves to be tamely deluded, in the Affair of the History of our Blessed
Savior, so as to be prevailed with, to look upon him to be no less than a God,
and the very Person that was so frequently, and so expressly Foretold by the
Jewish Prophets, and at the same Time be convinced in their Consciences, that
all that they writ concerning him (at least what seemed to favor him) was made
up of Fictions, that were entirely owing to their fruitful, but unhappy
Invention.

But it is plain, that either they were Men of Integrity, and published nothing,
but what they firmly believed was true, or else their Gospels are filled with
trifling Fictions of their own, and by Consequence, they could not possibly be
persuaded in their Minds, that our Savior was a GOD.

Then Celsus's Jew asserts, That even some of the Christians, (like Men that
are intoxicated by the Fumes of Wine, and don't mind at all what they say, or
do) have altered the Original Text of the Gospels, so that they may admit of
various, and almost infinite Readings. And this, I suppose, they did out of
Humane Policy, that when we press 'em home with an Argument, they might have
the larger Scope, for their Pitiful Evasions.

But for my Part, I confess, I know no Changes, that the Original Text of the
Gospels has ever undergone, unless by Means of the Followers of Marcion,
Valentinus and Lucian. Besides 'tisn't fair at all, to charge such a Thing as
this upon the Christian Religion, as a Crime, and unworthy of its pretended
Purity, but those Persons who were concerned in the Fact, ought by all the Laws
of Justice to answer for it.

And as it is no solid, though a plausible, and popular Argument, against the
Heathen Philosophy, that Sophists, Epicureans, and Peripateticks have used
their utmost Endeavors, to delude the World, with their false, and dangerous
Opinions: So it is no convincing Argument against the Truth of the Christian
Religion, that some Persons have had the horrid Impudence to corrupt the
Gospels themselves, and so have given an unhappy Rise to numerous* and most
impious Heresies.

CHAP. XIX.
THEN Celsus's Jew finds Fault with the Christians again, for misapplying, as
he fondly imagines, the Scripture-Prophecies to our Blessed Savior. But I
think, I have spoke sufficiently to this Point already.

Besides, if the Conviction of his Reader was the End which he proposed to
himself, he ought to have given us a Key, for the right understanding of the
Jewish Prophecies, and might have offered, one would think, some solid Reasons,
why they can by no Means be fairly accommodated to our Savior, and really he
needn't have been so sparing of his Time, and Strength, in examining a Matter
of such vast Importance, and especially, since he confidently affirms, that
there are Abundance of Persons, to whom the Prophecies might more fitly be
applied.

But Celsus, it seems, is not sensible at all, that though such extravagant
Discourse as this might become one, who is an utter Stranger to the Prophetic
Oracles; yet it is very improper, to come from the Mouth of any rational, and
sober Jew.

Indeed, a Person of the forementioned Character, will do what lies in his
Power, to evade the Interpretations of Scripture, which we Christians give, but
he will never grant what Celsus says, viz. That there are Abundance of Persons,
to whom the Prophecies may more fitly be applied, than to our Blessed Savior.

I have already observed, that the Prophets speak of a twofold Coming of the
Messiah, so that it is needless for me, to answer the pretended Jew, when he
says, The Prophets represent the Messiah, as a mighty Prince, and Sovereign of
the Universe.

CHAP. XX.
WHAT he adds, that God never destgn'd to bring so great a Plague upon the
World, as the Christian Religion, does strongly savor of the Malice of an
inveterate Jew, who supplies his Want of Reason, by a vast Stock of Impudence,
that he has always by him. But I defy Celsus, and all the Men in the World, to
prove, that a Doctrine, introduced by one, who reclaimed so many Persons, from
the most scandalous Vices, and effectually engaged 'em, to enter upon a
virtuous Course of Life, did deserve so scornful a Title, as that which the Jew
bestows upon our Holy Religion.

Celsus adds with equal Inadvertency, No one, says he, but a Mad Man, would
take your Savior to be God, or the Son of God, who instead of carrying the
aweful Stamp of Divinity, bore all the Marks of Infamy and Disgrace, and
especially since this Doctrine is entirely built on some forced, and even
ridiculous Interpretations of Scripture.

But he ought to produce some Instances of these forced Interpretations, which
he talks of, and these Marks of Infamy (as he thinks) which do so much disgust
him, and let us see, what it is, that he has to offer against us, that so the
Christians might return him a satisfactory, or at least a sufficient Answer, if
they thought the Matter did require it.

He says, That as the Sun, enlightening every Thing by its piercing Rays, does
immediately discover it self to us, by the glorious Light, which it transmits,
over the whole Sphere by turns: So your pretended Savior, had he been God, or
the Son of God, would have resembl'd that glorious Luminary.

This we say, believe, know, and can prove, he did. For when he came into the
World, or which is the same Thing, when the Sun of Righteousness did but begin
to shine, and its dazzling Rays were intercepted, by a dark, and sullen Cloud,
Justice seemed to regain its native Seat, the Neighing of Horses, the Clangor
of Trumpets, the Clashing of Arms, and the piercing Groans of Sick, and Wounded
Persons were heard no more; but a wonderful, and happy Calm succeeded the late
dismal Confusions. The All-wise GOD so ordered Matters, that he prepared the
Way, for the Success of the Gospel, by subjecting entire Nations to the Roman
Empire, that so our Savior's Apostles might not be hindered, as otherwise they
might have been, in observing the Orders, which their Blessed Lord had given
'em, to teach all Nations. For how would this have been practicable, (I wo'n't
say easy to be done) if People of different Countries had lived under Princes
of their own, had wanted a mutual, and fair Correspondence, and had not lived
under the Jurisdiction of the Roman Emperors.

It Is very well known, that our Savior was born, in the Reign of the Emperor
Augustus, who brought the greatest Part of the World under the Roman Yoke, and
made Mankind, almost, as it were, one Body Politic.

This manifestly, and greatly conduced to the Spreading of the Gospel, not
only, as it laid a Foundation for a Freedom of Commerce, but also as it happily
prevented those dreadful Wars, which, we have Reason to believe, would
unavoidably have happened, if all the Nations of the Earth had not been united,
under one common Empire. For before the Reign of Augustus, the Athenians waged
War with the Peloponnesians, and many Parallel Instances, if it were needful,
might easily be produced from History. And the strict, and most peaceful
Religion, which the Christians embrace, would never; in all Probability, have
been established in the World, as, Blessed be God, it is, if our Savior had not
been seasonably born, in a Time of profound, and universal Tranquillity.

Then Celsus says, That the Christians are guilty of wretched Sophistry, when
they have the Confidence to say, that he, whom they affirm, to be the Son of
God, was the VERY ETERNAL WORD. And he thinks this is unanswerable.

Because (says he) instead of that Pure, and Holy Word, which we exspected they
would give us an Account of, they only tell us of a miserable Man; and
scandalous, Wretch, that ended his Days upon a Cross, which was certainly the
most shameful, as well as painful Death, that he could possibly have sufr'd.

But this Objection has been already answered, and I have plainly showed, that
The Firstborn of every Creature was pleased to assume a Human Body, and Soul,
that at the Creation of the World, God gave a positive, and strict Command, and
the Person, who was concerned in its honorable, and speedy Execution, was no
other than the LIVING, and COETERNAL WORD.

And since my Business at present is to talk to a pretended Jew, I shall quote
a Passage out of the Old Testament, viz. He sent HIS WORD, Psalm. 107, V. 20.
and healed 'em, and delivered 'em from their Destructions.

What Celsus adds, in the Person of a Jew, That if this was the Word, that was
the Son of God, we heartily agree with you, is more than I ever heard any Jew
acknowledge* though I have frequently conversed, and disputed, with their most
Celebrated Doctors.

I have already proved, that our Blessed Savior was no Magician, nor Vile
Impostor, and I don't think fit, to imitate Celsus, in his frequent, and
ridiculous Tautologies.

CHAP. XXI.
LET us see now, what he has to say, against the Account we have, of the
GENEALOGY of our SAVIOVR.

Here one would think, he might seasonably have mentioned the Disputes, that
the Christians themselves have often had, by reason of the seeming
Disagreement, that there is between the several Evangelists, in this important
Affair. But with all his profound Knowledge of the Mysteries of our Holy
Religion, he hadn'd so much Policy, it seems, as that would amount to.

He says, This Genealogy, which, it seems, is orderly traced up, to the reputed
Parent of Mankind, and according to which your pretended Savior was of the
Honorable Line of the Jewish Kings, was a fine Invention, to procure him
greater Kindness, and Respect, from those weak Persons, who would be so
credulous, as to take any Notice of him. And (says he) it is a little odd indeed
(but the Christians can swallow any Thing) that the Carpenter 's Wife was
descended, from so Noble a Race, and, which is more unaccountable, that she her
self should know nothing of the Matter.

But pray what is this to the Affair in Hand? Suppose she was ignorant, that she
came from a Noble Family, what I beseech you, can you infer from thence, to the
Prejudice of Christianity? Might it not be true, that she was remotely
descended, from the common Parents of Mankind, and more immediately from the
Kings of Judah, whether she knew it, or no?

And perhaps Celsus thinks, that all the Ancestors of a Person, who is
oppressed with Poverty, must of Course resemble him in Condition, and that all
the Ancestors of a King did infallibly attain to Royal Dignity. But 'twou'd be
Loss of Time, to return an Answer, to such ridiculous Discourse as this. For
the Age in which our Lot is cast, will furnish us, with innumerable Instances
of Persons, who came of a Rich, and Noble Family, and yet by some unhappy
Accident, or other, were soon reduced to a much meaner Condition, than that of
the Virgin Mary, the Mother of our BLESSED LORD, and on the contrary, they
whose Outward Circumstances were formerly very inconsiderable, have been
advanced, by some Sudden, and Remarkable Turn of Providence, to the Highest
Pitch of External Grandeur.

CHAP. XXII.
THEN he asks, in his Cavilling Way, Pray what did your Jesus ever do, that was
truly Great, and any Way Worthy of a God? Did he baffle his Enemies, and
disconcert their most Politic Measures?

To this I answer, that we are told in the Gospels, that the Earth shook, the
Rocks were rent, the Graves were opened, the Vail of the Temple was rent in
two, the Sun suffered an Eclipse, and the Earth was covered with thick
Darkness, even such as might be felt. These were some of the Aweful
Circumstances, that attended the most bitter Passion of our Blessed Lord. And I
think, Celsus would have discovered much more of an ingenuous Temper, if
instead of relying on the Authority of the Evangelists, only when they offer
any Thing, that makes, as he thinks, for the Cause, which he espouses, he had
either wholly rejected the Gospels, or else wholly admitted 'em, and had but
thankfully admit'd the Amazing Condescension of the ETERNAL WORD, who willingly
became Incarnate, with this great Design, to recover a Degenerate World, from
the sad Ruins of their First Apostasy.

Another very considerable Circumstance, that makes for the Honor of our
Blessed Savior is this, viz. That even at this Distance of Time, His NAME has
such an Admirable Virtue, that it infallibly, and easily cures the most
dangerous Distempers, both of Body, and Mind. And as for the Sympathy, which
the Sun, if I may so say, discovered, when the Sun of Righteousness it self was
suffering a more dreadful Eclipse, which happened in the Reign of the Emperor
Tiberius; and as for the stupid Earth, which trembled, when the God of Nature
groaned, and was ready to expire; We have the concurring Testimony of Phlegon,
if I mistake not, in the Thirteenth Book of his Chronicon.

Then the Jew, thinking to ridicule our Savior, quotes those Words of Bacchus
in Euripides.

-- when ever I please Euripid. Bacc.

Heaven for my Rescue daigns to interpose.
But here in the first Place, I cannot but make this obvious Remark, that the
Jews, of all People in the World, are least fond of the Heathen Poets. However
for once, we'll suppose our Jew, to differ from all his Countrymen, and to
express a singular Affection, for the Learning of the Greeks. And I ask him,
whether, according to the Rules of any Logic, that he ever read, it even seems
to follow, that, because our Savior didn't avoid his Sufferings, he could not
have freed himself from 'em, if he pleased.

I think, he ought much rather to believe, what is related to us in the Acts of
the Apostles, that an Angel shook off St. Peter's Chains, and delivered him
from Prison, and that Paul and Silas, who were put into the Stocks, at
Philippi, a City of Macedonia, escaped out of Prison by a Miracle, and much
more would the Power of God have been engaged, to preserve our Savior, from
the grievous Sufferings, which he underwent, if the Decrees of Heaven, and the
Reason of Things had not conspired, if I may so say, to render 'em most highly
necessary.

For ought I know, Celsus would be ready to ridicule those Stories, or perhaps
might never take the Pains to read 'em, since in all Probability if he had ever
minded 'em at all, he would presently have resolved 'em, as he does our
Savior's Miracles, into the Power of Magic.

Then Celsus has the following Words, The Person that condemned your Pretended
Savior, didn't endure a Punishment, comparable to that of Pentheus, who was
deprived of his Senses, and torn to Pieces.

But he is so horribly ignorant, as not to know, that Pilate, considered in his
Public Capacity, was not so properly concerned, in Condemning our Blessed
Savior, as the whole Body of the Jewish Nation, which, we see, is for that
Reason dispersed, over the whole habitable World, and suffers a far worse
Distraction, than ever Pentheus did.

But why does he make no Mention at all of the troublesome Dream, that the Wife
of the Roman Governor had, insomuch that she said to her Husband, Have thou
nothing to do with Matxxvii V. 19.
that just Man; for I have suffered many Things this Day in a Dream, because of
him.

Then he leaves out those Things, that are evident, and remarkable Proofs of
the Divinity of our Savior's Person, and Commission, and takes Abundance of
Pains, to dress up the LORD of GLORY in a Fool's Goat, by the disadvantageous,
and ludicrous Relation, which he gives, of the horrid Affronts, that were
offered him, viz. The Scarlet Robe, that they put upon him, in a Way of
Mockery; the Crown of Thorns, that they put upon his Head, and the Reed, that
they put into his Hand.

But it may not be amiss, to ask you the following Question, From whence could
you learn these Things, but from those very Gospels, which you take the Liberty
to reject at Pleasure? And if this be the true State of the Case, how comes it
to pass, I beseech you, that such Persons as you are can take Occasion, to
reflect upon our Savior, from those very Passages of Scripture, which, as many
others, with great Reason, judge, do leave an Eternal Brand of Infamy on those,
who had the horrid Impudence to insult him?

I think, you should rather admire the Remarkable Integrity, which appears, in
the Writings of the Evangelists, and be filled with a Holy Awe, when you
consider the Amazing Condescension of the Blessed Jesus, who sealed his
Doctrine, with his most precious Blood. For we have no Account, that, after the
Sentence of Condemnation was passed upon him, he made the least Complaint, or
ever uttered a Word, that even seemed to be unworthy of the Greatest Hero, that
the World could ever boast of.

Then Celsus says, One would think, that now, if ever, he had a fair
Opportunity, to give full Proof of his pretended Deity, and in the Face, if I
may so say, of the whole habitable World, to be revenged of the Jews for the
base Affronts, which you see were offered, both to him, and to his
Dearly-belov'd, and Highly-honour'd Father.

But here I ask those of the Greeks, who believe an Overruling Providence, and
grant that Miracles have been wrought, Pray, why don't the injured Deity take
that Advantage (as on your Hypothesis he might easily do) which is plainly
given him, by those innumerable, and great Affronts, which are daily offered
him, by the bold Assertors of a Blind Fatality.

And when they return an Answer to this single Question, all the Arguments,
which they bring, may easily be retorted on themselves.

CHAP. XXIII.
THEN says the pretended Jew, What! Shall we say, that this vile Fellow that
was crucified the other Day had

Such Blood, as from the immortal God does flow? Hom. Il. l. 5, v. 340


This we must suppose to be spoken by him, in his usual Way of Banter, which
seems to me to be his peculiar Talent.

But I shall show, that the Evangelists, who relate these Matters, with a
becoming Gravity, and prudent Care, have left behind 'em a true, and sufficient
Account, of the most considerable Passages, that occurred, let Celsus say what
he pleases, to the contrary. They acquaint us, that the Blood, which flowed
from our Savior's Body, was not fabulous, like that, which Homer speaks of,
but that soon after he expired. One of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his
Side, and forthwith there came out John 19, V. 34, 35.
Blood, and Water, and he that saw it bare Record, and his Record is true, and
he knows that he says true.

In Dead Bodies, it is common for the Blood to stagnate, and we don't use, to
see Water trickle down from the Veins; but when our Savior was dead, Water,
and Blood flowed from his pierced Side, in a praeter-natural Way. And if
instead of putting an improper, and forced Sense, upon some Passages in the
Gospels, and thereby seeking all possible Occasion, to reproach our Savior,
and his Followers, one would but diligently, and impartially consider the
strange Events, which are there related, one might easily perceive, that the
Centurion, and they who were set to watch the dead Body of our Savior, (who
had been Eyewitnesses of the Earthquake, and many other surprising Accidents,
that happened at that Time) were struck with an unusual Terror, and said, Truly
this Mat. 27, V. 54.
was the SON of GOD.

Then our Bigoted Adversary, who only reads the Gospels, with a Design to pick
up some Scraps of 'em here and there, which, as he fondly imagines, do make for
the Interest, which he espouses, ridicules our Savior, on the Account of the
Gall, and Vinegar, that was given him to drink.

He was so very thirsty, says he, that he greedily drank off the bitter Draught.

In answer to this, I might easily show, that that Action of our Savior will
admit of an Allegorical Sense, and must by no Means be consigned to the bare
literal Interpretation of the Words. But I choose at present to return a more
general Answer, to this vile, and notorious Calumny, viz. That this Relation of
the Evangelists exactly agrees, with what was foretold, under the
Old-Testament-Dispensation. For in the 69th Psalm, The Messiah is brought in
speaking the following Words, They gave me also Gall for my Meat, and in my
Thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink.

Now let the Jews acquaint us, who it is that the Prophetical Psalmist speaks
of, and name any other Person, recorded in any History, whether Sacred, or
Profane, who had Gall, and Vinegar, given him to drink; or, let 'em freely
acknowledge, that what is here related was predicted, as what would certainly
befall that Person, whom we believe to be the TRVE MESSIAH, and then we come
upon 'em, and ask 'em this natural Question, how comes it to pass, Gentlemen,
that you should be so loath, to see YOUR OWN PROPHECIES accomplished, for which
you have deservedly so profound a Veneration?

And methinks, an impartial Enquirer into Truth should scarce need any other
Argument, to convince him, that our Blessed Savior was the Person, who was all
along foretold, than this, that in him all the Jewish Prophecies concerning the
Messiah were so exactly fulfilled.

CHAP. XXIV.
THEN Celsus's Jew addresses himself to us, in the following Words, Do you
really believe (even you who are so apt to swallow any Thing, that is proposed
to you, by some People, how ridiculous soever it may be) I say, do you really
believe, that we do ill, in not acknowledging your pretended SAVIOR to be GOD,
and not looking upon him, as one who sacrificed his Life, for the General
Advantage of the Humane Race, with this great Design, among others, to set us a
Bright Example of Patience, under the afflicting Hand of Almighty God.

To this I answer, that we justly blame 'em, because though they were born, in a
Land of Light, and educated in the Knowledge of the Law, and the Prophets,
which should have been Schoolmasters, to have brought 'em unto Christ, they
cannot answer the solid Arguments, which we bring against 'em, and yet will
obstinately persist in their wretched Unbelief, if the Grace of God don't
seasonably, and remarkably interpose in their Behalf.

Farther, we have great Cause to blame em', because they will not see that the
numerous, and great Advantages, which the Followers of our Blessed Lord did
most certainly reap, from the Heavenly Instructions which he gave 'em, were an
undeniable Argument, that he assumed Humane Nature, with a kind, and generous
Intention, to promote our common Interest, and 'twas not his Design at his
first Appearance in the World, immediately to distribute complete Rewards, and
inflict the severest Punishments on Men, according to their good or bad
Behavior, but to have his Doctrine published to the most distant Parts, as the
Prophets had most expressly foretold, and to that happy End to accompany the
Preaching of the Apostles with an irresistible Power.

Farther, they justly incur our Censure, by refusing to believe his Miracles,
which so evidently carried with 'em the Stamp of a Divine Authority, and
saying, That he cast out Devils, by Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils.

Lastly, We think they rendered themselves highly obnoxious to the just
Vengeance of Almighty God, by treating him as a Slave, and a Vagabond, which
was an odd Requital of the Kindness, which he showed 'em, in causing the Gospel
to be preached, to every City, and Village, throughout the Land of Judaea.

For there was nothing mean, or in any Respects unworthy of his Character, in
all the sad Fatigues which he underwent, but on the contrary, 'twas a great,
and highly Honorable Action, truly, and every Way worthy of an incarnate God,
to give wholesome Precepts, with a liberal Hand, to such Persons, as were
capable, of receiving Instruction from him.

What Celsus's Jew adds, is most notoriously false, Not being able, says he,
during the whole Course of his Life, so much as to prevail with his own
Disciples, to adhere to him, he was at last very severely punished, as I hope
all the World is by this Time sufficiently informed.

But pray what was it, that so greatly excited the Rage, and Envy of the Chief
Priests, Elders, and Scribes among the Jews, but the Consideration of the vast
Numbers of People, that followed our Blessed Savior, even into Deserts, some
of 'em being strangely charmed, with the sweet, and Heavenly Expressions, that
dropped from his sacred Lips, and others convinced by the Miracles, which he had
wrought, which filled the Minds of his most inveterate Enemies, with equal
Malice, and Astonishment? And how apparently false are those Words, which
follow, That he could not prevail with his own Disciples, to adhere to him, but
they gave too evident Proofs, of the Frailty of their Nature, by their wretched
Cowardice? For what Malignant Influence soever their irregular Fear might have
upon their Minds, which were not yet duly fortified, against the violent
Shocks, of outward, and approaching Calamities, they were fully satisfied in
their own Minds, and were ready, for the most Part, to profess, that our
Blessed Savior was no other, than the TRUE MESSIAH.

For St. Peter had no sooner denied his Lord, but struck with the Horror of
his Crime, He went out, Mat. 26. V. 74.
and wept bitterly, as St. Matthew tells us, and those of his Disciples, that we
read of, who retained a profound Respect for their Lord, and Master, but were a
little amazed and for the present, shocked, by considering the sad Calamities,
which befell him, regained that Native Courage, when he appeared to 'em, after
his Triumphant Resurrection. Nay, they not only believed, he was the SON OF
GOD, but were confirmed in the Christian Faith, and became more Courageous,
than ever, under the happy Conduct of the great Captain of their Salvation.

Celsus thinks, as appears, by the Sequel of his Discourse, there was no real
Excellency in our Savior's Doctrine, nor any Regularity, and Strictness,
observable in his Morals, sufficient to advance him above other Men, but that,
contrary to the Character, which he bore, he ought not to have died at all, or
at least there should have been nothing in his Death, that might justly induce
us, to lay down our Lives, when Occasion offers, for the Sake of our most Holy
Religion. But to me, I confess, this seems to be a Notion, not a little
unworthy of the Learning, and good Sense, even of a Heathen Philosopher.

On the contrary, our Savior, by dying for Mankind, has set us a Bright
Example of Patience, under all the Sufferings, to which the Providence of God
may call us, for the Sake of the True Religion, in Opposition to the ungrounded
Prejudices, which the Generality of Men are too apt to labor under, who are
Naturally ready to pay Divine Adoration, to the most insignificant Trifle,
rather then the Supreme, and Truly-Adorable Majesty, and viewing Persons, and
Things, in a false, or very imperfect Light, are wretchedly, and frequently
mistaken in the Judgment, which they pass upon 'em. For the greatest Instance
of the pretended Piety of these Bigots to Idolatry, is to level all their Wit,
and Malice, at those Well-meaning, and Truly-religious Persons, who from a deep
Sense of their indispensible Duty, have entirely devoted themselves a Holy, and
Living Sacrifice, to the Great Creator, and Supreme Governor of the Universe.

CHAP. XXV.
THEN Celsus, in the Person of the pretended Jew, continues his Charge, against
our Blessed Savior, in the following Words, Your Jesus could not keep himself
free from Evil.

But I think he would do very well, to instance in any MORAL EVIL, that might
justly be charged upon him.

If he means, that our Savior was guilty of some Vice, or other, (which must
be his Meaning, or else it is plain, that he talks very improperly) 'twill lie
upon this vile Caviller, to name any one Vice. if he can, that ever stained the
Life, and obscured the Bright Character of the HOLY JESUS.

But if his Meaning be no more than this, that our Blessed Lord himself was
exposed to many outward, and grievous CALAMITIES, such as Poverty, Persecution,
the Treachery of wicked Men, and especially the shameful, and painful Death,
which he suffered on the Cross, then I think, we may, with equal Justice, bring
in a severe Charge, against so great a Man as Socrates, who, with all his
Philosophy, and Moral Virtue, could not avoid falling into innumerable external
Dangers. And how many of the Greek Philosophers could I easily name, who were
not only oppressed with extreme Poverty, but made it the Matter of their de.
liberate Choice.

For Proof of this, we may have Recourse, to their own Celebrated Authors.

They tell us, that Democritus was so taken up, with Nobler Thoughts, that he
had no Leisure -- Hours, to bestow upon his Farms, that Crates gave away the
Income of his whole Estate, with the greatest Freedom imaginable, that he might
have the better Opportunity, for Philosophical Speculations, and that Diogenes,
out of his strange Frugality, was contented, to spend his Life in a Tub; and
yet no Man, I think, of common Sense, will, for that Reason, entertain hard
Thoughts, of so excellent a Person.

Then Celsus adds, That our Savior was far from being regular, and unblameable.

But let him give an Instance, if he can, of any one, among the Numerous
Followers of our Savior, who ever observed him, to do an unworthy Action, or
if he refuses to rely on their united Testimony, I think, it is fit, he should
acquaint us, with the Grounds, on which he builds his unjust, and heavy Charge.

It Is very unlikely, (to say no more,) that our Savior should be guilty of the
least Breach of any Promise, that he ever made, if we consider, how much, and
how readily he consulted the true Interest of his Followers, I mean the Welfare
of their Precious, and Immortal Souls.

And when we see, that the remarkable, and unlikely Events, which he foretold,
at some Distance of Time from their Accomplishment, have exactly answered his
Prediction, that his Doctrine is published, to all the Nations of the World,
and that they, who have embraced it, have, merely on that Account, been brought
before Governors, and Kings; we cannot but be filled with a Holy Admiration,
and encouraged, to have our firm, and entire Dependence, upon his Infinite
Wisdom, Irresistible Power, and Universal Goodness.

And sure I am; that Celsus himself cannot reasonably desire, to have greater
Evidence, of the Truth of any Doctrine, than that which our Savior has given
us, of the Truth of the Gospel, unless he be so wretchedly ignorant of the
Incarnation of the ETERNAL WORD, as to exspect, that the HUMANE NATURE, which
was assumed by him, should not be subject to the common Calamities, which
attend Humane Life, and by Consequence, to imagine, that we should want the
Brightest Example, of Submission to the Will of God, that any Mortal ever gave.

The only Reason, if it may be called so, that can possibly be assigned, for
such an extravagant Conceit, is this, that Celsus esteems PAIN the GREATEST
EVIL, and PLEASURE the HIGHEST GOOD.

And here he goes a Strain, beyond most of the Philosophers themselves, I mean,
of those that believed an Overruling Providence, and allow Courage, and
Constancy, and the like Endowments, a Place among the MORAL VIRTUES, which are
at once so Necessary, and so Ornamental.

And our Savior was so far, from subverting the Foundation of our Faith, by
the various, and grievous Calamities, to which he was exposed, and which in the
Event did befall him, that I think, he has taken the most effectual Method, to
confirm it, if we can but divert our Thoughts, from the shocking Calamities,
that attend Humane Life, to the Bright Objects, and Glorious Entertainments of
the Future State, in which we shall look, with an Holy Disdain, upon Sin,
Satan, and this lower World.

CHAP. XXVI.
THEN Celsus has the following Words, Surely you will not have the Confidence
to say, that your JESUS, being unable to work upon the Minds of Men, in the
wretched World, in which we live, went down to Hell it self, to see if he
could not make Converts there.

But our Savior when he was here on Earth, had so many, and such zealous
Followers, that, for that Reason, he had abundance of Enemies, and when he was
stripped, as it were, of his Humane Body, did converse with Naked Spirits, in the
Infernal Region, to make Converts of those, that were capable, of being duly
wrought on, by his powerful Ministry, and thereby of answering the DEEP
DESIGNS, of his ETERNAL, and UNIVERSAL LOVE.

What Celsus's Jew adds is, I think, very ridiculous. If (says he) after you
have tamely suffered your selves, to be led aside, like a Company of prodigious
Fools, you think you need no other Apology, than a few Pityful Arguments, in
your own Defense, Pray why may not all those Scoundrels, and Villains, (that
like your JESUS have been publicly executed, according to the just Demerit of
their Crimes) be accounted Persons, who had the Broad-Seal of Heaven?

But nothing, in my Mind, can be more clear, than the wide Difference, between
the Exemplary Sufferings of our Blessed Savior, and the just Execution of
those, who have been condemned as Impostors, or punished for some scandalous
Crime. And sure I am, that no Man can show, with any Color of Reason, that a
Person can ever be reclaimed, from the most notorious Crimes, or indeed from
any Immorality, by the Help of Magic.

Then the pretended Jew, comparing our Savior with a Company of Highway Men,
says, That by a Parity of Reason a Person may have the Impudence, to say, that
such a Highway Man, instead of being a Person of so infamous a Character, was
no less than a GOD, because forsooth he acquainted his cursed Crew beforehand,
that he should shortly suffer all those grievous Calamities, which in the Event
did befall him.

To this I answer, in the first Place, that our Believing our Blessed Savior
to be the True Messiah is not merely, or chiefly founded, on his Foretelling
the dreadful Sufferings, to which he was exposed, and which for our sakes he
readily underwent.

In the second Place, I acknowledge, that the Holy Scriptures acquaint us, that
though our Savior was GOD as well as MAN; yet He was numbered with the
Transgressors, that Barabbas, a Robber, was released, and our Savior
crucified, and placed between two Condemned Malefactors. And I grant, that if
our Savior's Disciples bore any Resemblance to Thieves, and if 'twas known in
the Memory of Man, that Persons of that infamous Character did readily expose
themselves to the greatest Contempt, and Scorn, and the worst Treatment, that
Humane Wit, and Malice could invent, and if they can rationally be supposed, to
do all this, from a just Regard to the Glory of GOD, and the Holy Precepts of
our BLESSED REDEEMER; then I confess, Celsus would have had some Ground, for
his bold, and most profane Comparison.

But our Savior, who laid down his precious Life, as a Sacrifice for the Sins
of Men, and his sincere Disciples, (who, by their unparalled Sufferings, bore
an Honorable Testimony, to the Truth of his most Excellent Doctrine, and were
the only Persons, whose bare Religion ever brought 'em into Trouble) underwent
the most violent Persecutions, from their Enemies, without the least Color of
Reason, and contrary to the Known, and Fundamental Laws of Humanity.

CHAP. XXVII.
NOW observe, how Celsus renders himself ridiculous, by what he says, of the
sincere Followers of our Blessed Lord, During the greatest Part of his Life,
Says he, they conversed with him, in a Femiliar Manner, and seemed to listen to
the Instructions, which he gave 'em, but withal, were so cunning, that, when
they saw he was condemned to dye, they would neither dye with him, nor for him,
and were so far, it seems, from putting in Practice that wholesome Doctrine,
which their Master had taught 'em, viz. Cheerfully to encounter the greatest
Difficulties, and Dangers, and to be ready even to dye, for the sake of their
Religion, that they shamefully denied him, and didn't envy any Martyrs, the
imaginary Honor of laying down their Lives, for the Cause of Christ.

Here Celsus takes the Hint from the Gospels, and aggravates some Faults of the
Disciples, with a Design, no doubt, to expose the Christian Religion to
Contempt, not considering they were just entered, into the School of Christ,
nor mentioning one Syllable of their Recovery, from their grievous Falls, which
was so remarkable, that they preached the Gospel boldly, and suffered abundance
of Ill-treatment, at the Hands of the Jews, and had the Courage, to welcome,
and even defy Death, in its most horrid Shapes. I perceive, he didn't care at
all, to take Notice of what our Savior foretold to St. Peter, When thou shall
be old, thou shall stretch forth thy Hands. Nor of those John 21, V. 18 V. 19.
Words, This spoke he, signifying by what Death he should glorify God.

He says not one Word of St. James, the Brother of St. John, nor of the latter,
and seems to be ignorant, that Herod killed John the Baptist with the Sword,
because he bore Testimony to the Truth of Christ. Nor does he do St. Peter, and
the rest of the Apostles so much Justice, as to mention their flaming Zeal, in
spreading the Gospel of our Savior, and to give us an Account, how They
departed from the Acts 15, V. 41.
Presence of the Council, rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer
Reproach for his Name; wherein they vastly exceeded all that is related, in the
Histories of the Greeks, concerning the Courage, and Constancy of their
justly-admir'd Philosophers.

So that we plainly see, that from the very Infancy of Christianity they who
embraced it, were effectually taught by it, to despise the gaudy Vanities of
the present Life, (which the greatest Part of Mankind imagine to be so
charming, and agreeable) and to have the sincere Desires of their Souls most
vehemently carried out, after another Life, which is far more excellent, and in
a word, is every way worthy of a GOD.

I cannot conceive, how Celsus can be freed from the Charge of willful
Imposture, in the following Words* All that your pretended SAVIOVR could do,
says he, was only to get ten wicked Mariners, and Publicans, to publish his
Doctrine to the World, and 'Iwas more than he could do, after all his big
Pretenses, to convince even those credulous Animals of its Truth.

For it is plain, even from the open Confession of the Jews, that not only ten
Persons were overcome, by the Divine Efficacy of his Doctrine, nor a Hundred,
nor a Thousand, but at one Time four Thousand, and at another Time a much
greater Number, and that he wrought upon 'em; to so great a Degree, that they
forlow'd him into Deserts, which alone were capable of containing those vast
Numbers of Persons, that through him did believe in GOD, and where they reaped
great Benefit, from his Exemplary Life, and Engaging Conversation.

I confess, the frequent Repetitions, which Celsus makes, do almost force me,
to be guilty of wretched Tautology, and make me as impertinent as himself.

For if I didn't, in some Measure, (though sorely against my Will) comply with
his way of Writing, perhaps some weak Persons might suspect, that out of wicked
Policy I passed by his Objections, being conscious to my self, that I was
utterly incapable, of returning a satisfactory, or even tolerable Answer.

Then says he, Pray is not it the most absurd Thing in the World, to suppose,
that he, who when he was alive, and used all the little Arts he had, could gain
no Followers in comparison, or at least none of any Sense, or Rank, should
after his Death, by the Ministry of his Apostles, so strangely influence a
considerable Part of Mankind, as they are represented by some to do.

But according to the Rules of strict Reasoning, which he pretends to be so
great a Master of, he should have argued thus, if after his Death he furnished
his Ambassadors, with all necessary Abilities, to work upon the Minds of Men,
and did actually, and so wonderfully move all the secret Springs of the Humane
Soul; then there is no Question to be made, but that when he was on Earth in
Person, he made deep Impressions on the Minds, even of the greatest Barbarians,
partly by his powerful Preaching, and partly by his uncontested Miracles.

CHAP. XXVIII.
BY and By he asks, Pray what Reason have you to believe, he was the Son of
God? And personating one of us, returns this Answer, in his usual way of
Banter, Because we know, says he, that he laid down his Life, to destroy the
Works of the Devil.

But the Faith of Christians, in an Affair of this Nature, and Importance, is
built, I can assure him, on no single Argument, how persuasive soever it may
be, but the concurring, and clear Evidence of several Motives, a few of which I
have already mentioned.

And I shall have Occasion perhaps, to make Mention of some other Arguments, on
this Head, not only in my Answer to Celsus's Book, entitled A TRUE RELATION,
but also in some other Treatises, if GOD shall be pleased to afford me that
Measure of the Assistance of his Spirit, that will be necessary, to accomplish
my Design.

Then, as if we were so weak, as to believe, that our Savior's bare Suffering
on the Cross, was sufficient to prove, He was the Son of God, He says, What if
he did really suffer, cannot we instance in many others, that suffered as well,
and as much as he?

But Celsus, in this Matter, acts the Part of one of the most unfair Enemies,
which the Christian Religion has, who, when they read the History, of the
Crucifixion of our Savior, immediately imagine, that we FONDLY CANONIZE all
Persons, who were ever so unfortunate, as to hang upon a Cross.

This, any one may see, is the common Practice of the Adversary, I have to do
with, who, being utterly unable, to resist the clear Evidence, which the
Miracles of our Blessed Savior, do carry in 'em, of the Truth of our Holy
Religion, has the Face, to misrepresent 'em to the World, as done by mere
Legerdemain, or rather by the Assistance of the Devil.

But this Pityful, and Vile Cavil has been so frequently answered, according to
my slender Ability, that really it quite tires my Patience, to repeat Things so
often, as I see I must.

Then Celsus makes us say, That our Savior was the SON OF GOD, because he
cured the lame, and blind, and raised a few from the dead, as we Poor Creatures
that we are! are ready to imagine.

But that, in Spite of all that he can say, this Consideration of it self is a
solid Argument, to prove, he was the SON OF GOD, is plain, from that Famous
Prophecy in Isaiah, Then the Eyes of the Blind shall be opened, and the Ears of
the deaf shall Isa. 35, V. ^.
be unstopp'd, Then shall the lame Man leap as an Heart.

And it is highly improbable, to say no more, that the Evangelists should forge
the Account, they give us, of some, raised from the dead, because had they been
given, to inventing Fictions, merely to serve a Turn, they would have given us
more frequent Instances of that Nature than we meet with, and of the
Resurrection of those, who had been longer dead, than those, of whom we read in
the Gospels.

But their giving so few Instances of Persons restored to Life, seems to me, to
be as plain a Proof as can be, that the Evangelists, whatever Celsus may say,
were Men of HONEST PRINCIPLES, and the farthest of all Men in the World, except
our Blessed Savior, from being Persons of INTRIEGVE.

They instance only in the Daughter of the Ruler of the Synagogue, (whose Case
seems foreign to the Purpose, for our Savior says of her, She is not dead, but
sleeps) in the only Son of a Widow, whom our Savior recovered, out of tender
Compassion to his disconsolate Mother, ordering the Coffin to be stopped. And
Lastly in Lazarus, who had continued some Days in the Grave, as the Evangelist
acquaints us; and I would offer the following Consideration, to the most
judicious of our Adversaries, and at this Time more immediately to the Jew,
whom Celsus personates, viz. That as in Elisha's Time, there were many Lepers,
but none of 'em were cured, that we read of, except Naaman the Syrian; and many
Widows in the Days of the Prophet Elijah, but he was only sent to the Widow of
Sarepta, in the Country of Sidon, (for she alone was thought worthy of the
Miracle he wrought:) so many Persons died, when our Savior was on Earth, but
he only raised those from the dead, who, in some Sense, had QVALIFY'D
THEMSELVES for so SPECIAL A FAVOR. And this I am apt to think he did, to
typifie something future, and give Mankind convincing Proofs, of the Truth and
Excellency of that Doctrine, which he introduced into the World.

And I may safely say, that according to the Promise he had made, his Disciples
did far stranger Things, than those, which he himself exhibited to the outward
Senses of them, who were the happy Spectators of his Miracles.

For the Eyes of the spiritually blind were frequently opened by 'em, the Ears
of those, who once were deaf to all the awakening Precepts of Virtue, and
Religion, were unstopp'd, that so they might receive the Word of God, and the
Promise of Eternal Life, and many, who were spiritually lame, were cured by the
Gospel; insomuch that they don't only leap, but even leap as a Stag, which
Animal, as Naturalists observe, is an Enemy to Serpents, and happily expels
their Poison.

They derived such a healing Virtue, from their Heavenly Physician, that they
could immediately tread on those Serpents, and Scorpions, by which they were
once most sadly crippl'd, without incurring the least seeming Danger. Nay, they
were effectually steeled, if I may so say, against the strong, and too often
fatal Impressions, which Vice, and Immorality are apt to make, upon the Minds
of Men, and in a great Measure fortified, against the malicious, and vigorous
Attempts of United Demons.

CHAP. XXIX.
WHEN our Savior admonished his Disciples, to avoid those designing Wretches,
who confidently affirmed, they were the TRVE MESSIAH, and endeavored by their
cursed Enchantments, to draw Men after 'em, (for 'twas needless to admonish
'em, to avoid every trisling, and conceited Impostor) he directed his Discourse
to 'em after the following Manner, If any Man, says he, shall say unto you, Lo!
here is Christ, or there; believe it not. For there shall arise FALSE CHRIST'S,
and false Prophets, and they shall show great Signs, and Wonders; Insomuch that
(if it be possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. Behold I have told you
before. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold he is in the Desert, go not
forth. Behold he is in the secret Chambers, believe it not. For as the Lightning
comes out of the East, and shines even unto the West; so shall also the Coming
of the Son of Man be.

In another Place he has the following Words, Many will say unto me in that
Day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? And in thy Name cast out
Devils? and in thy Name done many wonderful Works? And then will I profess to
'em, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work Iniquity.

But Celsus, confounding the Miracles of our Savior, with the-Enchantments of
Men, breaks out into the following Exclamation, O the Force of Truth! He
himself don't stick to acquaint us, as even your own Writings inform us, that
many shall come, and do the same Miracles, that were wrought by him, and on
that very score, O monstrous Impudence! He charges 'em with being wicked Men,
and notorious, and vile Impostors; and says, That Satan will be the Original
Author of their cursed Arts. So that he himself acknowledges, that it is so far
from bearing the Stamp of a DIVINE AVTHORITY, that it is owing to a
Dishonorable, and Unhappy Source, and not being able to resist the clear
Evidence of Truth, does, in the very same Breath, condemn their Miracles, and
his own. Now is not it a most intolerable Thing, that from the very same
Actions, he, by all Means, must be denominated a GOD, and Others be branded
with the Infamous Title of MAGICIANS?

So that his own Mouth condemns him, and we have not more Reason, to think, that
they were Wicked Men, than that he himself was one of the Vilest Persons upon
Earth. For he has plainly told us, that Actions of that Nature, were certain
Indications of the most Notorious Deceit, and Impiety, and not of a Divine
Power, accompanying the Persons, who performed 'em.

But here it is obvious to observe Celsus's Malicious Mis-representation of
Matters, since our Savior's Language is vastly different, from what the
Pretended Jew would fain have it to be.

Perhaps he might have had some plausible Pretense, sor his Profane Discourse,
if our Savior had admonished his Disciples, to avoid all those, who should
make their Boast of Miracles, and had infinuated nothing of the unjust Claim,
they laid, to the Title of the TRVE MESSIAH.

But since we are told, that they gave out, they were the CHRIST, (which I
think, is a Profession, that Magicians don't commonly make) and since we are
told, they should be Persons, of very loose Morals, and should work such
Miracles, as were vastly different from those, which were wrought by our
Blessed Savior, the Conduct of the Holy JESUS in this very Affair, is so far
from carrying the Appearance of the least Imposture, that to me, it is a
Convincing Argument, that both he, and his Disciples, wrought their Miracles,
by the POWER of GOD, and that others, who were acted by Satan, did only
counterfeit the Glorious Actions of CHRIST, and his Apostles, and so prevailed
with some deluded Persons, to believe, that their High Pretensions were most
just, and reasonable.

The Apostle Paul acquaints us, how The Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition,
should be revealed, and exalt himself above 2 These. 2. V. 3.
all that is called GOD, or worshipped, so that as GOD, he sits in the Temple
of God, showing himself, that he is GOD.

And in another Place he says, Now ye know what withholds, that he might ibid.
V. 6
be revealed in his Time. For the Mystery of Iniquity does already work; only
he who now lets will let, until he be taken out of the Way. And then shall that
wicked One be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume, with the Spirit of his
Mouth, and shall destroy with the Brightness of his Coming; even him, whose
Coming is after the Working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying
Wonders, and with all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness, in them that perish.

And he gives the Reason, why God would suffer him, to act his Hellish Part,
upon the Stage of the World, viz. Because they received not the Love of the
Truth, that they might be saved, that they all might be damned, who believed
not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness.

Now let any one show, with any Color of Reason, that the Miracles of our
Savior, and his Disciples, which are related in the Gospels, were done by such
WICKED ARTIFICE, as the Apostle speaks of, and it may not be amiss, to read the
Prophecy of Daniel concerning ANTICHRIST.

But Celsus represents the Words of our Savior to a Disadvantage, when he
makes him say, That many should come after him, who should do the very same
Miracles, with those which he wrought himself, and yet be Wicked Persons, and
Notorious Impostors.

For as there was a VAST DIFFERENCE, between the DIABOLICAL POWER, by which the
Wise Men of the Egyptians were acted, and the DIVINE ASSISTANCE, which Moses
had, when he wrought his Miracles, the Event sufficiently proving, that what
the former did, was merely owing to the Force of their Cursed Enehantmenss, and
what was performed by the latter, was manifestly owing to the INFLVENCE of the
BLESSED SPIRIT: So there was the same between those of our SAVIOVR, and those
of ANTICHRIST, and his Confederates, who counterfeited the Miracles of CHRIST,
and his Apostles, and Followers, which had a most wonderful, and happy Issue,
Mankind being thereby induced, to embrace the BEST RELIGION, that was ever
introduced into the World.

Celsus, I confess, discovers, that he is not entirely ignorant of the
Scriptures, when he makes our Savior say, That Satan would be the Original
Author, of that Cursed Art, by which false Prophets would impose upon the
World, but is a little too hasty in drawing his pretended Consequence, viz. Our
Savior's Miracles, even according to his own free Confession, did bear no
Stamp of a DIVINE AVTHORITY, but were such Works, as were to be performed, it
seems, by some of the Vilest Persons, that ever breathed on Earth.

For he makes no Difference at all, between those Things that are Homogeneous,
and those that are Heterogeneous, as Logicians Call 'em, between Things of the
same, and Things of a very different Kind.

Now as a Wolf, and a Dog, do widely differ, though there seems to be some
considerable Resemblance between 'em, with respect to their Shape, and Tone of
Voice, and the same may be said of a Stock-Dove, and a Pidgeon: So what is done
by the Help of Magic is not of the same kind, with what is performed by a
Power, that is Truly-Supernatural and Divine.

And if such wonderful Things, even in the Judgment of Celsus, are done, by the
Assistance of Infernal Spirits, may we not rationally suppose, that Things,
that are much more unaccountable, may be easily done, by the immediate
Assistance of the Ever-Blessed God?

Shall every Thing that is evil, be found among Men, and every Thing that is
truly-good, be banished from the World? I think, there is much more Reason, to
lay down this, as a General, and most Excellent Maxim, that wherever there is
any real Evil, under the Disguise of some real Good, the opposite Good must, at
least, be equal to it, with Respect to its Degree.

And thus we may strongly argue, from Miracles wrought by the Help of Magic,
to such as are performed, by the special Assistance of the Great GOD himself.

We must either deny, that any Good or Evil, is to be found in the World, or,
on the Supposition of the latter, must allow the former, and perhaps if we
grant the former, we must affirm the latter; or at least on the Supposition of
any real Evil, must allow an equal Proportion of that real Good, to which the
real Evil is directly opposite.

He that will assert the one, without granting the other, seems to me, to talk
at the same mad Rate, with one, who, confessing, that there are such Things as
Sophisms, or false Shows of Reason, should deny, that there is any such Thing,
as true Logic in the World, which is widely different from 'em.

So that I say, if we grant, that there is such a Thing as Magic, which has so
great an Influence upon wicked Demons, as to engage 'em, to lend their ready,
and joint Assistance, to those, who profess that Art, it naturally follows,
that Almighty God is obliged, in some Sense, to exert his Power, in Performing
such Miracles, as carry with 'em a convincing Evidence of the Truth, they were
designed to attest.

The next Thing, I take it, that we have to do, under this important Head, is
to examine into the Life, and Conversation, of those, who pretend, they have a
Power, to produce supernatural Effects, and to enquire, whether the wonderful
Operations they perform, do any way tend, to the Temporal, and Eternal
Advantage of the Souls of Men, and we must carefully distinguish between
Magicians, who hold a Correspondence with the Devil, and those happy Persons,
who are filled with the Holy Spirit of God, (whose Divine Impressions they
experience both on their Souls, and Bodies,) who consult the true, and best
Interest of Mankind, and endeavor to make Men Proselites to the most Excellent
Religion, that was ever revealed by a God.

Now if an Enquiry of this Kind be necessary, to distinguish true Miracles from
those which are false, to prevent us from making Miracles, where there are
really none, and engage our Assent, to the Truth of 'em, when the Finger of God
may very plainly be discovered, then we shall find, that the Miracles, which
were wrought by Moses, and our Blessed Savior, were owing to an Extraordinary
Appearance of the Power of God, since they were Solemn Seals, by which the
Truth of the Jewish, and Christian Religion was confirmed, each of which, we
know, was embraced by a considerable Body, of very Wife, and Virtuous Men.

Besides, how could Moses's Law, which forbids the Jews to worship Images, and
teaches 'em, to raise their Minds above all created Beings, and fix 'em, on the
Eternal God, the Great Creator, and Sovereign Disposer of the Universe, I say,
how could such a Law derive its Original, from the Horrid Practice of Magicians.

And since it is a Jew, that Celsus personates, I would humbly desire him, to
resolve the following Question, How comes it to pass, that you (who firmly
believe, that the Miracles, which Moses wrought, were performed, by the
Extraordinary Assistance of the Spirit of God, and endeavor to defend 'em
against those, who say, that the Wife Men of Egypt did strange Things, by the
Help of Magic) cannot be prevailed with, to acknowledge, that our Blessed
Savior performed his Miracles, by an Immediate Assistance from Above, but are
so strangely fond, of Imitating the Egyptians, whom you know, to be your sworn,
and irreconcilable Enemies?

For if we may be allowed, to judge of Miracles, by the Event, and argue in
Favor of YOUR JVSTLY-CELEBRATED MOSES from his being raised up by Almighty
God, to be the HONORABLE FOUNDER of the Jewish Polity, I am sure, we may say
far more, in Commendation of our BLESSED SAVIOVR, since the imperfect Moses
is not worthy to be named, with the HOLY, and SPOTLESS JESUS.

For, as for Moses, it is obvious to remark, that he found, ready to his Hand,
such Persons, among the Posterity of Abraham, as liy'd in a Religious
Observance of Circumcision, that initiating Rite, and many approved Customs,
which were handed down, by Tradition, from Father to Son, and he knew very
well, that they were, in a great Measure, disposed, to receive his useful
Instructions, and practice his wholesome Precepts, when 'twas he, under God,
who brought 'em out of Egypt, and the Laws he gave 'em, had the Stamp of a
Divine Authority, as You your self acknowledge.

But Our Savior making, in some Sense, a much greater Attempt, introduced a
Religion, that was in a Manner new, and caused it, to gain Ground continually,
in Spite of all the rooted Prejudices of a different Education.

And if 'twas highly necessary, that Moses should convince, not only the
Sanhedrim, but also the Common People among the Jews, of the Truth of his
Doctrine, by confirming it, with those Miracles, which the Scriptures gives us
an Account of, there was at least equal Reason, why our Blessed Savior should
take the same Method, to prove the Divinity of his Mission, since the People
did naturally, eagerly, and very justly expect Signs, and Wonders, in such
extraordinary Cases.

Nay, 'twas evidently necessary, he should work far greater Miracles than
Moses, to wean the bigoted Jews, from their Humane Traditions, and prove, by
Dint of Argument, and plain Appeals to Sense, and common Observation, he was a
Person, who was TRULY-DIVINE, and in a far more noble Sense, than any of their
Ancient, and JUSTLY -- CELEBRATED Prophets.

And how was it possible, that he should be otherwise, when the Manifest Design
of the Glorious Prophecies under the Old-Testament-Dispensation, was obscurely
to reveal him, under the Character of the TRUE MESSIAH?

And what Celsus's Jew objects, against the Christians, may every Whit as well
be urged by him, to the Prejudice of the Authority of Moses, Viz. That Our
Blessed Savior was guilty of the most Notorious, and Vile Imposture.

The Jew breaks out into the following Exclamation, O the Force of Truth! He
himself acquaints us, as your own Writings inform us, that many should come,
who would perform the same Miracles, that he wrought himself, and on that very
score, O horrid Impudence! he has the Face to charge 'em, with being wicked
Men, and most notorious Impostors.

And a Greek, or Egyptian, or any other Infidel, may say thus to a Jew, O the
Force of Truth! Moses has told us plainly, as your own Writings inform us, that
many should come, who would perform the same Miracles, which he did himself,
and yet be very wicked, and designing Wretches.

For it is writ in YOUR OWN LAW, If there arise among you a Prophet, or a
Dreamer of Dreams, and Deuteronomy. 13, V. 1.
he gives thee a Sign, or a Wonder, and the Sign, or the Wonder come to pass,
whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, let us go after other Gods, which thou have
not known, and let us serve 'em; Thou shall not hearken to that Prophet, or
Dreamer of Dreams.

The pretended Jew goes on, and makes our Savior say, That Satan will be the
Original Author of their Cursed Art, thinking thereby to ridicule, and insult
him. But the Christians, or any Infidels, may as well allege, against his
Celebrated Moses, that these Prophets, and Dreamers of Dreams would counterfeit
his Miracles.

The Jew says farther, That our Savior's Miracles, even according to his own
Confession, have no Stamp of a Divine Authority, but are such Works, as would
be done, by the Vilest Persons upon Earth.

But an Infidel may turn the Argument upon Moses, and say, that his Miracles,
even according to his own Confession, have no Stamp of a Divine Authority, but
are such Works, as would be done, by Persons of the most infamous Character.
And the following Words, that our Savior, not being able, to resist the
Evidence of Truth, does, in the same Breath, condemn their Miracles, and his
own, may every whit as well be retorted upon Moses.

And those Words of the Jew, Is Not it, I beseech you, a most intolerable Thing,
that from the same Actions He by all Means, must be denominated A GOD, and
Others be branded with the Infamous Title of MAGICIANS?

I say those Words of the Jew may be turned upon Moses thus, Is Not it, I
beseech you, a most intolerable Thing, that from the same Actions He by all
Means must be denominated a Faithful, and EMINENT SERVANT of the BLESSED GOD,
and Others be branded with the odious Title of IMPOSTORS.

And those Words of the Jew, Even According to his own free Confession, we have
no more Reason, to think, that they were wicked Men, than that he was a vile
Wretch himself, may be turned upon Moses thus, what an Instance of Madness is
it, to look upon Moses as a Servant of GOD, and more than ordinary Prophet, and
at the same Time to deny these honorable Characters, to such Persons, as were
to work Miracles, as well as he, even according to his own Prediction? And
those Words of the Jew (which he thinks do give more Force to the Objection)
viz. That our Savior himself has told us, that such Actions were certain
Indications of the most notorious Deceit, and Impiety, and not of a Divine
Power, accompanying the Persons who performed 'em, may easily be retorted upon
Moses.

CHAP. XXX.
THEN Celsus's Jew, speaking to those of his Native Country, who had embraced
Christianity, asks us the following Question (for it is plain, he had his Eye
upon us all along, though for a blind, he directs his Discourse to them) What in
God's Name could induce you, to believe in your pretended Savior? Was it his
Foretelling, that he should rise from the dead? But this may be turned upon
Moses thus, What induced you to believe in your most Celebrated Prophet? Was it
his Foretelling the Circumstances of his Death, in the following Words, So
Moses the Servant Deuteronomy. 35. V. 4. 5.
of the Lord died there, in the Land of Moab, according to the Word of the
Lord. And he buried him, in a Valley, in the Land of Moab, over against
Beth-peor: But no Man knows of his Sepulcher, unto this Day.

If the Jew ridicules our Savior, because he foretold, that he should rise
from the Dead, we may, by a Parity of Reason, expose Moses to Contempt, and
say, that he was the Author of the Pentateuch, and inserted that Passage, No
one knows his Sepulcher, unto this Day, with a politic Design, to render his
Name Immortal.

Then the Jew continues his Discourse, to those of his own Countrymen, that
were Christians, in the following Words, Well, we'll suppose, says he, for
once, that your pretended Savior foretold, that he should rise from the dead.
But pray, have not others made Use of the same pityful Artifice, to take
Advantage of the Weakness of some silly People?

Zamolxis, Servant to Pythagoras, took this Method, to delude the Scythians,
and it seems, Pythagoras was so cunning, as to do the same. And Rampsinitus is
reported to have done the like in Egypt, who, if any Credit is to be given to
History, played at Dice with Ceres, in the Region of the dead, and forced her,
to give him a Handkerchief, she had, that was curiously embroidered. Orpheus
did the same, among the People, who were called Odrysae, Protesilaus among the
Thessalians, and Hercules, and Theseus among the Inhabitants of Toenarus. But
here it deserves to be considered, whether any Person, that was really dead,
did ever rise with the same Numerical Body.

Do you, who look on the Accounts, that are given by others, as trifling
Stories imagine, that the Catastrophe of your senceless Drama is ever the more
just, or probable, because you endeavor to adorn it, with some fine
Inventions, because your Crucified JESUS gave a dreadful Outcry, when he lay
at the very Point of Death, because there happened to be an Earthquake, and a
more than ordinary Darkness?

You boldly affirm, that he rose from the dead, (though it seems, he was far from
being able, to secure his Person, while he remained on Earth) and showed upon
his Body all the Marks of his Crucifixion, and the very Print of the Nails.

But you your selves acknowledge, that there was no Witness of the Truth of
this Account, but one Fanatical Woman, and perhaps some Body else, of the same
wretched Caball, that was plainly deluded, by her own idle Whimsies, or too
easily believed, what she would have to be true, as it frequently happens, or
in the last Place (which seems to me more probable) had a Mind to amuse People,
with this imaginary Miracle, and furnish such Cheats, as her Self, with a
Pretense, for disturbing the World, with Notorious, and Vile Impostures.

But since it is a pretended Jew, that says all this, I shall answer him
accordingly, and turn the Edge of his own Weapon upon Moses, by desiring, that
he would resolve me the following Question, Pray how many gross Impostors have
done Miracles, to take Advantage of the Weakness of some silly People, and yet
you are forward to give Credit to Moses, on the Account of the Miracles, he
wrought?

Besides, methinks it is somewhat unsuitable to the Character of a Jew, to
allege the Instances of Zamolxis, and Pythagoras, since the Jews, it is well
known, are little conversant with the Greek Historians.

The Account which he gives us; of Rampsinitus, and Ceres, would have come,
with a much better Grace, from the Mouth of an Egyptian, who, to lessen the
Authority of Moses, might say, that 'twas much more probable, that the
forementioned Persons should play at Dice together, in the Region of the Dead,
and that he, as a Proof of his Descent thither, should produce the embroidered
Handkerchief, which he took from the Goddess, than that Moses went into the
Darkness, which God himself did inhabit, and that he alone had the Honor, to
come near him, as he himself gives us an Account.

And we, who are the Followers of the Holy Jesus, may make the following
Address, to the pretended Jew, when he talks at so extravagant a Rate, Pray how
do you answer the Greeks, and Egyptians, who raise many of the same Objections
against Moses, that you offer against our Blessed Savior? When you have heaped
up all the Arguments, you can think of, in Defense of Moses, (though we think, at
the same time, that we can solidly, and clearly prove him to be a True, and
very Eminent Prophet) you will be forced, unawares to acknowledge. even according
to those Arguments, which you your Selves make use of, that our Blessed Savior
did vastly, and indeed infinitely exceed him.

But because Celsus's Jew makes mere Game of the Histories which give us an
Account, of the Descent of some Heroes into the Region of the Dead, and their
Return from thence, and thinks, that their pretended DIVINE SORT OF ABSCONDING
for a Time, and then coming back again, and making an Appearance upon the Stage
of the World, was all Artifice, and Delusion (as he plainly intimates, when he
speaks of the Opinion, that the Odrysians had of Orpheus, the Thessalians of
Protesilaus, and the Inhabitants of Toenarus entertained of Hercules, and
Theseus,) I shall make it appear, that there is no Manner of Comparison,
between these Fables of the Greeks, and the Account that the Evangelists give
us, of the Resurrection of Our Savior.

It Is obvious to remark, that these Fabulous Heroes could descend into the
Region of the Dead, whenever the Fancy took 'em, and return as soon as they saw
Cause to do so. But since our Savior was crucified, in the open View of the
Jews, and Romans, and after his Death, was taken down from the Cross, in the
Sight of so many Witnesses, what Reason have we to imagine, that he feigned his
Descent, into the World of disembody'd Spirits, and his Return to our World
again, as the Greeks have feigned their Heroes, to have often done.

Nay, I Am inclined to think, that from the Story of these Ancient Heroes we may
be furnished, with an Argument, that will take away, in a great Measure, the
SVPPOS'D INFAMY of the CROSS of CHRIST.

Had our Savior died, in a common Way, and given the Jews and Romans no
convincing Proof, of the Reality of his Death, he had certainly been liable to
Suspicion, as well as many of the Heroes of the Greeks, though he had really been
loosed from the strong Bonds of the Grave, in which he was some Time held.

I humbly conceive, therefore, that one principal Reason, why he died, in so
public a Manner, was this, that no Person might have the least Umbrage of
Jealousy, that he craf^ily retired from the World, and feigned himself, to be
gone down to the Region of the Dead, and took his own Time to appear again,
making the World believe, that he was risen from the Dead, when in Truth, he
was all this While as much alive as ever.

But to remove any such foolish Suspicion, we need only consider, that his
Disciples most willingly exposed themselves to imminent Dangers, in publishing
his Doctrine to the World, though they were not ignorant, of the rooted
Prejudices of Men, against it. This certainly, they would never have been
tempted to do, if their Lord's Resurrection had been no more than an emty
Fiction, especially if we consider, they not only persuaded others, to lay down
their Lives, for the Cause of Christ, but with the greatest Readiness would, if
it were possible, have died Ten Thousand Deaths, to promote it.

Then Celsus's Jew as if 'twas impossible, that any one should rise from the
Dead, with the same Numerical Body, makes Use of this rash Expression. We must,
says he, consider, whether any Person that was really dead, did ever rise, with
the same Numerical and Proper Body.

This, One would think, shou'dn't come, from the Mouth of one, who bears the
Character of a Jew, who is supposed to believe, what we find recorded, in the
two Books of Kings, 1 Kin. 17. V. 22.
concerning two Children, one of which was restored to Life by Elijah, 2 Kin.
4. V. 34.
and the other by Elisha. And I believe, 'twas Matter of our Savior's Choice,
to be educated among the Jews, because they were accustomed to Miracles, that
so by comparing what he did, with what had been done, in the former Ages of the
World, they might be forced to acknowledge, that his Miracles deserved the
Preference, by whom, and in whose Name, far greater Things were performed, than
had been done, in the Memory of Man.

Then the pretended Jew (having produced the Histories of the Greeks, to show
us the strange Artifices, which the Ancient Heroes used, that People might
imagine, that they were risen from the dead) directs his Discourse, to those of
his Native Country, that were converted to the Christian Faith, in the
following Words.

Do you look upon the Accounts, that are given by others, as trifling Stories,
and imagine, that the Catastrophe of your Senseless Drama is ever the more
just, or probable, because you endeavor, to adorn it, with some Fine
Inventions, because your Crucified Jesus gave a most dreadful Outcry, when he
lay at the very Point of Death?

To this I answer, we believe, that the Account, which you have given, of the
Ancient Heroes of the Greeks, is grossly Fabulous, but we are fully persuaded,
and I think, on very rational Grounds, that the Account, which is given us, of
our Blessed Savior, in those Holy Scriptures, which are common to us both, and
of which we make our Boast, as much as you your selves, is far from deserving
that contemptible Character, which this Gentleman is pleased to give it.

Therefore, we can never grant, that the Glorious Miracles, which were wrought,
in raising some Persons from the dead, as we are credibly informed, were no
better than empty Fictions, and vain Amusements. We believe, that our Savior
did really rise from the dead, as the Prophets, and he himself had foretold he
should; and one Thing, among others, that makes his Resurrection the more
remarkable, and in which it excelled that of any other Person, is the following
Consideration, that he wa'n't raised from the dead, by a Prophet, such as
Elijah, or Elisha was, but by the IMMEDIATE INFLVENCE of the GODHEAD.

Hence it came to pass, that the happy Effects of his Resurrection were so
Exrraordinary, and so General.

Pray was the Resurrection of the two Children beforementioned, a great and
diffusive Blessing to Mankind, as we know the Resnrrection of our Savior was,
when the Power of God did so eminently accompany the Preaching of the Gospel,
and caused it to make so deep, and lasting an Impression, upon the Minds, of so
many of his Hearers, who at first were strangely prejudiced against him?

CHAP. XXXI.
THE pretended Jew goes on, and is ready to split his Sides with Laughing, at
the Earthquake, and ridicules the more than ordinary Darkness, that were the
AWFVL CONCOMITANTS of our Savior's Sufferings.

But this I have already answered, according to my weak Ability, and produced
the Testimony of Phlegon, who acknowledges, that these wonderful Events did
really happen, at the Time of our Savior's Passion.

Then the Jew has the following Words, You say, that he rose from the dead,
(though he was far from being able, to secure his Person, while he remained on
Earth) and showed upon his Body all the Marks of his Crucifixion, and the very
Print of the Nails, with which his Hands, and Feet were pierced.

But what dos this Gentleman mean, by saying, He wa'n't able to secure his
Person? If he means, that our Blessed Savior wa'nt able to secure himself,
from the common Contagion of Vice, and Immorality, what he says, is absolutely,
and manifestly false. For he never spoke a Word, or did an Action, that was in
the least indecent, or unworthy of an INCARNATE GOD.

He was led, as a Sheep, to the Mat. 27 V. 2
Slaughter, and as a Laneb before her Shearers, was dumb; so he opened not his
Mouth. Viz. By way of Complaint, or Uneasiness, as St. Matthew acquaints us.

But if Celsus means, that he didn't exert his Power, to secure himself, from
the outward Calamities, to which he was exposed, which morally considered, were
neither Good, nor Evil; I have proved already, from the Gospels, that he
submitted to 'em with the greatest Readiness imaginable, and showed the
Reasons, which justified his Conduct.

Then the pretended Jew, having spoke of our Savior's showing all the Marks of
his Crucifixion, and the very Print of his Nails, says, There was no Witness,
of the Truth of this strange Account, but one Fanatical Woman, designing to
ridicule Mary Magdalen, who saw him, after he was risen from the dead, as we
are told in the Gospels, and because we are informed, that he was seen by
others, he thought fit to add the following Words, And perhaps some Body else,
of the same wretched Cabal.

Then he plainly discovers, that he is one of those, who admire the Epicurean
Hypothesis, when he endeavors, to show, how a lively Idea of a deceased Person
may be formed, in the warm Imagination, in the following Words, Who was deluded
by her own idle Whimsies, or too easily believed, what she would have to be
true, as we know it frequently happens.

There Is a great Deal of Force, if we must give any heed to his idle Whimsies,
in this scurrilous Language.

But even from hence we may be furnished, with an Argument, to prove the
IMMORTAL SVBSISTENCE of HVMANE SOULS, when they are separated from their
Bodies, and the unavoidable Consequence of what he here asserts, amounts to
this at least, that it survives the Body.

For, if as Plato observes, in his Dialogues, about the HVMANE SOUL, there are
certain Images of dead Persons, that are seen near their Tombs, then they must
be owing to some Cause or other. And no Cause can be so rationally assigned, as
the Soul of the deceased Person, that assumes a Body, which is adapted to it.

But Celsus, who advances the forementioned Notion, would make People dream,
while they are thoroughly awake, and have their Senses about 'em, and says,
They too easily believe, what they would have to be true. Such Dreams, indeed,
as he talks of, are common, when the Bodily Senses are locked up by Sleep, but
I think, we cannot easily account for 'em, when Persons are awake, unless they
be troubled with Melancholy, or fallen into a Fit of the Frenzy.

Celsus, it seems, wa'n't ignorant of this, and that made him call Mary
Magdalen, a Fanatic, though the Scripture-History says nothing like it, and our
Savior's Appearing, after he was risen from the dead, and showing all the
Marks, that were made in his Crucified Body, must, according to Celsus, be
solved by the Doctrine of the Images of deceased Persons, but, according to the
Scripture-Account, (which he is so cunning as to use, when he thinks that it
serves his purpose) the Matter of Fact stood thus.

Our Savior called one of his Disciples to him, who could not for his Life
believe, that he was risen from the dead, with the same Body, I say, with the
same Body. For the Appearance of Humane Souls, after Death, don't seem to be
the least Matter of his Doubt.

Therefore, it is remarkable, that he dos'n't say, Except I see him, but Except
John 20. V. 25*
I shall see in his Hands the Print of the Nails, and put my Finger into the
Print of the Nails, and thrust my Hand, into his Sides, I will not believe.

He didn't question, but that the Soul of a deceased Person might animate a
Body, which would be visible to the corporeal Eye, and, bear a Resemblance to
that, from which 'twas separated by Death, not only with respect to the Eyes,
and Voice, and Mien, but also, Sometimes appear in a like Habit clothed. Hom.
Il. Book 23, V. 67.


Therefore our Savior called Thomas to him, and said, Reach hither thy Finger,
and behold my Hands, and reach John 20, V. 27.
hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side, and be not faithless, but
believing.

And by the Way, 'twas agreeable, to the many Prophecies, which we meet with
concerning him, the many evident Miracles he wrought, and unusual Accidents,
that befell him, that he should rise from the Dead, and that this considerable
Circumstance should, as it were, crown, and complete the rest.

The Prophetical Psalmist speaking in the Person of our Savior, has this
Prophecy, relating to him, My Flesh also shall rest in Hope, for thou will not
leave my Soul in Hell, nor Psalm 16, V. 9.
suffer thy Holy One to see Corruption.

And the Body, with which our Savior rose from the Dead, did neither consist,
of such gross Matter, as it consisted of before, nor of such subtle Matter, as
that with which separate Souls are clothed, when an Apparition appears.

Therefore St. John has the following Words, His Disciples were within, and
Thomas with 'em. Then came Jesus, the Doors being shut, and stood in the Midst,
and said, Peace be unto you. And he adds these Words, Then says he to Thomas,
reach hither thy Finger.

St. Luke tells us, that When Simon and Cleopas were talking of the Things Luke
24, V. 14.
that had happened to him, Jesus himself drew near, and went with 'em. But
their Eyes were holden, that they should not know him. And he said to 'em, What
Manner of Communications are these, that ye have with one another, as ye walk?
And in the same Chapter he has these Words, And their Eyes were opened, and
they knew him, and V. 35,
he vanished out of their Sight.

And though Celsus compares this Account, which the Gospels give us, of the
Appearance, which our Savior made, after he was risen from the Dead, to common
Stories of wonderful Apparitions, and laughs at those, who were Eyewitnesses
of the Fact; yet they who impartially examine into Matters, and are furnished
with a Capacity, to make nice Enquiries, will be forced to acknowledge, there
was something in the Case before us, that was very remarkable, and surprising.

CHAP. XXXII.
THEN Celsus offers an Objection, which does a little deserve to be considered
by us, If Christ had a Mind, says he, to exert the Divine Power, which he
pretended to have, certainly he ought to have appeared to his Enemies, to the
Judge, who passed the Sentence of Death upon him, and to the whole Body of the
People, who rose up, as it were, in Arms against him.

And indeed we don't go about to deny, that the Scripture plainly acquaints us,
that after he was risen from the dead, he refused to appear so publicly, and
to all Persons promiscuously, as he did before. He was seen of the Apostles
forty Days, and spoke Acts 1, V. 3.
of Things, pertaining to the Kingdom of God, as we learn from the Acts of the
Apostles.

And we read in the Gospels, that he wa'n't continually with 'em, but sometimes
after the Interval of eight Days, appeared in the midst of 'em, when the Doors
were shut, and at other Opportunities appeared to 'em, in a very different
Manner.

And St. Paul, intimating to us, that he did't so frequently appear then, as he
had done before, has the following Words, I delivered unto you first of all,
that which I also received, how that 1 Cor. 15. V. 3, etc.
Christ died for our Sins, according to the Scriptures* And that he was buried,
and that he rose again the third Day, according to the Scriptures: And that he
was seen of Cephas, then of the Twelve. After that he was seen of above five
hundred Brethren at once, of whom the greater Part remain, unto this present,
but some are fallen asleep. After that he was seen of James, then of all the
Apostles. And last of all he was seen of me also, as one born out of due Time.

Here a very difficult Question does occur, that requires the closest
Application, and that not of ordinary Christians, but of those, who have
attained to the greatest Eminency, in the School of Christ, viz. Why our
Savior refused, to expose himself to public View, after his Resurrection, as
he had done before.

There Is no need, I think, in a Book of this Nature, (the main Design of which
is to defend the Christian Religion, against the bold Attempts of its malicious
Adversaries) to give a full, or large Solution of so Critical a Point. But I
shall offer a few Thoughts at present, which, I hope, will give the Reader some
small Satisfaction, in this difficult Affair.

Though our SAVIOVR was but ONE, with respect to HIS PERSON; yet there were
SEVERAL NOTIONS, under which Mankind did consider him, and different Persons
saw him, in very different Senses.

That there were several Capacities, in which Mankind did consider him, is
plain from such Expressions as these, I am the Way, the Truth, and John 14, V.
6.
the Life. I am the Bread, I am the Door; and many other Expressions, John 6,
V. 35.
that I could easily name, if Occasion John 10, V. 9.
offered.

That different Persons saw him, in very different Senses, will readily be
granted by those, who can assign the Reason, why he didn't take all the
Disciples with him, into the Mount of Transfiguration, but only Peter, James,
and John, viz, Because they alone could bear the Brightness of so glorious a
Sight, behold the dazzling Luster of Moses, and Elias, and hear the Voice, that
came from Heaven, and the Charming Conversation, which those two Celebrated
Prophets had the Honor, and Happiness, to maintain, with the Blessed Jesus.

I Am of the Opinion, I confess, that before he went up to the Mountain, Mat. 5,
V 1.
and instructed his Disciples, concerning the Beatitudes, he didn't appear to
those, who were brought to him in the Evening, at the Foot of the Mountain, and
were cured of their Distempers, I say, he didn't appear to those, who were
indisposed, and stood in need of his healing Power, in the same Manner as he
did to them, who enjoyed a confirmed State of Health, and were able to go up
with him to the Mountain. And as he privately explained the Meaning of his
Parables, to his Disciples, whose Sense of Hearing was much quicker, than that
of the Common People, to whose Ears there was nothing conveyed too often, but
an empty Sound: So I believe, there was some considerable Difference, in their
spiritual, and even their corporeal Sight.

It Is farther plain, that our Savior wa'n't seen by all Persons, after the
same manner, from the Instance of Judas, who being about to betray him, said to
his Accomplices; He whom I shall kiss is he, intimating Mat 26. V. 48.
they didn't know him. And that Expression of our Savior, I sat daily with
you, teaching in the Temple, and ye laid no hold on me; does manifestly favor
the Opinion, which I have here laid down.

Since therefore, we have such Apprehensions of our Savior, not only with
respect to his Divinity, which was more latent, and undiscerned by the
Generality of Men, but also with respect to his Humane Body, the Form of which,
I believe, he changed, when ever he thought fit to do it; We think, that before
his Death (by which he spoiled Principalities, and Powers) he was, in some
Sense, discernable by all, but afterward even many of those, who had formerly
seen him, had not Senses, that were adapted to the Sight of a risen Jesus.

'Twas therefore an Instance of his Condescension to the Weakness of Men's
Capacities, that he didn't expose himself to Public View, after he was risen
from the dead, to Public View, did I say, when 'twa'n't without frequent
Intervals, that he appeared even to his Apostles, and Disciples?

For after he had honorably, and happily accomplished the Work of our
Redemption, we have Reason to believe, that his Divinity shone with much
brighter Rays, through the Glass, if I may so say, of his Humane Nature.

Cephas, who was, as it were, the First Fruits of the Apostles, was the first,
that saw him, then the Twelve (Matthias being chosen, in the Room of Judas)
then five Hundred Brethren at once, then James, then perhaps all the Seventy
Disciples, and at last the Apostle Paul, (as one born out of due Time) who knew
very well, why he used the following Expression, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, Unto me, who am less than the least of Ephesians. 3. V* 8,
all Saints, is this Grace given. And perhaps those Words, Less than the least
of all Saints, and those Words, Born out of due Time, may have a greater
Affinity, than some Persons on the first View, may be ready to imagine.

And as there is no Color of Reason, for any One to reflect upon our Blessed
Savior, for not taking all the Apostles with him, to the Mount of
Transfiguration, but only three of 'em, when he was going to display the Glory
of his Raiment, and the Heavenly Luster of Moses, and Elias, who were to
discourse with him, in a familiar Manner: So neither is there just Cause, for
any one to find Fault with the Account, which we meet with, in the Gospels;
viz. That he didn't expose himself, after his Resurrection, to the View of all,
but only of those, whose Eyes were strong enough, to bear the dazzling
Brightness of so glorious an Object. And I think, that the following
Expression, which is used by the Apostle Paul, To this End Christ both died,
Rom 14, V. 9.
and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord, both of the Dead, and of the
Living, may have a Reference to the Subject, on which I am now discoursing.

The Dead, over whom he has a rightful Power, are they of whom the Apostle
speaks, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, The Trumpet, 1 Cor. 1 ^ V. 52.
says he, shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible.

Under the Term Living, I conceive he comprehends, not only those, who shall be
raised from the dead, to an Immortal Life, but those also, who may be
considered by us, in a very different Capacity, I mean those, who will be
alive, at the Coming of our Lord, and be changed.

He says, We shall be changed, which Words are brought in by him, after he had
said, That the Dead shall be raised incorruptible. And in his first Epistle to
the Thessalonians, he describes the Difference, between the Dead, and the
Living, in the following Words, I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, 1 These.
4. V. 13.
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others, who have
no Hope, for if we believe, that Jesus died, and rose again, even them also,
who sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. For this we say unto you, by the
Word of the Lord, that we, who are alive, and remain, to the Coming of the
Lord, sha'n't prevent them, who are asleep. The Sense of which Verses I have
given, according to the best of my Judgment, in my Comment on the foregoing
Epistle.

Now we needn't wonder, that our Savior, after his Resurrection, wa'n't seen
by all, that believed in him, since the Apostle, writing to the Corinthians, as
Persons of mean Seize, has the following Words, I determine, 1 Cor. 4. V.
4.
to know nothing, among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And says in
another Place, Hitherto ye 1 Cor. 3. V. 2.
were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able, for ye are yet carnal.

I confess, the Scriptures, in which the Characters of infinite Wisdom are so
legible, do acquaint us, that our Savior, before his Death, exposed himself to
Public View (though even here some Exceptions must be made) but after he was
risen from the Dead, he was no longer promiscuously seen by all, but according
to the Direction of Heaven, consulted the Capacities of those, to whom he
thought fit to appear.

As we read in Scripture, that God appeared to Abraham, and other Holy Men,
though there were considerable Intervals, and we know very well, that he didn't
appear to all: So we may rationally suppose, that the SON OF GOD, when he made
his Appearance to Persons, after he was risen from the dead, took a prudent
Method, not unlike that, which God had before observed, in making Discoveries
of himself, to the Ancient Fathers of the Jewish Church.

So that I have returned an Answer, (according to my weak Ability, and as far
as I thought, consistent with the Design of the present Treatise) to the
Objection which Celsus makes, in the following Words, If Christ says he, had a
Mind, to exert his Divine Power, he ought to have appeared to his Enemies, to
the Judge, who passed the Sentence of Death upon him, and to the whole Body of
the People, who, as it were, took up Arms against him.

Sure I am, that he acted wisely, in not appearing to his Enemies, or the
Judge, who condemned him. For he happily prevented 'em from being struck blind,
like the Sodomites of old, who lay in wait for the Angels, who, as the
Scripture acquaints us, were kindly entertained by Lot. Genesis 19, 9, 10.


The Men, it is said, put forth their Hand, and pulled Lot into the House to
'em, and shut the Door, and they sinote the Men, that were at the Door of the
House, with Blindness, both small, and great, so that they wearied themselves,
to find the Door.

The Design of our Savior was to show his DIVINE POWER, in a Way, suited to
the Capacities of Men, and the TRUE REASON why he refused, to appear so
publicly, after he was risen from the Dead, as before, was this, because he
was then too bright an Object, to be beheld by COMMON EYES.

Therefore Celsus, as if he had wracked his Brains, to the utmost, could hardly
have thought of any Thing, that had less Argument in it, than the following
Words, What! was he afraid, that he should be hung upon the Cross again, when
if we may give any Heed to you, he was no less than A GOD? Besides I suppose,
you will hardly say, that he came into the World, on Purpose to ABSCOND.

But it is evident, he came into the World, to be seen by few comparitively, and
many of those, who saw him were, in a great Measure, Strangers to the Bright
Rays of his Divinity.

Nay, he was altogether unknown to many, in as much as he came, to discover his
Glory, to those who were Children of the Light, and so were freed from that
worse than Egyptian Darkness, which naturally. draws a Veil, over the Minds of
Men.

And he came, with this generous Design, to display the Riches of his Grace, to
those, who were Unrighteous, and lay wallowing, in their Filth, and Gore, and
to act the Part of the best Physician, that the World could ever boast of, in
curing those, whose Minds were attended, with innumerable, and great Disorders.

CHAP. XXXIII.
LET us see, what Celsus adds, Had he had a Mind, says he, to have given a
Proof, of his pretended Divinity, one would think, he should have VANISHED, the
very Moment, he was nailed to the Cross.

But this is just for all the World like the idle, and profane Talk of those,
who deny an Overruling Providence, and are erecting new Schemes, in their
warm, and fruitful Imagination, for the more regular Government of the World,
and have the horrid Impudence to say, that had the Affairs of it been left
entirely to their prudent Management, the Benefit of the Universe had been more
effectually consulted, than now it is, though many Things in their Hypothesis are
possible, but still they add to the seeming Irregularities, that we allow to
have happened, by their Fancyful Schemes, or they suppose that to be done,
which, in some Respects, might have a Natural Tendency, to the Advantage of the
Universe, but go, on so many, and such weak Hypotheses, as would destroy the
very Nature of Things, and on both Accounts, are perhaps equally guilty, of
apparent, and gross Absurdities.

But to return a more direct Answer to Celsus, I might acquaint him, that our
Savior, by Virtue of his Divine Nature, could have disappeared, if he pleased,
as soon as ever he was nailed, to the Accursed Tree.

This is self-evident to those, who believe, and know that he was GOD. And it is
plain to them, who consult the Gospels, if they don't only rely on their
Authority, so far as they imagine, that they serve their turn, and think that
all is mere Fiction, and Jargon, that makes in the least against 'em. St. Luke
tells us, that After his Resurrection he took Bread, and blessed it, and brake
it, and gave to Simon, and Cleopas. And when they Luke 24, V. 31.
had taken it, their Eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out
of their Sight.

But I could easily show, that 'twas inconsistent with the Design, which he
had, in Coming into the World, to vanish, as soon as ever he was crucified.

And when we read the History of our Savior, we must not rest in the bare
Literal Sense, as if that were all, that the Holy Ghost designed. For every
considerable Circumstance, that occur^ in it, contains, or naturally leads us,
to some Mystery, or other, which a judicious Reader, with some Difficulty, may
perceive.

For Instance, the Crucifixion of our Savior was a Representation, of what is
meant by the following Expression of the Apostle, I am crucified with Gal. 2.
V. 20.
Christ; And by those other Words, God forbid, that I should glory, save in
Gal. 6. V. 14.
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is crucified unto me,
and I unto the World. His Death was necessary, that we might say, with the
Apostle, In that he died, he died unto Sin once, and that the righteous, Romans
6. V. 10.
being made conformable to his Death, might say, with the Apostle, If we 2 Timothy
2, V. 4.
be dead with him, we shall also live with him.

So his Burial was designed, to represent our Conformity to his Death, and our
Crucifixion with him, as St. Paul observes; We are buried with him, says he, by
Baptism into Death. But I shall give a fuller Acount of his Burial, of his
Tomb, and of the Person, that buried him, in a distinct Treatise, on these
important Subjects.

At present, I shall only mention, the Linen Clothes, in which, Divine
Providence did wisely order, that the Body of the Spotless Jesus should be
wrapped, and the New Sepulcher, that was hewn in Stone, or cut out of a Rock, by
Joseph of Arimathea, wherein, as St. Luke, and St. John observe, no Man was
ever laid before.

It may not be amiss, to consider, whether the Account of the Sepulcher of our
Blessed Lord, which has the Unanimous Consent of Three Evangelists, don't carry
with it, some convincing Evidence of Truth, and whether they, who apply
themselves, to the Allegorical Sense of Scripture, ought not to seek for some
Mystical Reason, why our Savior should be laid, in a New Sepulcher, as St.
Matthew, and St. John acquaints us, and why it should be such a one, as St.
Luke, and St. John mention, wherein no Man had ever been Mat. 27. V. 60.
laid before him. For 'twas highly requisite, that one, whose seemingly John
19. V. 41.
Tragical End was graced with so uncommon Circumstances, and such Marks of
Honor, that our Savior, who after he was dead, gave Signs of Life, I mean the
Water, and Blood, that flowed from his pierced Side, should have something,
that was very remarkable, in his Burial, that as he was free from the least
Stain of Moral Impurity, being born out of the ordinary Way, of Humane
Generation: So his Burial might bear the Marks, of an untainted Purity, which
is Mystically represented to us, by the New Sepulcher, in which he was laid,
which was not composed, of many Stones, joined together, according to the Rules
of Art, but was one entire Piece, cut out of the Rock, made hollow, and every
Way adapted for the Purpose.

I might have made several other Remarks, and from these outward Signs have
raised my Thoughts much higher, in Contemplation of those sublime Things, which
they faintly represent.

But they would afford such vast Plenty, of most excellent Matter, as would
very well deserve a distinct Discourse, and a considerable Volume by it self.

At present I shall only say, 'twas fit, that he, who had designed, to hang
upon a Cross, and to dye, like a Man, should be buried, in such a Manner, as
was suitable to his Mysterious Death, and so answer his Character to the last.

But suppose, the Evangelists had acquainted us, that our Savior vanished, as
soon as ever he was nailed to the Cross, then Celsus, and the Infidels, so hard
is it to please 'em! would have come upon us, and have said, Good Sirs, What
Crotchet came into his Head, that he should stay, 'till he was nailed to his
Cross, before he thought fit to vanish, or how came he to forget, to take this
Matter into his serious Thoughts, before he came to the Place, where he was
shamefully executed?

If therefore, they find Fault with the Evangelists, for not telling us, that
our Savior vanished, when he was going to be crucified, but giving us an
impartial Account of Matters, we have more Reason to blame them severely, for
not believing, that our Savior rose from the dead, and after his Resurrection,
appeared to his Disciples, though The Doors were shut, John 20, V. 19.
and gave Bread to two of 'em, and vanished, as soon as he had done discoursing
with 'em.

CHAP. XXXIV.
BUT I cannot conceive, why Celsus should say, that our Blessed Savior did
ABSCOND. What Ambassador, says he, did ever affect to conceal himself, when One
would think, it is plain enough, that his Business was to deliver his Embassy?

But this is a mere Slander, as is sufficiently evident, from the Words of our
Savior, to those, who endeavored to apprehend him, I sat daily, says he, with
you in the Temple, and Mat. 26. V. 55,
ye laid no hold on me.

As for what Celsus needlessly repeats, I shall content my self with the Answer,
which I have already given.

He goes on, and says, Did your pretended Savior in his Lifetime, teach his
Doctrine, in a most Public Manner, and after his Resurrection, only appear to
one Fanatical Woman, or some others, who belonged to the same wretched Cabal,
because, when he was living, the World had more Sense, than to give Credit to
him, but every one, forsooth, must believe the Doctrine of the Resurrection of
Course?

But that he appeared only to one Woman, is most notoriously false. For St.
Matthew has the following Words, In the End of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn,
toward the first Mat. 28. V. 1.
Day of the Week, came Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, to see the Sepulcher.
And behold there was a great Earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended
from Heaven, and came, and rolled back the Stone, from the Door, and sat upon
it. A little after he has these Words, Behold Jesus met them, (i. e. the two
Marys) saying, All hail. And ibid. 9.
they came, and held him by the Feet, and worshipped him.

And I have already answered what Celsus objects, in the following Words, When
he was crucified, says he, there were Witnesses enough, but when he rose from
the dead, at most he appeared, only to a small Company of Scoundrels.

I have sufficiently shown, that our Savior could not be seen by all, and I
shall only add at present, that all Persons were capable at Times, of seeing
him, with respect to his Humane Nature, but to discern the Bright Rays, or even
the least Glimmerings of his DEITY, was what exceeded the Capacity of the
Generality of Men.

I speak now, of his Humane, and Divine Nature, in Contra-Distinction to each
other, and not as having a mutual Reference, and close Connection.

But pray observe, how weakly Celsus talks, having said, That our Savior
appeared only to one Fanatical Woman, or perhaps a few Others of the same
wretched Cabal; he adds the following Words, When he was crucified, says he,
there were Witnesses enough, but when he rose from the dead, he appeared but to
a few, whereas had he had any Brains, he must have taken the quite contrary
Course.

But I would fain know what he means by the latter Words? According to his weak
Judgment, our Savior must have taken such Methods, as were plainly
impracticable, and grossly absurd, viz. He must be crucified, forsooth, in the
Sight but of a single Person, and have appeared to all Men PROMISCUOUSLY, when
he was risen from the dead, for those Words He should have taken the quite
contrary Course, will bear no other tolerable Sense, if I am capable of making
a Judgment, upon any Thing.

Our Savior has acquainted us, with the Person, that sent him, in the
following Words, No Man knows the Father, save the Son, and in these Words, No
Man has seen God, at any Time; but the only Begotten Son, who is in the Bosom
of the Father, he has declared him.

He it is, who reveals the Things of God, to his true Disciples, and we
endeavor to form our Scheme of Divinity, upon his most excellent Model, who
sometimes tells us, that GOD is Light, and in him is no Darkness 1 Jo^n 1. V. 5
at all, and at other Times, That God is a Spirit, and they that worship John
4. V. 24.
him, must worship him in Spirit, and in Truth.

And any one, that will, may learn, for what End, God sent his Son into the
World, if he will but consult the Prophecies, relating to our Savior, and the
Writings of the Evangelists, and Apostles, and especially the Epistles of St.
Paul.

He came, to instruct us, in the true, and most direct Way, to Peace here, and
Complete, and Eternal Happiness hereafter, and to take a most BLESSED
ADVANTAGE, if I may so say, of the HORRID IMPIETY, and continual PROVOCATIONS
of Impenitent, and daring Sinners.

Celsus being ignorant of this, has the following Words, He came, it seems, to
instruct good Men, and to make free, and Monstrously-large Offers of his Grace,
even to the vilest Rebels.

Then says he, If he had so Singular a Fancy to ABSCOND, what Need was there, I
wonder, of a Voice from Heaven, saying, that he was the SON of GOD. And if he
had not a Mind to ABSCOND, then why did he suffer, and dye?

He imagines, I perceive, that the Accounts, which we meet with in the Gospels,
are inconsistent with themselves, not being able, with all his pretended
Sagacity, to comprehend, or frame any just Idea, of the Design of our Blessed
Savior, which was neither to lie hid altogether, and so be entirely useless,
and a mere Cipher in his Own Creation, nor to have his Bright Side, if I may so
say, I mean his DIVINE NATURE KNOWN, to many of those very Persons, who had the
Honor, to see him, with their Bodily Eyes.

The Voice, that came to him from Heaven, saying, This is my Beloved Son, in
whom I am well-pleased, is not said to be heard by the Multitude, as Celsus's
Jew imagines, and the other Voice, which is said to come from the Cloud, was
only heard, by those, who went up, with our Savior, to the Mountain. For such
is the Nature of a Voice from Heaven, that it can only be heard, by those, for
whom God is pleased, for wise Reasons, to design it.

I don't speak here, of the mere Vibration of the Particles of the Air, or any
Philosophical Account, that may be given of a Voice, but of a Spiritual
Senfation, whereby one, who has Spiritual Senses exercised, does hear God
speak, when one, who is deaf, to all the awakening Precepts, of Virtue, and
Piety, is entirely ignorant of what is said, I mean, as to any valuable, and
lasting Purpose, that it serves.

This I think, is a sufficient Answer, to those Words of Celsus, What Need was
there, of a Voice from Heaven, saying, that he was the SON OF GOD?

And what I have already offered, concerning the Sufferings of our Savior, is
a satisfactory Answer, I judge, to the following Words, If he had not a Mind to
conceal his Power, and obscure his Glory, then sure he was born, under a very
unhappy Planet, or else he had never suffered, and died.

Then Celsus's Jew, is pleased to draw a Consequence, which is very unnatural,
and unjust. For it does by no Means follow, that because our Savior, by his
Sufferings, has taught us to bid Defiance to Death it self, therefore when he
rose from the Dead, he should have ordered the whole World, to make a General
Rendezvous, and have publicly acquainted 'em, with the Reason, why he left the
Realms of Light, and Glory, and thought it worth his While, to come down, into
this miserable, and si^ful World.

For this he had already done, when he said, Come unto me, all ye that labor,
Mat. 11. V. 28.
and are heavy-laden, and I will give you Rest. This he had also done, in the
long Sermon, which he preached upon the Mount, concerning the Beatitudes, and
his Discourses on several other Subjects, which are annexed to it, and in his
useful Parables, and frequent Disputes, with the Scribes, and Pharisees. And
St. John acquaints us, in his Gospel, with what a Majesty our Savior spoke,
which is not so much to be understood of the Artificial Colors of Humane
Rhetoric, or a graceful Elocution, and happy Gesture, as of those Divine,
Important, and Plain, but Commanding Truths, that were the Subject Matter of
his frequent Discourses. And we learn, from the other Gospels, that our Savior
spoke, with such a modest Air of Assurance, and such an Uncommon Authority, as
always engaged the Attention, and Affections, and raised the Admiration of the
Listening Audience, many of whom, did, as it were, hang upon his precious Lips,
and could gladly have imparted to him their very Souls, if it had been possible.

Then drawing to a Conclusion, he adds, All that I have said, has been
borrowed, from your own approved Authors, so that I needn't produce any other
Testimonies, since the Edge of your own Weapons, is sufficiently turned upon
your selves.

But I have already shown, that when he directs his Discourse to our Savior,
or to us, he is pleased, to interlard it, with Abundance of ridiculous Stories,
that I Am confident, the Evangelists never thought of, and it remains, to be
proved, that we are wounded by our own Weapons, unless his fond Imagination
must always pass, for a clear, and sufficient Proof, of one of the greatest
Untruths, that was ever broached in the World.

CHAP. XXXV.
THEN Celsus breaks forth into the following Exclamation, Good God! Can we
imagine, that a God should come down, from Heaven to Earth, and yet that Men
should refuse to embrace his Doctrine?

But to this I answer, that Moses himself acquaints us, that God did evidently,
gloriously, and frequently, appear to the Jews, when Miracles were wrought in
Egypt, when they passed the Red Sea, and had the Pillar of Cloud, and of Fire,
to conduct 'em, and when the Law was declared to 'em, in a very public Manner,
and with Circumstances of the most Awful Solemnity, and yet they, who were
Eyewitnesses, of these amazing Instances of an Overruling Providence, and of
the special Care, which Heaven took of them, were guilty of the grossest
Infidelity. For had they really, and firmly believed what they had seen, and
heard, they had never been so infatuated, as to have made the Calf, to Have
changed their Glory, into the Exodus 32. V. 4.
Similitude of an Ox, that eats Grass; or to have said to one another, speaking
of the Calf, These be thy Gods, O Psalm. 106. V. 20*
Israel, which brought thee up, out of the Land of Egypt.

And it is too plain, that the Carriage of the Jews, when God appeared so often
to 'em, and wrought so many Miracles for 'em, and especially when they were
wandering, in the Wilderness, as we learn, even from their own Sacred Writings,
and their proud Contempt of the Doctrine, which our Blessed Lord introduced,
though he delivered it, with the greatest Authority, and confirmed it by
Miracles, I say, it is too plain, that the Carriage of the Jews, upon these
various, and astonishing Scenes of Action, was owing to the same unhappy Cause,
I mean, their wretched Unbelief.

And it is no great Wonder, that they didn't believe in our Savior, since they
did but tread, in the Steps of their long-descended Ancestors, for whom they
profess to have so profound a Veneration.

Then Celsus asks, What God, I beseech you, did ever appear among Men, and
wa'n't credited by 'em, especially if he was so Politic, as to send 'em Word
of his Coming? And how could the Jews themselves, as stupid as they always
were, be ignorant of a Person, whom, it is well known, they had for many Ages
expected?

But I would fain know of the Jews, which were the greater Miracles, those that
were wrought in Egypt, and the Wilderness, or those that were performed by our
Savior, in the open View of his cruel, and malicious Enemies.

If they say, the former were the greater, then it is natural enough to suppose,
that they, who have resisted the Evidence of those Miracles, which, in their
Esteem, are the greater, should much more despise those, which, they think, are
far inferior to 'em; I mean the Miracles, that were wrought by our Blessed
Savior. Or, if they say, that the Miracles of Moses, and those which our
Savior performed, are equal, we needn't wonder, that the Jewish Nation should,
at different Times, be guilty of giving Way, to the Workings of their Horrid
Unbelief, in Cases that on many Accounts, were Parallel.

The Moral Law was first published to the Jews by Moses, who acquaints us, that
in those early Times, their Forefathers were chargeable with the
forementioned Sin, and many other notorious Crimes. And when the New Law, and
Second Covenant was first published by our Savior, the Jews plainly showed, by
their wretched Unbelief, that they were the genuine Offspring of those
notorious Unbelievers, in the Wilderness, and we may justly apply to 'em, those
Words of our Savior, Truly ye bear Witness, that ye Luke 11. V. 48.
allow the Deeds of your Fathers. And those of the Prophet, Thy Life shall hang
in doubt before thee, and thou shall Deuteronomy. 28. V. 66.
fear Day and Night, and shall have no Assurance of thy Life. For they didn't
believe in him, who came to give Life to a World, that was dead in Sin.

CHAP. XXXVI.
WHAT Celsus objects farther, in the Person of a Jew, may easily be retorted
upon Moses, and the Prophets. He finds Fault with our Savior, for exceeding,
as he thinks, the Bounds of Reason, and Modesty, when he threatens, and
upbraids, and says, Woe be unto you, and I foretell you, which, he says,
plainly intimates, that he wanted Power, to prevail with his Hearers, and is an
Argument, that he was so far from being A God, that he had not the Common
Prudence of a Man.

But we may easily retort his own Argument upon him.

For God himself uses many Expressions, in the Law, and the Prophets, that
sound every whit as harsh, as those Words, Woe be unto you, which our Savior
makes use of, in the Gospels. Woe unto them, says the Isaiah 5. V. 8.
Prophet Isaiah, that join House to House, Isaiah 5. V. 8.
that lay Field to Field. And again, Woe unto them, that rise up early, that
ibid. V. 11
they may follow strong Drink. And again, Woe unto them, that draw Iniquity with
Cords of Vanity. And again, Woe unto them, that call Evil Good, V. 20.
and Good Evil. And again, Woe unto them, who are mighty to drink Wine. And
abundance of Instances of the V. 22.
like Nature might easily be produced, if Occasion offered.

What think you, of that Expression of the forementioned Prophet? Ah sinful
Nation, a People laden with Isaiah 1. V. 4.
Iniquity, a Seed of evil Doers, Children that are Corrupters! Don't we meet
with as bitter Invectives, in that Chapter, as any that our Savior ever used?
Your Country, says the Prophet, is desolate, your Cities are burnt with Fire:
Your Land Strangers ibid. V. 7
devour it in your Presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by Strangers.

I might also instance in that Place, in Ezekiel, where God says to the
Prophet, Thou dwell among Scorpions. Ezekiel. 2. V. 6.


So that I can hardly think, that Celsus can be in Earnest, when he makes his
Jew find Fault with our Savior, as exceeding the Bounds of Reason, and
Modesty, as often as he used such Expressions as these, WOE BE UNTO YOU, and I
FORETELL YOU. For what the Jew says, may be retorted on himself, since the
GREAT GOD does often speak exactly after the same Manner, and thereby without
Doubt, did sufficiently, and as it were, de Novo, authorize our Savior, to use
that Turn of Expression.

And if there be any Force, in what he farther objects, viz. That our SAVIOR
wanted Power, to prevail with his Hearers; It makes as much against GOD
Himself, who is frequently brought in by the Prophets, speaking, with the same
Air of Severity, and any one who thinks, that the Jew has Cause, to blame our
Savior, for using the forementioned Expressions, would do well, I think, to
consider, that we meet with abundance of Very dreadful Exprobrations in
Leviticus, and Deuteronomy, and if the Jew, who is obliged, to defend the
Writings, which Moses published, can offer any Thing, to justify the
Expressions I refer to. We may bring the same, or much stronger Arguments, in
Defense of that seemingly-rigid Practice of our Savior.

Nay, we can offer more, in Defense of Moses, than the most bigoted Jew, since
our Savior has acquainted us, with its Spiritual, and Mystic Sense, though one,
who has any tolerable Knowledge of the Prophets, may discern, that the GREAT
GOD cannot be said, to exceed the Bounds of Reason, when he uses such
threatening, and upbraiding Expressions as these, Woe unto you, or, I foretell
you, and 'twou'd be horrid Blasphemy, to say, That the All-wise Being takes
such improper Methods, for the Conversion of Sinners, as argue, that he wants
the Common Prudence of a Man, as Celsus makes our Savior to do.

The Christians, who hold, that 'twas the same God, that spoke by the Prophets,
and by our Blessed Savior, can give a rational Account, of those Threatenings,
and direful Exprobrations, which we meet with in the Scripture. And because
Celsus pretends, to be so great a Philosopher, as well as so nicely versed in
the Opinions, which the Christians hold, I shall just touch upon a few Things,
that I think, very naturally occur.

I would ask him, whether Mercury in Homer don't take such Methods, as were
proper, to bring Ulysses to a Sense of his Duty, when he says,

Wretch that thou art! what makes thee Hom. Od. lib. 12. v. 281.
rove alone?

For it is the Part of Sirens, to fawn, and flatter, who,

-- sit and chaunt among dead Men's Hom. Od. lib. 12. v. 145.
Bones.

And speak after the following soft, and soothing Manner,

Ulysses, Glory of the Greeks, draw near. Hom. Od. lib. 12. v. 184.


How then can he have the Face, to say, that when the Prophets, and our
Savior, say, Woe unto you, to wean the Minds of Men from their beloved Lusts,
they had not a serious, and compassionate Regard, to their precious, and
immortal Souls, which they would fain rescue, if 'twere possible, with a Kind
Cruelty, if I may so say, from the ever-burning, and intolerably-scorching
Flames of the Infernal Lake.

But, perhaps, he dreams it is requisite, that the Great God, or any other
Person, who bears the Characters of Divinity, should merely consult the
Dignity, of his own Excellent Nature, and act in such a Way, as would not be
agreeable to the Capacities of Men, nor proper to persuade their Wills, and
engage their best Affections.

And how ridiculous does he render himself, when he says, that our Savior
wanted Power to persuade? I could produce many Parallel Instances, from the
Writings of the Jewish Prophets, and of the Greeks themselves, and know very
well, that some of the most Famous of 'em all, were unable to prevail with
their Enemies, their Judges, and Accusers, to leave their Vices, and apply
themselves to the Study of Philosophy, as a happy Introduction to a regular
Course of Virtue.

CHAP. XXXVII.
THEN the Jew, in Conformity to the Principles of Judaism, says, We hope for
the Resurrection of the Body, to Eternal Life, and shall be abundantly
convinced, of the Possibility of it, by the Resurrection of the Expected
Messiah, who will be the Glorious Pattern, according to which, we also, shall
be raised from the Dead.

But I Am apt to think, that the Jews will hardly grant, that their Messiah will
be the Pattern of their Future Resurrection.

However, if they really think so, and don't scruple to talk like Celsus's Jew,
I shall ask one Question, that may serve for an Answer, since he undertakes, to
confute us, by our own Authors, how comes it to pass, that he has read those
Passages, which he thinks, make for him, but seems to have never read, any
Thing of our Savior's Resurrection, at least to be ignorant of his being the
Firstborn from Colos. 1 V. 18
the Dead; or can there be nothing in the Scripture, but what he is willing
should be there? But since the Jew acknowledges the Resurrection of the Body,
it is needless to bring Arguments, to prove it, (whether he does in earnest
believe it, and is able to defend it, or no and therefore, as to this Matter, I
shall return him no farther Answer.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
THEN says Celsus's Jew, Where for God's sake, is this pretended Messiah, that
you make such a Stir about; for we want sadly to see him, and are ready to
embrace his Doctrine?

But we may ask him every Whit as well, where is that Glorious Person, who
spoke by the Prophets, and wrought so many Miracles, to confirm the Law of
their Celebrated Moses? I say, where is he, that we may see him, and may
believe, that you are God's peculiar Heritage? You wo'n't say, I suppose, that
Almighty God appeared always to the Jews themselves. And why may not we be
allowed to take the same Method, in Defense of our Savior, who once rose from
the Dead, and did so powerfully work upon the Minds of his Disciples, that
their lively Hope of a Glorious Resurrection to an Immortal Life of
Inconceivable Happiness, and spotless Purity, did revive their fainting
Spirits, and support, and comfort 'em, under the most grievous Torments.

Then he says, Did this Pretender come down from Heaven, on Purpose that we
might reject him? As if he were fond of the Basest Affronts, that could
possibly be offered him.

I answer, No; but he foresaw, what Treatment he should have, and foretold the
Unbelief of the Jews, and made use of it, as a Happy Occasion of the Calling of
the Gentiles; Unhappy, Unhappy indeed for them, but very happy for us, who are
not of the Posterity of Abraham.

For their Fall, (as Divine Providence was pleased to order the Matter) was the
Rising of the Gentiles, as the Prophetical Psalmist speaks, A Psalm. 18. V. 43
People, whom I have not known, shall serve serve me. As soon as they hear of
me they shall obey me. And as the Prophet Isaiah says, I was sought of them,
Isa. 65. V. 1.
that asked not for me: I am found of them, that sought me not.

We know, what a Series of Temporal, and Dreadful Calamities the Crucifixion of
our Savior has entailed, if I may so say, upon the Jewish Nation. And their
Mouths would be for ever stopped, should we upbraid 'em (but God forbid, we
should even seem to insult 'em) and should we demand of 'em, as we very well
may, whether the Dispensations of Divine Providence toward 'em, don't bear the
Awful Marks of his Severe Displeasure, and whether Almighty God didn't take a
most unaccountable Method, if his Design were, to show the World, that the Jews
were still his peculiar People (though too far from being zealous of Good Works)
when he suffered such grievous Calamities to befall 'em, when their Metropolis
was taken, and they were at once deprived of their Magnificent Temple, and all
their Pompous Worship, and whatever they could offer, to allay the Native
Darkness, of this MYSTERIOVS SCENE of PROVIDENCE, it might be largely insisted
on, and improved to very valuable Purposes, by the Christians, who admire the
Wise, and Deep Design of GOD, to make Use of the Horrid Impiety of those very
Persons, who were Once his PECVLIAR PEOPLE, as a Blessed Occasion of calling
them, who were Strangers to the Covenants, and had no Right to the Glorious
Promises, relating to the Messiah's Kingdom.

This was foretold by the Prophets, viz. That GOD would take an Advantage by
the Sins of the Jews, not merely to call any single Nation, but to select some
Persons, from all Parts of the Earth, that having Chosen the Foolish Things of
the World, he might give an ignorant People very clear Discoveries of important
Truths, taking his Kingdom from the Jews, to bestow it on the Despised Gentiles.

And I shall quote one Prophecy, concerning this surprising Turn of Providence,
which is in Deuteronomy, where the Prophetical Historian introduces GOD,
speaking after the following Manner, They have moved Deuteronomy. 32. V. 21.
me to Jealousy, with that which is not GOD, they have prvok'd me to Anger,
with their Vanities* And I will move them to Jealousy, with these, who are not
a People, I will provoke 'em to Anger, with a foolish Nation.

CHAP. XXXIX.
THEN the Jew concludes with the following Words, We see, therefore, says he,
that he was a Man, like one of us, as we had Reason to believe, both from
Reason, and Experience.

But I cannot for my Life conceive, how our Savior, if he was no more than a
Man, could ever be so weak, as to imagine, that his Doctrine would obtain, and
much less meet with the desired Success, that he should honorably surmount all
Difficulties, and Dangers, and prove in the Event superior to the United Force
of the People, Senate, and Emperors of Rome, and all Foreign Potentates. If we
don't allow, that he had a DIVINE, as well as a HVMANE NATVRE, how can we
account for his making so many, and so remarkable Converts, on a sudden, when
the Disadvantages were so great, which he labored under? Had they all been Men
of Reason, that he had to deal with, I confess, the Wonder would sensibly
abate. But the greatest Part by far were void of Reason, and little better than
Brutes, in a Humane Shape, and which is worse, were Slaves to their unruly
Passions, and on that Account 'twas far more difficult to reclaim 'em from
their exorbitant Vices.

So that we must resolve this Matter, into his being the Wisdom, and the Power
of GOD, let the Unbelieving Jews, and the Learned Greeks, gnash their Teeth, as
much as they please, or produce what they can to the contrary.

And I might say, that Instances of his Divine Power are not wholly wanting,
even at this Distance of Time*

We shall therefore not only continue, by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, to
believe in God the Father, according to the Doctrine of his ETERNAL SON, but
shall also be excited, by a Holy Ambition, to endeavor to convert the ignorant
Heathenss to the Christian Faith, while they by all Means will have it, that we
truly are the Persons, whose Ignorance deserves highly to be pitied, (though we
know very well, that the Case they commiserate is in Truth their own) and they
give it out, that we are guilty of Imposture, whereas they do but condemn their
own frequent, and most apparent Practice.

I am sure, if we lead Persons aside, it is a very Happy Seducement, since the
Eternal Welfare of their Better Part is Honestly aimed at, and Effectually
consulted by us, who are honored sometimes with being Instruments, in the Hand
of ALMIGHTY GOD to reclaim 'em.

By the GRACE OF GOD, with which, our sincere, and earnest, though weak
Endeavors, do concur, they are prevailed with, to leave their former
Intemperance, or at least make some slow, and imperfect Advances toward the
contrary Virtue, they leave their unjust Dealing, or at least approach to the
Confines of Justice, they renounce their Superstition, and Folly, or at least
are conducted into the Highway, if I may so say, that leads to the MOST
SUBLIME, and MOST USEFUL WISDOM, They leave their Cowardly, and Sordid Temper,
and are inspired, with the NOBLEST KIND OF COURAGE, which appears, on all just
Occasions, but especially when they are called, to lay down their Lives, and
seal the Truth of their most Holy Religion, with their warmest Blood.

To conclude, without Doubt, our SAVIOR is already come, who was expressly
foretold, even by the Jewish Prophets. My Antagonist therefore did not a little
discover his Ignorance, in making his Jew say, That A CERTAIN PROPHET foretold
the Coming of the MESSIAH.

But because Celsus, who brings in his Jew, speaking, as he imagines, agreably
to the Principles of Judaism, thinks fit, that he should break off here, (though
indeed he adds a sew Things, that are not worthy to be mentioned) I shall here
put a Period to my SECOND BOOK.

And if I may but have seasonable, and suitable Assistance from above, I shall
endeavor in my THIRD BOOK, to answer some remaining Arguments, if they may be
so called against the CHRISTIAN RELIGION, which Celsus thought fit to use, and
endeavors with all his Might to maintain.

FINIS.

